BritainlaTl
ENGLISH CHANNEL
^11
y
/o
i Cumbernauld
mm
GLASGOWlal Livingston
Irvine East Kilbride
Edinburgh
REGIONS, MAJOR
URBAN CENTRES
AND NEW TOWNS
National Boundaries
Regional Boundaries
Centres of Conurbations
New Towns
Designated New Town
Other Towns
0 20 40 60 80 100 MILES
0 40 80 120KILOMETRES
WOLVERHAMPTON MIDLANDS
•*. Tptfnrri C°rbV Peterborough
Newtown Telford
IBIRMINGHAIVI
EAST ANGLIA
W A L E S Er
MONMOUTHSHIRE
Cwmbran V
Redditch Northampton
MIDLANDS Milton^ ut|B
> Keynes Stevenage
Welwyn Gdn City Hailow
/ Hempstelfd
londonU
° Bristol Bas,ldon
Bracknell SOUTH-EAST
SOUTH-WEST
BRITAIN 1971
An official handbook
BRITAIN
1971
An official handbook
London: Her Majesty’s Stationery Office: 1971
© Crown copyright 1971
Published by
Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
To be purchased from
49 High Holborn, London wciv 6hb
13A Castle Street, Edinburgh EH2 3AR
109 St. Mary Street, Cardiff cfi ijw
Brazennose Street, Manchester m6o 8as
50 Fairfax Street, Bristol bsi 3DE
258 Broad Street, Birmingham bi 2HE
7 Linenhall Street, Belfast BT2 8ay
or through booksellers
Obtainable in the United States of America
from British Information Services,
845 Third Avenue,
New York, N.Y. 10022
Price £1-624 [jC1 i2S 6d] net
«eRKo,
.j
- 1 UMj
197
o')
APg
N ■
SBN 11 700094 9:
CONTENTS
Page
INTRODUCTION
1. THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE i
The Physical Background i
The Demographic Background 6
Social Life 17
2. GOVERNMENT 25
General Survey 25
The Monarchy 26
Parliament 30
The Privy Council 41
Her Majesty’s Government 43
Government Departments 46
The Civil Service 61
Local Government 67
The Fire Service 73
3. LAW AND ORDER 79
The Law 79
Treatment of Offenders 93
The Police Service 104
4. DEFENCE 109
Policy I09
Planning and Control no
NATO Commitment 113
Deployment 113
Combat Forces 03
Defence Procurement and Support 119
Use of Manpower and Resources 120
5. SOCIAL WELFARE I22
State and Voluntary Services 122
Social Security I24
Health X32
Immigration and Community Relations 146
6. EDUCATION I48
Youth Services X66
7. PLANNING AND HOUSING 170
Town and Country Planning 170
Housing X77
8. THE CHURCHES X82
9. PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS 190
The Promotion of the Sciences 190
The Promotion of the Arts 207
v
Page
10. THE NATIONAL ECONOMY 225
Background 225
The Framework of the Economy 227
Economic Policy and Planning 233
11. INDUSTRY 238
Organisation and Production 238
Fuel and Power 254
Water Supply 269
Construction
Manufacturing Industries 274
12. AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY 299
Agriculture 299
Fisheries 3I9
Forestry 322
13. TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS 327
Shipping 327
Inland Transport 334
Civil Aviation 347
The Post Office 353
14. FINANCE 358
Public Finance 358
The Central Bank 3^9
Banking and Private Finance 37°
15. TRADE AND PAYMENTS 380
Overseas Trade 38°
The Balance of Payments 393
Internal Trade 402
16. LABOUR 410
Manpower 410
Employment, Training and Productivity Services 413
Terms of Employment and Working Conditions 419
17. TELEVISION AND RADIO BROADCASTING 433
18. THE PRESS 441
19. SPORT 45°
APPENDIX 467
Currency 4^7
Metric Equivalents for British Weights and Measures 467
BIBLIOGRAPHY 4^9
INDEX 489
vi
DIAGRAMS
MAPS
PHOTOGRAPHS
Birth Rates and Death Rates in Britain 8
Expectation of Life at Birth in England and Wales 9
Age Distribution of United Kingdom Population 11
The Royal Family: Genealogical Tree 28
Functional Analysis of Defence Personnel 1970-71 121
Functional Analysis of Defence Expenditure 1970-71 121
Organisation of the National Health Service 134
Changes in National Expenditure 1959 to 1969 228
Public and Private Fixed Investment 1959 and 1969 229
Personal Income and Expenditure, 1969 232
Consumers’ Expenditure in 1958 and 1968 232
Index of Industrial Production 1969 249
Energy Trends 1960-69 255
National Savings 1958 and 1969 373
Commodity Composition of Imports and Exports in 1969 382
Area Pattern of Trade in 1969 383
Earnings, Wage Rates, Retail Prices and Salaries 1957-69 420
Physical Features
Regions, Major Urban Centres and New Towns
Fuel and Power
Motorways and Principal Trunk Roads
front end-papers
front end-papers
back end-papers
back end-papers
Leisure
Action Against Pollution
Leisure
Architecture
Scientific Instruments
Industry
Fuel and Power
facing page
38
between pages 38 and 39
39
between pages 134 and 135
262
between pages 262 and 263
263
Decimal Coins
Amenities for Children
Safety at Sea
Agricultural Research
Agricultural Exports
Agricultural Education
facing page
358
between pages 358 and 359
359
422
between pages 422 and 423
423
Acknowledgment is made for photographs to: R. Carpenter Turner for Watermill Theatre (facing p. 38);
Bootle Barge Co. for surface dredger (between pp. 38 and 39); Lodge-Cottrell Ltd. for electrofilter
(between pp. 38 and 39); White Fish Authority for plaice ‘farm’ (between pp. 38 and 39); Butlin’s for
holiday camp (facing p. 39); Ardin & Brooks & Partners and Bercott & Associates, Architects, for
Falkirk shopping centre (between pp. 134 and 135); George Kenyon, City Architect, for Newcastle civic
centre (between pp. 134 and 135); British Rail for Coventry railway station (between pp. 134 and 135);
Powell and Moyer, Architects, for High Wycombe General Hospital (between pp. 134 and 13s); Rendel,
Palmer & Tritton for Taf Fechan bridge (between pp. 134 and 135); Architectural Press for gas research
station (facing p. 135); Neilson McCarthy Ltd. for power house of Scottish pulp mill (facing p. 135); United
Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority for reactor building at Winfrith (facing p. 135), for mass spectrometry,
micro-probe analyser, electron microscope and acoustic hologram (facing p. 262); Mercury Airfield
Equipment Ltd. for airtug (between pp. 262 and 263); C. A. Parsons & Co. Ltd. for 660 megawatt
turbine-lines (between pp. 262 and 263); Tube Investments for automatic tube butt welding (between pp.
262 and 263); The Dunlop Co. Ltd. for tyre building machine (between pp. 262 and 263); Rover Co.
Ltd. for Range Rover (between pp. 262 and 263); British Petroleum for oil drilling rig (facing p. 263);
British Nuclear Design & Construction Ltd. for Wylfa (facing p. 263’); United Kingdom Atomic Energy
Authority for isotope powered light (facing p. 359); Marconi Communications Systems Ltd., for ‘Predictor’
(facing p. 359); Fisons Fertilizers Ltd. for soil analysis and fertiliser research (facing p. 422); East Mailing
Research Station for Fruit Research (facing p. 422); Barfords of Belton Ltd. for dumper truck (between
pp. 422 and 423); E. Aliman & Co. Ltd., for sprayer-hover (between pp. 422 and 423); John Salmon
Engineering Co. Ltd. for beet harvester (between pp. 422 and 423); Ransomes Sims & Jefferies Ltd. for
tandem disc harrow (between pp. 422 and 423); Massey-Ferguson {United Kingdom) Ltd. for combine
harvester (between pp. 422 and 423); David Brozvn Tractors for tractor (between pp. 422 and 423);
Butyl Products Ltd. for inflatable silos (between pp. 422 and 423); Kent County Council for dosing sheep
(facing p. 423).
vm
INTRODUCTION
Britain 1971 is ^ie twenty-second official handbook in the series prepared
and revised each year by Reference Division of the Central Office of In¬
formation with the co-operation of other government departments and of
many national organisations. The handbook is widely known as an established
work of reference and is the mainstay of the reference facilities provided by
the British Information Services in many countries. It is available overseas
in a limited free edition and is on sale throughout the world.
This 1971 edition, which covers events up to September 1970, gives a
factual account of the administration and the national economy of Britain.
It describes the activities of many of the national institutions, both official
and unofficial, and shows the part played by the Government in the life of
the community.
The handbook does not claim to be comprehensive, nor does it attempt
to cover Britain’s participation in Commonwealth or world affairs. The
factual and statistical information it contains is compiled from official and
other authoritative sources, and, while most sections of the book relate to
Britain as a whole, facts and figures for England, Wales, Scotland, and
Northern Ireland are also given separately when relevant.
Readers who require more detailed information should consult the Annual
Abstract of Statistics and the Monthly Digest of Statistics, issued by the Central
Statistical Office, and also other government publications and standard works
of reference, some of which are listed in the bibliography towards the end
of the handbook. Readers are asked to note that in Britain the Central Office
of Information reference documents listed in the bibliography and marked
with an asterisk may be obtained, on payment of a small charge, from
Reference Division, Central Office of Information; and that overseas they
may be obtained from British Information Offices.
REFERENCE DIVISION
CENTRAL OFFICE OF INFORMATION, LONDON
September igjo
ix
An addendum on changes affecting the text
of this handbook will be found between pages 6 and 7
1 THE LAND AND THE
PEOPLE
THE PHYSICAL BACKGROUND
The British Isles form a group lying off the north-west coast of Europe with
a total area of about 121,600 square miles (314,940 sq. km.). The largest islands
are Great Britain (comprising the mainlands of England, Wales and Scotland)
and Ireland (comprising Northern Ireland and the Irish Republic). Off the
southern coast of England is the Isle of Wight and off the extreme south-west
are the Isles of Scilly; off North Wales is Anglesey. Western Scotland is
fringed by numerous islands and to the far north are the important groups of
the Orkneys and Shetlands. All these form administrative counties or parts
of counties of the mainland, but the Isle of Man in the Irish Sea and the
Channel Islands between Great Britain and France have a large measure of
administrative autonomy and are not part of England, Wales, Scotland or
Northern Ireland.
England (excluding the county of Monmouth on the Welsh border) has a
total area (including inland water) of 50,334 square miles (130,364 sq. km.)
and is divided into 39 geographical or 46 administrative counties; Wales
(including Monmouthshire), with a total area of 8,016 square miles (20,761
sq. km.), has 13 counties; Scotland, including its 186 inhabited islands, has a
total area of 30,414 square miles (78,772 sq. km.) and is divided into 33
counties; Northern Ireland, consisting of six counties, has a total area of
5,452 square miles (14,121 sq. km.). Together, these countries constitute the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland (or Britain), with a
total area of 94,214 square miles (244,014 sq. km.). The total land area of the
United Kingdom (excluding inland water) is 93,027 square miles (240,940 sq.
km.): England, 50,056 (129,645); Wales and Monmouthshire, 7,967 (20,635);
Scotland, 29,798 (77,177); and Northern Ireland, 5,206 (13,484).
Care must be taken when studying British statistics to note whether they
refer to England as defined above, to England and Wales (considered together
for many administrative and other purposes), to Great Britain, which com¬
prises England, Wales and Scotland, or to Britain (the United Kingdom) as
a whole. The position is further complicated by the fact that the county of
Monmouth is occasionally included with England. United Kingdom statistics
and other data sometimes include the Isle of Man, 227 square miles (588 sq.
km.), and the Channel Islands, 75 square miles (194 sq. km.), which strictly
are not part of the United Kingdom but are dependencies of the Crown. Since
southern Ireland became independent, official statistics do not normally refer
to the British Isles as a whole.
The latitude of 50° North cuts across the southernmost part of the British
mainland (the Lizard Peninsula) and latitude 6o° North passes through the
Shetland Islands. The northernmost point of the Scottish mainland, Dunnet
Head, near John o’ Groats, is in latitude 58° 40'. The prime meridian of o°
passes through the old Observatory of Greenwich (London), while the
easternmost point of England is nearly i° 45' East and the westernmost point
of Ireland is approximately io° 30' West. It is just under 600 miles (966 km.)
Geology and
Topography
BRITAIN I971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
in a straight line from the south coast of Britain to the extreme north and
rather over 300 miles (483 km.) across in the widest part. Owing to the
numerous bays and inlets no point in the British Isles is as much as 75 miles
(121 km.) from tidal water.
The seas surrounding the British Isles are everywhere shallow—usually less
than 50 fathoms (300 feet or 91 metres)—because the islands lie on the con¬
tinental shelf. To the north-west along the edge of the shelf the sea floor
plunges abruptly from 600 feet (182 metres) to 3,000 feet (914 metres). These
shallow waters are important because they provide excellent fishing grounds
as well as breeding grounds for the fish. The North Atlantic Current, the drift
of warm water which reaches the islands from across the Atlantic, spreads out
over the shelf and its ameliorating effect on the air is thus magnified. The
effect of tidal movement is also increased by the shallowness of the water.
Despite their small area, the British Isles contain rocks of all the main
geological periods. In Great Britain the newer rocks, which are less resistant
to weather and have thus been worn down to form low land, lie to the south
and east, and the island can therefore be divided roughly into two main
regions, Lowland Britain and Highland Britain.
In Lowland Britain the newer and softer rocks of southern and eastern
England have been eroded into a rich plain, more often rolling than flat and
rising to chalk and limestone hills, but hardly ever reaching a thousand feet
(305 metres) above sea level. Its boundaries run roughly from the mouth of
the Tyne in the north-east of England to the mouth of the Exe in the south¬
west.
Highland Britain comprises the whole of Scotland (including the hills and
moors of southern Scotland as well as the mountains of the Scottish Highlands,
which extend from the Forth-Clyde valley to the extreme north-west), the
Lake District in north-west England, the broad central upland known as the
Pennines, almost the whole of Wales, and the south-western peninsula of
England coinciding approximately with the counties of Devon and Cornwall.
Highland Britain contains all the mountainous parts1 of Great Britain and
extensive uplands lying above one thousand feet (305 metres). This high
ground, however, is not continuous but is interspersed with valleys and plains.
Geologically the mountains and hills consist mainly of outcrops of very old
rocks (archaean and palaeozoic), while the top strata in the valleys and plains
are mainly more recent (carboniferous age) and similar to those in the
northern and western parts of Lowland Britain.
These carboniferous strata are rich in minerals and include the coal
measures which have been the foundation of Britain’s industrial expansion.
The outcrops and shallow seams of coal which have now largely been exhausted
were found on the edge of the plains and up the valleys leading to the high
land. Most of the present deep coal workings underlie the fertile lowlands.
Towards the end of Britain’s long geological history, when the ancestors
of present-day man had already settled in the country, came the great Ice Age,
and at one period or another during this time the whole of Britain north of
a line joining the river Thames and the Bristol Channel was covered by ice
caps and ice sheets. The ice naturally accumulated on the higher ground and
swept from the mountains of Scotland, northern England and Wales any
loose rock or soil which had previously been formed, so that, when the ice
1 The highest peaks are: in Scotland, Ben Nevis, 4,406 feet (1,342 metres); in Wales,
Snowdon, 3,560 feet (1,085 metres); and in England, Scafell Pike (in the Lake District,
Cumberland), 3,210 feet (978 metres).
Climate
Winds
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE 3
eventually disappeared, the hills stood out as barren rocky areas, while a
thick mantle of glacial debris—boulders, boulder-clay, sands and gravels—
lay distributed widely over the lower ground. The ice had blocked up previous
drainage channels and left large lakes, which have since gradually dried
up, leaving deposits of sand, silt and mud, often affording soils of great
fertility.
In Ireland, where the solid rocks are covered deeply by the debris left by
the ice sheets, the great central plain has large boggy areas, due to interruption
of the previous natural drainage. The mountains and hill masses1 are irregu¬
larly placed around central lowlands; the rocks of Ireland are of the same
types geologically as the Highland zone of Great Britain, and in the higher
parts the moorland vegetation resembles that of the higher parts of Highland
Britain.
Britain’s complex geology is one of the main reasons for its rich variety
of scenery and the stimulating contrasts found within short distances,
particularly on the coasts. The ancient rocks of Highland Britain often reach
the coast in towering cliffs; elsewhere the sea may penetrate in deep lochs, as
along much of the west coast of Scotland. Bold outstanding headlands are
notable features in other parts of the varied coastline: the granite cliffs of
Land’s End; the limestone masses and slates of the Pembrokeshire coast in
south Wales; the red sandstone of St. Bees Head on the Cumberland coast;
and the vertically jointed lavas of Skye and the island of Staffa in the Inner
Hebrides. Even around Lowland Britain there are striking contrasts. In some
parts the soft, white limestone—the chalk—forms the world-famous white
cliffs of Dover or the Needles off the Isle of Wight; while other parts of the
south and south-east coastline have beaches of sand or shingle. The eastern
coast of England between the Humber and the Thames estuary is for the
most part low-lying, and for hundreds of years some stretches of it have been
protected against the sea by embankments.
The marked tidal movement around the British Isles sweeps away much of
the sand and mud brought down by the rivers and makes the estuaries of the
short British rivers2 valuable as natural harbours.
Britain has a generally mild and temperate climate. It lies in middle latitudes
to the north-west of the great continental land mass of Eurasia, but the
prevailing winds are south-westerly and the weather from day to day is
controlled mainly by a succession of depressions from the Atlantic which,
moving in a generally easterly or north-easterly direction, pass over or near
the British Isles. The climate is subject to frequent changes but to few
extremes of temperature. Although it is largely determined by that of the
eastern Atlantic, occasionally during the winter months easterly winds may
bring a cold, dry, continental type of weather which, once established, may
persist for many days or even weeks. During the summer months the Azores
high pressure system usually extends its influence north-eastwards towards
north-west Europe, and the depressions take a more northerly course, often
passing entirely to the north of the British Isles.
In Britain, south-westerly winds are the most frequent, and those from an
easterly quarter the least; such winds occur about one-third as often as
south-westerly ones although easterly winds are appreciably more frequent in
1 The highest peak in Northern Ireland is Slieve Donard, 2,796 feet (852 metres).
2 The longest rivers in England—the Severn and the Thames—are only about 220
and 215 miles (354 and 346 km.) long respectively.
Temperature
Rainfall
Sunshine
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
the spring than at any other time of the year. In hilly country, wind direction
may differ markedly from the general direction owing to local topography.
Winds are generally stronger in the north than in the south of the British
Isles, stronger on the coasts than inland, and stronger in the west than in the
east. The strongest winds usually occur in the winter; the average speed at
Lerwick, Shetland Islands, varies from about 19 m.p.h. (31 km.p.h.) in
January to about 14 m.p.h. (23 km.p.h.) in August, while at Kew Observatory,
on the western outskirts of London, the average speed varies from about
10 m.p.h. (16 km.p.h.) in January to about 7 m.p.h. (n km.p.h.) in August.
The stormiest region of the British Isles is along the north-west coast with
over 30 gales a year; south-east England and the east Midlands are the least
stormy, with gales occurring on about 2 days a year inland and on some 15 to
20 days on the Channel coast.
Near sea level in the west of the British Isles the mean annual temperature
ranges from 8°C. (47°F.) in the Hebrides to ii°C. (52°F.) in the extreme
south-west of England; latitude for latitude it is slightly lower in the eastern
part of Britain. The mean monthly temperature in the extreme north, at
Lerwick (Shetlands), ranges from 4°C. (39°F.) during the winter (December,
January and February) to i2°C. (54°F.) during the summer (June, July and
August): the corresponding figures for the Isle of Wight, in the extreme south,
are 5°C. (4i°F.) and i6°C. (6i°F.). The average range of temperature between
winter and summer varies from 7°C. to i2°C. (i50-23°F.), being greatest
inland in the eastern part of the country. During a normal summer, the
temperature occasionally rises above 27°C. (8o°F.) in the south, but tempera¬
tures of 32°C. (90°F.) and above are infrequent. Extreme minimum tempera¬
tures depend to a large extent on local conditions, but -7°C. (2o°F.) may
occur on a still, clear winter’s night, -i2°C. (io°F.) is rare, and -i8°C.
(o°F.) or below has been recorded only during exceptionally cold winter
periods.
The British Isles as a whole have an annual rainfall of over 40 inches (102 cm.),
while England alone has about 34 inches (86 cm.). The geographical distribu¬
tion of annual rainfall is largely governed by topography and exposure to the
Atlantic, the mountainous areas of the west and north having far more rain
than the plains of the south and east. Between 150 and 200 inches (381 and
508 cm.) of rain fall on the summits of Snowdon and Ben Nevis during the
average year, whereas some places in the south-east of England record less
than 20 inches (51 cm.). Rain is fairly well distributed throughout the year,
but, on the average, March to June are the driest months and October to
January the wettest, the former period of four months having about 60 per
cent of the rainfall of the latter. A period of as long as three weeks without
rain is exceptional, and is usually confined to limited areas. In successive
years, however, remarkably contrasting weather conditions are sometimes
experienced.
The distribution of sunshine over the British Isles shows a general decrease
from south to north, a decrease from the coast inland, and a decrease with
altitude. During May, June and July—the months of longest daylight—the
mean daily duration of sunshine varies from five hours in north-west Scotland
to eight hours in the Isle of Wight; during the months of shortest daylight—
November, December and January—sunshine is at a minimum, with an
average of half an hour a day in some parts of the Highlands of Scotland and
in the Peak District (Derbyshire) and two hours a day on the south coast of
England.
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE
5
Visibility
Soil and
Vegetation
Fauna
In fine, still weather there is occasionally haze in summer and mist and fog
in winter.1 Fogs have become less frequent and less severe in recent years as a
result of changes in fuel usage and the operation of clean air legislation.
Many parts of the surface of Highland Britain have only thin, poor soils, with
the result that large stretches of moorland are found over the Highlands of
Scotland, the Pennines, the Lake District, the mountains of Wales and in
parts of north-east and south-west England. In most areas the farmer has
cultivated only the valley lands and the plains where soils are deeper and richer;
villages and towns are often separated by uplands with few if any habitations.
With the exception of a few patches of poor soil or rocky land, almost the
whole of Lowland Britain has been cultivated, and farmland covers the area
except where there are urban and industrial settlements. Elaborate land
drainage systems have been developed through the centuries to bring under
cultivation the fertile soil of the low-lying fenland of Lincolnshire and similar
areas in East Anglia.
With its mild climate and varied soils, Britain has a diverse pattern of
natural vegetation. When the islands were first settled, oak forest probably
covered the greater part of the lowland, giving place to extensive marshlands,
forests of Scots pine on higher or sandy ground and perhaps some open
moorland. In the course of the centuries the forest area was progressively
diminished and, in spite of planting by estate owners in the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries and the establishment of large forests by the Forestry
Commission in the past 40 years, woodlands now occupy only about 7 per cent
of the surface of the country. The greatest density of woodland occurs in the
north and east of Scotland, in some parts of south-east England and in
Monmouthshire on the Welsh border. Midland Britain appears to be well
wooded because of the numerous hedgerows and isolated trees. The most
common trees are oak, beech, ash and elm and, in Scotland, pine and birch.
There are various types of wild vegetation, including the natural flora of
woods, fens and marshes, foreshores and cliffs, chalk downs and the higher
slopes of mountains; the most widespread is that of the hilly moorland country,
which consists mainly of heather, grasses, gorse and bracken, with cotton
grass in the wetter parts. Most of Britain, however, is agricultural land, of
which about a third is arable and the rest pasture and meadow, a varied
semi-natural vegetation composed of indigenous grasses and flowering plants.
Farming land is divided into fields by hedges, stone walls or wire fences
and, specially in the mixed farms which cover most of the country, presents
a pattern of contrasting colour. The cool temperate climate of Britain and the
even distribution of rainfall ensure a long growing season; streams rarely dry
up, grassland is green throughout the year and full of wild flowers from
spring to autumn; in most years there is scarcely a month in which some
flowers may not be found in hedgerows and sheltered woodland glades.
The fauna of the British Isles is, in general, similar to that of north-western
Europe, though there are fewer species. Some of the larger mammals,
including the wolf, the bear, the boar and the reindeer, have become extinct;
but red deer, protected for sporting reasons, flourish in the Scottish Highlands
and on Exmoor in the counties of Devon and Somerset, roe deer are found in
Scotland and in the wooded areas of southern England, and fallow deer
1 The number of mornings with less than 1,100 yards (1,005 metres) visibility ranges
from less than 5 a year in areas of lowest incidence to about 55 in areas of the highest.
6
BRITAIN I97i: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
(which are probably not indigenous) have been introduced into parks and are
wild in some districts. The badger, a nocturnal animal, is rarely seen; there
are foxes in most rural areas, and otters are found along many rivers and
streams. Both common and grey seals may be seen on various parts of the
coast, though not usually in the same localities. Smaller mammals include
mice, rats, voles, shrews, hedgehogs, moles, squirrels (the imported grey
more numerous than the native red), hares, rabbits, weasels and stoats.
There are about 430 species of birds, including many song-birds. About
230 species are resident and the rest are regular visitors to Britain. The
chaffinch and the blackbird are probably the most numerous and are widely
and evenly distributed, but sparrows usually predominate near houses, and
huge flocks of starlings, which gather at certain seasons, sometimes congregate
in London and other large towns. These and some other species of small birds
have been on the increase for several decades owing to their success in adapting
themselves to a man-made environment, while small birds in general have
benefited by more considerate treatment from the public. The number of
large birds, on the other hand, has tended to decline, except for game birds
which are specially preserved, such as pheasants and partridges, and the red
grouse which is found in moorland areas.
Many species of gulls and other sea-birds nest round the coast and gulls
often fly far inland in search of food or shelter in rough weather. The drainage
and reclamation of marshlands have diminished the natural habitat of ducks,
geese and other aquatic birds. Such birds, however, now frequent reservoirs,
gravel pits and sewage farms in addition to the nature reserves and bird
sanctuaries which have recently been established on an increasing scale.
Nearly all British wild birds are protected; the principal exceptions are those
considered injurious to agriculture and birds shot for sport in the open season.
River and lake fish include salmon, trout, sea-trout, perch, roach, dace,
grayling and pike.
Reptiles and amphibians are few. The former are represented by three
species of snakes, of which only the adder is venomous, and three species of
lizards, including the snake-like slow-worm. The amphibians are represented
by three species of newts and five species of frogs and toads. Of these, only
one species of newt and the common viviparous lizard are indigenous; the
other species of reptiles and amphibians that are now firmly established came
to Britain from Europe. There are no snakes in Ireland.
There are more than 21,000 different kinds of insects, most of them small,
in the British Isles. Among the largest are the rare swallowtail butterfly
(3 to 4 inches or 8 to 10 cm.) and the stag beetle (2% inches or 6 cm). The insect
fauna in Britain is less varied than that of continental Europe and lacks a
number of common European species. With modern methods of pest control,
extensive insect damage to crops or timber and serious outbreaks of diseases
commonly spread by insect vectors are exceptional in Britain but there is some
anxiety among naturalists that chemical protection against insects may be
reducing the population of creatures which feed on them, and of their
predators in turn.
THE DEMOGRAPHIC BACKGROUND
The people who now inhabit the British Isles are descended mainly from the
people who inhabited them nearly nine centuries ago. The last of a long
succession of invaders and colonisers from Scandinavia and the continent of
Europe were the Normans, a branch of the Norsemen or Scandinavian
ADDENDUM
Trade and
Industry
Aviation
Environment
MACHINERY OF GOVERNMENT
A number of radical changes in the machinery of Government, aimed at increas¬
ing its efficiency by improving methods of policy formulation and administra¬
tion, were announced on 15th October 1970. Those affecting this handbook are
as follows:
A unified Department of Trade and Industry has been formed from the
Ministry of Technology, without its aviation group (see p. 56), and from the
Board of Trade (see p. 57). The department has also assumed responsibility
for Government policy towards monopolies, mergers and restrictive practices
(see p. 239) previously exercised by the Department of Employment and Pro¬
ductivity (see p. 50), which has been renamed the Department of Employment.
The objective of the Department of Trade and Industry is to assist British
industry and commerce to improve their economic and technological strength,
and it has therefore been charged with establishing a general framework of
requirements, incentives and restraints within which firms will be able to
operate as freely as possible to their individual advantage. The department has
also been made responsible for the Government’s relations with the great
majority of industries in both the public and the private sectors.
One of the major functions of the department, and one for which special
machinery will be established, is to review the size and methods of the various
services now provided to help industry in order to determine whether they are
a proper charge on the State and, if so, whether the present system of organisa¬
tion is cost-effective and likely to produce the required result.
The department is in charge of a Secretary of State for Trade and Industry,
who also holds the office of President of the Board of Trade. The Secretary of
State is assisted by two Ministers—the Minister for Trade and the Minister for
Industry. The status of these Ministers is that of a Minister in charge of a
separate department not represented in the Cabinet.
As an interim stage of a long-term reshaping of defence research, development
and procurement, a Ministry of Aviation Supply has been set up, temporarily,
to take over all the aerospace functions of the aviation group of the former
Ministry of Technology, both civil and military. The new Ministry has its own
Minister who has full responsibility for all the civil aspects of his department’s
work, but has the same responsibility to the Secretary of State for Defence on its
defence aspects as previously existed between the Technology Ministers and
the Defence Secretary.
The Ministries of Housing and Local Government (see p. 52), of Public
Building and Works (see p. 56), and of Transport (see p. 57) have been unified
in a single Department of the Environment under a Secretary of State for the
Environment, who is assisted by a Minister for Local Government and De¬
velopment, a Minister for Housing and Construction, and a Minister for Trans¬
port Industries. Each of these Ministers (whose status is that of a Minister in
charge of a department not represented in the Cabinet) has full charge of his
functional wing of the department by delegation from the Secretary of State,
and has subordinate Ministers working to him within the field of policy which
falls to each.
ADDENDUM
Overseas Aid
Child Care
Wales
Cabinet Office
Income Tax
Corporation Tax
Agricultural
Support
Aid to Industry
The Ministry of Overseas Development (see p. 54) has become a functional wing
of the Foreign and Commonwealth Office. By delegation from the Secretary of
State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs, the Minister of Overseas Develop¬
ment continues to be in charge of overseas development administration.
Responsibility for the child care services in England and Wales is to be trans¬
ferred from the Home Secretary to the Secretary of State for Social Services
and the Secretary of State for Wales on 1st January 1971. At that date the
work of the Children’s Department of the Home Office will be transferred to
the Department of Health and Social Security and to the Welsh Office, except
for its responsibilities in connection with the functions of the courts, the police,
and the probation and after-care service in relation to children and the law on
these matters and its responsibility for the law on adoption, which will remain
with the Home Secretary.
In addition to child care, the Secretary of State for Wales is assuming
responsibility for primary and secondary education in Wales. Further, admini¬
strative arrangements have been made to ensure that, in future, the Welsh
Office (see p. 57) shares in the administration of the urban programme of
grants to areas of acute social deprivation.
A small central policy review staff is to be established within the Cabinet Office
(see p. 47). Under the supervision of the Prime Minister it will be at the dis¬
posal of Ministers collectively to assist them in working out the implications of
their basic strategy and establishing the relative priorities to be given to the
different sections of their programmes.
NEW POLICIES FOR PUBLIC SPENDING
In a statement in the House of Commons on 27th October 1970 the Chancellor
of the Exchequer announced new policies. Their objective is to concentrate
government activities and expenditure on those tasks which government alone
can perform: to enable the individual citizen to keep more of the money he
earns, have greater incentive to increase his earnings and greater freedom in
how he spends or saves his income. Some of them took effect immediately,
while others will come into effect progressively up to the end of 1975. The
immediate changes or those planned to take effect before the end of 1971, which
affect this handbook, are as follows:
The standard rate of income tax (see p. 363) is to be reduced from 41-25
per cent to 3875 per cent from 6th April 1971.
The corporation tax in respect of the financial year 1969-70, which becomes
payable from 1st January 1971, will be reduced from 45 per cent to 42 5 per
cent (see p. 364).
Levies on agricultural imports will be introduced and deficiency payments (see
p. 310) phased out.
Investment grants (see p. 251) were replaced immediately by a new system of
tax allowances for depreciation, with preferential treatment for development
areas.
The Industrial Reorganisation Corporation (see pp. 234 and 239) will be
wound up and the grants to the British Productivity Council (see p. 249)
phased out.
More will be spent on Government Training Centres (see p. 417) and other
training.
ADDENDUM
Social Security No benefit (see p. 127) will be paid for the first three days’ absence from work,
even if sickness absence lasts for more than 12 days.
An income supplement up to a maximum of ^S'oo a week will be paid in
addition to existing benefits (see p. 125), to low wage earners.
Subsidised welfare milk (see p. 139) is no longer available, but the arrange¬
ments for free milk continue unchanged.
Schools Subsidies for school meals (see p. 151) are to be phased out (raising the price
from £o-og to £0-12 in 1971 and to £0-14 by 1973). School milk is free for
children up to the age of seven or on medical recommendation.
More is to be spent on the educational building programme (see pp. 154
and 159).
Consumer Council The grants to the Consumer Council are to cease (see p. 409).
Housing The system of housing subsidies is to be refashioned with emphasis on help
for persons in need (see p. 180).
DEFENCE
A supplementary Statement on Defence Policy 1970 (Cmnd. 4521), presented
on 29th October 1970, sets out several changes in defence policy. Those which
affect this handbook are as follows:
Far East In South-East Asia, to help preserve stability and confidence in the area, Britain
will continue to make a military contribution to the defence of Malaysia and
Singapore, through an arrangement with Malaysia, Singapore, Australia and
New Zealand (see p. 109). The arrangement will be based on a political com¬
mitment of a consultative nature, replacing the bilateral Anglo-Malaysian
defence agreement: the British contribution, designed to complement the forces
of the other four governments, will consist of five frigates or destroyers, a
battalion group, a detachment of Nimrod maritime reconnaissance aircraft, and
Whirlwind helicopters.
Persian Gulf Britain is continuing discussions with leaders in the Gulf (see p. 115) and
other interested countries on how Britain can best contribute to the main¬
tenance of peace and stability in this area.
Royal Navy The Statement outlines improvements in the capabilities of Britain’s forces,
some of which will make possible an increased contribution to the North
Atlantic Treaty Organisation. The aircraft carrier Ark Royal (see p. 116) will
now be retained until the late 1970s, providing, in conjunction with shore-
based aircraft (see p. 114), invaluable air support at sea and a substantial
reinforcement of NATO’s maritime strength. The aircraft carrier Eagle will,
as planned, be phased out after 1972, and it is not planned to replace Ark Royal
with another fixed-wing carrier. The strike capability of surface ships will be
improved by the introduction of the surface-launched anti-ship guided missile
system, Exocet, a system developed by France, to be produced by a collaborative
programme.
Army For the Army, it has been decided, as a modification of the run-down of
major units already under way, to provide a number of additional small units;
to retain the Brigade of Gurkhas, at a strength of four or five battalions (see
p. 115), the greater part of which w'ill continue to be stationed in the Far East,
and to expand the T & AYR (see p. 112) in order to make provision for an un¬
committed reserve of, initially, 10,000 men, wFile increasing the contribution
of the reserve forces to NATO by the formation of an additional T & AYR
armoured car regiment.
ADDENDUM
Royal Air Force To improve the Royal Air Force’s close support capability, a greater proportion
of the Anglo-French Jaguar light-strike/trainer aircraft (see pp. 118-119) to be
purchased by the Royal Air Force will be the operational version enabling
Britain to augment the Jaguar front line by four squadrons: this will also con¬
stitute a significant increase in Britain’s contribution to NATO. The require¬
ment for a new jet trainer, for use in addition to the now smaller number of
Jaguar trainers, is still under consideration.
3rd November 1970
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE
7
Vital Statistics
and Population
Censuses
Vikings who, after settling in northern France, intermarrying with the French,
and assimilating the French language and customs, crossed to England and
conquered it in 1066.
It is neither possible nor suitable to attempt in this chapter to estimate the
relative importance of various early peoples—pre-Celts, Celts, Romans,
Anglo-Saxons and the Norsemen, including the Danes—in the ancestry of the
present English, Scots, Welsh and Irish. It is significant, however, that over
most of England and the Lowlands of Scotland the language which soon
came to predominate was English, mainly a marriage of Anglo-Saxon and
Norman-French, while the use of Celtic languages persisted in Wales,
Cornwall, the Isle of Man, the Highlands of Scotland and in Ireland.
The available records do not enable any precise estimates to be made of the
size of population or of the extent or direction of population movement until
the beginning of the nineteenth century. It is believed, however, that at the
end of the eleventh century the population of Great Britain was about
2 million, while at the end of the seventeenth century a reasonable contem¬
porary estimate put the population of England and Wales at 5! million and
that of Scotland at about 1 million. The main factor in this gradual growth of
population was a slow natural increase, the rate of which was retarded in
Britain, as in all countries before the development of medical science, by high
death rates and, in particular, by very high infant and maternal mortality.
Immigration from the continent of Europe has been an influence at certain
times and immigration from Commonwealth countries more recently.
From the beginning of the nineteenth century, information about the British
people—their number, sex, age, geographical distribution, births, deaths,
marriages, occupations, language and family structure—is relatively plentiful
and reliable. Most of it is derived from two main sources: the regular flow of
vital statistics (that is, statistical information based on statutory registration of
births, marriages and deaths) and the periodic census of population which
gives a national snapshot at a particular moment of time.
The compilation of complete records of births, marriages and deaths is
carried out by registrars of births and deaths, some of whom also act as
registrars of marriages. In England and Wales there are nearly 500 super¬
intendent registrars in charge of registration districts and some 1,200
registrars in charge of sub-districts. Registrars and superintendent registrars
are appointed by the county, county borough and London borough councils
but they act under the instruction of the Registrar General for England and
Wales, who is in charge of a central government department, the Office of
Population Censuses and Surveys, whose functions include regulating the
registration of births, deaths and marriages, with planning and carrying out
population censuses, and with the compilation and analysis of population
and vital statistics. There are corresponding authorities1 and similar arrange¬
ments in Scotland, Northern Ireland, the Channel Islands and the Isle of
Man.
Censuses of the people of Great Britain have been taken regularly every ten
years since 1801, except that there was no census in 1941 because of the
second world war. The latest full census covering the whole of the British
Isles was taken in 1961 by the appropriate authorities in England and Wales,
1 The various authorities are: the Office of Population Censuses and Surveys, Somerset
House, London; the General Register Office, Edinburgh; the General Register Office,
Fermanagh House, Belfast; the Governments of Jersey, of Guernsey and its associated
islands, and of the Isle of Man.
Total
Population
Future Growth
Birth and Death
Rates
BRITAIN I97i: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Scotland, Northern Ireland, the islands of the British seas and the Irish
Republic. Censuses were taken throughout Great Britain (on a sample basis)
and Northern Ireland in 1966 and the first provisional figures were published
in 1967.
The short demographic account given in this chapter is based mainly on
census reports and on the regular returns of births, marriages and deaths,
though some use has been made of other special investigations, including the
Reports of the Royal Commission on Population.1
The estimated population of Britain (excluding the populations of the
Isle of Man and the Channel Islands, see p. 1, which are not strictly parts of
Britain) at mid-1969 was some 55,534,000 people, compared with 52,709,000
in 1961, 38*2 million in 1901, and over 6'5 million in 1700. The main causes
of this great increase in numbers were a progressive reduction in death rates
and a continuance of high birth rates into the beginning of the twentieth
century.
Britain’s population density is one of the highest in the world: it was
approximately 589 persons per square mile (228 per sq. km.) at mid-1969, but
in England and Wales there were approximately 837 persons per square mile
(323 per sq. km.), and in Greater London 12,600 persons per square mile
(4,880 per sq. km.).
On the basis of present trends in birth and death rates and migration, Britain s
population is expected to continue growing to the end of the century, reaching
58,903,000 in 1980, 62,343,000 in 1990, and 66,509,000 in the year 2000.
For most of the nineteenth century the annual birth rate was about 35 per
thousand of the population, and the annual death rate was just over 20 per
thousand. Both birth and death rates fell over the last 20 years of the century,
but natural population increase changed little.
BIRTH RATES AND DEATH RATES
IN BRITAIN
These fertile years, with their comparatively high death rates in all age
groups, produced a population of low average age. But when death rates in all
age groups fell by an average of about a third, as they did between 1880 and
1910, the results were a very low general death rate, which helped to maintain
the population increase in spite of a fall in the birth rate, and a gradual
increase in the average age of the population. By the 1930s the birth rate had
1 This commission was appointed in 19441 hs main report was published in 1949-
Mortality
Causes
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE 9
fallen to less than half the nineteenth century rate. The population continued
to increase slowly, but its average age rose more rapidly.
Owing to the changing age composition, the general death rate has remained
nearly stationary since 1920 at around 12 per thousand of the population
though death rates have continued to fall heavily in every age group, particu¬
larly among pre-school-children, school-children, and adults in their thirties
and forties, with a consequent lengthening of the expectation of life from about
48 years at birth for a boy born in 1900 to 1910 and 52 years for a girl, to
nearly 68-5 years at birth for a boy born in 1965 to 1967 and 74-6 for a girl.
EXPECTATION OF LIFE AT BIRTH Years
Since 1933 the steady fall in the number of births has ceased. During the
second world war the birth rate began to rise and reached a temporary post¬
war peak of 20-7 per thousand population in 1947. It receded to slightly above
the pre-war level in the early 1950s, but from 1955 onwards began to rise,
reaching a peak of 18-7 per thousand in 1964. It has since been falling and was
16-6 per thousand population in 1969. The proportion of illegitimate births,
which reached a peak of 9-1 per cent of all live births in 1945, the last year of
the second world war, fell between 1945 and 1955, when it reached 4-5 per
cent; since then it has risen, but fell again latterly to about 8-3 per cent in
1969.
The causes of the decline in mortality include better nutrition, rising standards
of living, the advance of medical science, the growth of medical facilities,
improved health measures, better working conditions, education in personal
hygiene, and the smaller size of the family, which has reduced the strain on
mothers and enabled them to take greater care of their children.
Mortality from acute infectious diseases and from tuberculosis, and infant
and maternal mortality have declined very sharply. Mortality from the main
acute infectious diseases of childhood is less than a two-hundredth and
mortality from tuberculosis is about one-fifty-fifth of the rate prevailing in the
mid-nineteenth century. The infant mortality rate (deaths of infants under
one year old per thousand live births) has fallen from 142 in 1900-2 to 18-6
in 1969 and maternal mortality from 4*71 per thousand live births in 1900-2
to 0-19 in 1969. The reported mortality from some of the diseases of middle
and old age, such as cancer of the lung and coronary thrombosis, has risen
during the twentieth century, and this rise, though exaggerated by the
improvement in diagnosis, is at least partly real. Medicine has not yet dis¬
covered effective measures to combat some of these diseases, and improve¬
ment in positive health does not always bring increased immunity or resistance
to them.
IO
Sex Ratio
Marriage
and Divorce
Fertility Trends
Age
Distribution
BRITAIN I97i: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Total births of boys naturally exceed those of girls by about 6 per cent, but
stillbirth rates and mortality rates at almost all ages are higher for males, so
that in nearly all countries—and in Britain since records began—women
preponderate among the elderly and outnumber men in the total population.
In 1969 there were 106 females to every 100 males in Great Britain. Formerly
women outnumbered men in every age group from adolescence onwards.
Recently, however, the fall in stillbirths and infant mortality has reduced the
influence of these factors on sex ratio so that the age at which women begin
to outnumber men has advanced and is now about 45. On the other hand, the
lengthening of the expectation of life, which has been rather more marked for
women than for men, has increased the preponderance of women among the
elderly—there are now some 28 women over 70 years old to every 15 men—
and made it a weightier factor in the sex ratio of the whole population.
Over the past 30 years the proportion of the population of Great Britain who
are married has risen from 42-1 per cent in 1938 to 507 per cent in 1969, while
the proportion of single persons in the population over 15 years of age has
fallen from 36-1 per cent to 18 per cent. This change has been due mainly to
an increase in marriage rates among men and women in their late teens and
early twenties; whereas in 1938 only 25-4 per cent of young women aged 20 to
24 were married, in 1969, 57*2 per cent of them were. Earlier marriage has led to
a large increase in the number of children born to women under 30 years of
age and in recent years has contributed to a substantial acceleration of the total
flow of births into the population.
There were approximately 4 decrees of divorce made absolute in 1969 for
every 1,000 married couples in England and Wales; a substantial proportion of
divorced people marry again. Divorce is highest for girls marrying in their
teens, the ratio being twice as high as for women aged 20 to 24 at marriage.
The fall in birth rates in the latter part of the nineteenth and the early part
of the twentieth centuries was due mainly to a decline in the size of the family
(that is, the number of children born per married couple) caused by the spread
of deliberate family limitation. Couples married a hundred years ago produced
on the average rather more than six liveborn children. The decline seems to
have set in with those married in the 1860s, and continued until, for couples
married in the decade 1934-43, the average family size for Great Britain fell
to below 2-i. It rose again for those married in 1944 to 2-13. Later data
suggest some increase, though the present position is not wholly clear, in view
of the latest trends in the birth rate.
The generation of girls born about 1840, and married mostly between 20
and 30 years later, had about 40 per cent more children than were needed to
replace the original generation, while those born at the beginning of the present
century had only about 70 per cent of the number of children needed for
replacement. Since then the figure has been rising again and seems likely to
exceed full replacement with the generation born during the second world
war. The rise has been due mainly to the increased proportion of women
getting married and of children surviving to adult life.
The effect of the fall in the birth rate beginning in the latter part of the
nineteenth century was to reduce the ratio of children and old people to
adults of working age. This ratio was at a minimum in 1930. After 1936 the
number of children leaving school for work fell sharply owing to the drop in
the birth rate after 1921, but the population aged over 64, born during an era
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE
II
Migration
of high fertility and representing successive generations of steeply rising
numbers, increased very rapidly; the population aged over 40 was also in¬
creasing relatively faster than that between 15 and 40. The higher birth rates
after 1942 arrested the compensating fall in the number of children and further
reduced the proportion of people of conventional working age.
AGE DISTRIBUTION OF UNITED KINGDOM POPULATION
Million
(projected)
)Under15 15-64 d 65and over
Because of this high proportion of the young and the old in the present
population, which is expected to increase still further (see diagram), there is a
special need to make the best use of national human resources. In 1966 about
93 per cent of men and 50*5 per cent of women between 15 and 64 in Great
Britain were economically active in remunerative work (this includes those
temporarily out of work or sick). In addition some 23-5 per cent of men and
6-7 per cent of women aged 65 or more were still economically active. At the
other end of the scale, some 25-7 per cent of both boys and girls between 15
and 19 were continuing their education. The scope for recruiting more men
and women into the paid working force is therefore limited, and emphasis is
laid on technological improvements and wider training to raise productivity.
From the beginning of the nineteenth century until the 1930s the balance of
migration was markedly outward. Between 1815 and 1930 well over 20 million
people left Britain for destinations outside Europe, mainly in the Common¬
wealth and the United States. Many emigrants later returned and large
numbers of Europeans, mainly Russians, Poles, Germans and Hungarians,
entered the British Isles. Nevertheless, the net loss by migration from Britain’s
present area amounted to some 4 million between 1871 and 1931. Since then
the balance of migration for Britain as a whole was inward until 1967, after
which a small net outflow has been recorded. Scotland and Northern Ireland
have throughout continued to have a net outward movement of population
to countries overseas as well as to England and Wales.
There have been two main periods of net inflow into Britain since 1931. The
first was in the years 1931 to 1940 when emigration was very low, many
former emigrants returned, there was considerable net immigration from the
Irish Republic, and extensive immigration from Europe, including about a
quarter of a million refugees seeking sanctuary in Britain. The second, from
the 1950s, resulted from a large increase in net immigration from Common-
12
Nationality
Language
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
wealth countries, particularly West Indian countries, India and Pakistan.
In the three years 1960-62 total net immigration amounted to some 388,000
people, about three-quarters of them from the Commonwealth. It was
in these circumstances that the Government introduced the Commonwealth
Immigrants Act 1962, which gave it power to restrict the number of people
from the Commonwealth and, in principle, the Irish Republic who may
immigrate into Britain without assured prospects of employment or adequate
means of self-support, and to deport unsuitable immigrants (that is, those
convicted of offences and recommended for deportation by a court of law).
Some 36,500 Commonwealth citizens were admitted to settle in Britain in
1969 of whom nearly 29,500 were dependants of Commonwealth citizens
coming to reside in or already resident in Britain. The Commonwealth
Immigrants Act 1968 extended immigration control to citizens of the United
Kingdom and Colonies formerly exempt from control but who have no close
links with Britain: broadly speaking, those neither born, naturalised, adopted
or registered in Britain nor having a parent or grandparent who was. (For
welfare of immigrants see p. 146 and for conditions of entry see p. 416.)
The net emigration of United Kingdom citizens to Commonwealth
countries in 1969 was 96,000 and to foreign countries 42,000.
In 1968-69 about 61,000 foreigners and 45,000 Irish entered Britain for a
period of a year or more.
Under the British Nationality Act 1948, with insignificant exceptions, persons
who are born, or whose fathers were born, in the United Kingdom or in a
territory which was a colony of the United Kingdom on 1st January 1949, or
at the date of birth if later, or in a United Kingdom registered ship or aircraft,
are citizens of the United Kingdom and Colonies. Citizenship may also be
acquired: by descent (subject to certain requirements) from a paternal grand¬
father born in the United Kingdom or Colonies or from a more remote
paternal ancestor in the male line; by registration, for citizens of Common¬
wealth member countries or of the Irish Republic, for minor children and for
women married to citizens of the United Kingdom and Colonies; in conse¬
quence of an adoption order; and by naturalisation. The requirements for the
grant of a certificate of naturalisation include five years’ residence in the
United Kingdom or Colonies or five years’ Crown service, good character, a
sufficient knowledge of English and the intention to reside in the United
Kingdom or a colony or to remain in Crown service; over 30,000 persons
acquired citizenship by registration or naturalisation in 1969.
A citizen of the United Kingdom and Colonies does not forfeit his citizen¬
ship by acquiring or possessing the nationality or citizenship of another
country; nor does a woman who is a citizen of the United Kingdom and
Colonies lose her citizenship by marriage to an alien. Indeed, a citizen cannot
be deprived of his citizenship against his will except in very exceptional
circumstances (for example, if he has obtained naturalisation or registration
as a citizen by fraud). Any man or woman who is a citizen is, however, at
liberty to renounce citizenship if he or she possesses or acquires the nationality
or citizenship of another country.
Citizens of the other independent Commonwealth countries are, in United
Kingdom law, British subjects or Commonwealth citizens.
In England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland, English is the language
predominantly spoken. In Wales, however, Welsh, a form of British Celtic,
is the first language of the majority of the population in most of the western
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE
!3
counties and was spoken by 26 per cent of the population at the time of the
1961 census. (The Welsh Language Act 1967 affirmed the equal validity of
Welsh with English in the administration of justice and conduct of govern¬
ment business throughout Wales.) In Scotland, in 1961, nearly 81,000
persons, mainly in Ross and Cromarty, Inverness, Argyll and Lanark, spoke
the Scottish form of Gaelic,1 while a few families in Northern Ireland spoke
the Irish form of Gaelic. The Manx and Cornish varieties of Celtic are no
longer effectively living languages, although, in the Isle of Man, Manx is used
in addition to English for certain official pronouncements.
English is spoken throughout the Channel Islands, but a Norman-French
patois is still also spoken there by some people. French is still the official
TABLE 1
Populations
1901-1969
190L
1931“
1961°
1969
England
(excluding
Monmouth¬
shire)
Wales and
Monmouth¬
shire
Scotland
Persons
Males
Females
Persons
Males
Females
Persons
Males
Females
30,514,967
14,717,155
15,797,812
2,012,876
1,011,458
1,001,418
4,472,103
2,173,755
2,298,348
37,359,045
17,839,205
19,519,840
2,593,332
1,293,805
1,299,527
4,842,980
2,325,523
2,517,457
43,460,525
21,012,069
22,448,456
2,644,023
1,291,764
1,352,259
5,179,344
2,482,734
2,696,610
46,102,300
22,423,700
23,678,600
2,724,500
1,328,300
1,396,200
5,194,700
2,493,900
2,700,800
Great Britain
Persons
Males
Females
36,999,946
17,902,368
19,097,578
44,795,357
21,458,533
23,336,824
51,283,892
24,786,567
26,497,325
54,021,500
26,245,900
27,775,600
Northern
Ireland
Persons
Males
Females
1,236,952
589,955
646,997
1,243,000*’
601,000*'
642,000*’
1,425,042
694,224
730,818
1,512,500
737,800
774,700
Totals Great
Britain and
Northern
Ireland
Persons
Males
Females
38,236,898
18,492,323
19,744,575
46,038,357
22,059,533
23,978,824
52,708,934
25,480,791
27,228,143
55,534,000
26,983,700
28,550,300
Isle of Man
Jersey
Guernsey and
Associated
Islands
Persons
Males
Females
Persons
Males
Females
Persons
Males
Females
54,752
25,496
29,256
52,576
23,940
28,636
43,042
21,140
21,902
49,308
22,443
26,865
50,462
23,424
27,038
42,743
20,675
22,068
48,133
22,034
26,099
63,550
30,715
32,835
47,099
22,718
24,381
49,812
23,003
26,809
72,656
n.a.
n.a.
48,433
n.a.
n.a.
Source: Census Reports and Estimates by Population Authorities.
n.a. =not available.
0 Census figures.
6 Estimate (censuses were taken in 1926 and 1937, but not in 193 O-
1 Most of the islands off the west coast of Scotland where Gaelic is spoken are included
in the counties of Ross and Cromarty, Inverness and Argyll.
H
Distribution of
Population
TABLE 2
Population
Distribution
1961-1981“
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
language of Jersey, used for ceremonial and official procedure; both French
and English are used in the courts. In Guernsey, however, English is now used
for almost all official proceedings.
The population of England is, and has been for centuries, greater than that
of all other parts of Britain. The distribution of the British population by
country, as enumerated by selected population censuses back to 1901 (or
nearest possible estimate), is shown in Table 1, which also gives figures for the
Isle of Man and the Channel Islands. The populations of England, Wales,
Scotland and Northern Ireland were in every case greater in 1961 than in 1931
and in 1931 than in 1901, and they rose again between 1961 and 1969.
The high rate of increase in England is partly due to migration from the other
three countries.
Geography, history and economic factors have given rise to the differences
between the four countries and to an uneven distribution of the population
within them. Table 2 shows the areas and populations of the eight standard
administrative regions of England in 1961 and 1969, as well as those of Wales,
Standard regions of England:
North  
Yorkshire and Humberside
North-West
East Midlands
West Midlands
East Anglia
South-East
South-West
Wales
Scotland
Northern Ireland
Area b in
square
km.
19,350
14,198
7,986
12,176
13,013
12,566
27,400
23,659
20,761
78,767
14,120
square
miles
7,470-9
5,481-8
3,083-3
4,701-1
5,024-4
4,851-6
10,584-8
9,134-9
8,015-8
30,412-1
5,451-8
Thousands
1961
3,249-0
4,628-1
6,546-6
3,107-0
4,762-9
1,489-8
16,350-5
3,436-1
2,635-2
5,183-8
1,427-4
1969
(esti¬
mated)
3,346
4,810
6,770
3,349
5,145
1,657
17,295
3,730
2,724
5,195
1,512
1981
(pro¬
jected)
3,433
4,959
7,040
3,742
5,516
1,941
18,281
4,099
2,822
5,347
1,646
Source: Census Reports and Estimates by Population Authorities.
a The boundaries of some of the administrative areas have been altered from time to
time. The population figures given relate in England to areas defined at 1961 and at
1 st April 1969.
6 Area at the date of the 1966 census.
Scotland and Northern Ireland, with forecasts for 1981. Table 3 gives figures
of Britain’s larger urban populations (over 250,000). About half the British
population lives within the area of an ellipse drawn across England enclosing
south Lancashire and west Yorkshire at one end, and the London area at the
other, having the industrialised Midlands at its heart. Other areas with large
populations are the central lowlands of Scotland; 1,000 square miles (1,609
sq. km.) in the north-east of England from north of the river Tyne down to the
river Tees; south-east Wales; the Bristol area; and the English Channel coast
from Poole, in Dorset, eastwards. Less densely populated areas are the
eastern fringes of England between the Wash and the Thames estuary, and the
far south-west. Most of the mountainous parts of Britain, including much of
Urban Dispersal
TABLE 3
Selected
Urban
Populations®
1951-1969
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE 15
Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland and the central Pennine Chain in
northern England, are very sparsely populated.
These differences in average density between different regions have been
widening. Though in most places the population has been increasing, there
have been local differences in the rate of increase. Many places in the Midlands
and south-east England, some south-coast areas and some of the most
prosperous parts of northern England, Wales and Scotland have had increases
well above the average national rate, while many of the older industrial towns
and remote country areas in northern England, Wales and Scotland and some
coastal resorts have had relatively small increases. The differences result from
the combined effect of natural increase in almost all areas and net migration
towards the expanding employment opportunities of the Midlands and south
and towards certain retirement areas, mainly on the south coast.
Throughout Britain the population is predominantly urban and suburban,
although there may be access to large parks, commons and other expanses of
open country within the urban area. Table 4 shows the distribution of the
people of Britain between areas classified as urban for administrative purposes
and those classified as rural.
Belfast
Bristol
Cardiff
Central Clydeside
Glasgow ..
Coventry
Edinburgh ..
Greater London
Kingston upon Hull
Leicester
Merseyside
Liverpool
Nottingham
Sheffield
South-East Lancashi
Manchester
Stoke on Trent
Teesside*
Tyneside
Newcastle upon Tyne
West Midlands
Birmingham
Wolverhampton
West Yorkshire
Bradford ..
Leeds
Area in
square
km.
64-0
109- 5
61-2
780-0
157-0
81- 5
135-0
1,595-0
58-4
73- 3
390-0
112-7
74- 2
160-2
980-3
110- 2
82- 5
177-5
230-4
44-7
678-0
208-8
69-0
1,257-0
103-2
164-5
square
miles6
24-7
42- 3
23-6
300-2
60- 5
31-4
52-0
616-4
22-5
28-3
150-3
43- 5
28-7
61- 9
379-6
42-6
35-8
68-5
90-2
17-3
261-8
80-6
26-6
484-6
39-9
63-5
Thousands
1951
(census)
444
443
244
1,758
1,090
258
467
8,201
299
285
1,386
789
306
513
2,423
703
275
836
292
2,237
1,113
163
1,693
292
506
1961
(census)
416
437
257
1,802
1,055
306
468
7,997
303
273
1,384
746
312
494
2,428
662
265
855
270
2,378
1,107
151
1,704
296
511
1969
(esti¬
mated)
386
427*
286*
1,746
928
336*
465
7,703
293*
278*
1,342
677
303
529*
2,433
594
272*
840
240
2,441
1,086*
265*
1,727
293
504
Source: Census Reports and Estimates by Population Authorities.
0 The boundaries of some of the administrative areas have been altered from time to
time. The population figures given for cities in Scotland and Northern Ireland relate in
general to the areas as these were defined in the year noted at the head of each column.
Other figures relate in general to approximately the same areas throughout, except
that the figures marked with an asterisk take account of boundary changes since 1961.
6 Area at the date of the 1966 census of population.
c New unit created April 1968.
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
l6
TABLE 4
Population
Distribution
between Town
and Country
1931-1969“
England and Wales:
Urban districts .
Rural districts
Scotland:
Cities and burghs
Landward areas .
Northern Ireland:
Urban districts
Rural districts
Area1 in
square
km.
21,503
129,619
1,218
75,955
240
13,880
square
miles
8,302-2
50,046-3
470-3
29,325-8
92-8
5,359-0
1931
31,952
8,000
3,362
1,481
678c
602c
Thousands
1951
35,336
8,422
3,563
1,534
728
643
1961
36,872
9,233
3,646
1,533
771
656
1969
(esti¬
mated)
38,386
10,441
3,707
1,488
840
673
Source: Census Reports and Estimates by Population Authorities.
a The boundaries of some of the administrative areas have been altered from time to
time. The population figures given relate in general to the areas as these were defined
in the year noted at the head of each column.
6 Area at the date of the 1966 census.
c 1937 census figures.
During the nineteenth century the labour demands of newly developing
industry drew great numbers from the countryside; by the end of the century
three-quarters of the British population was living in towns and the large
conurbation wTas already the dominant type of British community. During the
twentieth century the suburbs of the towns in these population centres have
continued to spread and merge. Since 1921 nearly 40 per cent of the popula¬
tion has lived in the seven great conurbations whose centres are the cities of
London (Greater London), Manchester (South-East Lancashire), Birmingham
and Wolverhampton (West Midlands), Glasgow (Central Clydeside), Leeds
and Bradford (West Yorkshire), Liverpool (Merseyside) and Newcastle upon
Tyne (Tyneside).
In recent years there has been a decline in the numbers of people living in
inner urban areas, balanced or surpassed by the increase of population in and
beyond the outer suburban fringes (limited in certain areas by the ‘green belt’
policy where little development is permitted). This applies most strikingly to
London, also to the outer areas of the West Midlands and Merseyside
conurbations and to Bristol, Derby, Leicester, Norwich, Oxford, Portsmouth
and Sheffield. These two trends, the movement out of the centre and develop¬
ment on the fringes, help to explain why the figures in Table 3 show apparent
decreases in some urban populations in recent years.
Factors in the further dispersal of the last few years have been the spread of
car ownership, expansion in public transport serving journeys to work, private
property developments to meet the demand for housing, and planned transfers
of population to the new towns around London, Glasgow, the West Midlands
and Merseyside and to selected expanding towns near to the great cities.
Mobility The extent to which people in Britain move about the country for work,
housing or study purposes is shown by the finding that 10-7 per cent of
residents in Great Britain in 1966 had changed their address in the preceding
year and 33 per cent in the previous five years; 4-2 per cent had moved
between England and Scotland or Wales, or from one region to another,
during 1961-66.
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE
Households
Dwellings
Housework
i?
SOCIAL LIFE
A summary of trends in social organisation, similar in scope to the foregoing
summary of population trends, is not practicable. However, some points of gen¬
eral interest about the structure of households and social habits in Britain will
provide a background to the information given in later chapters of the hand¬
book, in particular those on housing, transport and town and country planning.
The great majority of people enumerated in the 1966 sample census in Great
Britain (over 97 per cent) were living in private households (usually in families
or on their own). The remainder included such people as residents in hotels,
people in hospital, in the Armed Services and in educational or other institu¬
tions. Of 16-9 million private households in Great Britain in 1966 about 15 per
cent consisted of one person only, 30 per cent of two persons, 21 per cent of
three, 18 per cent of four and 16 per cent of five or more. The number of
households (which had increased by 96 per cent since 1911) and their small
average size (three persons) reflect a number of factors including lower birth
rates, the higher proportion of married people in the population, and the
increased tendency for young people, married and single, and for independent
elderly people to have their own separate homes. Social factors such as the
greater general availability of housing, the rehousing of slum dwellers outside
city centres, and a greater readiness by people to change their place of work
have helped to weaken the family unit and increase the dangers of loneliness,
particularly for the elderly. The persisting strength of family ties is, however,
reflected in the frequency of home visiting at weekends and at holiday
times.
In 1969, of 18-9 million dwellings, about one-half were owner occupied,
about one-third rented from public authorities, and one-sixth privately rented.
Towards the centre of large towns new housing is usually provided in the form
of multi-storey blocks of flats, but in the suburbs most people live in streets of
semi-detached or detached two-storey houses with gardens. Altogether some
85 per cent of families in Great Britain live in houses, and about 14 per cent
in flats. Standards of new housing have improved considerably—the average
size of houses has increased by 20 per cent in the last 30 years—and the degree
of overcrowding is lower than in most other European countries. There has
also been an increase in the number of houses with modern conveniences;
of some 16*3 million households enumerated in the 1966 sample census in
Great Britain, about 85 per cent had exclusive use of a hot water system and
81 per cent (in England and Wales) had a fixed bath, with an additional
increasing number having showers.
Much of the drudgery of housework has been reduced by changes in habits
and equipment, for instance, the increased use of easily cleaned plastic sur¬
faces in place of materials which need scrubbing or polishing, and of non-iron
fabrics and babies’ disposable napkins; the availability of convenience foods
(processed foods requiring little additional preparation before consumption),
and hot, ‘take-home’ meals (including the traditional fish and chips); and the
spread of labour-saving devices. More than four households in five have a
vacuum cleaner, one in two a refrigerator, two out of three a washing machine,
nearly all an electric iron, one in two an electric blanket, and one in five
an electric food mixer. An increasing, though still comparatively small num¬
ber possess a dish-washing machine. Nearly one household in three has
Income,
Leisure and
Opportunities
BRITAIN I971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
completely eliminated the traditional coal fire in the principal living room.
There is a trend towards conversion to ‘whole house’ or central heating by
means of oil, gas, or solid fuel systems or by off -peak electric storage heaters;
of all new dwellings in England and Wales nearly 90 per cent have central
heating.
Most women, and many men living alone, do their own catering and house¬
work ; probably less than five per cent of households employ any regular paid
help, and less than half of one per cent in England and Wales have a resident
servant. A few households (estimated at one in 750, and those mainly ones
with small children) have a foreign girl living with them au pair. Some
households get help through the local authority Home Help Service because
of particular need, for example, if there is an invalid or elderly person in the
house or because a mother is having her baby at home (about 20 per cent do).
Women who go out to work (about half the women of working age are in
employment) benefit, among other things, from launderettes with extended
opening hours and from shops, particularly departmental stores and super¬
markets, which stay open late at least one evening a week.
Most people have considerably more free time (which they have greater op¬
portunities to use as they wish) together with greater educational opportuni¬
ties and higher real incomes than had previous generations.
Agreed hours of full-time work are usually from 40 to 42 a week, although
men actually work somewhat longer because of voluntary overtime working,
while the hours worked by women and girls average a little less. Some
five or six hours a week are spent by the majority of people in travelling
to and from work. Almost all employees are entitled to a minimum of two
weeks’ paid holiday a year in addition to public holidays, and nearly half
have three. Britain has fewer public holidays than nearly all other European
countries. Probably more than half the working population already enjoy a
five-day week—most people employed in factories and offices have Saturdays
and Sundays free—and a further extension of five-day working in dis¬
tributive trades offering a six-day week service is in progress.
In the last decade average earnings have risen more than prices. Women’s
earnings have risen rather less than men’s. Although the principle of equal
pay for equal work applies in many occupations and is to be extended under
legislation passed in 1970, the average earnings of women in industry are still
under half the average earnings of men. The real incomes of manual workers,
especially unskilled workers and young people under 18 years old, have risen
both in absolute terms and in relation to the incomes of non-manual workers.
The weakest groups economically are retired people wholly or mainly depen¬
dent on pensions, households in which the father is dead or absent, and low
wage earners with a number of young children.
Illustrative of the widening opportunities for education and training is the
increase in the proportion of young people benefiting from non-compulsory
education. In 1967-68, for instance, 38-1 per cent of 16-year-olds entered
some form of full-time education, compared with 29 per cent in 1963-64.
The proportion of 18-year-olds continuing full-time education, other than in
schools, in 1967-68 was 14-2 per cent—an increase of 4-3 per cent over four
years. A large number of undergraduates in Great Britain are, moreover,
‘first generation’ students, neither of whose parents had a university educa¬
tion. Although the children of professional parents are still more likely to go
on to higher education than the children of manual workers—a reflection of
the continuing influence of parental education and encouragement—a higher
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE 19
proportion of the children of manual workers in Britain receive higher educa¬
tion than in most other European countries.
Over the last decade social differences between manual and other workers
have become less pronounced. Increased prosperity and modern production
and marketing methods have allowed many workers to adopt ways of living
formerly regarded as ‘middle-class’. The increased diversity of market pro¬
ducts and lower prices have permitted a much freer expression of personal
taste for everyone, irrespective of class. Styles in clothes, for example, vary
more according to age group than according to income group or occupation.
The general level of nutrition is high and is still rising. Because most
housewives have more money to spend, and because those at work have less
time for cooking, the sale of better quality cuts of meat and the more expensive
prepared foods has substantially increased. Poultry, vegetables, butter and
cream are among the other foodstuffs consumed in greater quantities than a
decade ago while the consumption of bread and flour has declined. Tea
remains the most popular beverage, but more people drink coffee, including
‘instant’ coffee, than ever before. The consumption of considerable quantities
of sweets and chocolate (some 7-6 oz. per person a week in 1969) remains a
notable feature of British eating habits. Many more people are now interested
in ‘good eating’, both of traditional English food and exotic dishes. Restaurants
providing the national dishes of other countries are to be found throughout
Britain; Chinese restaurants predominate but there are also many which
specialise in Indian, Pakistani and Italian food, while the growth in the
number of French bistros has widened the available range of French cuisine.
The quality of domestic cooking has also improved and menus have become
more imaginative, helped by cookery journalism, including television demon¬
strations, and a great variety of paper-backed recipe books. Increased
affluence and tastes acquired abroad have likewise increased the demand for
wines, spirits and liqueurs—during the 1960s sales of wines nearly doubled.
Beer remains the most popular alcoholic drink in Britain, consumption per
head in 1969 being 173 pints.
Although more cigarettes were smoked in 1969 (nearly 125,000 million 01
about 40 a week per head of population) than ten years previously, the in¬
crease was due to a trend towards smaller (and cheaper) cigarettes and not to
an increase in the total consumption of cigarette tobacco, which has fallen
since 1959. During the same period, while sales of pipe tobacco also declined,
sales of cigar tobacco increased nearly threefold. In a consumer survey
carried out in 1969, 68 per cent of men and 43 per cent of women described
themselves as smokers.
The share of expenditure on food in total consumer expenditure on goods
and services has declined from 25 per cent in 1959 to 20-5 per cent in 1969.
Clothing and footwear account for about 8 per cent. The most noticeable
developments have been in the growing range of leisure clothes, in the more
adventurous styling in men’s wear, and in the large turn-over in mass pro¬
duced fashions for young people, with frequent (and sometimes startling)
changes of style. In this branch of fashion, British designers are among the
leading designers in the world.
The greatly increased diversification and output of consumer products have
been accompanied by a growth of activity to protect and help the shopping
public; this has received Government support, notably by the establishment of
the Consumer Council. Which?, the magazine of the Consumer’s Association,
a non-governmental organisation, publishes appraisals of selected consumer
goods and has some 600,000 subscribers with an estimated readership of over
20
Home hiterests
BRITAIN 1971: an OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
three million. Over a million people a year visit the Design Centre in London
where consumer goods in current production, which meet its criteria of good
design, are displayed.
In Britain, as in many other countries, a considerable proportion of people’s
free time is spent in their homes; on a weekday evening, for instance, seven
out of eight of the adult population are likely to be found at home, watching
television, reading newspapers or books, listening to the radio or the record
player, playing musical instruments (guitars are particularly popular among
young people), or entertaining friends. Many of them also have hobbies,
some of which demand considerable skill and financial outlay, their varied
interests being catered for by magazines and periodicals of all kinds, including
papers dealing with sport, ‘fan’ magazines about current ‘pop’ music, do-it-
yourself and gardening weeklies, and illustrated instructional periodicals
which build up into encyclopedias of art, science or general knowledge.
Almost all families in Britain have a television set and it is thought that more
leisure time is spent watching television than on any other pastime; it is
estimated that a television set is, on average, in use for about 4 hours a day.
Audiences for the most popular programmes exceed 20 million.
Nearly one-third of the total population are registered members of public
libraries. Book sales have increased—a widening range of titles, including
works of scholarship, being bought in the comparatively cheap ‘paper-backed’
form, which constitutes about a third of total book production. More ‘comics’1
are produced per head of the child population than in any other European
country; their sale reaches about eight million a week, and each comic is read,
on average, by about eight children.
Sales of long-playing records (LPs), including ‘pop’ albums, have increased
sharply during the past decade, partly in response to lower prices; the 1969
production figures of nearly 60 million were four times higher than in 1959.
The production of ‘extended play’ and ‘single’ records—on the weekly sales
of which the ‘pop’ music popularity placings, known as the ‘Top Ten’ and
the ‘Top Twenty’, are calculated—reached its peak in 1964; in 1969 produc¬
tion figures were 47 million.
About four out of five families do most of their own decorating, and the
large sales of hand-tools and of small power tools testify to the extent and
range of home carpentry and other crafts. Gardening is another major interest;
in spite of the high proportion of the population living in urban areas, at least
half the families in Britain have some garden, and the general standard of
cultivation in both town and country gardens is high. Over 3,000 local
horticultural societies are affiliated to the National Allotment Garden Society,
and there are a large number of unaffiliated societies. Probably about 20
million people do some gardening in their spare time. The numerous flower
and vegetable shows held in town and country are very popular, and there is a
large attendance at the more important of them, including the annual Chelsea
Flower Show.
In Britain, nearly one household in two has a pet, according to an estimate;
the favourite pets are budgerigars, cats and dogs. Annual registrations of
pedigree dogs at the Kennel Clubs have more than trebled since 1938—
reaching a total of 170,000 in 1969; the leading breed in numbers, is the
Alsatian. There are 3,500 dog shows every year, of which Cruft’s is the best
1 Comics are papers for children (normally appearing weekly) which consist largely of
picture stories and cartoons. Horror comics are illegal.
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE
21
Entertainments
Outside the Home
known; breeders number between 20,000 and 25,000; and exports of dogs
(as few as 577 twenty years ago) exceeded 14,500, worth ^14 million in 1969.
The increasing diversity of entertainments outside the home includes, for
young people, discotheques and ‘pop’ concerts, and, for wider age-groups, the
many and varied coffee bars. The cinemas, several of which show inter¬
national as well as British films, are popular among young people, although
audiences in general have been declining for several years. Theatres continue
to appeal to all age groups throughout Britain; although the theatre-going
public is not a large one, the new theatres opened during the last decade in
and around London and in the regions are well supported. Ballet, opera, and
concerts of classical music also have an enthusiastic and growing public.
Amateur dramatic and music-making societies flourish, encouraged by the
increasing number of local and national festivals which have become a feature
of British cultural life. Special art exhibitions often attract large audiences;
nearly 160,000 visited the 1970 Rodin Exhibition at the Hayward Gallery,
which was opened in 1968 on the South Bank in London.
Dancing is very popular, especially with those under 35 years of age; it is
thought that over 6 million people go dancing each week. There are between
3,000 and 4,000 regular dance halls throughout the country, including public
dance halls and halls operated by the major dance schools (which are open at
least three times a week), and about 4,000 other schools of dancing. Public
dances are often held in other halls, while many of the clubs and societies
which abound in Britain hold dances occasionally in their own or hired
premises. For younger people formal ballroom dancing is fast being super¬
seded by dances involving spontaneous movement to the rhythms and moods
of ‘pop’ music. However, ballroom dancing, together with Scottish, English
and Irish traditional dances retains a following, particularly among the over¬
thirties. The three-day folk dancing festival at the Royal Albert Hall in
London attracts a daily attendance of some 6,000 every year.
The public house—the ‘pub’ or the ‘local’—has for many years been a
centre of social life for a large number of people (especially men) in Britain.
Pubs, besides offering a wide variety of alcoholic and non-alcoholic drinks and
providing (in increasing numbers) hot and cold food, serve as places for meet¬
ing friends and for entertainment; many have, for instance, television sets,
amusement machines and juke-boxes and provide facilities for playing darts,
billiards, dominoes and similar games. Some also employ musicians for even¬
ing entertainment, such as piano playing, folk singing and modern jazz.
‘Bingo’1 is widely played in converted cinemas and in club rooms and village
halls; legalised by the gambling Acts of the 1960s, it provides a form of social
entertainment of particular value to the elderly and lonely, and does not
involve large sums of money. There has also been a considerable growth in
the number of commercial gaming clubs established, which now operate under
strict legislative control. Betting shops number over 15,000. The turnover of
money staked by the public on horse and greyhound racing is of the order of
£1,100 million a year, about three-quarters of which is staked on horse-races.
Betting on football matches, both at fixed odds and through football pools, is
widespread, but usually for smaller stakes.
Increasing prosperity and leisure have affected interest in playing and
watching both outdoor and indoor sports—an interest which has been stimu¬
lated by frequent television broadcasts of sporting events. According to the
1 Bingo is a traditional game of chance played by groups of people for prizes. It is
also known as ‘lotto’ or ‘housey-housey’.
22
Clubs and Groups
Holidays
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) audience research figures, the sports
most popular with viewers, are, in order: football, boxing, athletics, show-
jumping, horse-racing and tennis. Large crowds continue to be attracted to
the major sporting spectacles, such as the association football ‘Cup Final’ at
Wembley, the international rugby matches at Twickenham, the Lawn Tennis
Championships at Wimbledon, and the five ‘classic’ horse-races. A growth in
active participation is reported by the governing bodies of almost every sport.
With more money to spend more people are able to enjoy minority sports,
such as golf, sailing, riding and ski-ing. The steadily rising sales of sports
goods indicate the increased enthusiasm for open air leisure activities,
especially among younger people.
A number of people in all age-groups and occupations spend much of their
free time in the more serious group activities associated, for instance, with the
churches, the trade unions, local or national politics, social welfare and reform,
and in educational and cultural pursuits—every year some one and a half
million people attend non-vocational adult education classes in a very wide
range of subjects. A feature of recent years has been the forming of new groups
outside the official welfare bodies to meet newly recognised needs—the Cam¬
bridge Literacy Group, for instance, which helps illiterate adults to learn to
read and write. Novel methods of fund-raising, such as sponsoring long¬
distance walks, have been introduced.
Some of the longer-established clubs and societies are organised on a
national basis and have branches throughout the country; these include the
Working Men’s Clubs and Institutes, the Townswomen’s Guilds and the
Women’s Institutes. Working Men’s Clubs, affiliated to the Working Men’s
Club and Institute Union, number some 3,000 and have over three million
members (mainly but not entirely men); primarily social and recreational in
nature, the clubs aim at providing amenities comparable with the comforts of
members’ homes and at arranging events, including lectures and classes, of
sufficient interest to compete with the entertainment provided by television.
Over 2,700 Townswomen’s Guilds, with a total membership of some quarter
of a million, are affiliated to the National Union of Townswomen’s Guilds.
The guilds are educational as well as social in purpose, and they co-operate
in many public welfare activities. The declared objective of the National
Federation of Women’s Institutes is to improve rural life and amenities; in
villages throughout England and Wales there are nearly 9,000 institutes with
a total of nearly half a million members. In Scotland and Northern Ireland
there are Women’s Rural Institutes with similar aims and interests.
At least 35 million people in Britain take an annual holiday and many now
take two holidays a year. Most people spend their holidays away from home;
one in two travel by car (three in ten going abroad), most of them preferring
to tour. The number of people who go abroad for their holidays has risen from
a million in the early 1950s to nearly 6 million in 1969. The popularity of
foreign travel is attributable to several factors besides rising incomes: the
attraction of the sun which makes Spain and Italy the most sought-after
destinations for the British tourist; the many charter and other air-line services
provided; and the readiness of the travel trade to provide inexpensive,
inclusive holidays. A by-product has been an increase in the number of adults
who, with the help of radio and television programmes and by attending adult
classes, are studying foreign languages to add to what they learned at school.
Of those who stay in Britain an increasing number enjoy active holidays, such
as canoeing, sailing and pony-trekking; camping under canvas, in caravans and
Private Transport
The Changing
Face of Britain
Changes in
British Society
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE 23
in specially equipped vehicles, is becoming increasingly popular among
holiday makers.
More people in Britain own cars than ever before and the number is still
rising. There is an increasing number of ‘two-car’ families and some families
have more. In mid-1969 there were about 11*2 million cars licensed on the
roads in Great Britain, compared with 5 million in 1959. There are still a
large number of motor cycles (including motor scooters)—1-2 million in 1969
—but fewer than in 1962, when the licence figure was 1*9 million. Sales of
bicycles to the home market fell from 952,000 in 1959 to 549,000 in 1969.
Although the number of motor vehicles has continued to increase, the
number of total casualties from road accidents has not risen proportionately.
The 1969 figures of 7,380 killed and 90,700 seriously injured, though higher
than those of 1968, were still lower than those of five years ago. The rate of
deaths per 1,000 vehicles licensed has been progressively reduced from 3-2
in 1930 to 0-5 in 1969, partly through advances in medical and surgical
techniques as well as in vehicle design, road construction and road safety
legislation, for instance the introduction of the ‘breathalyser’ (a means of
administering a breath test to indicate the level of alcohol in the blood).
Increasing population and social developments are affecting the physical
appearance of Britain. The spread of car ownership, which has changed the
whole pattern of leisure activities, has also led to a new and more scattered
distribution of houses and to different siting for factories, shops and offices. It
is also one of the main reasons for the large-scale urban reconstruction and
road development programmes which are now being carried out. In general,
towns and cities are being altered to accommodate more traffic and house more
people; experiments are being tried in remodelling town centres with
pedestrian precincts; multi-storey blocks of flats and offices pierce the skyline.
In addition to new roads and motorways, more reservoirs are needed to supply
the growing demand for water and more lines to carry electric power for the
growing volume of appliances.
In a modern industrial society in a densely populated country there is much
scope for conflict between the need for new communal facilities and the desire
to preserve existing beauty or places of historic interest, and between potential
users of a new service and people whose way of life is threatened by the
need to accommodate it. As a result the activities of the established amenity
societies, such as the Council for the Preservation of Rural England, the
National Trust and the Georgian Society, are being supplemented to a growing
extent by those of groups formed expressly to study the implications of
particular proposals and to give publicity to the views of the people they
represent.
Growing public concern about the dangers both to health and to the natural
environment caused by the unregulated disposal of industrial and human
waste, by exhaust fumes and by the rising volume of noise endemic in highly
technical societies is reflected in the appointment by the government of a
standing Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution and an Advisory
Commission on Noise. European Conservation Year 1970 gave an impetus to
the activities of societies such as the National Society for Clean Air, the Noise
Abatement Society and the Council for Nature.
In the past 20 years the traditional pattern of life in Britain has undergone
considerable change. Not only have distinctions of class and social habits
become less rigid, but subjects formerly taboo in public discussion are now
B
24
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
openly considered in books, plays and films and in ordinary conversation. A
more informed tolerance of behaviour which deviates from the usual pattern is
reflected, for instance, in the growing popular sympathy for the difficulties of
the unmarried mother. The passing of new laws on such matters as abortion,
divorce and homosexuality, although disliked by many people (particularly of
the older generation) is nevertheless indicative of public unwillingness to
penalise individuals with particular personal problems. Similarly, changes in
the law applying to young offenders reflect the view that it is unreasonable to
treat children who have broken the law as fundamentally different from other
children in trouble.
This liberalising trend is balanced by a recognition that, in some areas,
restrictions on some freedoms must be extended in the interests of society as
a whole—hence legislation on race relations and the control of dangerous
drugs and firearms.
Relationships between the generations are also undergoing considerable
change, with the result that there is today a greater readiness than there has
ever been on the part of children and young people to criticise traditional
institutions and to seek more influence in shaping society. This desire foi
personal involvement is manifest not only among those prepared to demon¬
strate for or against certain courses of action and to bring pressure on the
responsible authorities, but also among the increasing numbers of young
people who offer their services, both as individuals and as members of
voluntary organisations, to help the old, the immigrants, the disabled, the
illiterate, and others in need.
2 GOVERNMENT
GENERAL SURVEY
The United Kingdom is a monarchical State, whose origins and traditions
are to be found in the history of each of its four component parts: England,
Wales, Northern Ireland and Scotland. England was unified under a Saxon
king in the ninth century; Wales became part of that kingdom and Ireland
was joined with it before the end of the thirteenth century; and the English
and Scottish thrones were dynastically united in the person of James I and VI
in 1603. In 1707 the Treaty for the Union of England and Scotland provided
that the two countries ‘should be forever united into one kingdom’, and one
Parliament (the Parliament of Great Britain) became the supreme authority
in both countries. In 1801 the Act for the Union of Great Britain and Ireland
1800, which joined the Irish Parliament to the Parliament of Great Britain,
established the United Kingdom. In 1922 the 26 counties of Southern Ireland
(now the Republic of Ireland) became a self-governing country, outside the
United Kingdom. Meantime, the Government of Ireland Act 1920 had
enacted a constitution for Northern Ireland which, while preserving the
supreme authority of the United Kingdom Parliament, provided Northern
Ireland with its own legislature and executive, to deal with domestic
affairs.
The United Kingdom is a unitary, not a federal, State but methods of
government are flexible and, to some extent, adapted to the needs of the
constituent countries. England and Wales on the one hand, and Scotland on
the other, continue as before the Union to have different systems of law, a
different judiciary, different educational systems, different systems of local
government, national churches on a different footing, and, for most domestic
matters, different government departments. In Scotland these departments
have headquarters in Edinburgh and are grouped under the Secretary of
State for Scotland, who is a member of the Cabinet.
There is also a considerable measure of devolution in the administration of
Welsh affairs to the Welsh Office, under the Secretary of State for Wales—
a Cabinet Minister who is assisted by a Minister of State. In Northern Ireland
the law is derived from and similar to the law of England but the judiciary is
separate; the Northern Ireland government departments are responsible to
the Northern Ireland Parliament. The Channel Islands and the Isle of Man
(which are Crown dependencies, not part of the United Kingdom) have their
own legislative assemblies and systems of local administration and of law,
and their own courts. At the same time, they have a special relationship with
the United Kingdom because of their proximity to the mainland and the
antiquity of their connection with the Crown. They are treated as part of the
mainland for certain purposes, such as wireless and postal communication,
and are ‘territories for whose international relations Her Majesty’s Govern¬
ment is responsible’.
The United Kingdom Parliament has the ultimate responsibility for the
good government of the British dependencies which are administered by
territorial governments and are at various stages of development towards full
self-government. The United Kingdom is also one of the independent member
26
BRITAIN I971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
nations of the Commonwealth,1 which all acknowledge the Queen as the
symbol of their free association and, as such, the head of the Commonwealth.
The United Kingdom constitution is formed partly by statute, partly by
common law and partly by precepts and practices, known as conventions,
which are not part of the law of the land since violation of them would not
lead to proceedings in a court of law, but which are nevertheless indispensable
to the machinery of government. The rules of the constitution have never
been codified; principles and practice are both alterable, and the rules of the
constitution can be adapted to changing conditions at any time by the passing
of an Act of Parliament, or by the general acceptance of a new convention,
without serious disturbance to existing organs and forms.
The organs of government in the constitution are readily distinguishable
although their functions often intermingle and overlap. They are:
1. the legislature, which consists of the Queen in Parliament, and is the
supreme authority in the realm;
2. the executive, which consists of: (a) the Cabinet and other ministers of the
Crown, who are responsible for initiating and directing national policy;
(b) government departments, most of them under the control of ministers
and all staffed by civil servants, which are responsible for administration
at the national level; (c) local authorities, which administer and manage
many services at the local level; and (d) statutory boards, which are
severally responsible for the operation of particular nationalised industries
or public services, and which are subject to ministerial control in varying
degrees; and
3. the judiciary, which determines common law and interprets statutes, and
is independent of both the legislature and the executive.
The following pages describe these three organs of government in some
detail in order to show how the constitution of the United Kingdom works.2
THE MONARCHY
The monarchy is the most ancient secular institution in the United Kingdom.
Its continuity has been broken only once in over a thousand years; and in
spite of interruptions in the direct line of succession, the hereditary principle
upon which it was founded has never been abandoned. Queen Elizabeth II
is a descendant of the Saxon king, Egbert, who united all England in the
year 829, and of Malcolm II, whose reign in Scotland (1005-34) was corre¬
spondingly important in that part of the realm.
According to the Royal Titles Act 1953, the royal title in the United
Kingdom is: ‘Elizabeth the Second, by the Grace of God of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and of Her other Realms
and Territories Queen, Head of the Commonwealth, Defender of the Faith’.
The form of the royal title is varied for the other member nations of the
1 The other members are: Canada, Australia, New Zealand, India, Pakistan, Ceylon,
Ghana, Malaysia, Nigeria, Cyprus, Sierra Leone, Tanzania, Jamaica, Trinidad and
Tobago, Uganda, Kenya, Malawi, Malta, Zambia, The Gambia, Singapore, Guyana,
Botswana, Lesotho, Barbados, Mauritius and Swaziland.
2 A Commission on the Constitution is considering whether any changes are desirable
in the present constitutional relationships between the several countries, nations and
regions of the United Kingdom and also between the United Kingdom and the Channel
Islands and the Isle of Man.
Succession
Accession
Coronation
GOVERNMENT Z*]
Commonwealth which owe allegiance to the Crown, to suit the particular
circumstances of each.
The seat of the monarchy is in the United Kingdom, the Queen being
represented by a Governor in Northern Ireland. For the performance of
royal functions in the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man the Queen is
represented by a Lieutenant-Governor. In the other member nations of the
Commonwealth which owe allegiance to the Crown the Queen’s representative
is the Governor-General, who is appointed by the Crown on the advice of the
ministers of the country concerned and is wdiolly independent of the United
Kingdom Government. In the United Kingdom dependencies the Queen is
usually represented by Governors who are appointed by the Crown, have
varying executive and legislative powers, and are responsible to the United
Kingdom Government for the good government of the countries concerned.
The title to the Crown derives from the Act of Settlement 1701, which
provided that ‘the Crown . . . shall remain and continue to the said most
excellent Princess Sophia1 and the heirs of her body being Protestants’.
Subsequent Succession to the Crown Acts have confirmed this declaration;
and although succession is not bound to continue in its present line, it cannot
now be altered (under a provision of the Statute of Westminster 1931) except
by common consent of the member nations of the Commonwealth which owe
allegiance to the Crown.
The inheritance of the Crown is governed by rules of descent, which
provide that the sons of the Sovereign are in Order of Succession to the
Throne according to their seniority; if there are no sons, the daughters
succeed in order of their seniority. When a daughter succeeds, she becomes
Queen-Regnant and the powers of the Crown are vested in her as fully and
effectively as though she were a king. By convention, the consort of a king
takes the rank and style of her husband; the converse, however, does not
apply and the constitution has never attached any special rank or privileges
to the husband of the Queen-Regnant although in practice he may fill an
important role in the life of the nation.
There is no interregnum between the death of one Sovereign and the accession
of another. Immediately on the death of his or her predecessor the new
Sovereign is proclaimed at an Accession Council to which all members of
the Privy Council are summoned. The Lords Spiritual and Temporal, the
Lord Mayor, aldermen and other leading citizens of the City of London,
and the High Commissioners in London of the member nations of the
Commonwealth are also invited to attend.
The coronation of the Sovereign follows the accession after an interval which
may last for a year or more. The ceremony has remained much the same in
substance for nearly a thousand years although the details have frequently
been modified to bring it into conformity with the customs of the time. The
service used at the coronation of Queen Elizabeth II in 1953 was derived from
that used at the coronation of King Edgar at Bath in the year 973.
The coronation service is held at Westminster Abbey in the presence of
representatives of the Lords, the Commons and all the great public interests
in the United Kingdom, of the Prime Ministers and leading members of the
other Commonwealth countries and of representatives of foreign States.
1 The Eleetress of Hanover, grand-daughter of James I of England.
THE ROYAL FAMILY
From the reign of Queen Victoria up to September 1970
28
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
o>^
1
o
< C
^ ip
0 S"
R 0
so
►> K
>-jr Cl
W O
ac
0's
Jl
•5.2
7^4 «
"o|
u S °"
;gO‘;j
1 0 s
«01 S
55 K ^
'.2 S'S'
§0
M 25
i-r2<
^ cjQ
_q-2§_
r/ C<
< xp,
> w W
O^.M
Ssw
« 5
£ £
<D
--C-S
2 ^
V W
"^*5!
U) ^
>
J' O) o «u
.S 7 -o u
.5 s
.§<0
If^ss
°|8|SS
- Son
~Ld Sl"Oi<!’
to <
WW
-5 a-
pig
wiS
go
21
° ^.g
<D O) G
■3 T S S
-o ss L
« o> . t-.
s.“ so
0 a
^2
—£ o m
§•0
™ . •
ito C m >-
. ^ CO o 3 >
2 I c^'
|^e<°
; v< 10 u &
S§6c-
- O ►H Q
? S 0^5:
o
^ fc J “g
n S d ’H1'?
- o So j,_
o 0'S
go§sg
K .7Q
: u ^ vh ^
5a; • <5
: ^ r-'iy (u
^ • O S-
Sco • «
- Effi
"O'S ° °
O.H-S .
>-a 9to
’l3 ^ Tl O)
_ ^ 13 ^ hH
bfi O w. t£>
_ J- -T3 o
O b G ~
1> c3 J2 #
OW^^o
go||®1
^ s'mo.g^
O
OS^cN|
3g<
-N
^ w ►—• jr.
o 1.2
>X 10^2,1 w v
aw^ ^2
2=2 H
C 0_ m
_>o3Q^ p a
‘s :w3e s
^-^oks-^
■p
£?«£ c
- rt ® o C/3-
W ^4
5klf
|?.&|-
w^|3
z 5
M S
O'
p7’u9
c/3 to m
— >■ O d
-a t, .
«
-l S
g
<
- ScS
^ J d
■IIs
0 JO
2» £2 o S
--52pc!« c —
S-j'p ^ >• g v
$ 0<<W S S.S n O
4, (D <U t> <u
5 o o o o 50
8.S.S.S.S.SS
yjpL.PL.^PnPL, g ^
tN CJ D (U D (U ^ T3 ^
0)
-c
5.S S
2^3 I
33 s< s c-s^
fl.OkJ
o v OLx<'>J-i v ti
000 -rt >-99
a c^t: i--o.S.S
*cn x p ® ^ ^
a,CL,Qw1-lH-iP-fe
b/K£)
0<E
£
•Sx2
—0 2
3^
o o>
^5 ^
s
OS M
•J3 Tt*
--G ^>
 T> 6
W 2
£xi
l<B
T3 01
o o
a 19
G co
■3 ° 4
^ % •
5-°
1^ d cors «
m m s- a
O) cn o a 3
H«» »<h->
• • 4) C
X>XaM--
ti o o P «
•« o» «
N «
M
w
o
r&g|^s
- bj»s: a o& n2
«.2
P'S .2
Ml
P3 2 O ®
ScoSo
GOVERNMENT
29
Acts of
Government
The Queen is the personification of the State. In law, she is the head of the
executive, an integral part of the legislature, the head of the judiciary in
England and Wales, Northern Ireland and Scotland, the commander-in-chief
of all the armed forces of the Crown and the temporal head of the established
Church of England. In practice, as a result of a long evolutionary process
during which the absolute power of the monarchy has been progressively
reduced, the Queen acts only on the advice of her ministers which she cannot
constitutionally ignore. She reigns, but she does not rule. The United
Kingdom is governed by Her Majesty’s Government in the name of the
Queen.
Within this framework, and in spite of the fact that the trend of legislation
during the past hundred years has been to assign powers directly to ministers
without any necessity for royal intervention, there are still important acts of
government which require the participation of the Queen.
The Queen summons, prorogues and dissolves Parliament; as a general rule
she opens the new session with a speech from the throne (although this may
be read by the Lord Chancellor if the Queen is unable to be present); and
she must give Royal Assent before a Bill which has passed all its stages in
both Houses of Parliament becomes a legal enactment. The Queen is ‘the
fountain of justice’ and as such can remit all or part of the penalties imposed
on people convicted of crime. As ‘the fountain of honour’, the Queen confers
peerages, baronetcies, knighthoods and other honours,1 and makes appoint¬
ment to all important State offices, including those of judges, officers in the
armed forces, governors, and diplomats, and to all leading positions in the
established Church of England. The Queen’s consent and approval are
required before a minister can take up office or a Cabinet be formed. In the
realm of international affairs, by virtue of her pre-eminence as head of the
State, the Queen has the power to conclude treaties, to cede or accept territory,
to declare war and to make peace.
These and similar acts of government involve the use of the royal preroga¬
tive which has been defined as ‘the residue of discretionary authority legally
left in the hands of the Crown’.2 Ministerial responsibility for the exercise
of this authority is shown in three constitutional ways in which the royal will
can be expressed: by Order in Council made ‘by and with the advice of the
Privy Council’; by Order, Commission or Warrant signed personally by the
Queen and generally bearing the signature of one or more responsible
ministers; or by Proclamation, Writs, Letters Patent, or other documents
under the Great Seal affixed by the Lord Chancellor in obedience to a Royal
Warrant countersigned by a minister.
Ministerial responsibility for the exercise of powers by the Crown does not
detract from the importance of the participation of the Sovereign in the
smooth working of government; for although the Queen has no personal
authority and must show complete impartiality in every field, she must be
informed and consulted on every aspect of the national life. The Queen holds
meetings of the Privy Council, gives audiences to her ministers and other
1 Most honours are conferred by the Sovereign on the advice of the Prime Minister; a
few (the Order of Merit, the Royal Victorian Order, the Most Noble Order of the
Garter, and the Most Noble and A'lost Ancient Order of the Thistle) are in the
Sovereign’s personal gift.
2 Other powers of the Crown relate to the creation of corporations by Royal Charter;
the construction and supervision of harbours; the guardianship of infants; the admini¬
stration of charities; coinage; the grant of franchises, for example, to markets, ferries and
fisheries; the right to treasure trove; and the right of printing or licensing others to
print the Bible, the Book of Common Prayer and State papers.
3°
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
holders of office at home and overseas, receives accounts of Cabinet decisions,
reads dispatches and signs innumerable State papers.
Such is the significance attached to these royal functions that provision has
been made by Acts of Parliament for a Regent to be appointed to fulfil them
if the Sovereign is totally incapacitated, or is under the age of 18 years on
accession to the throne. The latest of these Acts—the Regency Act 1953—
laid down that the first potential Regent should be The Prince Philip, Duke
of Edinburgh, and thereafter those in succession to the throne who are of age.
In the event of the Sovereign’s partial incapacity or absence abroad, provision
is made for the appointment of Counsellors of State (generally speaking, the
wife or husband of the Sovereign, and the four adult persons next in succession
to the Crown1) to whom the Sovereign may delegate by Letters Patent certain
royal functions. But Counsellors of State may not, for instance, dissolve
Parliament (except on the express instructions of the Sovereign), nor create
peers.
Ceremonial and Ceremonial has always been associated with the kings and queens of the
Royal Visits British Isles and, in spite of the changes that have taken place with the altered
outlook of both the Sovereign and the people, certain customs and usages
are the same today as they were many centuries ago. Royal marriages, the
birth of royal children and royal funerals are marked by ancient ceremonial,
although to a lesser degree than in former days. The birthday of the Sovereign
is officially celebrated early in June by Trooping the Colour on the Horse
Guards Parade and is also celebrated as Commonwealth Day. State banquets
take place when a foreign monarch or head of State visits the United Kingdom;
investitures are held at Buckingham Palace; and royal processions grace such
social occasions as the Ascot Race Meeting, known as Royal Ascot, and add
significance to the opening of Parliament, when the Queen drives in state from
Buckingham Palace.
The Sovereign is the leader of society by order of general precedence dating
from the fourteenth century and sustained until the present day by royal
ordinances, established custom and the public will. The Queen and other
members of the royal family visit many parts of the United Kingdom every
year, and their presence at the inauguration of scientific, artistic, industrial
and charitable works of national importance ensures nation-wide interest and
support. They also pay State visits to foreign governments and undertake
lengthy tours in other countries of the Commonwealth.
PARLIAMENT
The supreme legislative authority in the United Kingdom is the Queen in
Parliament, that is to say, the Queen and the two Houses of Parliament—the
House of Lords and the elected House of Commons.
The three elements of Parliament are outwardly separate; they are consti¬
tuted on different principles; they do different work in different places; and
they meet together only on such occasions as the coronation, or the opening
or closing of a session of Parliament when the Commons are summoned by
the Queen to the House of Lords. As a law-making organ of State, however,
Parliament is a corporate body and cannot legislate without the concurrence
of all its parts (except in the case of Bills passed under the Parliament Acts
1911 and 1949).
1 The Regency Act 1953 provided that Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother should be
added to the persons to whom royal functions may be delegated as Counsellors of State.
GOVERNMENT
31
The Parliament at Westminster is representative of all the countries of the
United Kingdom. It can legislate for the United Kingdom as a whole, or
any of the constituent countries separately, or for any combination of them.
It can also legislate for the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man, but in these
islands, and in Northern Ireland, it is not the only legislature, for the Northern
Ireland Parliament has power to legislate for Northern Ireland on most
domestic subjects (see p. 41), and the ancient legislatures of the two Channel
Island Bailiwicks (the States of Jersey and the States of Guernsey) and of the
Isle of Man (the Tynwald Court) legislate on domestic matters.1 Nevertheless,
the Parliament at Westminster retains supreme authority, and within practical
limits there is nothing that it cannot legally do.
By the passing of the Parliament Act 19 n the life of a United Kingdom
Parliament was fixed at five years (although it may be dissolved and a general
election held before the expiry of the legal term); and since one Parliament
cannot bind its successor (for otherwise the succeeding Parliament would not
be sovereign or supreme), each assembly has a period of time of up to five
years during which it may legislate exactly as it chooses. During its life, it
can make or unmake any law; destroy by statute the most firmly established
convention or turn a convention into binding law; or legalise past illegalities
and make void and punishable what was lawful when done and thus reverse
the decisions of the courts.
In law, therefore, the supremacy of Parliament is absolute. In practice
Parliament does not exercise its supremacy in this way. Its members bear
in mind the common law which has grown up in Britain throughout the
centuries and they act as far as possible in accordance with precedent and
tradition. Moreover, although the validity of an Act of Parliament that has
been duly passed, legally promulgated and published by the proper authority
cannot be disputed in the law courts, no Parliament would be likely to pass an
Act which it knew would receive no public support. The system of party
government in Britain ensures that Parliament legislates with its responsibility
to the electorate in mind.
The Meeting of A Parliament, in the sense of a parliamentary period, begins and ends with
Parliament a proclamation made by the Sovereign on the advice of the Privy Council.
Such a proclamation on the one hand dissolves an existing Parliament and,
on the other, orders the issue of writs for election and announces the date on
which the new Parliament is to meet. This cannot be less than 20 days after
the proclamation, but it may be more.
The resignation of a government usually entails the dissolution of Parlia¬
ment. Formerly the death of a Sovereign also involved dissolution, but this
has ceased to be the case since the Representation of the People Act 1867.
The time between the meeting of a Parliament and its prorogation or
dissolution is called a session. Parliament is usually prorogued by a com¬
mission under the Great Seal, which appoints the day and place of its meeting
in a new session. The date so appointed may be brought forward or deferred
by a subsequent proclamation. The effect of a prorogation is at once to
terminate all business (with certain minor exceptions) until Parliament is
summoned again.
During a session either House may adjourn itself on its own motion to such
1 The legislatures of the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man consist of the Queen, the
Privy Council and the local assemblies. It is the duty of the Home Secretary, as the
member of the Privy Council primarily concerned with island affairs, to scrutinise each
legislative measure before it is submitted to the Queen in Council.
B*
33
The House of
Lords
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
date as it pleases. An adjournment does not affect uncompleted business.
A reassembly of the House can be accelerated either by proclamation or on
the initiative of the Government under powers specially conferred by each
House on its Speaker.
The avaerage number of sitting days for the House of Commons is 165,
divided by custom into the following periods: one from November until
Christmas lasting about 40 sitting days, one from January to Easter of about
50 sitting days, one from Easter until Whitsun of about 30 sitting days, and
one from Whitsun until the end of July lasting about 40-50 sitting days.
Nowadays, the session is sometimes concluded with a short period of up to
10 sitting days in October, after the long summer adjournment. The House
of Lords sits, on average, for about no days in each session.
The House of Lords consists of the Lords Temporal and the Lords Spiritual.
The Lords Temporal may be sub-divided into (1) all hereditary peers and
peeresses of England, Scotland, Great Britain and the United Kingdom who
have not disclaimed their peerages under the Peerage Act 1963, (2) all life
peers and peeresses created by the Crown under the Life Peerages Act 1958,
and (3) Lords of Appeal in Ordinary who are appointed under the terms of the
Appellate Jurisdiction Act 1876 to assist the House in the performance of its
judicial duties and who remain members of the House after their retirement
from office. The Lords Spiritual are the Archbishops of Canterbury and York,
the Bishops of London, Durham and Winchester, and 21 other bishops of the
Church of England, according to their seniority as diocesan bishops.
Peerages (both hereditary and life) are conferred by the Sovereign on the
advice of the Prime Minister. Hereditary peerages carry with them a right to
a seat in the House of Lords, provided the holder is 21 years of age or over,
but anyone succeeding to a peerage may, within 12 months of succession,
disclaim that peerage for his or her lifetime. Those who disclaim their
peerages lose their right to sit in the House of Lords but they are able to
vote at parliamentary elections and are eligible for election to the House of
Commons.
Not all holders of temporal peerages with a right to sit in the House of
Lords attend the sittings of that House. Those who do not wish to attend may
apply for leave of absence, either for the duration of a particular Parliament
or for a single session.
Peers who frequently attend the House of Lords include elder statesmen
and others who have spent their lives in public service. They receive no
salary for their parliamentary work, but they are entitled to travelling expenses
from their homes to the Palace of Westminster (provided they attend at least
one-third of the number of sittings), and (with the exception of the Lord
Chancellor, the Lord Chairman of Committees and any member in receipt
of a salary as the holder of a ministerial office) they may claim payment for
expenses incurred for the purpose of attendance at the House (except for
judicial sittings) within a maximum of ^6-50 a day.
The House of Lords is presided over by the Lord Chancellor, who sits
on the woolsack and is ex officio Speaker of the House. The Crown, by
commission under the Great Seal, appoints several members of the House
to act as deputy speakers in the absence of the Lord Chancellor. The first
of the deputy speakers is the Lord Chairman of Committees, who is appointed
each session and takes the chair in all committees, unless the House otherwise
directs. The permanent officers include the Clerk of the Parliaments, who is
charged with keeping the records of proceedings and judgments and who
GOVERNMENT
33
The House of
Commons
Parliamentary
Electoral
System
pronounces the words of the Royal Assent to Bills; the Gentleman Usher of
the Black Rod, who enforces the orders of the House; and the Serjeant-at-
Arms, who attends the Lord Chancellor.
The House of Commons is a representative assembly elected by almost
universal adult suffrage and consists of men and women from all sections
of the community. There are at present 630 seats in the House of Commons
(511 for England, 36 for Wales, 71 for Scotland, 12 for Northern Ireland).
Members of the House of Commons are paid an annual salary of £2,000
together with a Parliamentary allowance of £1,250 and an allowance of up
to £500 for secretarial assistance; they hold their seats during the life of a
Parliament. Members are elected either at a general election after a Parliament
has been dissolved and a new one summoned by the Sovereign, or at a
by-election, held when a vacancy occurs in the House as a result of the death
of a member, or of his acceptance of office under the Crown,1 or as a result
of his elevation to the House of Lords.
The chief officer of the House of Commons is the Speaker, who is elected
by the members to preside over the House immediately after a new Parliament
is formed. Other parliamentary officers of the House are the Chairman of
Ways and Means, and the Deputy Chairman, both of whom act as Deputy
Speaker; these officers are elected by the House on the nomination of the
Government and, like the Speaker, neither speak nor vote other than in their
official capacity.
Permanent officers of the House, that is, those who are not members of
Parliament, include the Clerk of the House of Commons, who conducts the
business of the House in the official departments under his control and is
charged with such matters as keeping the records, endorsing Bills and signing
orders, and the Serjeant-at-Arms, who attends the Speaker in the House.
For electoral purposes the United Kingdom is divided into constituencies,
each of which returns one member to the House of Commons. Permanent
Boundary Commissions for England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland
undertake general reviews of constituencies throughout that part of the
United Kingdom for which they are responsible at intervals of not less than
ten and not more than 15 years and report on the changes they recommend.
A Commission is also empowered to submit interim reports on particular
constituencies if, for instance, it is necessary to bring constituency boundaries
into line with altered local government boundaries.
The law relating to parliamentary elections is contained principally in the
Representation of the People Act 1949 as amended by the Act of 1969. Under
the provisions of these Acts, election to the House of Commons is decided by
secret ballot in which British subjects (except members of the House of Lords)
and citizens of the Irish Republic are entitled to vote (voting is not com¬
pulsory), provided that they are 18 years old or over, and are not subject to
any legal incapacity to vote. Those eligible to vote in any constituency are
those who are recorded on the register2 of electors for the constituency as
1 If a member wishes to resign from the House, he may apply either for what is techni¬
cally an office of profit under the Crown (Bailiff of the Chiltern Hundreds and Steward
of the Manor of Northstead), but to which, in fact, no remuneration attaches, or for a
directorship by government nomination in a commercial company which is an ordinary
trading concern (see p. 33).
2 A register containing the names of all electors, prepared for each constituency and
published yearly by the registration officers, who in England and Wales are the clerks of
local councils and in Scotland are the land valuation assessors.
34
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
resident in that constituency on a date fixed by statute. Each elector may cast
one vote, normally in person at a polling station, although members of the
armed forces, Crown servants of the United Kingdom and staff of the British
Council employed overseas, and wives or husbands of such persons, if resident
overseas with their married partners, may vote by proxy. Voting by post, or
in certain cases by proxy, may also be allowed if the voter cannot attend in
person on grounds of religious observance or because of physical incapacity
or the nature of his work.
Anyone, male or female, who is a British subject aged 21 or over, and is
not otherwise disqualified may stand as a candidate in any constituency at a
parliamentary election. Those who are disqualified include members of the
House of Lords, clergy of the Church of England, the Church of Scotland,
the Church of Ireland and the Roman Catholic Church, undischarged
bankrupts, and those expressly disqualified by the House of Commons
Disqualification Act 1957, for instance, holders of judicial offices, civil ser¬
vants, members of the regular armed forces and the police forces, and
government-nominated directors of commercial companies which are ordinary
trading concerns.
The conduct of elections, including the manner in which candidates can be
nominated for election, is likewise governed by provisions of the 1949 and 1969
Acts, the second of which also prescribes the maximum sum of money that
a candidate may spend on his election campaign. This is £750, plus ^0-05
for each eight electors in a borough constituency and ^0-05 for each six
electors in a county constituency. The prescribed scale is not required to
cover a candidate’s personal expenses, for instance, the cost of his living at an
hotel during the election campaign, but any such expenses beyond £100 must
be paid by his election agent and particulars sent to the returning officer.
Each House of Parliament enjoys certain rights and immunities designed to
protect the House from unnecessary obstruction in carrying out its duties.
These rights apply collectively to each House and individually to each
member.
In the House of Commons, the Speaker formally claims from the Crown
for the Commons ‘their ancient and undoubted rights and privileges’ at the
beginning of each Parliament. These include freedom of speech in debate;
and the right of access to the Crown, which is a collective privilege of the
House. Further privileges include the right of the House to control its own
proceedings (so that it is able, for instance, to exclude strangers if it so wishes);
the right to pronounce upon legal disqualifications for membership and to
declare a seat vacant on such grounds; and the right to penalise those who
commit a breach of its privileges.
The privileges of the House of Lords include: freedom of speech in debate;
freedom of access to the Sovereign for each peer individually; and the right to
commit for contempt. These privileges are not formally claimed by the
Speaker as in the House of Commons; they exist independently without grant.
The Party The party system has existed in one form or another since the seventeenth
System century, and has now become an essential element in the working of the
constitution.
The present system is based upon the existence of organised political
parties, each laying rival policies before the electorate. Whenever there is a
general election or a by-election, the parties may put up candidates for
election; any other citizen who wishes may also stand. The electorate then
Parliamentary
Privilege
GOVERNMENT 35
indicates, by its choice of candidate at the poll on election day, which of the
opposing policies it would like to see put into effect.
The party which wins the majority of seats (although not necessarily the
majority of votes) at a general election, or which is able to command a majority
of supporters in the House of Commons, forms the Government. By tradition,
the leader of the majority party is appointed as Prime Minister by the
Sovereign, usually on the advice of senior ministers; and its most outstanding
members in the House of Lords and the House of Commons receive ministerial
appointments on the advice of the Prime Minister. The largest minority party
becomes the official Opposition with its own leader1 and its own council of
discussion or ‘shadow Cabinet’; while the members of any other parties or
any Independents who have been elected may support the Government or the
Opposition according to their party’s or their own view of the policy being
debated at any given time.
In the general election held in June 1970, ya2 per cent of the electorate
voted, compared with 75-8 per cent in October 1966. The number and percent¬
age of votes cast for the principal parties is shown in Table 5.
TABLE 5
Votes Cast at
General
Elections
1970 and 1966
Party
Conservative
Labour
Liberal
Others'*
1970
13,106,965
12,141,676
2,109,268
900,473
% of votes
cast
46-4
43-0
7-4
3-2
1966
11,418,433
13,057,941
2,327,533
452,689
% of votes
cast
41-9
47-9
8-6
1-6
0 Others include the Speaker, Republican Labour (Northern Ireland), Communists,
Scottish and Welsh Nationalists, Independents, and members of individual parties,
few of which were represented by more than one candidate.
TABLE 6
Members Elected
at General
Elections in
1970 and 1966
The distribution of seats in the House of Commons resulting from the
general elections of 1970 and 1966 is shown in Table 6.
The effectiveness of the party system in Parliament rests to a considerable
extent upon the fact that Government and Opposition alike are carried on
1970
Conservative and Associates .. 330
Labour .. .. .. .. 287
Liberal .. .. .. .. 6
Republican Labour .. . . 1
Scottish Nationalist .. . . 1
Unity (Northern Ireland) . . 1
Protestant Unionist
(Northern Ireland) .. .. 1
Independents .. .. . . 2
The Speaker0 .. . . .. 1
630
1966
Labour .. .. .. .. 363
Conservative and Associates .. 253
Liberal .. .. .. .. 12
Republican Labour .. .. 1
The Speaker . . .. .. 1
630
“ When a candidate at the polls the Speaker remains aloof from party issues, standing
as ‘the Speaker seeking re-election’. In the past it was customary to allow the Speaker
an unopposed election in his constituency but this is by no means settled practice and
since the end of the second world war the Speaker has, almost always, been opposed.
1 The Leader of the Opposition in the House of Commons receives an annual salary of
£4,500 in addition to his parliamentary allowances; in the House of Lords the leader
of the Opposition receives £2,000 a year.
2 The lower percentage vote in 1970, in spite of the higher number of total votes cast,
is accounted for by the increased size of the electorate, mainly due to the reduction of
the voting age to 18.
3^ BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
by agreement: that is to say, the minority agrees that the majority must
govern and therefore accepts its decisions; and the majority agrees that the
minority should criticise and therefore sets time aside for that criticism to
be heard. The detailed arrangements of government business are settled,
under the direction of the Prime Minister and the Leader of the House, by the
Government Chief Whip in consultation with the Opposition Chief Whip.
The Chief Whips together constitute the ‘usual channels’ often referred to in
the House of Commons when the question of the possibility of finding time
for debating some particular issue is discussed. The direction of the business
of the House is primarily the responsibility of the Leader of the House, and it
is his duty to provide all reasonable facilities for the House to debate matters
about which it is concerned.
Outside Parliament, party control is exercised by the national and local
organisations. Inside Parliament, it is exercised by the Chief Whips and their
assistants (chosen within the party) whose duties include maintaining the
voting strength of their parties by ensuring the attendance of members at
important debates. The Government Chief Whip in the House of Commons is
Parliamentary Secretary to the Treasury; of the other Government Whips,
five hold titular posts as Lords Commissioners of the Treasury, three are
officers of the Royal Household and four are paid Assistant Whips. The Chief
Opposition Whip also receives a salary, as does his counterpart in the House
of Lords, the amounts being £3,750 and £1,500 respectively. The Govern¬
ment Whips in the House of Lords hold offices in the Royal Household and
sometimes act as spokesmen for the Government in debates.
The Functions The main functions of Parliament are (1) to pass laws regulating the life of
of Parliament the community, (2) to take formal action, cast in legislative form, to make
available finance for the needs of the community and to appropriate the funds
necessary for the services of the State, and (3) to put relevant facts and issues
before the electorate. By custom, Parliament is also consulted before the
ratification of certain international treaties and agreements (in spite of the
fact that the making of treaties is a royal prerogative exercised on the advice
of the Government and, in theory, is not subject to parliamentary approval).
Parliamentary Parliamentary procedure is based to a considerable extent on custom and
Procedure precedent, supplemented by standing orders governing details of practice in
each House. The system of debate is much the same in the two Houses: for
instance, every matter is determined upon questions put from the chair or
woolsack and resolved in the affirmative or negative, as the case may be;
members speak from wherever they have been sitting and not from a rostrum;
and members do not read their speeches. The main difference is that in the
House of Lords the office of Speaker carries with it no inherent authority to
check or curtail debate, such matters being decided by the general sense of
the House, whereas in the Commons the Speaker has full authority to give
effect, promptly and decisively, to the rules and orders of the House. He
must carefully guard against abuse of procedure or any infringement of
minority rights, and it is his duty to allow or disallow any closure motion
(that is, a motion to end discussion so that the matter may be put to the vote).
He has certain powers to check irrelevance and repetition in debate, and to
save the time of the House in various other respects. In case of grave disorder,
he has power to adjourn the House or suspend the sitting on his own initiative.
Voting in the House of Commons is carried out under the direction of the
Speaker, and it is his duty to pronounce the final result. If an equal number
GOVERNMENT
Legislation
37
of votes is cast, the Speaker, who has no original vote, must give the casting
vote; he does this (if possible) in such a way as to avoid change and leave the
question to be decided on another occasion. The procedure on voting in the
House of Lords is similar to that in the House of Commons, except that
the Speaker or chairman has an original, but no casting, vote. With the excep¬
tion of questions relating to Bills and delegated legislation, the House of Lords
is governed by the principle that unless there is a majority in favour, the
question is decided in the negative. When the House is sitting judicially
(see pp. 81 and 84) the question is put in such a way that, if the votes are
equal, there is no interference with the order under appeal.
All proceedings of either House are public, except on extremely rare
occasions; the minutes (in the House of Commons called Votes and Proceed¬
ings and in the House of Lords, Minutes of Proceedings) and the speeches
(The Official Report of Parliamentary Debates, Hansard) are published daily.
Legislation can be initiated from either side of either House, but no Bill
involving taxation or the spending of public money can proceed very far
unless the Government agrees to introduce a ‘financial resolution’ to cover it.
This has the effect of giving the Government exclusive rights over a wide
field of legislation, and as a result most Public Bills are presented by the
Government. Certain days are, however, set aside for debating Private
Members’ Bills1; that is, Public Bills introduced by members of the House
not holding office in the Government, who have been successful in the ballot,
held early in each session, of members wishing to introduce Bills. Peers can
introduce Public Bills in the Plouse of Lords at any time during a session
without notice. Also, persons and bodies outside Parliament can promote
Private Bills relating solely to matters of individual, corporate or local interest.
Bills may originate in either House, unless they deal with finance or
representation when they are always introduced in the Commons. As a rule,
however, Bills likely to raise political controversy go through the Commons
before the Lords, while those of an intricate but uncontroversial nature are
frequently introduced and debated in the Lords before being sent to the
Commons.
The process of passing a Public Bill is basically the same in the House of
Lords as in the House of Commons. The Bill receives a formal First Reading
on introduction; it is then printed; and after a period of time (which varies
between one day and several weeks depending on the nature of the Bill) it
is given a Second Reading after the result of a debate on its general merits or
principles. In the Commons a non-controversial Bill may be referred to a
Second Reading Committee to recommend whether or not it should be taken
as read a second time. After a Second Reading in the Commons a Bill is
referred for detailed examination either to a standing committee or, if the
House so decides, to the whole House sitting in committee; in the Lords it is
referred to a committee of the whole House. The committee stage is followed
by the report stage, during which previous amendments may be altered and
additional amendments may be suggested and incorporated. In the Commons,
if a Bill has been considered by a Second Reading Committee or the Scottish
Grand Committee (see p. 39) the report stage may be taken in that committee.
In the Lords, it is always taken in committee of the whole House. The final
stage is the Third Reading after which the Bill is sent from the Commons
1 A private member may also present a Bill after question time on notice given, or seek
leave to introduce a Bill under the ‘Ten Minute Rule’, that is, the standing order which
allows a brief speech proposing and another opposing the introduction of the Bill before
the House decides whether or not to grant leave.
38
Parliamentary
Committees
BRITAIN I97i: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
to the Lords or from the Lords to the Commons (depending on its place of
origin), where it enters on the same course again. In the Commons, the third
reading may be taken formally but a motion requesting a debate (or a reasoned
amendment) supported by six members will secure a debate and considerable
use is made of this device. Any amendments which the second House makes
to the Bill must be agreed to by the first House, or a compromise reached,
before the Bill becomes law.
In practice, the Lords pass without amendment all financial Bills,1 such as
the Finance Bill, which authorises annual taxation and amends existing
taxation, and the Appropriation Bill, which authorises expenditure on the
Supply Services from the Consolidated Fund. As a general rule, these Bills
are introduced upon resolutions in the House of Commons; they may be
initiated only by a Minister of the Crown.
When Bills have passed through their various parliamentary stages, they are
sent for Royal Assent, which is given by the Sovereign in Letters Patent and
is declared to both Houses by their Speakers or, occasionally by Royal Com¬
mission. The Sovereign’s power to refuse assent has not been exercised since
the early eighteenth century.
The majority of Bills introduced in the House of Lords pass through the
Commons without difficulty because of their non-controversial nature; they
are then returned to the Lords to be brought forward for Royal Assent.
However, should any Lords Bill be unacceptable to the Commons, it would
never reach the Statute Book, for no debating time would be allotted to it—
at any rate until a new government came into power, when it might be
reintroduced. The Lords, on the other hand, cannot prevent a Bill insisted
upon by the Commons from finally becoming law. In the normal course of
events, they either accept a Bill from the Commons and return it unchanged; or
they revise and improve it by amendments and return it for the consideration
of members of the other House, who frequently agree to the amendments made.
The Lords cannot veto financial measures; nor, in practice, can they delay
any other Commons Bill for more than six months. These limitations on the
powers of the Lords are based on the belief that the function of the Upper
House, which is a non-elected assembly, is to act as a chamber of revision
in respect of technical legislation, but not to frustrate the decisions of the
elected House of Commons.
In substance, a Private Bill goes through the same procedure as a Public
Bill but most of the work is done in committee, where proceedings follow a
semi-judicial pattern: the promoters must prove the need for the powers or
privileges that they seek and objections on the part of opposing interests are
heard. Both parties may be represented by counsel.
Either House may resolve itself into a committee, known as a Committee of
the Whole House, to consider Bills in detail, clause by clause, after their
second reading. A Committee of the Whole Plouse is presided over by the
Chairman of Ways and Means or his deputy instead of by the Speaker.
There are two other main kinds of parliamentary committee, both of which
exist to relieve their parent House of some of its more specialised and complex
work. They are:
1. Standing Committees, which are appointed by the House of Commons to
deal with Public Bills at the committee stage and, in certain cases, at the
1 It is provided in the Parliament Act 19 n that all Money Bills sent to the House of
Lords one month before the end of the session shall receive the Royal Assent notwith¬
standing, if they are not passed by the Lords without amendment within the month.
LEISURE
The Watermill Theatre, Berkshire,
converted to a theatre in 1969, seats
115 persons.
Youth hostel, Houghton Mill,
Huntingdonshire.
Field Study Centre, Flatford Mill,
Suffolk.
ACTION AGAINST POLLUTION
Surface dredger for
clearing refuse from
docks and inland
waterways.
Below:
Modern sewage works
at Tonbridge, Kent.
Above right:
Sewage filtration at
the Water Pollution
Research Laboratory,
Stevenage, Hertford¬
shire.
Plaice ‘farmed’ in the
warm effluent water at
Hunterston Nuclear
Power Station.
Jet engine noise mufflers at
London airport.
A
LEISURE
Above left:
Holiday camp, Minehead,
Somerset.
Above:
On the Norfolk Broads.
Rambling near Hawkeshead,
Lancashire.
Pony trekking in Queen Elizabeth
Forest Park, Perthshire.
GOVERNMENT
39
Delegated
Legislation
second reading and the report stages. With the exception of the Scottish
Standing and Grand Committees1 (which consider Scottish estimates and
other matters relating exclusively to Scotland as well as Scottish Bills), and
the Welsh Grand Committee2 (for which parallel arrangements exist),
standing committees consist of from 16 to 50 members nominated for each
Bill by the Committee of Selection (a body normally consisting of 11 mem¬
bers drawn from the main parties in the House at the beginning of each
session)—the parties being represented in proportion to their numbers in
the House. The procedure of a standing committee is generally similar to
that of a committee of the Whole House.
2. Select Committees, which are appointed to enquire into and report to the
House on special matters. Select Committees are appointed by either
House when the occasion for such an appointment occurs, or at the begin¬
ning of a session (some of them by standing order) to consider all aspects
of a particular subject that may arise during the session. The latter type of
committee is known as a ‘sessional’ committee and includes the Committee
of Privileges, the Public Accounts and Estimates Committees, and the
Committees on Nationalised Industries, Statutory Instruments, Public
Petitions and House of Commons (Services). There are also a number of
specialist select committees such as the Committee on Science and Tech¬
nology; other committees include the Standing Orders Committee which
has duties relating to Private Bills; and joint select committees of both
Houses of Parliament which may be appointed at the instance of either
House.
In addition to the House of Commons committees there are the parlia¬
mentary party organisations; the Parliamentary Labour Party, which is a
corporate body comprising all members of the party in both Houses; and the
Conservative and Unionist Members Committee, popularly known as the
1922 Committee, which consists of the back-bench membership of the party.
The system of delegated legislation, which is used to relieve pressure on
parliamentary time, empowers ministers and other authorities to regulate
administrative details after a Bill has become an Act. In order to minimise the
risk that.powers thus conferred on the executive might supersede or weaken
parliamentary government, they are normally delegated to the Queen in
Council or to authorities directly responsible to Parliament, that is, to Ministers
of the Crown, to government departments for which ministers are responsible,
or to organisations whose regulations are subject to confirmation or approval
by ministers who thereby become responsible to Parliament for them. More¬
over, the Act which delegates power to issue rules and orders3 generally defines
the precise limits of this power and, in the more important cases, gives
Parliament the right to confirm or annul the orders themselves. Certain Acts
also require direct consultation with organisations which will be affected
thereby before rules and orders are made.
The House of Commons is aided in its supervision of delegated legislation
1 The Scottish Standing Committee consists of 30 members nominated from Scottish
constituencies with up to 20 other nominated members; in its plenary form, as the
Scottish Grand Committee, it comprises all the members for the Scottish constituencies
and not less than ten nor more than 15 others.
2 The Welsh Grand Committee consists of 36 members for constituencies in Wales and
Monmouthshire, with up to 5 other nominated members.
3 Statutory instruments (‘SI’) are made in accordance with the provisions of the
Statutory Instruments Act 1946.
40
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
by the Select Committee on Statutory Instruments. The Special Orders
Committee of the House of Lords examines and reports on all Statutory
Instruments requiring affirmative resolution.
Parliamentary
Control
Parliamentary
Commissioner
Control of the Government in power is exercised in the final analysis by the
ability of the House of Commons to force the Government to resign either
by passing a resolution of ‘no confidence’ or by rejecting a proposal which the
Government considers so vital to its policy that it has made it a matter of
confidence’; but Parliament has not used its power in this way for many
years. A number of opportunities for a searching examination of government
policy by both the Opposition and the Government’s own back-benchers are,
however, provided in parliamentary procedure. Such opportunities include:
1. Question Time, which is an hour of parliamentary time on Monday,
Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday during which ministers, in rotation,
answer questions put to them on matters for which they are responsible.
So much parliamentary time is devoted to scheduled public business that
questions are regarded as one of the best means of eliciting hitherto un¬
published information about the Government’s intentions, as well as an
effective way of airing, and possibly securing some redress of, grievances
brought to the notice of members by their constituents. (The other means
available to members is by way of the Parliamentary Commissioner—see
below.)
2. The right of members to use motions for the adjournment of the House to
initiate discussions on constituency cases or matters of public concern.
There is a half-hour adjournment period at the end of public business; on
a day when public business ends before the scheduled time the time saved
may be used for adjournment debates; and immediately before the
adjournment for each recess (Christmas, Easter, Whitsun and the Summer)
there is a whole day spent discussing topics raised by private members.
Moreover, if a member wishes to discuss a ‘specific and important matter
that should have urgent consideration’ he may, at the end of Question
Time, ask leave to move the adjournment of the House; if the Speaker
accepts the motion and if, the matter being referred to the House, leave is
given unanimously, or on an objection being made, 40 or more members
support the motion, the matter is debated for three hours, usually on the
following day.
2, The practice whereby the consideration of the Estimates has ceased to be
a consideration of the financial requirements of the Government and has
become an occasion for the examination, initiated by the Opposition, of
some aspect of the Government’s administrative policy, the cost of which
has been included in the Estimates.
The involvement of Parliament, and more particularly the House of
Commons, in the management of the revenues of the State and payments for
the public service are described in Chapter 14* finance.
The Parliamentary Commissioner is an officer of the House of Commons,
independent of the executive. His function is to investigate complaints of
maladministration brought to his notice by members of Parliament on behalf
of members of the public. His powers of investigation extend to actions taken
by central government departments in the exercise of their administrative
functions, but not to policy decisions (which are the concern of the Govern¬
ment). Certain administrative actions are also outside his jurisdiction; these
The Northern
Ireland
Parliament
GOVERNMENT 41
include matters affecting relations with other countries and the activities of
British officials outside the United Kingdom.
In the performance of his duties, the Parliamentary Commissioner has
access to all departmental papers, and reports his findings to the member of
Parliament who presented the case. The Commissioner reports annually to
Parliament and may submit such other reports as he thinks fit. A Select
Committee has been appointed to consider his reports.
The Parliament of Northern Ireland consists of the Sovereign, a Senate and
a House of Commons. The Sovereign is represented in Northern Ireland by
a Governor, who summons, prorogues and dissolves Parliament in Her
Majesty’s name; the Senate is composed of an ex officio senator (the Lord
Mayor of Belfast) and 24 senators who hold office for an eight-year term,
12 being elected by the House of Commons every four years under a system
of proportional representation; while the House of Commons consists of 52
members, elected by a system of parliamentary franchise similar to that which
operates in Great Britain. The House continues in existence for a period of
five years unless it is dissolved earlier.
The Northern Ireland Parliament has power to make laws for the peace,
order and good government of Northern Ireland in relation to all matters
except those especially reserved to the Parliament of the United Kingdom,
which include the Crown or succession to the Crown; foreign relations;
defence; the postal services; the Supreme Court; customs and excise; income
and profits taxes; coinage; standards of weights and measures; trade marks;
submarine cables; wireless telegraphy; aerial navigation; and lighthouses,
buoys and beacons. Under the constitutional practices which have developed
since the passing of the Government of Ireland Act 1920 the United Kingdom
Parliament does not legislate on matters within the powers of the Northern
Ireland Parliament unless the Government of Northern Ireland requests that
this should be done. But, because certain matters have been reserved to the
United Kingdom Parliament, provision was made in the Government of
Ireland Act 1920 for the continued representation of the Northern Ireland
constituencies in the House of Commons of the United Kingdom; in
accordance with this provision, 12 members are returned to Westminster.
There is a Parliamentary Commissioner for the Northern Ireland House
of Commons whose status and powers are similar to those of the Parlia¬
mentary Commissioner at Westminster, but who may, additionally, in¬
vestigate personnel matters in the Civil Service.
THE PRIVY COUNCIL
Until the eighteenth century, the Sovereign in Council, or Privy Council, was
the chief source of executive power in the State. As the system of Cabinet
government developed, however, the Privy Council became less prominent.
Many of its powers were transferred to the Cabinet as an inner Committee
of the Privy Council, and much of its work was handed over to newly created
government departments, some of which were originally committees of the
Privy Council. The present-day Privy Council is the body on whose advice
and through which the Sovereign exercises his or her statutoiy and a number
of prerogative powers. It also has its own statutory duties, independent of the
power of the Sovereign in Council.
Apart from Cabinet Ministers, who must be Privy Counsellors and are
sworn of the Council on first assuming office, membership of the Privy
42
Procedure and
Functions
Committees of
the Privy
Council
Judicial
Committee
*
BRITAIN I97i: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Council (which is retained for life) is accorded by the Sovereign on the
recommendation of the Prime Minister as an honour to persons who have
reached eminence in some branch of public affairs in any country of the
Commonwealth. There are usually about 300 Privy Counsellors.
The Privy Council is convened by the Clerk of the Council and is presided
over by the Sovereign or, when the Sovereign is abroad or ill, by Counsellors
of State. Three Privy Counsellors form a quorum, but, as a rule, not fewer
than four are summoned to attend. The whole Privy Council is called together
only on the death of the Sovereign or when the Sovereign announces his or her
intention to marry.
The Privy Council is responsible for advising the Sovereign to approve
Orders in Council, of which there are two kinds, differing fundamentally in
constitutional principle: those made by virtue of the royal prerogative, for
example, Orders approving the grant of Royal Charters of Incorporation; and
those made under statutory powers, which are the highest form of delegated
legislation. It is an accepted principle that members of the Privy Council
attending meetings at which Orders in Council are made do not thereby
become personally responsible for the policy upon which the orders are based;
this rests with the minister whose department is responsible for the subject
matter of the Order in question, whether or not he was present at the meeting.
Notice of certain Orders in Council must be published in the London Gazette,
an official periodical published by the authority of the Government.
The Privy Council also advises the Crown on the issue of royal proclama¬
tions, some of the most important of which relate to prerogative acts (such as
summoning or dissolving Parliament) of the same validity as Acts of
Parliament.
There are a number of Privy Council committees whose meetings differ from
those of the Privy Council itself in that the Sovereign cannot constitutionally
be present. These committees, which have advisory functions, may be
prerogative, such as the committee which deals with legislative matters
submitted by the legislatures of the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man; or
they may be provided for by statute as are those for the universities of Oxford
and Cambridge and the Scottish universities, and that which deals with
applications for the grant of charters to municipal corporations.
The administrative work of the Privy Council committees is carried out
in the Privy Council Office under the control of the Lord President of the
Council.
The Judicial Committee of the Privy Council derives its appellate jurisdiction
from the right of subjects of the Crown to appeal for redress to the Sovereign
in Council if they believe that the courts of law have failed to do them justice.
It is now the final court of appeal from the courts of the United Kingdom
dependencies, from the courts of those independent members of the Common¬
wealth (including certain countries of which Her Majesty is no longer Queen)
which have not elected to discontinue the appeal, from prize courts1 in the
United Kingdom and dependencies, from the courts of the Channel Islands
and the Isle of Man, and from certain professional disciplinary committees.
It also has jurisdiction in a limited class of English ecclesiastical appeals.
Appeals come to the Judicial Committee either where a right of appeal has
1 Prize courts deal with matters concerning property captured in time of war which, by
grace of the Crown, falls to the forces which assist in the capture.
GOVERNMENT
43
Composition
Prime Minister
Departmental
Ministers
Non-Departmental
Ministers
been specially created—for instance, by statute, Order in Council or Letters
Patent—or by special leave of the Sovereign in Council on the advice of the
Judicial Committee. They are heard by a board of the committee, whose
members are usually selected from the Lord Chancellor, ex-Lord Chancellors
and Lords of Appeal in Ordinary, although other members of the Privy
Council who have held high judicial office (including chief justices and
certain other judges from Commonwealth countries overseas) are asked to
sit from time to time. In theory the Judicial Committee does not deliver
judgment. It advises the Sovereign who acts on its report and approves an
Order in Council to give effect thereto. Its decisions, though not binding on
the English courts, are treated with great respect by them.
HER MAJESTY’S GOVERNMENT
Her Majesty’s Government is the body of ministers charged for the time being
with the administration of national affairs.
The Prime Minister is appointed by the Crown, and all other ministers are
appointed by the Crown on the recommendation of the Prime Minister.
The majority of ministers are members of the House of Commons. There
are, however, always some ministers in the House of Lords, partly because
there is a statutory limit to the number of ministers who may sit and vote in
the Commons while receiving salaries from the Crown, and also because
every Government must be assured of spokesmen to expound and justify its
intentions and its actions to the House of Lords. The Lord Chancellor is
always a member of the House of Lords.
Ministerial salaries range from £14,000 a year for the Prime Minister and
£8,500 for senior ministers to £3,750 for junior ministers. The Prime
Minister and ministers in the House of Commons also have the parliamentary
and secretarial allowances paid to all members of the House. The Lord
Chancellor receives £14,500 a year, including £4,000 as Speaker of the House
of Lords.
The composition of the Government is subject to variation from time to time,
both in the number of ministers and in the titles of some offices. The usual
ministerial offices may be classified under the following heads:
The Prime Minister, who is also First Lord of the Treasury and Minister
for the Civil Service.
Departmental Ministers, who are ministers in charge of government depart¬
ments. The holders of eight offices (some ancient and others of recent crea¬
tion) are known as ‘Secretaries of State’; others have special titles, for instance,
the Chancellor of the Exchequer (who is responsible for the Treasury and a
number of sub-departments) and the President of the Board of Trade. The
remainder hold the formal title of ‘Minister’.
Non-Departmental Ministers, who include the holders of various traditional
offices—the Lord President of the Council, the Chancellor of the Duchy of
Lancaster,1 the Lord Privy Seal, the Paymaster General—and Ministers
without Portfolio. Usually these ministers have few or no departmental duties
and are thus available to perform any special duties which the Prime Minister
may wish to entrust to them.
1 The Duchy of Lancaster is an inheritance which, since 1399, has always been enjoyed
by the reigning Sovereign; it is kept quite apart from his or her other possessions and
is separately administered by the Chancellor.
44
Lord Chancellor
and Lazo Officers
Ministers of State
Junior Ministers
The Prime
Minister
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Lord Chancellor has departmental functions; he is also in a special
position as a Minister of the Crown who is also head of the judiciary in
England and Wales. The four Law Officers of the Crown are: for England
and Wales, the Attorney General and the Solicitor General; for Scotland, the
Lord Advocate and the Solicitor General for Scotland.
Ministers of State are appointed to government departments in which the
work is particularly heavy and complex or where it involves frequent travelling
abroad. There are now two Ministers of State in the Ministry of Technology,
and in the Home Office; and one each in the Foreign and Commonwealth
Office, the Treasury, the Ministry of Defence, the Department of Health and
Social Security, the Department of Employment and Productivity, the
Scottish Office, the Ministry of Housing and Local Government, the Welsh
Office, and the Board of Trade.
Junior Ministers, who generally have the title of Parliamentary Secretary or,
where the senior minister is a Secretary of State, Parliamentary Under¬
secretary of State. The primary function of most junior ministers is to relieve
their senior ministers of some of their burden by taking part in parliamentary
debates and answering parliamentary questions, and by assisting in their
departmental duties. The Parliamentary Secretary of the Civil Service De¬
partment and the other Lords-Commissioners of the Treasury are in a
different category as Government Whips.
The head of the Government became known as the Prime Minister during
the eighteenth century. The unique position of authority enjoyed by the
holder of this office derives from his ability to command a majority in
Parliament and from his power to submit his own choice of ministers to the
Sovereign and to obtain their resignation or dismissal individually. Nowadays,
by convention, the Prime Minister always sits in the House of Commons.
It is the duty of the Prime Minister to inform the Sovereign of the general
business of the Government; to preside over the Cabinet; and to exercise a
general supervision over departments, settling departmental differences and
approving important departmental decisions where reference to the Cabinet
is not required. The Prime Minister speaks for the Government in the House
of Commons on the most important topics and answers questions on its
general administration in that House.
The Prime Minister’s other responsibilities include making recommenda¬
tions to the Sovereign for the appointment of Church of England archbishops,
bishops and deans and the incumbents of some 200 Crown livings, as well as
for appointments to high judicial offices, such as Lords of Appeal in Ordinary,
Lord Chief Justice and Lord Justices of Appeal. He also advises the Crown
on appointments of Privy Counsellors, Lord Lieutenants of counties1 and
certain civil appointments, such as Lord High Commissioner of the General
Assembly of the Church of Scotland, Poet Laureate, Constable of the Tower,
and some university appointments which are in the gift of the Crown. The
Prime Minister makes similar recommendations for appointments to various
public boards and institutions, such as the British Broadcasting Corporation,
as well as to various royal and statutory commissions. He likewise makes
recommendations to the Sovereign for the award of many civil honours and
distinctions and of Civil List pensions, and selects the trustees of certain
national museums and institutions.
1 The office of Lord Lieutenant of the county was first created in the sixteenth century.
Its holder was chief among the county justices and commander of the county militia.
GOVERNMENT
45
The Cabinet
Cabinet
Meetings
Ministerial
Responsibility
The Cabinet is composed of a number of ministers1 personally selected by the
Prime Minister. Its origins can be traced back to the informal conferences that
the Sovereign held with his leading ministers, independently of the Privy
Council, during the seventeenth century. After the Sovereign’s withdrawal
from an active role in politics in the eighteenth century, and the development
of organised political parties stimulated by successive extensions of the fran¬
chise from 1832 onwards, the Cabinet assumed its modern form.
The functions of the Cabinet are: the final determination of the policy to
be submitted to Parliament; the supreme control of the national executive
in accordance with the policy agreed by Parliament; and the continuous
co-ordination and delimitation of the authority of government departments.
The exercise of these functions is vitally affected by the fact that the Cabinet
is a group of party representatives, depending for its existence upon the
support of a majority in the House of Commons.
The Cabinet meets in private and its proceedings are strictly confidential.
Its members are bound by their oath as Privy Counsellors not to disclose
information about its proceedings. The Official Secrets Acts forbid the
publication of Cabinet as well as of other State papers (although after they
have been in existence for 30 years they may be made available for inspection
in the Public Record Office) and a resigning minister desiring to make a
statement involving disclosure of Cabinet discussions should first obtain the
permission of the Sovereign through the Prime Minister. From a practical
point of view, this secrecy is essential in the interests of full and frank discus¬
sion, which can be maintained only if there is no risk of publicity for every
statement made and every point conceded.
In normal times the Cabinet meets for a few hours once or twice a week
during parliamentary sittings, and rather less frequently when Parliament is
not sitting. Additional meetings may be called by the Prime Minister at any
time if a matter urgently requiring discussion should arise. To keep the
amount of work coming before the Cabinet within manageable limits, a great
deal of the work of the Cabinet is carried on through the committee system,
which involves the reference of any issue either to a standing Cabinet
committee or to an ad hoc committee composed of the ministers primarily
concerned. The committee then considers the matter in detail and either
disposes of it or reports upon it to the Cabinet with recommendations for
action. Ministers not in the Cabinet are called to attend its meetings when
matters affecting their departments are under discussion; they may also be
members of Cabinet committees.
The Secretary of the Cabinet and senior officials of the Cabinet Office attend
meetings of the Cabinet and its committees as appropriate. A record is kept of
the conclusions and of the main points made in discussion.
Ministerial responsibility means both the collective responsibility which
ministers share for the policy and actions of the Government and the individual
responsibility of ministers to Parliament for the work of their departments.
The doctrine of collective responsibility, which was fully accepted by the
middle of the nineteenth century, means that the Cabinet is bound to offer
unanimous advice to the Sovereign, even when its members do not hold
identical views on a given subject. Consequently it means that the policy of
departmental ministers must be consistent with the policy of the Government
1 At 31st September 1970 this was 18.
46
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
as a whole. In principle, once the Government’s policy on a particular matter
has been decided, each minister is expected to support it, unless he chooses
to resign, as he is free to do if he cannot agree with his colleagues on a matter
of general policy or on a single major issue.
The individual responsibility of a minister for the work of his department
means that, as political head of that department, he is answerable for all its
acts and omissions and must bear the consequences of any defect of admini¬
stration, any injustice to an individual or any aspect of policy which may be
criticised in Parliament, whether he is personally responsible or not. Since
the majority of ministers are members of the House of Commons, they are
available to answer questions and to defend themselves against criticism in
person. Departmental ministers who are in the House of Lords must be
represented in the Commons by someone qualified to speak on their behalf,
usually their Parliamentary Secretaries.
Departmental ministers normally decide all matters within their responsi¬
bility, although on important political matters they will usually wish to consult
their colleagues collectively, through the Cabinet or a Cabinet committee. Any
decision by a departmental minister binds the Government as a whole.
The responsibility of ministers for their departments is an effective way
of bringing government under public control, for the knowledge that any
departmental action may be reported to and examined in Parliament dis¬
courages the taking of arbitrary and ill-considered decisions.
GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS
Government departments are the main instruments for giving effect to
government policy when Parliament has passed the necessary legislation.
They may, and frequently do, work with and through local authorities,
statutory boards, and government-sponsored organisations operating under
varying degrees of government control.
A change of government does not necessarily affect the number or general
functions of government departments, although a radical change in policy may
be accompanied by organisational change. The widening scope of government
activity in the past half-century, however, has led to the formation of many
new departments. A few have existed for over 200 years.
The work of some departments, for instance, the Board of Customs and
Excise, covers the United Kingdom as a whole. Other departments, for
instance, the Department of Employment and Productivity, cover Great
Britain (England and Wales, and Scotland, but not Northern Ireland); others,
such as the Ministry of Housing and Local Government, cover England only,
and there are separate departments for Scotland and Northern Ireland. There
is also a separate department with responsibility for affairs in Wales.
A department is usually headed by a minister. Certain departments in
which questions of policy do not normally arise are headed by a permanent
official, and a minister with other duties is responsible for them to Parliament.
For instance, Treasury ministers are responsible for a number of departments,
including Her Majesty’s Stationery Office, the Central Office of Information,
the Treasury Solicitor’s Department, the Department of the Government
Actuary, the Royal Mint, the National Debt Office, the Public Works Loan
Board, and the National Savings Committee. The staff of departments are all
members of the Civil Service, a body of Crown servants recruited into the
service as a career.
GOVERNMENT
47
Internal
Organisation
Advisory Bodies
Distribution of
Functions
The Cabinet
Office
Departments differ in size and in the volume, type and complexity of their
work. Since each department makes its own arrangements for discharging
its duties there are variations in internal organisation. Most departments,
however, have certain features in common: for instance, the minister of a
major department is likely to have at the head of his officials a permanent
secretary (known as the Permanent Under-Secretary of State in those depart¬
ments where the minister is a Secretary of State), one or more deputy secre¬
taries, and a varying number of under-secretaries and assistant secretaries.
Usually major departments also have a principal finance officer and a principal
establishments and organisation officer. A number of establishment divisions
have their own organisation and methods (‘O and M’) branch, the members
of which act in an advisory capacity. Many departments also have their own
legal advisers or solicitors, and their own information divisions.
Some departments maintain a regional organisation, and some that have
direct contact with the public throughout the country also have local offices.
Many government departments are assisted by advisory councils or com¬
mittees (several hundred in all) which undertake research and collect
information, mainly to enable ministers to ascertain informed opinion before
coming to a decision involving a legislative or executive act. In some cases
there is a statutory obligation on a minister to consult a standing committee,
but usually advisory bodies are appointed at the discretion of the minister
concerned because he feels the need for their advice.
The membership of the advisory councils and committees varies according
to the nature of the work involved. Some are expert committees; others
include civil servants and representatives of varying interests and professions,
for instance, industrialists, trade unionists, university and industrial scientists,
educationists, lawyers and local government councillors and officers.
In addition to these standing advisory bodies, there are ad hoc committees
which the Government frequently sets up to examine and make recom¬
mendations on specific matters. For certain important enquiries Royal
Commissions, whose members are selected on the grounds of their wide
experience and diverse knowledge, may be appointed (by Royal Warrant).
Royal Commissions examine written and oral evidence from government
departments and other interested organisations and individuals, and on this
evidence submit recommendations. The Government may accept the recom¬
mendations in whole or in part, or it may decide to take no further action or
to delay action. Enquiries may also be undertaken by departmental committees,
appointed by the head of the appropriate department.
The following pages provide an outline of the principal functions of the main
government departments. They are arranged in alphabetical order, except
for the Cabinet Office, the Civil Service Department, and the Treasury
(which, in view of their central position, are placed first) and the Scottish and
Northern Ireland departments (which are grouped at the end of the section).
Further information on the work of departments is given in later sections
under the relevant subjects headings.
The Cabinet Office is in essence a secretariat, headed by the Secretary of the
Cabinet, serving ministers collectively. It operates under the direction of the
Prime Minister as an instrument in the co-ordination of policy at the highest
level. Its functions include circulating the memoranda and other documents
required for Cabinet or Cabinet committee business, preparing the agenda for
48
Central
Statistical
Office
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
meetings of the Cabinet and its committees, recording their discussions and
circulating the minutes, keeping in touch with the progress of action on
decisions and safeguarding the security of documents. The Cabinet Office
also includes an historical section, which is responsible for the preparation of
Official Histories of the War.
The Central Statistical Office (CSO), which is part of the Cabinet Office, is
charged with the collection from departments of statistics relating to the
national economy, their analysis, and their preparation as an agreed body of
statistics to assist the Government in formulating its economic and financial
policy. In addition, the CSO has broad responsibility for the co-ordina¬
tion of work, in particular new developments, throughout the Government
statistical service.
The Civil
Service
Department
The Civil
Service
Commission
The Civil Service Department is under the control of the Prime Minister as
Minister for the Civil Service, with responsibility for the day-to-day work
of the department delegated to a senior minister assisted by a Parliamentary
Secretary. The departments’ Permanent Secretary is the official head of the
Home Civil Service.
The department is responsible for personnel management in the Civil
Service, which includes policy and central arrangements for recruitment,
training, promotion, general career management, welfare and retirement. It
is also responsible for the control of numbers in the Service and for grading
standards in individual departments; and it deals with questions of pay,
pensions, and conditions of service in the Civil Service, and with pay and
pension policies in the public sector as a whole. The department is further
responsible for promoting the development of administrative and managerial
techniques and provides a central management services consultancy—dealing
with organisation and methods, computers, operational research and similar
matters—to other departments.
The Civil Service Commission, which is responsible for the selection of
permanent civil servants, forms part of the Civil Service Department, but
specific and formal arrangements have been made to ensure its independence
and impartiality in the performance of its task.
The Treasury Nominally the heads of the Treasury are the Lords Commissioners: the
First Lord of the Treasury (now always the Prime Minister), the Chancellor
of the Exchequer and five Junior Lords. In practice, the Lords Commissioners
never meet as a board and their responsibilities are carried by the Chancellor
of the Exchequer, assisted by the Chief Secretary to the Treasury, the Financial
Secretary and a Minister of State. There is also a Parliamentary Secretary to
the Treasury, who is the Chief Government Whip in the House of Commons.
The Treasury is the government department primarily responsible for the
development of Britain’s overall economic strategy. The main body of its
work is carried by three large groups of divisions: the Public Sector Group
which has the broad function of controlling the level of public expenditure
in relation to the general economic strategy and ensuring that resources are
efficiently used within the public sector; the Finance Group which is respon¬
sible for ensuring that financial and monetary policy in all its aspects is
consistent with the overall strategy; and the National Economy Group which
is responsible for the preparation of short-term and medium-term economic
forecasts and the co-ordination of long-term forecasting work; for the formu¬
lation of a co-ordinated economic strategy based in part on these forecasts;
and for the surveillance of certain areas of economic policy administered
Parliamentary
Counsel to the
Treasury
The Ministry of
Agriculture,
Fisheries and
Food
The Board of
Customs and
Excise
The Ministry of
Defence
GOVERNMENT 49
primarily by other departments—namely, fiscal policy, incomes and prices
policy, and industrial policies.
The Office of the Parliamentary Counsel is responsible for the drafting of
all Government Bills, except those Bills or provisions of Bills exclusively
affecting Scotland, which are handled by the Lord Advocate’s Depart¬
ment. The Office drafts all financial and other parliamentary motions and
amendments moved by the Government during the passage of Bills; it advises
departments on questions of parliamentary procedure; and attends sittings
(and committees) in both Houses. It also drafts subordinate legislation when
specially instructed, and advises the Government on legal, parliamentary and
constitutional questions falling within its special experience.
The Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food is responsible in England
and Wales for administering government policy for agriculture, horticulture
and fishing. The Ministry administers deficiency payments schemes and
various grants and subsidies designed to improve the efficiency of the
industries, and gives free technical advice. A number of the functions relating
to agriculture and fisheries in Wales and Monmouthshire are the joint
responsibility of the Minister and the Secretary of State for Wales.
Schemes for the control and eradication of animal and plant diseases are
also administered by the Ministry, whose responsibilities extend to Scotland
in the operational control of certain diseases of animals.
In England and Wales the Ministry deals with certain questions relating
to legislation about food, including labelling and advertising, slaughter¬
houses, and the quality and cleanliness of milk. Questions relating to the
supply and manufacture of food, its consumption, composition, preservation
and nutritional qualities, are dealt with for Great Britain or the United
Kingdom as a whole.
The Ministry maintains relations with other Commonwealth and foreign
countries and participates in certain of the activities of a number of inter¬
national organisations concerned with agriculture, fisheries and food, such as
the Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations, the Organisa¬
tion for Economic Co-operation and Development and the General Agreement
on Tariffs and Trade.
The primary work of the Board of Customs and Excise is to collect and
administer the customs and excise duties imposed from time to time in the
annual Finance Acts or by other legislation, and to advise the Chancellor of
the Exchequer on any matters connected with them. The Board is also
responsible for preventing and detecting evasion of the revenue laws.
The Board undertakes, for other departments, a wide range of non-revenue
agency work, for instance, the enforcement of prohibitions and restrictions on
the importation and exportation of certain classes of goods, exchange currency
control, and the compilation of United Kingdom overseas trade statistics
from customs import and export documents.
The Ministry of Defence is the government department responsible for
defence policy and for the control and administration of the three fighting
Services—Navy, Army and Air Force. The Secretary of State for Defence
is in charge of the department assisted by a Minister of State for Defence,
who is responsible for personnel and logistics, research, development and
production and also for procurement and sales. There are also three Parlia¬
mentary Under-Secretaries with responsibilities for the respective Services.
5°
The Meteorological
Office
The Department
of Education
and Science
The Department
of Employment
and
Productivity
The Foreign
and
Commonwealth
Office
BRITAIN I971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Meteorological Office provides the national weather service and meteoro¬
logical library. It is responsible for: forecasts required for aviation and sound
and television broadcasting; much of the weather information published by
the press; and forecasts provided on the Automatic Telephone Weather
Service. Weather centres have been opened in London, Glasgow, Manchester,
Newcastle upon Tyne and Southampton to deal with industrial, commercial
and popular demands.
The Meteorological Office is also responsible for research into various
problems related to weather forecasting and to atmospheric physics.
The Department of Education and Science, under the Secretary of State
for Education and Science, is organised in branches severally concerned with
schools, further education (including vocational, recreational and adult
education and the youth service), teachers and kindred subjects in England
and Wales; and with the universities, civil science and support for the arts
throughout Great Britain. The department also has responsibility for National
Libraries policy and all general policy matters relating to libraries. There are
specialist branches, which advise on health, building, planning (including
educational research and statistics), and law, and an information service.
The department’s responsibilities for the development of primary,
secondary and other education include dealing with the supply, training and
superannuation of teachers, the building of new schools and other institutions,
the school health service, the special educational treatment of handicapped
children, and the provision of school meals and milk. In these matters the
Department works in co-operation with local education authorities whose
duty it is to secure adequate facilities for all forms of education in their areas.
Its relations with the universities are conducted through the University Grants
Committee. Its activities in the field of civil science are discharged through
five research councils: the Medical Research Council, the Agricultural
Research Council, the Natural Environment Research Council, the Social
Science Research Council, and the Science Research Council. The Council
for Scientific Policy advises the Secretary of State.
The Department of Employment and Productivity (DEP) is generally
in charge of planning and promoting the efficient use of Britain’s manpower
resources. Its responsibilities include manpower policy; employment services;
vocational training; industrial relations, safety, health and welfare; and
administration of the Government’s productivity, prices and incomes policy.
It is also responsible for the administration of legislation on monopolies and
mergers, restrictive trade practices and resale price maintenance; and it
undertakes agency work for other Government departments in connection
with the payment of unemployment and other social security benefits, the
repayment of income tax to unemployed workers, and the issue of passports.
In addition, the DEP is responsible for the relations of the British Govern¬
ment with the International Labour Organisation and for providing repre¬
sentation on employment and related matters at sessions of all other inter¬
national bodies. Labour attaches in British embassies and consulates abroad
deal with overseas questions about labour and employment in Britain.
The Foreign and Commonwealth Office, under the Secretary of State for
Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs, acts as a channel of communication
between the British Government and the governments of foreign and overseas
Commonwealth countries for the discussion and negotiation of all matters,
GOVERNMENT
51
The Forestry
Commission
The Department
of Health and
Social Security
The Home
Office
including economic issues, falling within the sphere of international and
Commonwealth relations. The department provides the means by which the
British Government is represented in the United Nations and on other
international bodies and is kept informed about developments in countries
overseas; by which British subjects and interests abroad are protected and
trade promoted; and by which British policy is explained to governments and
peoples overseas. It also discharges the British Government’s responsibilities
in the associated states and dependent territories of the Commonwealth. In
the case of the associated states, these responsibilities relate mainly to defence
and external affairs. In the dependent territories, each of which has its own
internal administration, the British Government is finally responsible for
good government and for the relations between these territories and other
countries.
The Forestry Commission has its own annual Vote in the Estimates. As the
national forestry enterprise, it is charged primarily with the production of
timber for industry, and as secondary objectives, with the provision of
recreational facilities, wildlife management and with paying due regard to the
beauty and amenity of the countryside. As the forest authority it is responsible
for administering the grant scheme to private woodland owners, forestry
research, the implementation of forestry legislation (mainly concerning plant
health), and for licensing the felling of growing trees.
The ministers responsible for forest policy are the Minister of Agriculture,
Fisheries and Food, the Secretary of State for Scotland, and the Secretary of
State for Wales.
The Department of Health and Social Security, under the Secretary of State
for Social Services, is the government department responsible (in England)
for the administration of the National Health Service, the welfare services
provided by local authorities for the elderly and handicapped, welfare foods
and certain aspects of public health, including hygiene. Throughout Great
Britain it is responsible for the payment of benefits and collection of contri¬
butions under the national insurance and industrial injuries schemes and the
payment of family allowances. The department is concerned in making
reciprocal social security arrangements with other countries, and represents
the United Kingdom on the World Health Organisation of the United
Nations.
Through its Supplementary Benefits Commission the department is
responsible for determining awards of non-contributory benefits, for reception
centres, for the provision of accommodation under the Polish Resettlement
Act, for certain refunds of the selective employment tax, and for assessing the
means of people applying for legal aid. It also has responsibilities in connection
with pensions and welfare services (including in some cases the provision of
medical and surgical treatment) for war pensioners in the United Kingdom,
the Channel Islands, the Isle of Man, and the Republic of Ireland, and for
United Kingdom war pensioners living in Northern Ireland or in other
countries overseas.
The head of the Home Office is the Secretary of State for the Home Depart¬
ment (the Home Secretary), who is entrusted with all the responsibilities of
national administration which have not been especially assigned by law or
convention to another minister. The Home Secretary is the channel of
52
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
communication between the Sovereign and her subjects, and between the
United Kingdom Government and the Governments of Northern Ireland,
the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man.
The chief matters with which the Home Office is concerned are: the main¬
tenance of law and order; the police service; the treatment of offenders,
including juvenile offenders; the probation service; the organisation of
magistrates’ courts; the introduction of legislation on criminal justice; the
criminal injuries compensation scheme; the fire service; the care of children by
local authorities and voluntary organisations; the regulation of the employ¬
ment of children and young persons; the law relating to the conduct of
parliamentary and local government elections; public safety; immigration
control and naturalisation of aliens; racial integration problems; and general
questions and individual cases relating to British nationality and citizenship
of the United Kingdom and Colonies.
Other matters for which the Home Office is responsible include: receiving
and submitting addresses and petitions to the Sovereign and preparing pre¬
sentations to Parliament; preparing patents of nobility for peers and formal
proceedings for the bestowal of honours; advising the Crown on the exercise
of the prerogative of mercy; making and receiving requests for the extradition
of criminals; sanctioning by-laws made by local authorities in so far as they
relate to ‘law and order’ and ‘good governance’; granting licences for scientific
experiments on animals; ordering the exhumation and removal of bodies;
supervising the control of explosives, firearms and dangerous drugs; deciding
general policies on the law of liquor licensing and of shops; general policy on
the law relating to music and dancing; and administering the State Manage¬
ment Scheme for control of the liquor trade in the Carlisle district.
The Ministry of
Housing
and Local
Government
The Ministry of Housing and Local Government is generally responsible for
local government in England, and exercises powers in regard to housing, and
the administration of the planning Acts concerning the use and development
of land, sewerage, and other services administered by local authorities. It is
also responsible for sanctioning loans for most purposes for which local
authorities require to borrow money and for acting as the main link between
local authorities and the central Government.
As the central housing authority, the Minister supervises the administration
of the housing statutes and the national housing programme; and his officers
keep in close touch with the local housing authorities. Local authority
proposals for dealing with slum clearance are also submitted to him.
The planning work of the Ministry includes confirmation of the acquisition
and disposal of land by local authorities and the payment of grants in certain
cases towards the cost of acquisition, clearing and compensation. The
Minister also has responsibility for regional planning councils and boards, the
Countryside Commission, and the Water Resources Board, and is concerned
with historic buildings, the designation of new towns and their develpoment
corporations, and with the Commisision for New Towns.
Ordnance Survey The Ordnance Survey, which is administered by the Ministry of Housing and
Local Government but is responsible for the management of its day-to-day
affairs, is in charge of the survey and mapping of Great Britain—the maps
resulting from the survey ranging in scale from 1/1,250 to 1/1,250,000. The
survey also undertakes a considerable amount of agency work in compilation,
drawing and printing for other departments, particularly the Ministry of
Defence and the Land Registry.
GOVERNMENT
53
The Central
Office of
Information
The Board of
Inland Revenue
The Law
Officers’
Department
The Lord
Chancellor’s
Departments
The Central Office of Information is a common service department which
produces information and publicity material, and supplies publicity services
required by other government departments. In the United Kingdom, it
conducts government press, television and poster advertising, produces
booklets, leaflets, films, television material, exhibitions, photographs and other
visual material, and distributes departmental press notices. For the Foreign
and Commonwealth Office it supplies British information posts overseas with
press, radio and television material, booklets, magazines, reference services,
films, exhibitions, photographs, display and reading-room material; and
manages schemes for promoting the overseas sale of British books, periodicals
and newspapers. It is responsible for British pavilions at world exhibitions,
such as Expo 70, and for exhibition services on behalf of the Board of Trade at
overseas trade fairs and British Weeks. It also organises tours (other than those
sponsored by the British Council—see p. 206) for visitors officially invited to
Britain. There are nine regional information offices in England, which provide
sendees for the home departments and assist the overseas services by the
provision of material and in arranging tours for overseas visitors, and similar
services are supplied on an agency basis by the information staffs of the
Scottish and Welsh Offices and of the Government of Northern Ireland. As
a non-ministerial department, the Central Office of Information is adminis¬
tratively responsible to Treasury ministers, but the ministers whose depart¬
ments it serves are responsible for the policy expressed in its work.
The Board of Inland Revenue administers the laws relating to income tax
and surtax, corporation tax, capital gains tax, stamp duty, estate duty and
certain other direct taxes, and advises the Chancellor of the Exchequer on any
matters connected with them. It is also responsible for the valuation of real
property for such purposes as compensation for compulsory purchase, local
rates in England and Wales, and estate duty; and it collects tithe redemption
annuities.
The Law Officers of the Crown for England and Wales (the Attorney General
and the Solicitor General) are responsible for the legal advice given to the
Government; in addition, they have a wide range of duties in relation to the
courts. The Attorney General, who is the senior Law Officer, is the Crown’s
representative in the courts, and legal proceedings for the enforcement of
public rights and on behalf of the interests of charity are conducted in his
name; he is assisted by the Solicitor General, who is the junior Law Officer.
The Attorney General’s consent is required to the institution of criminal
proceedings for certain offences, and the Director of Public Prosecutions is
subject to his superintendence. The Queen’s Proctor, who has certain duties
connected with the operation of the divorce laws, also exercises his functions
under the direction of the Attorney General. The Solicitor General is subject
to the authority of the Attorney General, with the same rights and duties. The
Law Officers, who are appointed from among the leading members of the
English Bar and are always members of the House of Commons, are assisted
by a small professional staff.
The Chancellorship is a legislative, judicial and executive office held by an
eminent ex-member of the Bench or of the Bar and carrying Cabinet rank.
In addition to his functions as Speaker of the House of Lords and Custodian
of the Great Seal, the Lord Chancellor is in charge of more than 20 different
offices and branches which are mainly concerned with legal practice and
54
The Department
for National
Savings
The Ministry of
Overseas
Development
The Paymaster
General’s Office
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
procedure. He controls the personnel and machinery of the courts of law
through his patronage, through administrative powers conferred by the
Judicature Act 1925 and other Acts, and through his membership of the
Supreme Court and Matrimonial Causes Rules Committees and his
responsibility for that of the county courts; he appoints the justices of the
peace and recommends to the Crown other appointments to the judiciary in
England and Wales; and he is the minister responsible for the Judge Advocate
General’s Department, which advises the Secretary of State for Defence and
the Defence Council on legal matters arising out of the administration of
military law, and which reviews the proceedings of army and air force courts
martial (see p. 90).
In addition, the Lord Chancellor is a leading member of the Judicial
Committee of the Privy Council; he appoints the members of the Law
Commission for England and Wales, the chairmen of certain administrative
tribunals in England and Wales, and (with the Secretary of State for Scotland)
the members of the Council on Tribunals; and he is responsible for the
administration of the Land Registry (which maintains a State register of
title to land), the Public Trustee Office (which may act as the executor or
administrator of the estate of a deceased person or as a trustee under a will or
settlement) and the Public Record Office (which preserves, and provides
access to the national archives).
The Department for National Savings is responsible for the administration of
the National Savings Bank, National Savings Certificates, Premium Savings
Bonds, Government Bonds and stocks on the National Savings Stock register
and for the new contractual savings scheme, SAYE. The head of the depart¬
ment is the Director of Savings, who has assumed the responsibility for national
savings previously held by the Postmaster General, and is answerable to the
Treasury.
The Ministry of Overseas Development formulates and implements, in
consultation with the other departments concerned, the British Government’s
policy of financial and technical assistance to developing countries. It is
responsible for the development aid programme as a whole and its make-up
between bilateral and multilateral aid and between capital aid and technical
assistance; the terms and conditions of capital aid and the principles on which
technical assistance is granted; the size and nature of the aid programme for
each country; the management of capital aid and technical assistance; relations
with international aid organisations; the United Kingdom interest in United
Nations programmes of technical assistance; and liaison with voluntary bodies
operating in the same field. The Ministry has direct responsibility for a
number of technical and scientific organisations, whose services, research and
advice are available as technical assistance to the developing countries. It is
also responsible for the Commonwealth Development Corporation, which
provides capital for certain development projects in Commonwealth countries.
The aid aspects of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Develop¬
ment (UNCTAD) are the concern of the Ministry, as is United Kingdom
participation in UNESCO and FAO.
The Paymaster General’s Office acts generally as a banker for government
departments other than the Boards of Inland Revenue and Customs and
Excise, for which separate arrangements exist. Money granted by Parliament
is transferred (in such sums as may be required from day to day) from the
GOVERNMENT ^
Exchequer account to the account of the Paymaster General at the Bank of
England. Most departmental payments are made by means of payable orders
drawn on the Paymaster General’s Office; these are similar to cheques, and
their recipients obtain payments through the commercial banks, whose
accounts at the Bank of England are in turn reimbursed by the Paymaster
General’s Office.
The department is also responsible for the regular payment of many public
service pensions, including those of civil servants, teachers, and members of
the National Health Service, as well as the retired pay and pensions of officers
of the armed forces, their widows and dependants.
The Office of
Population
Censuses and
Surveys
The Office of Population Censuses and Surveys was formed in May 1970 by
the merger of the General Register Office and the Government Social Survey
Department. Its director is also the Registrar General for England and
Wales. The work includes the regulation of civil marriages, the registration
of births, marriages and deaths in England and Wales, and control of the
registration services. It also includes the preparation and publication of re¬
ports on vital medical and demographic statistics, taking the periodical census
of the population, and through the social survey division conducting research
into the attitudes and circumstances of individuals through direct contact
with sample members of the general public or of particular groups.
The Ministry of
Posts and
Telecom¬
munications
The Minister of Posts and Telecommunications is responsible to Parliament
for the General Post Office, which was established as a public corporation
in 1969. He has also assumed the former Postmaster General’s responsibilities
for national broadcasting policy and his constitutional function in relation
to the British Broadcasting Corporation under its charter and licence,
and to the Independent Television Authority under the Television Act
1964.
The Ministry carries out the functions of the former Post Office under the
Wireless Telegraphy Act 1949, has regulatory control of radio transmission
and reception, and is responsible for the issue of radio licences, including the
sale (through the Post Office) of broadcast receiving licences.
The department also represents the United Kingdom in the Universal
Postal and International Telecommunications Unions and all related inter¬
governmental bodies.
The Department
of the
Procurator
General and
Treasury
Solicitor
The Treasury Solicitor provides a common legal service for a large number of
government departments in England and Wales; the duties of his department
include instructing Parliamentary Counsel on Bills and drafting subordinate
legislation, representing other departments in court, and giving general advice
on the interpretation and application of the law. The department undertakes
a considerable amount of conveyancing connected with the transfer of
real property, administers residuary estates (estates undisposed of by will)
of certain deceased persons, and deals with the outstanding property
and rights of dissolved companies. The Statutory Publications Office is
staffed and controlled by the Treasury Solicitor, who reports annually on
its work to the Statute Law Committee (a body appointed by the Lord
Chancellor from among the judiciary and legal profession in England and
Scotland).
Some government departments are wholly dependent on the Treasury
Solicitor for their legal work; others have their own legal staffs for a propor¬
tion of the work and draw on the Treasury Solicitor for special advice and,
c
^5 BRITAIN I971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
often, for litigation and conveyancing; others, whose administrative work is
based on or deals with a code of specialised law or involves a great deal of
legal work, have their own independent legal sections.
The Treasury Solicitor is also the Queen’s Proctor.
The Ministry of The Ministry of Public Building and Works is responsible for the execution
Public Building of works services for the Ministry of Defence; the provision of office accom-
and Works modation for government departments at home and overseas, and buildings
for British embassies, legations and reasearch establishments and many other
types of accommodation required by civil and Service departments; the
design, purchase, supply and maintenance of furniture and equipment for, and
supply of fuel, household articles and stores to, diplomatic and consular
buildings, civil and Service departments and certain other bodies; the admini¬
stration of the Ancient Monuments Acts and the maintenance of those
monuments and historic buildings in the department’s charge; the mainten¬
ance of royal palaces and certain official residences; the provision of services
for certain State ceremonial occasions; and the management and maintenance
of the royal parks and certain other open spaces.
The Ministry is also the point of contact within the Government for the
construction industries and the building materials industries; in this regard
it has general responsibility for co-ordinating information about current and
future building programmes and for advising on the level of building activity.
Regular consultation with the industries at national and regional levels and a
comprehensive statistical service are maintained.
The Ministry is further responsible for the Building Research Station, for
the general co-ordination of research and development work carried out in
connection with building, for developing and fostering good management
practice at all stages of the building process, for disseminating the results of
such work and for encouraging the construction industries to make full use
of them.
The Stationery Her Majesty’s Stationery Office, responsible to the Chancellor of the
Office Exchequer, is the central agency for government printing, binding and
publishing, and for providing government departments with data processing,
reprographic, addressing and distributing services, office machinery and
supplies, automatic data processing equipment, commercially published books
and periodicals, and desk stationery. It also provides certain of these services
for the armed forces of the Crown.
The Controller is Queen’s Printer of Acts of Parliament and the copyright
of all British government documents is vested in him. About a third of all
official printing, including parliamentary needs, is done in the Stationery
Office’s 13 printing and binding works, the remainder being carried out by
private printers under contract. As government publisher, the Stationery
Office is responsible, through its eight government bookshops as well as the
normal bookselling channels at home and abroad, for sales of official publica¬
tions. It is also the United Kingdom agent for Canadian and Italian
government publications and for those of the principal international and
European inter-governmental organisations.
The Ministry of The Ministry of Technology is the government department with the main
Technology responsibility for industry in both the public and private sectors. Its functions
are divided among four groups relating to industry, aviation, regional develop¬
ment and research. The first group deals with the nationalised gas, coal,
GOVERNMENT
The Board of
Trade
The Ministry
Transport
The Welsh
Office
57
electricity and steel industries and is the sponsor department for the mech¬
anical and electrical engineering industries generally and for most of the
manufacturing industries, including chemicals, textiles, paper and non-ferrous
metals. The second is responsible for the department’s defence supply activi¬
ties, for research, development and procurement of aircraft, guided weapons,
and electronic equipment, and for the development and support of civil air¬
craft. The third discharges the department’s responsibility for regional indus¬
trial development particularly for such aspects as the Local Employment Acts,
grants and loans, and industrial development certificates. The fourth group
runs the department’s research establishments, of which seven are concerned
with defence supply and ten are industrial establishments. The four groups
are supported by a central economic group, whose functions include planning
the department’s budget and allocating resources, choosing between different
lines of support for industrial development, identifying long-term problems
in international industrial policy, and studying international technical
collaboration.
The Ministry is responsible for the United Kingdom Atomic Energy
Authority, the National Research Development Corporation, and the British
Standards Institution.
The Board of Trade, under its President, has a general responsibility
for overseas trade and export promotion, and for trade and commerce within
the United Kingdom. In overseas trade (which includes the many activities
contributing invisible earnings to the balance of payments), the Board is
responsible for external commercial policy (including tariff policy), export
policy and services, shipping and civil aviation (including the management and
development of the United Kingdom Air Traffic Control Organisation),
tourism, hotels and insurance. Within the United Kingdom, the Board is
concerned with the distributive and service trades, including retail distribu¬
tion, newspapers, printing, publishing and films. It also has a number of
general responsibilities in relation to commerce, including the administra¬
tion of the Insurance and Companies Acts, patents and copyrights, weights
and measures and hire purchase legislation.
The Minister of Transport has powers and duties relating to inland transport
in Britain, including certain statutory duties concerning railways, roads, road
transport and inland waterways. He is responsible to Parliament for the
nationalised transport undertakings (British Railways Board, British Trans¬
port Docks Board, British Waterways Board, Transport Holding Company,
National Freight Corporation and National Bus Company), appoints the
members of their boards and may determine the broad policies to be pursued,
including the formulation of capital investment programmes. He is the high¬
way authority for motorways and trunk roads in England, allocates the funds
provided by Parliament for road expenditure (including grants for principal
roads vested in local authorities) and has many powers and duties relating to
road traffic and safety. -
The Minister is also responsible in Britain for general policy in connection
with the development of ports and for their operation in the event of war.
The Secretary of State for Wales has full responsibility in Wales for ministerial
functions relating to health, housing, local government, town and country
planning, new towns, water and sewerage, roads, forestry, tourism, national
parks and historic buildings, and shared responsibility (with the Minister of
58
SCOTLAND
The Department
of Agriculture
and Fisheries
for Scotland
The Scottish
Development
Department
The Scottish
Education
Department
BRITAIN I97i: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Agriculture, Fisheries and Food) for agriculture in Wales. He has, in addition,
a general oversight of government policy in Wales, and certain responsibilities
relating to the National Library and the National Museum. The Welsh Office
maintains close and continuous working relationships with the government
departments mainly concerned with economic and social planning through
the Welsh Planning Board and Welsh Council.
The Welsh Office is centred in Cardiff; there is also a small ministerial
office in London.
The Secretary of State is responsible in Scotland for a wide range of functions
which in England and Wales are divided among a number of departmental
ministers. He is assisted at ministerial level by a Minister of State and three
Parliamentary Under-Secretaries of State. There are also two Scottish Law
Officers.
The Secretary of State’s statutory functions are discharged by four main
departments of equal status (the Department of Agriculture and Fisheries
for Scotland, the Scottish Development Department, the Scottish Education
Department, and the Scottish Home and Health Department), each under a
Secretary responsible to the Secretary of State.
The responsibilities of the Secretary of State for the preparation and
implementation of the economic plans for Scotland are discharged through
the Permanent Under-Secretary of State and other Scottish Office staff
with the advice of the Scottish Economic Planning Council and the assistance
of the Scottish Economic Planning Board and the officials of the departments
principally concerned.
The day-to-day administration of the departments is conducted in
Edinburgh, but each department has representatives in London for liaison and
parliamentary duties. The London office is generally known as the Scottish
Office, the term also used to describe all Scottish administration for which the
Secretary of State is responsible.
The Scottish Ministers are advised and assisted (particularly on questions
with which more than one of the departments are concerned or which fall
outside the province of any of them) by the Permanent Under-Secretary of
State.
The Department has a general responsibility for, and in most cases admini¬
sters, government measures for the promotion and development of farming
in Scotland. It also has responsibilities for the oversight and protection of the
Scottish inshore, deep sea and fresh-water fisheries, and functions relating
to certain harbours.
The Scottish Development Department is concerned with a number of
services affecting the physical development of Scotland, such as town and
country planning, Highland and rural development, new towns, housing,
roads, water supplies and sewerage, coast protection, flood prevention,
building standards and the prevention of river and air pollution (most of
which are administered locally by town and county councils); with passenger
transport by road and sea; and with the policy of the Electricity Boards in
Scotland. The department is also responsible for general policy in regard to
local government organisation and finance.
The Scottish Education Department is responsible for supervising the
administration of the Education (Scotland) Acts and for guiding the develop¬
ment of public education in Scotland in all its forms. The department s
GOVERNMENT
59
The Scottish
Home and
Health
Department
Other
Administrative
Departments
The Law
Officers and
Legal
Departments
functions include: the supervision of the training of teachers; the regulation
of teachers’ salaries and the administration of the Teachers (Superannuation)
(Scotland) Regulations; the control and distribution of specific Exchequer
grants in aid of educational expenditure; the award of students’ allowances
to those taking full-time courses at universities and colleges of education; and
general supervision over local authority social work services exercised through
the Social Work Services Group. The department is also concerned with the
development of the arts in Scotland, having responsibility in this connection
for the administration of the National Galleries of Scotland, the Royal
Scottish Museum, the National Museum of Antiquities of Scotland, and the
National Library of Scotland.
The Scottish Home and Health Department is responsible for: (a) the
central administration of function relating to law and order; and (b)
the administration of the National Health Service in Scotland. Under (a)
the Department is concerned with the police service, criminal justice, legal
aid and the services needed by the courts, and is directly responsible for
the administration of prisons and borstal institutions. It is also the central
authority in Scotland for the fire service, for civil defence, and for legislation
concerning shops, theatres, cinemas and licensed premises (which are directly
maintained by the department in districts in which State management is in
operation).
In addition to the main departments, there are a number of other Scottish
departments, all of which work in varying degrees under the direction of the
Secretary of State. Such departments include the Scottish Information Office,
which undertakes information services on behalf of the Scottish departments
and, to some extent, for Great Britain departments in Scotland, and acts as
the agent in Scotland of the Central Office of Information; the Department
of the Registrar-General for Scotland (the General Register Office); the
Scottish Record Office; and the Department of the Registers of Scotland.
There are also Scottish branches of the Great Britain and United Kingdom
departments under the direction of controllers, who are responsible for
ensuring that the execution in Scotland of the policy and procedure of their
departments is in accordance with Scottish conditions and needs.
The Law Officers of the Crown for Scotland (the Lord Advocate and the
Solicitor General for Scotland) are the chief legal advisers to the Government
on Scottish questions and the principal representatives of the Crown for the
purposes of litigation in Scotland. The Lord Advocate is also closely concerned
with questions of legal policy and administration and is himself responsible
for the institution and direction of all prosecutions on indictment in Scotland,
and the control of summary prosecutions in the sheriff court.
In some of this work the Lord Advocate is assisted by the Lord Advocate’s
Department, the members of which also act as legal advisers on Scottish
questions to certain government departments who have no Scottish legal
adviser of their own. The work relevant to prosecutions is centred in the
Crown Office in Edinburgh.
The Parliamentary Draftsmen for Scotland, incorporated in the Lord
Advocate’s Department, are responsible to the minister concerned and to the
Law Officers for the drafting of government Bills affecting the Law of
Scotland.
6o
NORTHERN
IRELAND
The Prime
Minister’s
Department
The Ministry of
Commerce
Ministry of
Community
Relations
The Ministry of
Development
The Ministry of
Finance
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Executive and administrative powers in matters under the jurisdiction of the
Northern Ireland Parliament are vested in the Crown, and exercised by the
Governor, acting on the advice of the Northern Ireland Cabinet, through a
number of departments. Each of the eight ministries (Agriculture, Commerce,
Community Relations, Development, Education, Finance, Health and Social
Services, and Home Affairs) is under the control of a minister responsible to
the Northern Ireland Parliament. Other Northern Ireland departments in¬
clude the Supplementary Benefits Commission, and the Exchequer and Audit
Department and there is an Office of the Agent of the Government of Northern
Ireland, which carries out liaison duties in Great Britain to promote trade,
commerce, and the tourist industry and to act as the main agent in Great
Britain of the Northern Ireland Government’s publicity services.
Certain of the Northern Ireland departments, including the Ministries of
Home Affairs, Education and Agriculture, have functions indicated by their
titles. The other departments have duties of a varied nature, which are
summarised below.
The Prime Minister’s Department includes the Cabinet Secretariat and the
Information Service. With the assistance of a senior civil servant from Great
Britain, the department corresponds with the Government of the United
Kingdom on major matters of policy and acts as a channel of communication
between the Governor and the Cabinet and between the Cabinet and
departments.
The Ministry of Commerce is concerned with industrial information and
statistical services; the progress of industrial production and trade in Northern
Ireland; the development of existing enterprises and the attraction of new
ones; and the administration of schemes of financial assistance to industry.
The department also has responsibilities in relation to electricity and gas under¬
takings; harbours; the tourist trade; the regulation and inspection of mines
and quarries; mineral development; scientific development and the provision
of scientific and technical services to industrial and commercial undertakings,
local authorities and other Government departments; weights and measures;
the registration of companies and friendly societies; and the administration
of the Assurance Companies Acts and the Industrial Assurance Acts.
There is a close association between the Ministry and the Ministry of
Technology in Great Britain.
The Ministry of Community Relations is the department responsible for
formulating and sponsoring policies for the improvement of community rela¬
tions in Northern Ireland, and for assisting in the administration of the
public services so as to improve those relations.
The Ministry of Development is responsible for planning, land development
values, new town development, expansion of existing towns, amenity lands,
local government, housing, rent restriction, slum clearance and redevelop¬
ment, water supplies and sewerage. The department is also responsible for
public transport, motor taxation, road freight licensing and the planning,
construction and maintenance of roads, including motorways.
The basic functions of the Ministry of Finance are the settlement of financial
questions with the United Kingdom Treasury, the financial control of
Northern Ireland departments, and the management of the Civil Service. In
Tie Ministry of
Health and
Social Services
Development of
the Modern
Civil Service
GOVERNMENT 6l
connection with these functions the Ministry is responsible for the control
of borrowing, the issue of Ulster Savings securities, government loans to
local or public authorities, the collection of stamp duties, death duties and
certain excise duties, the collection of land purchase annuities and the
staffing, recruitment and training of the Civil Service and the regulation of its
conditions.
Other responsibilities of the Ministry include the provision of buildings for
the Northern Ireland Government and certain departments of the United
Kingdom Government, the preservation of ancient monuments, the Public
Record Office, property valuation, ordnance survey, the Land Registry and the
Registry of Deeds, censuses, the registration of births, deaths and marriages,
and certain duties in relation to charities and charitable funds.
The Office of the Parliamentary Draftsmen, which prepares Bills for
introduction into Parliament, is attached to the Ministry.
The Ministry of Health and Social Services is responsible for the health and
welfare services work connected with employment services, industrial training,
industrial conciliation, national insurance, industrial injuries and family
allowances. It also administers the Selective Employment Payments Act (NI)
1966 in respect of industry in the private sector and certain public bodies.
THE CIVIL SERVICE
A civil servant in Britain is a servant of the Crown (not being the holder of
a political or judicial office), who is employed in a civil capacity and whose
remuneration is found wholly and directly out of money voted by Parliament.
The term is generally used only to cover ‘non-industrial’ members of the
staffs of the various government departments in the United Kingdom or
working overseas. They total about 490,000,1 a third of them women. In
addition, however, there are about 200,000 government industrial employees
in such establishments as Royal Ordnance factories and Royal Dockyards.
Civil servants work in support of ministers in their public and parliamentary
duties. Their functions range from the formulation of policy proposals and the
management of the machinery of government to carrying out the day-to-day
duties that public administration demands. Stability of administration is
ensured by the political neutrality of the Service. Although a civil servant
works under the authority and direction of the minister of the department to
which he is appointed, legally he is a servant of the Crown. A change of
minister, whether due to ministerial changes within a government or the
advent of a government of a different political complexion, does not involve a
change of permanent staff.
The Civil Service in its present form is a product of the past hundred years.
Before then, departments were free to choose their own staffs, qualifying
standards were unknown, there was no central supervision, and political
jobbery was rife. Nineteenth century reforms included the substitution of open
competition for the practice of obtaining Civil Service appointments by favour
or purchase, and the establishment of an independent body, the Civil Service
Commission, to control recruitment. The great expansion in State activity in
the first half of the twentieth century, and the consequent increase in the
1 Including part-time staffs—two part-time officers being reckoned as equivalent to
one whole-time officer.
6z
The Fulton
Reforms
Civil Service
Classes
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
numbers of civil servants and the scope of their duties, led to further
reorganisation, including the creation of service-wide scientific and profes¬
sional classes; recruitment was adapted to a developing educational system,
and co-ordination between the various departments improved. Civil servants,
though they remained employees of their departments, became members of
an integrated service with common conditions of employment and traditions
and standards of conduct belonging, not to individual departments, but to the
Civil Service as a whole.
Since the publication of the report of the Fulton Committee1 and the Govern¬
ment’s acceptance of its main proposals, the Civil Service has embarked upon
an important programme of reconstruction and reform. The programme is
designed to make the Civil Service fully effective in carrying out its changing
and expanding tasks, and will take several years to complete both because of
its complexity and because of the resources in money and manpower that its
full implementation requires. Action has been taken on several of the proposed
innovations: the Civil Service Department (see p. 48), for instance, has been
in operation since November 1968; the Civil Service College has opened two
centres in England and one in Scotland; and a greatly extended training
programme has been introduced throughout the Service. In addition, pre¬
liminary studies on the reform of the grading structure and on possible savings
in manpower2 are being carried out; a beginning has been made with the
temporary interchange of staff between the Civil Service and other employ¬
ment; a specific course of action has been devised for the development and
reorganisation of the management services; and certain of the recruitment
processes are being changed.
Because modern government touches almost every aspect of life, the Civil
Service comprises officers with a wide variety of professional and technical
qualifications. Where officers of a particular type are needed in more than one
department they are at present organised in general service or linked depart¬
mental classes. The main classes are:
1. The Administrative Class, which numbers about 3,900, including equiva¬
lent grades in the Diplomatic Service (see p. 63). The duties of this class
include the formulation of policy, and its members comprise the majority
of those civil servants responsible for advising ministers. The class is also
responsible for the co-ordination and improvement of government
machinery and the general administration and control of government
departments. Most entrants to the class are still appointed soon after
leaving university, but there is now substantial ‘mature’ entry, either as a
result of promotion from other classes (mainly the Executive Class) or by
direct entry from people with outside experience. About 40 per cent of the
present Administrative Class started their careers in this way.
2. The Executive Classes (General and Departmental) which number some
90,000. These classes are broadly responsible for the day-to-day conduct
1 The committee appointed by the Government in 1966 under the chairmanship of
Lord Fulton, then Vice-Chancellor of the University of Sussex, to examine the
structure, recruitment and management, including management training, of the Civil
Service published its report on the Civil Service in June 1968 (see Bibliography, p. 471).
2 The Civil Service Department is to become a founder member of the Institute of
Manpower Studies, which undertakes research on behalf of employers into improving
the use of manpower. It will make the Institute an annual grant-in-aid of not more than
£5,000 for a period of five years.
GOVERNMENT
63
of government business within the framework of established policy, for
instance, the higher work of accounts and revenue collection and the
management of regional and local offices. The increasing size and scope of
the work of the Civil Service means that the duties performed by officers
of the higher grades of this class are often indistinguishable from those
performed by the corresponding grades of the Administrative Class.
3. The Specialist Classes (General and Departmental), which number about
85,000, include the Professional, Scientific, and Technical Classes which,
assisted by ancillary technical classes, carry out the wide range of specialised
activities now undertaken by the Government. The categories include
accountants, legal and medical staff, engineers, surveyors, statisticians,
economists, architects and scientific officers, as well as members of pro¬
fessions with less exacting qualifications, such as draughtsmen, librarians,
experimental officers and scientific assistants.
4. Ihe Clerical Classes (General and Departmental) comprise about 127,000
officers who undertake all the usual clerical work involved in running
departmental business: for instance, the preparation of accounts and the
keeping of records, the handling of particular claims in accordance with
known rules, and the summarising and annotation of documents for the
assistance of senior officers. Superintendents of typists are also members
of this class.
5. The Clerical Assistant Class (71,000) who perform the simpler clerical
duties, such as the preparation, verification and scrutiny of straightforward
documents, certain forms of registry work and the operation of office
machines.
6. 1 he Typing Class (about 26,000) and the Personal Secretary Class (about
3,600).
7- The Minor Technical and Manipulative Classes, numbering about 53,000,
which include duplicator and machine operators, photographers, photo¬
printers, telephonists and teleprinter operators.
8. Messengerial Classes (with some 26,000 members) which, in addition to
messengers, include paperkeepers, office cleaners and similar workers.
In addition there are many other departmental classes where employment
is peculiar to one department: for instance, the Inspectorate of Children’s
Department of the Home Office; the Factory Inspectorate of the Department
of Employment and Productivity; the Schools Inspectorate of the Depart¬
ment of Education and Science; and the Mines Inspectorate of the Ministry
of Technology.
The Diplomatic
Service
The Diplomatic Service is a separate self-contained service of the Crown,
which provides the staff (comprising some 6,400 civil servants) for service in
the Foreign and Commonwealth Office and at United Kingdom diplomatic
missions and consular posts in foreign and in independent Commonwealth
countries. Its functions include advising on policy, negotiating with overseas
governments and conducting business in international organisations; pro¬
moting British exports and the advancement of British trade; presenting
British ideas, policies and objectives to the people of overseas countries; and
protecting British interests abroad.
'The Service has its own grade structure, corresponding by salary with the
64
The Northern
Ireland Civil
Service
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
grades of the Administrative, Executive and Clerical Classes1 of the Home
Civil Service; it also has Secretarial, Communications and Security Guard
branches. Various specialists and advisers from home departments or the
armed forces may serve at overseas posts on secondment or attachment to the
Diplomatic Service.2
The Government of Northern Ireland has its own Civil Service which deals
with matters transferred to its jurisdiction under the Government of Ireland
Act 1920. Subject to regional differences, the Northern Ireland Civil Service
is modelled on its counterpart in Great Britain, recruitment being effected
through its own Civil Service Commission. Interchange of staff between the
two Civil Services occurs to a minor extent only, and is a matter for depart¬
mental agreement in individual cases.
Public Services
of Overseas
Dependent
Territories
Britain’s dependent territories fill vacancies in their public services by the
appointment of suitably qualified local candidates wherever possible, but
when vacancies cannot be filled by this means, the Ministry for Overseas
Development and the Crown Agents for Oversea Governments and Adminis¬
trations are asked to recruit other candidates, principally from the United
Kingdom.
Recruitment of The main principle of recruitment to the permanent Civil Service is that of
Staff entry by open competition, in which all eligible candidates (both within and
outside the Service) are considered on equal terms. Limited competitions,
designed to afford special opportunities of permanent appointment or pro¬
motion for particular categories of staff already employed in the Service, are
also held for many general service classes or departmental grades.
The main point of entry into each of the general classes corresponds with a
specified level in the British educational system, and selection is by interview
and/or qualifying examination. Entry to the Professional and Technical
Classes usually requires appropriate qualifications in the subject concerned,
and selection is by record and interview. The Civil Service Commission is
responsible for conducting the examinations and interviews, and for issuing
to departments certificates to the effect that candidates are qualified for
permanent posts. The appointment of the candidate after certification is
carried out by the department in which he is to be employed.
Recruitment to clerical and certain other junior posts may be undertaken by
the departments themselves, with the Commission acting in an advisory
capacity and issuing the certificates necessary for permanent appointment.
Temporary civil servants are also normally recruited by the department
concerned; no special qualifying examinations are required.
In-service In all except the smallest government departments, there are full-time training
Training officers and instructors whose task it is to help to identify the training needs of
the staff and to organise courses, both general and technical, to provide for
their varying requirements. The number of management courses run within
the Civil Service, as well as the use made of external management courses
1 The numbers in these separate classes are included in the equivalent Home Civil
Service Grades.
2 The future scale and scope of this service have been the subject of an independent
review carried out by a committee under the chairmanship of Sir Val Duncan (chair¬
man of Rio Tinto Zinc Corporation Limited), which reported in 1969. As a result a
number of changes are in prospect.
GOVERNMENT
Promotion
Conditions of
Service
65
at business schools, the Administrative Staff College and elsewhere, have
increased substantially during recent years with the growing emphasis on the
provision of training in all aspects of management, and will continue to do so.
Methods of training within the Service include lectures, discussion groups,
instructional visits, case-studies, closed-circuit television and Video-tape
recordings, instructional films and programmed learning, as well as ‘on-the-
job’ training. Civil servants are regularly moved between the different
branches of their department and sometimes between departments so that
they can gain as wide an experience as possible of Civil Service work.
In order that they may continue their studies, civil servants under the age of
18 are released, usually on one day a week (‘day release’ schemes) to attend
local technical colleges, while adult staff are assisted financially, and by giving
them ‘time off’, to undertake private studies leading to recognised educa¬
tional or professional qualifications in approved subjects. There are also
opportunities for civil servants in mid-career to obtain fellowships or other¬
wise go on sabbatical leave to undertake research in areas of interest to
themselves and their departments.
Training is co-ordinated by the Training Requirements Division of the
Civil Service Department which is responsible for the analysis and determina¬
tion, in conjunction with the Civil Service College, of training needs to be met
centrally in the Civil Service, and exercises advisory and co-ordination
functions in departmental training. All central training is provided by the
College which conducts a large number of management courses and seminars
covering such subjects as organisation and staff management, economics,
statistics, industrial growth, social administration, operational reasearch,
computers and information systems, as well as a number of specialised
courses.
A period of probation (varying according to grade, with extensions in certain
instances) is the rule for all new entrants to the permanent Civil Service.
Promotions from grade to grade are made by departments; those from class
to class partly through centrally conducted competitions and partly by
departments themselves. Promotions or appointments to most of the highest
positions in the Civil Service, for instance, permanent secretaries, deputy
secretaries, principal establishments officers and principal finance officers,
are approved by the Prime Minister, who is advised in these matters by the
head of the Home Civil Service.
Machinery for negotiation on conditions of service affecting the Civil Service
as a whole is provided by the National Whitley Council, which is composed
jointly of official and staff representatives. Negotiating machinery for separate
sections of the service is provided through the various staff associations which
civil servants are encouraged to join (for instance, the Civil and Public Services
Association, the Society of Civil Servants, the Institution of Professional Civil
Servants and the Association of First Division Civil Servants), and through
departmental Whitley Councils.
In general, the civil servant receives a salary which is based on a fair
comparison with that paid for similar work outside the service and usually he
receives annual increments up to the maximum of the scale of the grade to
which he belongs. In addition, although a civil servant holds office at the
pleasure of the Crown and may therefore be dismissed at any time, in practice
he enjoys a considerable measure of security of tenure. Thus every permanent
66
Political and
Private
Activities
BRITAIN I971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
civil servant, who is capable and efficient, may reasonably expect a full career
in the public service and a pension on retirement.1
Civil servants are required to work a specified number of hours each week.
Certain grades are eligible for overtime pay for any hours worked in excess of
the standard hours, but this does not apply to the higher grades whose salaries
are determined on the assumption that they will work such long hours as may
be necessary without additional pay. The standard working week for office
staffs is 41 hours in London and 42 hours in the provinces. Annual leave varies
according to grade and length of service up to a maximum of six weeks, that
is, 30 working days a year. Sick leave on full pay, less any national insurance
benefit received, may be granted to permanent civil servants for up to six
months in any 12 months, and on reduced pay up to a maximum of one year’s
sick leave in any four years; any officer whose health is permanently impaired
may be retired on medical grounds.
The position and functions of a civil servant remain the same whichever
political party is in power; and it is his duty to serve the government of the
day irrespective of his own political opinion. The extent to which he is free,
as a private individual, to participate in political activities varies according to
grade. For this purpose civil servants are divided into three groups: those who
are completely free to engage in all kinds of national and local political
activities (although if they intend standing for Parliament, they must resign
their appointment before nomination day on the understanding that if not
elected they will be reinstated in their previous capacity within a week of the
declaration of the election result); those who are free, subject to the acceptance
of the need for discretion and with the permission of the department, to take
part in most activities except parliamentary candidature; and those who are
debarred from national political activities though they may seek permission
to take part in local government political activities. In the non-industrial
Civil Service, the completely free groups are members of the minor classes
such as cleaners and messengers. The intermediate group includes mainly
members of the clerical and typing classes and the granting of permission by
the department depends, broadly, on the nature of the work done. The group
which is not allowed to take part in national political activities includes
members of the Professional, the Scientific and Technical, and the Executive
and Administrative classes. Departments are encouraged to permit members
of this group to engage in local political activities to the maximum extent
consistent with the reputation of the Service for political impartiality, having
regard to the nature of the duties of the officer concerned and the extent of
contact with the public that these duties involve. Where permission is granted,
it is subject to a code of discretion and to the obligation to notify the depart¬
ment of election or co-option to a local council.
Civil servants in all classes enjoy the right to register their private political
opinions on appropriate occasions, for instance, at general or local authority
elections. They may also engage in such private activities as they wish, pro¬
vided that these do not in any way conflict with their official duties, nor with
the provisions of the Official Secrets Acts 1911 and 1920, and the Prevention
of Corruption Act 1906. However, since a civil servant must not use his
1 An established civil servant with sufficient service to his credit may retire with
immediate superannuation benefits at any time after the age of 60, but there is no
fixed age of retirement, and it is possible for a civil servant to continue to work after
the age of 60, provided that he is in good health and continues to give satisfactory
service.
GOVERNMENT
Security
Relationship
between
Central and
Local
Government
67
official position to further his private interests, he is subject to certain
restrictions in commerce and business: for instance, he may not hold private
interests in public contracts and he may not use official information in writing,
broadcasting or lecturing without the approval of his department.
The private political views of civil servants are not as a general rule a matter of
official concern, but there are some Civil Service duties in which secrecy is
so vitally important to State security that the Government does not feel
itself justified in employing anyone to carry them out whose reliability is in
doubt. For this reason no one who is known to be a member of, or actively
associated or in sympathy with, the Communist Party or with Fascist
organisations, or is liable to be a security risk in any other respect, is employed
in connection with secret work.
Each government department is responsible for its own internal security
and the Security Service, which operates independently under a Director
General who is responsible for its efficiency to the Home Secretary, deals
with national security. In addition, there is a Security Commission which, if
requested by the Prime Minister in consultation with the leader of the
Opposition, may investigate and report on breaches of security in the public
service and, in certain circumstances, advise whether any change in security
arrangements is necessary or desirable.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Government on a local basis has been part of the administrative system of
the United Kingdom for many centuries. In its present shape much of it dates
back to the late nineteenth century, when the conception of a comprehensive
system of locally elected councils to manage various services provided for the
benefit of the community was first incorporated in statute law. Since that time
there has been a large increase in the population, and a massive transformation
in the range, complexity and scale of local authority functions. Because of
this, local government in Greater London was reorganised in the 1960s and
radical changes in the existing structure in England and Scotland have been
proposed by two Royal Commissions1 while proposals for Wales have also
been formulated. These proposals are being considered by the Government.
In Northern Ireland the structure of local government is under review.
Meanwhile legislation to bring voting qualifications in local elections into line
with those operating in Great Britain has been passed. A Commissioner for
Complaints has been appointed to investigate complaints against local
authorities and other public bodies.
Local government is conducted by elected local authorities, acting in accor¬
dance with powers and duties conferred on them by Parliament. The actual
administration and the exercise of discretion within statutory limits, are the
1 In England (outside London) there would be 58 unitary authorities, singly responsible
for all services; and three metropolitan authorities and 20 district councils, each respon¬
sible for certain functions in the proposed new metropolitan areas of Merseyside,
Selnec (south-east Lancashire and north-east Cheshire), and the west Midlands. Local
councils would be elected to represent opinion at a local level, while at a provincial
level there would be eight provincial councils who would decide the strategy and
framework of social and economic development in their areas.
In Scotland there would be two levels of authority independently elected, consisting
of seven regional authorities responsible for the major services and 37 district authorities
responsible for a wide range of local services. At the most local level there would be
community councils, which would not be local authorities but would be able to express
and promote local opinion.
68
Principal Types
of Local
Authority
Constitution
and Election of
Councils
BRITAIN I971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
responsibility of the local authority, but, in respect of certain services, Acts of
Parliament dealing with local government give ministers of the Crown defined
powers, some of which are designed to secure a measure of national uniformity
in the standard of service provided, or to safeguard public health, while
others are for the protection of the rights of individual citizens. For some
services the minister concerned has wide powers of supervision; for others
there are strictly limited powers.
In addition to their statutory powers, ministers concerned with local
government give assistance to local authorities by the general issue of advisory
circulars and by giving advice in individual cases.
The Ministry of Housing and Local Government is the main link between
local authorities and the central Government in England; in Scotland the
Scottish Development Department is responsible for general policy in regard
to local government; in Wales, the Welsh Office; and in Northern Ireland,
the Ministry of Development.
The main pattern of local government organisation in England and Wales
(outside the Greater London area) and Northern Ireland is at present a
division of the country into county boroughs and administrative counties.
The county boroughs (mostly with populations of over 75,000) are separate
from the counties and independent of them. The administrative counties are
subdivided into county districts—non-county boroughs, urban districts and
rural districts, the last-named being further divided into parishes1 (except in
Northern Ireland). Scotland is divided into counties, counties of cities, large
and small burghs, and districts. Each local authority area is administered by
its own elected council. In England and Wales (outside the Greater London
area) there are 58 county councils, 83 county borough councils, 259 non¬
county borough councils, 532 urban district councils, 470 rural district coun¬
cils,2 about 7,500 parish councils and some 3,300 parish meetings (in parishes
not large enough to have a parish council); in Scotland, 33 county councils
(two pairs being combined for certain purposes), 201 town councils (including
4 for counties of cities) and 196 district councils (2 counties not being divided
into districts); and in Northern Ireland, 1 county borough council, 6 county
councils, 9 non-county borough councils, 24 urban district councils, 26 rural
district councils, and 2 Development Commissions exercising municipal
functions.
The Greater London area is administered by the councils of 32 London
boroughs and the City of London, and by the Greater London Council.
Local councils comprise a number of unpaid elected councillors (and, in some
cases, though not in Scotland, aldermen elected by the councillors), presided
over by a chairman who has varied ceremonial and civic duties to perform in
addition to his work on the council. In most boroughs of England and Wales
and Northern Ireland the chairman is the Mayor; in the City of London and
certain important boroughs, the Lord Mayor; in the Scottish counties, the
Convener; and in the burghs, the Provost or Lord Provost.
The normal term of office of a councillor elected to any form of local
government is three years; aldermen normally hold office for six years. In
some local authority areas the whole council retires every third year and
another is elected immediately; in other areas elections are held annually,
when one-third of the councillors retire. Procedure at local government
There are usually some 20 to 30 parishes in a rural district.
Including the Isles of Scilly.
Functions and
Services
GOVERNMENT 69
elections in Great Britain is governed by rules laid down in the Representation
of the People Acts 1949 and 1969 or made for a specific type of authority.
Any person (including a member of the House of Lords) is entitled to vote
at a local government election in Great Britain provided that he or she is 18
years of age or over, is a British subject or a citizen of the Irish Republic, is
not subject to any legal incapacity and is registered as a local government
elector for the area for which the election is held. A person qualifies for regis¬
tration as a local government elector if, on the qualifying date for the register
(compiled annually), he or she is resident in the council area. In Northern
Ireland, in order to qualify for registration as a local government elector, a
person must be 18 years of age or over (under the Electoral Law Act 1969)
and must have been born in Northern Ireland or, alternatively, have resided
continuously in the United Kingdom for seven years immediately prior to
the qualifying date.
Voting takes place at polling stations arranged by the returning officer
concerned, and under the supervision of a presiding officer appointed for the
purpose. The procedure for local government voting in Great Britain is
similar to that for parliamentary elections, although facilities for postal voting
are more restricted. Each elector has one vote for each seat contested in his
electoral area: he need not record all his votes, but must not give more than
one vote for each candidate.
A candidate for election as councillor normally stands as a representative
of one of the national political parties, as a member of an association repre¬
senting some local interest, or as an independent. He must be of British
nationality, aged 21 or over, and must be registered as a local government
elector in the register of electors for the area of the local authority to which
he seeks election, or have resided within that area (or within three miles of it
in the case of a rural borough or parish council) during the whole of the 12
months preceding the day on which he is nominated as a candidate. A
candidate is also subject to a number of statutory disqualifications designed
to ensure that unsuitable persons do not offer themselves for election.
Procedure at local government elections in Northern Ireland is governed
by the Electoral Law Acts (Northern Ireland) 1962-69 and regulations made
thereunder by the Ministry of Home Affairs for Northern Ireland. These
regulations are similar to those which apply in Great Britain.
Most local authority areas are divided into electoral areas for local council
elections. Administrative counties are divided into single-member electoral
divisions in accordance with orders made by the Secretary of State for the
Home Department, the Minister of Housing and Local Government, or the
Secretary of State for Scotland. Boroughs and urban districts in England and
Wales, and burghs in Scotland, are either divided into ‘wards’, or, if they are
small, left as single units. For rural district council or parish council elections,
each parish or ward of a parish (or, in some cases, a combination of parishes)
forms an electoral area which returns one or more members.
For the purposes of elections to the Greater London Council, each London
borough forms an electoral area returning two, three or four councillors.
It is the primary duty of every local authority to provide and administer such
services as Acts of Parliament require it to provide and administer. It may
provide additional services under the permissive powers of a general Act or
under powers granted to it by local or Private Bill legislation.
The responsibilities of local authorities depend upon their type, as follows:
in England (outside the Greater London area) and Wales county borough
yo
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
councils are all-purpose authorities, while both county councils and county
district councils have particular functions allotted to them,1 which they
exercise independently to a considerable extent, although there is a certain
degree of delegation from county councils to county district councils,
especially of duties connected with town and country planning and the
education, health and welfare services. Parish councils or parish meetings
have a few functions of local interest which they may exercise of right. In
Scotland the town councils of the counties of cities are all-purpose authorities;
elsewhere, the county councils, the town councils and the district councils
all share in local government work. In Northern Ireland the position is
broadly similar to that in England and Wales, except that local authorities are
not called upon to provide or administer police or (except in Belfast) fire
services. The Government has proposed to transfer the housing functions of
local government in Northern Ireland to a central housing authority.
In Greater London the basic units of local government are the London
boroughs; the GLC is responsible only for those services which, by their
nature, require unified administration and control over the whole area. In the
City of London (an area of approximately one square mile in the centre of the
metropolis) the City Corporation exercises the general powers administered,
and duties performed, by the London borough councils.
Local authority services may be classified under three heads: environ¬
mental, protective and personal. The environmental services are designed
to secure local good order, amenity and public health. They include the
inspection and abatement of nuisances, drainage, sewerage, street cleansing,
refuse collection and disposal, litter prevention, rodent control, the supervision
of water supplies, measures for ensuring food hygiene and for preventing
air pollution and the provision of baths and washhouses. They also include
the services for bridge and highway construction and maintenance, for street
lighting, public safety on the roads, and the provision of recreation grounds,
parks and similar amenities. Town and country planning is the major environ¬
mental service. The protective services are the fire service and the police
service, while the personal services range from health services, education and
housing to the provision of public entertainment.
Services concerned primarily with health and welfare cover the provision
of ante-natal, post-natal and child welfare clinics, and some residential and
day nurseries; the provision and supervision of midwifery services, health
visitors and home nursing facilities; measures for the prevention of illness and
the aftercare of physically or mentally sick persons; the provision of domestic
help where necessary; the ambulance service; the provision of facilities for
vaccination and immunisation against certain infectious diseases; and the
services for the permanently disabled or handicapped, for the aged and infirm
and for children deprived of a normal home life.2 Education and culture are
promoted by the establishment and maintenance of various types of schools;
by the provision of adult education centres, and art and technical colleges;
by the award of grants and scholarships to students of all kinds; and by the
provision of libraries, art galleries and museums. Housing needs are met, as
far as possible, by building new houses (mainly to let), acquiring old houses
and converting them to provide additional accommodation, clearing slums,
1 For instance, county councils are generally responsible for the police, fire and civil
defence services, while the district councils administer most of the environmental and
sanitary services.
2 Proposals have been published for the transfer of some of these services to new area
health authorities within the National Health Service (see p. 134).
GOVERNMENT
71
and laying down the standards to be maintained in both newly built and older
houses.
Some local authorities engage in trading services, such as passenger
transport, water supply, and harbour, dock and pier services; they also have
power to initiate schemes to attract industrial development.
The above is only a brief outline of local authority services. Fuller infor¬
mation is given under the relevant subject headings in later chapters of this
book.
Internal
Organisation
of Local
Authorities
Officers and
Employees
Local authorities are free to a very considerable extent to make their own
internal arrangements and to choose the means and methods by which they
will discharge their responsibilities. Most councils use the committee system,
whereby questions of policy and principle are decided in full council, and
committees are appointed to carry out the detailed administration of the
various services. In recent years many councils, particularly borough councils,
have been rationalising their organisation. Some have established policy
advisory or co-ordinating committees with powers to originate policy, subject
to the approval of the full council. A few have introduced management boards,
thus taking away some of the executive powers of individual committees. In
general the number of committees has been substantially reduced. Parish
councils and the smaller district councils are often able to do their work
efficiently in full session although they appoint committees from time to time
as necessary. Where the larger local authorities use the committee system,
work may be delegated to sub-committees, which stand to the parent com¬
mittee in a relation similar to that of the main committees to the whole
council.
The powers and duties of local authority committees (which may be
advisory or executive) are usually laid down in the appointing council’s
standing orders. A council is free to delegate all its powers to committees,
except its powers in connection with raising loans, levying rates, or making
financial demands on other authorities liable to contribute (raising precepts
in England and Wales and levying requisitions in Scotland) which are legally
reserved to the council as a whole. County and county borough councils
exercise their powers of delegation to a considerable extent, but in most
districts and parishes councils use their committees only in an advisory
capacity.
Joint committees or joint boards consist of representatives of more than
one authority and may be established, outside the Greater London area, for
services that can be more effectively administered over a wider area than that
controlled by a single council, for instance, town and country planning, water
supplies and the police service.
The public and the press are admitted to all meetings of the council (and of
some committees) but may be excluded while a particular item is considered
if the council resolves that publicity for that matter would be prejudicial to the
public interest.
The execution of council policy rests with salaried officers and employees,
whose number may vary from about half a dozen in a small rural district to
tens of thousands in the larger authorities. Generally speaking, councils are
free to make such appointments as they think necessary for carrying out their
work, although certain posts, for instance, the clerk, the treasurer and the
medical officer of health, are compulsory in almost all councils, and a borough
or city architect must be appointed in each London borough and in the City of
72
Local
Government
Finance
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
London. Otherwise choice of personnel is left to a great extent to the in¬
dividual council: in theory, the appointment of certain chief officers is subject
to some central control but, in practice, the nominee of the council is nearly
always accepted.
As a general rule, employees are of three kinds: heads of departments or
chief officers, whose duties are mainly of an administrative and managerial
kind; subordinate officers employed in a professional, clerical or technical
capacity; and manual workers who are employed to do the physical work for
which the council is responsible. Senior staff appointments are usually made
at the instance of the committee or committees particularly concerned; most
junior appointments are made by heads of departments, who are also
responsible for engaging manual workers. Appointments and engagements
are always made in conformity with the council’s set establishment and
committees are informed of any appointments which they have not made
themselves.
Rates of pay and conditions of service for local authority staff are within
the jurisdiction of the employing council (except for the rare case where the
proposed salary of an officer requires the approval of a government depart¬
ment, as in the case of the clerk of a county council in England and Wales).
They are based on recommendations made by the Whitley Councils, of
which the largest are the National Joint Council for Local Authorities’
Administrative, Professional, Technical and Clerical Services and the National
Joint Council for Local Authorities’ Services (Manual Workers). Conditions
of service and salary scales for senior local government officers are determined
by separate joint committees for England and Wales, and for Scotland. The
local government service in Northern Ireland has its separate joint negotiating
machinery at various levels.
All local government officers are expected to maintain a high standard of
conduct; as public servants they ‘must not only be honest in fact, but must be
beyond the reach of the suspicion of dishonesty’.
There are three sources of local authority income1: government grants (about
two-fifths); local rates, paid by occupiers of land and buildings (about two-
fifths); and rents from municipal houses, dividends and interest (about
one-fifth). Capital investment is, for the greater part, financed by borrowing.
Government grants occasionally take the form of capital grants, paid on
approval of claims made by local authorities for specific services, principally
roads and public lighting, and annual subsidies are payable for local authority
housing. Most government grants are, however, revenue grants, related to
local authority revenue expenditure (other than contributions towards deficits
on housing and trading accounts). These are payable, both in aid of revenues
generally (when they are known as rate support grants) and for specific
services. Rate support grants in England and Wales amount to J£I>744 million
and the estimated grant for specific services to £154 million in 1970-71. The
grants for Scotland are £207 million and ^19-6 million respectively.
The rate support grants are distributed among authorities (in England and
Wales, the county, county borough, county district and London borough
councils; in Scotland, the county and town councils) in three parts: the ‘needs’
element composed of a basic payment which takes into account total heads of
population and, in particular, the number of children of school age, together
with supplementary payments which may take into account the numbers of
1 A committee has been set up to enquire into methods of financing local government.
GOVERNMENT
Rates
73
children under five years old and of people over 65, the cost of various stages of
education, density of population and road mileage; the ‘resources’ element
which is paid to authorities whose rateable resources are below the average for
all authorities in relation to population; and the ‘domestic’ element which
compensates rating authorities for loss of rate income from reductions in rate
poundage which they are required to give to householders—in England and
Wales £o-o6£ in 1969-70 and ^o-o8| in 1970-71, and in Scotland, where the
general level of rate poundage is higher, £o-i2| and £o-i6| respectively.
Services qualifying for specific grants include the police and comprehensive
rebuilding schemes. Grants are also made towards the cost of rate rebates for
people with low incomes. The aggregate revenue grants are estimated to shift
the balance from rates to taxes on revenue account by about 1 per cent
annually.
In Northern Ireland there is a system of grants towards the cost of specific
services (for instance, education, roads, housing, health and welfare, water
supplies and sewerage), supplemented by a General Exchequer Contribution
which compensates for derating and takes account of the needs and resources
of individual authorities. A grant is also paid to rating authorities to compen¬
sate them for prescribed reductions in rate poundages, which they are required
to give to householders.
Rates are a local tax paid by the occupiers of land and buildings as a contribu¬
tion towards the cost of local services—the only major class of property
exempt being agricultural land and buildings. The amount of each payment
is calculated by multiplying the rate poundage, determined by the rating
authority, by the rateable value of the property. The rateable value reflects
the rental value of the property in the open market and is assessed in England
and Wales by valuation officers of the Board of Inland Revenue, who are
independent of the local authorities. In the latest valuation lists (1963)
assessments of all classes of property were based on rental values current at
that time. New valuation lists will come into force in 1973. Disputes about
assessments are heard by local valuation courts, each consisting of three
members of an independent local valuation panel and then, on appeal, by the
Lands Tribunal.
Rate rebates are available for householders with small incomes and all
householders pay lower rates than do commercial and industrial ratepayers.
In addition householders have the right to pay in ten instalments a year.
Charities pay half the full rate on property they occupy for charitable purposes
but may be given further reliefs by the rating authorities, which are em¬
powered to reduce or remit the rates for a wide range of non-profit-making
bodies. Half rates may be levied on the owners of all empty properties.
To offset the extra rate burdens caused by the reorganisation of London
government, transitional assistance is being given to the councils of the home
counties (Essex, Surrey and Kent) of which parts have been absorbed into
the Greater London area. There is also a scheme for reducing disparities in
the rates levied in Greater London.
In Scotland valuation is on a basis similar to that in England and Wales;
but it is carried out by assessors appointed by the councils of counties and
counties of cities. Appeals are heard by the valuation appeal committee of each
valuation area and thereafter by the Lands Valuation Appeal Court of the
Court of Session. A Scottish Valuation Advisory Council has been established
by the Secretary of State for Scotland. In Northern Ireland the valuation
authority is the Commissioner of Valuation, whose department is part of the
Loans
Control of Finance
BRITAIN I971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Ministry of Finance. Industry and freight transport in Scotland are rated at
half and in Northern Ireland at a quarter of their net annual value.
In England and Wales the responsibility for levying and collecting the rates
lies with the councils of county boroughs and county districts, with the
London borough councils and with the Common Council of the City of
London. The rate poundage for each county district consists mainly of a
district rate and a county rate, calculated in accordance with the respective
requirements of the two authorities, and the proceeds of the latter are passed
on to the county council. In rural districts the rate levied in each parish takes
into account precepts issued by the parish council or parish meeting. In
Greater London the GLC raises revenue by precepting on the London
boroughs and the City. Rates in Scotland are levied by the town councils in
burghs and by county councils elsewhere; to cover their expenditure, district
councils make a requisition each year to the county council; a town council
has to meet an annual requisition from the county council in respect of the
burgh’s share of the expenditure on functions exercised by the county council
throughout the county, including the burgh. In Northern Ireland, county
councils are responsible for making, levying and collecting the rates, except in
such parts of the county as fall within the jurisdiction of the county borough,
borough, or urban district councils.
Loans may be raised by local authorities for financing such items of capital
expenditure as are sanctioned by the Minister of Housing and Local Govern¬
ment, the Secretary of State for Wales, the Secretary of State for Scotland,
or, occasionally, the government department responsible for the service for
which the capital is required. The Greater London Council applies annually
for parliamentary sanction to raise the money it needs for capital expenditure.
In Northern Ireland the government department responsible for the service
also issues the appropriate loan approvals. Borrowing powers for specific
purposes may also be taken under Acts of Parliament of local application.
Local authorities may raise long-term loans by issuing mortgages, by issuing
stock upon the Stock Exchange and by bonds which may or may not be quoted
on the Stock Exchange. Although these bonds may be for any period, local
authorities normally issue them for one year. Local authorities also have right
of access to the Public Works Loan Board, financed by the Exchequer, or, in
Northern Ireland, to the Government Loans Fund, for a proportion of their
long-term borrowing, and may borrow temporarily for a limited proportion
of their outstanding loan debt.
Internal control of finance is exercised on behalf of the council concerned
by a finance committee, whose function it is to keep the financial policy of
the council under constant review. In England and Wales an external audit is
carried out (except for certain general accounts in most of the county
borough and about two-thirds of the borough councils) by district auditors
appointed by the Ministry of Housing and Local Government. County
borough councils must use the services of the district auditor for accounts
which relate to police, children and education, and local health and welfare
services. In both county and non-county boroughs rating and coast protection
are also subject to district audit. For their other accounts borough councils use
mainly professional auditors; a small number use ‘elective audit’, which
provides for the appointment of three auditors: two elected by the local
government electors and one appointed by the mayor. In Scotland the accounts
of each authority are audited by a professional auditor appointed by the
Secretary of State for Scotland and paid by the council concerned, and in
FIRE
AUTHORITIES
IN GREAT
BRITAIN
Central Control
Establishment
Schemes
GOVERNMENT 75
Northern Ireland by special local government auditors appointed by the
Ministry of Development.
THE FIRE SERVICE
The fire services in Great Britain1 are organised on a local basis, subject to
a measure of central control exercised by the Home Secretary (in England
and Wales) and the Secretary of State for Scotland. The fire services in
Northern Ireland are controlled by two authorities, the Belfast Corporation
and the Northern Ireland Fire Authority, which are responsible to the
Minister of Home Affairs. Every part of the United Kingdom is covered by a
public fire brigade.
There are 132 local authority fire brigades in England and Wales and 11 in
Scotland. In England and Wales, under the Fire Services Act 1947, separate
fire brigades are administered by the county and county borough councils,
which are the fire authorities for their areas and have powers and duties
which they exercise either separately or as combined authorities where
neighbouring councils care to make such arrangements in the interests of the
efficiency of the service. The Greater London Council is the fire authority for
the London Fire Brigade. In Scotland the local authorities are grouped in
11 areas each with a single brigade; with the exception of Glasgow, where the
town council of the city is the responsible authority, each area is administered
by a joint committee representative of the councils of the counties and large
burghs in the area.
There are also fire-fighting organisations outside the local authority service;
for instance, those maintained by the Ministry of Defence and by some large
industrial and commercial concerns.
The Home Secretary and the Secretary of State for Scotland may make
regulations regarding discipline, training, appointments and promotions,
pensions, the design and performance of equipment, and the uniformity
of fire hydrants in local fire brigades, and their approval is necessary for
certain reductions in establishment schemes. In matters affecting the fire
brigades as a whole (excluding discipline and conditions of service), each
minister is advised by the appropriate Central Fire Brigades Advisory Council,
consisting of officers of the respective home departments, representatives of the
local authority associations, representatives of the chief fire officers (firemasters
in Scotland) and other members of the brigades, and other persons having
special qualifications. The National Joint Council for Local Authorities’ Fire
Brigades in Great Britain and the National Joint Council for Chief Officers
of Local Authorities’ Fire Brigades in Great Britain are the negotiating
bodies on ranks, pay and conditions of service of members of the brigades.
Inspectorates of fire services advise the Secretaries of State on operational and
technical matters.
Each fire authority is required to draw up a scheme showing the establishment
of officers and other ranks (both whole-time and part-time), the number and
location of fire stations and the number and type of appliances considered
necessary for the provision of an all-over cover of its area. Establishment
1 Changes have been recommended by a Departmental Committee on the Fire Service,
whose report (Cmnd. 4371) was published in May 1970.
?6
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Equipment
Operational
Methods
Fire Losses
Personnel
schemes differ according to the fire risks in the area concerned; in the whole of
England and Wales there are about 23,770 whole-time and 17,240 part-time
firemen, operating more than 375 fire-fighting appliances (including pumps,
turntable ladders, water tenders, and emergency and salvage tenders) housed
in some 1,590 fire stations. In Scotland there are approximately 3,000 whole¬
time and 3,200 part-time firemen, 520 fire-fighting appliances, and 330 fire
stations.
It is the duty of every fire authority to buy such appliances and equipment as
may be necessary to meet efficiently all normal fire-fighting requirements in
their area. Certain items of equipment are standardised so that there is com¬
plete interchangeability when men and appliances of more than one brigade
combine to fight a fire. The principal types of fire-fighting appliances are
bought by fire authorities to requirement specifications approved by the
Home Secretary and Secretary of State for Scotland, on the advice of the
respective Central Fire Brigades Advisory Councils. These specifications
ensure that minimum standards are maintained and at the same time allow
sufficient freedom of design to meet special circumstances and encourage
further developments.
Each fire authority must appoint a chief fire officer (firemaster in Scotland)
to be the head administrative and executive officer for its fire services. The
appointment must be approved by the Home Secretary or by the Secretary of
State for Scotland. The chief fire officer or firemaster is responsible to the
fire authority for seeing that the fire brigade is organised and managed in
accordance with policy.
Central control rests with brigade headquarters and local control with
divisional officers in charge of the geographical divisions into which most areas
are divided, these officers being responsible for mobilising their forces in the
strength necessary for dealing with any outbreaks of fire in their divisions.
Constant communication is maintained between divisional and brigade head¬
quarters and if at any time an outbreak of fire should grow beyond the capa¬
bilities of a division, help is sent from one or more neighbouring divisions,
or even from the area of another fire authority. Under arrangements for
mutual help made by all fire authorities, the nearest available force is sent to
the scene of a fire, regardless of area boundaries.
In England and Wales the approximate number of fire calls (in 1969), includ¬
ing false alarms and special service calls for such purposes as rescuing persons
and animals trapped in dangerous situations, dealing with crashed aircraft,
and pumping and salvage operations, was 418,400. In Scotland the number
of fire calls was approximately 46,000.
Estimated fire losses in the United Kingdom in 1969 amounted to about
£120 million, some 20 per cent higher than the corresponding figure for
1968.
About three-fifths of the total number of firemen in local authority fire
brigades work on a whole-time basis. The part-time firemen include retained
firemen who, in return for a retaining fee, undertake to attend fires if called
upon, and volunteer firemen, who receive no remuneration. Many fire
authorities employ women (about 840 in England and Wales and 120 in Scot¬
land in 1970) on communications and mobilising duties, and some brigades
have schemes for the employment of junior firemen between the ages of 16
Finance
Fire Prevention
Research
GOVERNMENT 77
and 18 years, with a view to their being enrolled as regular firemen at the
age of 18.
Recruits and junior ranks in the fire service in England and Wales receive
practical training in basic firemanship at training schools run by fire
authorities. In Scotland similar training is carried out at a central training
school which is the responsibility of the Scottish Home and Health Depart¬
ment. Command, advanced technical and management training is provided
for the higher and middle ranks at the Fire Service Staff College, Wotton
House, near Dorking, Surrey, where high-level operational studies are also
conducted; fire prevention, practical firemanship, advancement and instructor
training, mainly for the middle ranks is provided at the Fire Service Techni¬
cal College, Moreton-in-Marsh, Gloucestershire. Both these establishments
are maintained by the Home Office and the Scottish Home and Health Depart¬
ment. Facilities for properly accredited officers from overseas fire services to
study the organisation, current training methods, appliances and equipment
of the British fire brigades are arranged by the Home Office Fire Department.
The fire authorities bear the cost of maintaining the fire service, but they
receive an Exchequer contribution which is included in the aggregate amount
of the local authority rate support grant (see p. 72). For the purpose of
arriving at the amount of this contribution, the Government receives from fire
authorities (at the time when the grant is to be considered) details of the last
known actual expenditure for a year, together with estimates for the impending
grant period.
Fire authorities are required, under the 1947 Act, to make efficient arrange¬
ments for giving advice, when requested, about fire prevention, limiting the
spread of fires, and means of escape in case of fire. In addition, they have been
made the enforcing authority for fire precautions under a steadily growing
number of Acts of Parliament (of which the most notable are the Factories
Act 1961, and the Offices, Shops and Railway Premises Act 1963), and they
are concerned with provisions relating to fire and fire prevention in a large
number of other Acts.
Within brigades, the work of fire prevention is entrusted to a staff of fire
prevention officers. Other sources of advice on fire prevention include the
various insurance companies which advise their policyholders, and the Fire
Protection Association, a non-profit-making body established by the Fire
Offices’ Committee1 as an advisory centre on a nation-wide basis for industry
and the general public on protection of life and property against fire.
Research into the causes, development and prevention of fire is undertaken
by the Joint Fire Research Organisation under the general direction of a
steering committee, whose members are drawn from the Ministry of Techno¬
logy, the Home Office, the Fire Offices’ Committee, the independent
insurance companies and industry. The annual cost of the Organisation is over
^420,000, of which £125,000 is paid by the Fire Offices’ Committee, the
balance being met by the Ministry of Technology. The Organisation operates
from the fire research station at Boreham Wood, Hertfordshire.
An Operational Fire Research Group has been established in the Home
1 The Fire Offices’ Committee is representative of some, but not all, of the fire insur¬
ance companies in Britain.
78
FIRE SERVICES
IF NORTHERN
IRELAND
Finance
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Office to undertake research into the factors affecting fire cover, fire service
performance and fire losses.
In Northern Ireland the Belfast Corporation controls the Belfast Fire Brigade
and is responsible for the area inside the city boundary, and the Northern
Ireland Fire Authority covers the rest of the country outside Belfast.
The Belfast Fire Brigade maintains five whole-time stations and has an
establishment of 293 officers and men manning 18 appliances, while the
Northern Ireland Fire Authority has one whole-time station in Londonderry
and 44 other stations throughout the remainder of the area, and an establish¬
ment of 110 whole-time officers and men and 700 part-time firemen, manning
108 appliances.
The amount of fire service grant payable to the Northern Ireland Fire
Authority is 50 per cent of the loan charges in respect of capital expenditure
which do not exceed £107,000 and 25 per cent of the amount (if any) by which
the loan charges exceed £107,000, together with 50 per cent of the first
£310,000 of other net expenditure and 25 per cent of the excess over that
amount. Expenditure in excess of the fire service grant is apportioned among
the local authorities liable to contribute to the funds of the Authority. Under
the Fire Services Act, the Belfast Fire Brigade does not qualify for the payment
of fire service grant.
3 LAW AND ORDER
THE LAW
Although the United Kingdom is a unitary state, it does not have a single
body of law applicable universally within its limits. Scotland has its own
distinctive legal system and law courts, and although the existence of a single
Parliament for Great Britain since i7°7> common opinions on broader issues,
and a common final court of appeal in civil cases have resulted in substantial
identity on many points, differences in legal procedure and practice remain. In
Northern Ireland on the other hand, the structure of the courts and legal
procedure and practice have closely resembled those of England and Wales for
centuries but, as Northern Ireland has its own Parliament with defined powers
(as well as being represented in the Parliament at Westminster), its enacted
law derives in certain spheres from a different source and may differ in
substance from that which operates in England and Wales. However, a large
volume of modern legislation, particularly in the social field, applies through¬
out the United Kingdom.
A feature common to all the systems of law in the United Kingdom (which
differentiates them from some continental systems) is that there is no complete
code.1 The sources of law in all the systems include legislation and unwritten
or ‘common’ law.
Legislation includes some 3>000 Acts of Parliament and delegated or
subordinate legislation made by ministers and others under powers conferred
by Parliament, Acts of Parliament being absolutely binding on all courts of
the United Kingdom, and taking precedence over any other source of law. The
common law of England originated in the customs of the realm and was built
up by decisions of the courts. A supplementary system of law, known as
equity , came into being during the Middle Ages to provide and enforce
more effective protection for existing legal rights. It was administered by a
separate court and later became a separate body of legal rules. In 1875 the
courts of equity were fused with the courts of common law, so that all
courts now apply both systems but, where they conflict, equity prevails.
In Scotland the basis of common law, which largely depends on the canon
law of Rome, helped by continental commentators, is embodied in the
writings of certain seventeenth, eighteenth and early nineteenth century
lawyers of great repute who, between them, described systematically almost
the whole field of private and criminal law as existing in their times. Broadly
speaking, the principles enunciated by these lawyers, together with the many
judicial decisions which have followed and developed from those principles,
form the body of Scots non-statutory law. Scotland has never had a separate
system of equity equitable principles having always permeated the ordinary
rules of law.
A feature common to the legal systems of the United Kingdom is the
distinction made between the criminal law and the civil law. Criminal law
is concerned with wrongs against the community as a whole; civil law is
The Law Commission (see p. 91) is working on the codification of certain branches
of law.
8o
CRIMINAL LAW
IN ENGLAND
AND WALES
Criminal Courts
Magistrates'
Courts
Quarter Sessions
Assizes
BRITAIN 1971: an OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
concerned with the rights, duties and obligations of individual members of
the community between themselves.
The courts of ordinary criminal jurisdiction in England and Wales include:
magistrates’ courts, which try the less serious offences; courts of quarter
sessions, which try most of the more serious offences; and courts of assize,1
including the Central Criminal Court (for Greater London) and the Crown
Courts in Liverpool and Manchester, which try the very grave or difficult
cases. Trial by jury is the rule at quarter sessions and assizes.
Most magistrates’ courts consist of two to seven lay magistrates, known as
justices of the peace, whose function it is to hear and determine charges
against people accused of summary offences—that is, those offences that may
legally be disposed of by the justices sitting together without a jury. In
addition, justices may also try certain offences which would normally be tried
on indictment, that is to say, the more serious offences, if the accused consents
to forgo his right to trial by jury—and, in fact, about 98 per cent of all
criminal cases are disposed of in magistrates’ courts. Magistrates also sit as
‘examining justices’ to conduct preliminary enquiries to determine whether
there is sufficient evidence to justify the committal of the accused for trial in a
higher court.
In inner London and a few large provincial cities there are, in addition to
justices, stipendiary magistrates, who are full-time salaried lawyers, and
usually sit alone. In the City of London, the courts consist of the aldermen
of the City, who are justices ex officio by virtue of charters, and of justices.
Benches of lay magistrates work with the help and advice of the Clerk of the
Court—a barrister or solicitor or other person with court experience.
To hear cases involving children under 14 brought before the court as
being in need of care, protection and control, and to deal with applications for
the adoption of children, magistrates’ courts sit as juvenile courts. For young
people between the ages of 14 and 17 the juvenile courts are concerned both
in care proceedings and in criminal proceedings (where these are appropriate
—see p. 101). Juvenile courts sit either in a different room or building from
other courts, or at a different time, and only limited publicity is allowed.
Quarter sessions must be held four times a year; in the busier places they are
held much more frequently.
All counties have courts of quarter sessions, each consisting of a bench of
lay magistrates under a legally qualified chairman or deputy chairman. Most
boroughs do not have their own quarter sessions—their criminal work being
done in county quarter sessions—but in the 94 boroughs which have the right
to hold their own courts, the bench consists of a single judge, known as the
Recorder, who is a practising barrister appointed to act part-time in this
capacity. Quarter sessions for the City of London are held in the Old Bailey.
In the rest of Greater London there are five quarter-sessions areas, presided
over by full-time chairmen or deputy chairmen. The work of quarter sessions
in Liverpool and Manchester is taken in the Crown courts.
Courts of assize are branches of the High Court presided over by High Court
judges and held at assize towns2—generally the county town of each county
1 Recommendations for radical changes in the court system have been made by the
Royal Commission on Assizes and Quarter Sessions, set up in 1966 under the chair¬
manship of Lord Beeching. These have been generally accepted by the Government
and will be implemented as soon as possible.
2 Under the Administration of Justice Bill it is proposed that holding of assizes at any
place may be dispensed with by Order in Council.
LAW AND ORDER
8l
Criminal
Appeals
Proceedings
Before Trial
Prosecutions
Arrest
and certain of the other larger towns and cities. The judges go round ‘on
circuit’ three times a year—on the autumn, winter and summer assizes. Each
town is visited once on each circuit; the larger towns are visited twice. After
the trial of criminal cases in each town, the judges deal with civil cases.
The assize court for Greater London is the Central Criminal Court, which
sits at the Old Bailey. The jurisdiction of the court is entirely criminal and it
is in continuous session. The court may sit in two or more divisions; some¬
times as many as 15 courts sit at the same time, each presided over by a
salaried judicial officer.
The Crown Courts of Liverpool and Manchester act as courts of criminal
assize (and of quarter sessions) in and for two divisions of south Lancashire.
The courts, which are in continuous session, are presided over by the Recorders
of Liverpool and Manchester respectively. Civil matters are dealt with in the
ordinary assize courts for these areas.
Appeals may be brought on a point of law, by either the prosecutor or the
defendant, direct from the magistrates’ court to the High Court; but the more
usual appeal is that of a convicted person against his conviction or his sen¬
tence, which is heard by quarter sessions.
Appeals against convictions or sentences by quarter sessions, assizes or
Crown Courts go to the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division).1 Appeals
against conviction may be brought to the court by right on any point of law,
and with leave of the trial judge or the court on any question of fact or mixed
fact and law. Appeals against sentence come with the leave of the court,
provided that the sentence was in the discretion of the trial judge and not
fixed by law. The Lord Chief Justice or a Lord Justice of Appeal presides
in the Criminal Division and Queen’s Bench judges sit with Lords Justices of
Appeal. A further appeal from the Court of Appeal to the House of Lords
can be brought if the court certifies that a point of law of general public
importance is involved and it appears to the court or the House of Lords
that the point is one that ought to be considered by the House.
In the majority of cases there is no restriction on the right of a private citizen
to institute criminal proceedings, but most prosecutions in England and
Wales are, in fact, initiated and conducted by the police. In some cases the
consent of the Attorney General or the Director of Public Prosecutions or,
less frequently, a government department is required. The Director of Public
Prosecutions is also concerned with prosecutions in all the more serious cases
of indictable offences; in courts where a substantial number of cases with
which he is concerned are tried, standing counsel are appointed by the
Attorney General to appear on his behalf. At the Central Criminal Court in
London, for instance, there is a panel of counsel known as Treasury Counsel,
who are retained to prosecute in the Director’s cases.
In criminal cases arrest may be effected either on a warrant issued by a judicial
authority on sworn information laid before it or, in certain cases, without
warrant. In the latter circumstances, a police officer may release the defendant
on bail, that is, he may discharge him temporarily, subject to his entering into
a recognisance, with or without sureties, for a reasonable sum of money, to
appear in court or at a police station at an appointed time. If the defendant
cannot be brought before the magistrates’ court within a day, and his alleged
1 The Court of Appeal has two divisions—Criminal Division and Civil Division. It is
the upper part of the Supreme Court of Judicature.
$2
Trial
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
offence is not serious, the police must release him on bail. Magistrates also
have discretion to grant bail, which they exercise according to well-defined
principles. If bail is refused by the magistrates, the defendant is entitled to
apply to a judge of the High Court, and he must be informed of this right.
Once anyone has been charged with an offence, the police may not put any
further questions to him, save, in exceptional circumstances, to prevent or
minimise harm or loss to any person or to the public, or to clear up an ambi¬
guity in a previous answer or statement. This is laid down by the Judges’
Rules which, although they do not have the force of law, nevertheless carry
very great weight.
A person detained in custody who thinks that the grounds for his detention
are not lawful,1 may sue out a writ of habeas corpus against the person who
detained him, this person then being required to appear before the court on
the day named to justify the detention. An application for such a writ is
normally made to a divisional court either by the person detained or by some¬
one acting on his behalf. If no court is sitting the application may be made to
a single judge who may, and in some cases must, direct that it should come
before a divisional court. An application on behalf of anyone under 18 is
always first made to a judge sitting in chambers or in private. A writ may be
refused only by a divisional court.
Since criminal law in Britain presumes the innocence of the accused until
his guilt has been proved the prosecution is not granted any advantage,
apparent or real, over the defence. A defendant has the right to employ a legal
adviser for his defence and if he cannot afford to pay he may be granted legal
aid at the public expense; if remanded in custody he may be visited in prison
by his legal adviser to ensure that his defence is properly prepared. During
the preparation of the case, it is customary for the prosecution to inform the
defence of any relevant documents which it is not proposed to put in evidence
and to disclose them if asked to do so.
Criminal trials are (with rare exceptions) held in open court and the rules
of evidence (which are concerned with the proof of facts) are rigorously
applied. For instance, although the uncorroborated evidence of one witness is,
as a matter of English law, sufficient, conviction in criminal cases solely on the
evidence of an accomplice (or accomplices) is, in practice, never allowed unless
the judge has warned the jury of the danger of convicting without corroboration.
During the trial the defendant has the right to hear and subsequently to
cross-examine (normally through his counsel) all the witnesses for the
prosecution; to call his own witnesses who, if they will not attend the trial of
their own free will, may be legally compelled to attend; and to address the
court either in person or through his counsel—the defence having the right
to the last speech at the trial. Moreover, the defendant cannot himself be
questioned unless he consents to be sworn as a witness in his own defence.
The right to cross-examine him, even when he is so sworn, is limited by law,
with the object of excluding enquiry into his character or into past offences
not relevant to the particular charge on which he is being tried. Furthermore,
although confessions made in the course of previous judicial proceedings are
admissible as evidence if they have been made upon oath, no confessions
made in any other circumstances are admitted unless it can be proved that
1 Lawful grounds are: in pursuance of criminal justice; for contempt of court or of
either House of Parliament; detention of persons found to be mentally disordered;
detention of children by their parents or guardians; and detention expressly authorised
by Act of Parliament. The writ of habeas corpus runs in both criminal and civil cases.
LAW AND ORDER 83
they were made voluntarily, that is, without fear of prejudice or hope of
advantage held out by the person to whom the confessions were made.
In criminal trials by jury the judge determines questions of law, sums up
the evidence for the benefit of the jury, and acquits the accused or passes
sentence according to the verdict of the jury; but the jury alone decides
the issue of guilt or innocence. Verdicts in criminal proceedings need not
necessarily be unanimous; in certain circumstances the jury may bring in a
majority verdict provided that, in a normal jury of 12 people, there are not
more than two dissentients.
If the jury returns a verdict of ‘not guilty’, the prosecution has no right of
appeal and the defendant cannot be tried again for the same offence. If a
defence of insanity is accepted by the jury the verdict is ‘not guilty by reason
of insanity’ and the defendant will be detained in a suitable hospital. From a
verdict of ‘guilty’ or of ‘not guilty by reason of insanity’ there is a right of
appeal on the part of the defendant to the appropriate court.
The main civil courts in England and Wales are the county courts, which are
the courts for the lesser cases, and the High Court, where the more important
cases are heard. Magistrates’ courts have limited civil jurisdiction. Most
appeals in civil cases go to the Court of Appeal (Civil Division) and from
there may go to the House of Lords.
The civil jurisdiction of magistrates’ courts extends to matrimonial proceed¬
ings for separation and maintenance orders, adoption, and affiliation and
guardianship orders. The courts also have jurisdiction in respect of such
matters as nuisances under the Public Health Acts and the recovery of rates.
Committees of magistrates exercise quasi-administrative functions in relation
to the licensing of public houses and of betting shops and clubs.
County courts (of which there are nearly 400) are so located that no part of
a county is more than a reasonable distance from one of them. They are
presided over by a paid judge, who almost always sits alone, although he may
sit with a jury consisting of eight persons if either party wishes it and the court
makes an order to that effect. There are 106 county court judges now in
office, each having a circuit, which is either one court, or a group of courts,
depending on the amount of work to be done.
The jurisdiction of the county courts covers: actions founded upon contract
and tort (except libel, slander, and some other types of case) where the
amount claimed is not more than ^750; equity matters, such as trusts and
mortgages, where the amount does not exceed £5,000; and actions for the
recovery of land where the net annual value for rating does not exceed £400.
Cases outside these limits may be tried in the county court by consent of the
parties, or may be transferred to the High Court.
Other matters dealt with by the county courts include adoption cases,
bankruptcies (which are dealt with in certain courts outside the London
Bankruptcy Districts), undefended divorce cases1 (which are heard and deter¬
mined by county courts designated as divorce county courts), and complaints
of racial discrimination brought by the Race Relations Board (which are dealt
with by specially designated courts sitting with two assessors having know¬
ledge and experience of matters of race).
A few local courts survive from the medieval borough court system and
exercise a jurisdiction similar to that of the county courts. The most important
1 Defended cases are transferred to the High Court.
84
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The High Court
of Justice
Appellate Courts
Civil
Proceedings
are: the Liverpool Court of Passage, the Court of Pleas of the Borough of
Preston, the Norwich Guildhall Court of Record, and the Salford Hundred
Court. The Mayor’s and City of London Court, formed by statutory amal¬
gamation in 1920, is indirectly a survival from the medieval system.
The High Court of Justice, which forms part of the Supreme Court of
Judicature, is divided into the Chancery Division, the Queen’s Bench
Division and the Probate, Divorce and Admiralty Division.1 Its jurisdiction,
which is both original and appellate and covers all civil and some criminal
causes, is vested in all its divisions. Some matters are, however, assigned to a
particular division—distribution of work being governed by statute, the rules
of court and the practice of the court. Although the judges can sit in any
division, they are in fact, assigned to a particular one.
The High Court is staffed by 68 puisne judges (judges without any other
special office). The Lord Chancellor is president of the Court of Appeal and
of the Chancery Division—the administration of the Chancery Division being
the responsibility of the senior judge known as the Vice-Chancellor. The
Queen’s Bench Division is presided over by the Lord Chief Justice of
England, who ranks next to the Lord Chancellor in the legal hierarchy,
and the Probate, Divorce and Admiralty Division is headed by the Presi¬
dent.
For the hearing of cases at first instance, High Court judges sit singly.
Appellate jurisdiction in civil matters from inferior courts is exercised by
divisional courts of two (or sometimes three) judges, or by single judges of
the appropriate division, nominated by the Lord Chancellor.
Appeals in matrimonial proceedings heard by magistrates’ courts lie to a
divisional court of the Probate, Divorce and Admiralty Division of the High
Court. Affiliation appeals are heard by quarter sessions, as are appeals from
decisions of the licensing and betting licensing committees of magistrates.
Appeals from the High Court, the county courts and assizes (in civil cases) are
heard in the Court of Appeal (Civil Division) and may (with leave of the court
or of the House of Lords) go on to the House of Lords, which is the ultimate
court of appeal in civil cases in the United Kingdom.
The ex officio members of the Court of Appeal (Civil Division) are the
Lord Chancellor, the Lord Chief Justice, the President and the Master of the
Rolls; the ordinary members are 14 Lords Justices of Appeal.
The judges in the House of Lords are the ten Lords of Appeal in Ordinary,
who must have a quorum of three, but usually sit as a group of five, and
sometimes even of seven. Lay peers do not attend the hearing of appeals
(which normally takes place in a committee room and not in the legislative
chamber), but peers who hold or have held high judicial office may also sit.
The president of the House in its judicial capacity is the Lord Chancellor.
In England and Wales civil proceedings are instituted by the aggrieved
person; no preliminary enquiry as to the authenticity of the grievance is
required. The most common form of proceedings is an action commenced
by a writ of summons served on the defendant by the plaintiff, which notifies
the defendant that the plaintiff has a claim against him and states the nature
of the claim. If the defendant intends to contest the claim, he ‘enters an
1 Under provisions of the Administration of Justice Act 1970, this Division is to be
renamed the Family Division and there will be a redistribution of business among the
Divisions of the High Court, including the establishment, as part of the Queen’s Bench
Division, of Admiralty and Commercial Courts.
LAW AND ORDER
85
appearance’ by informing the court to this effect and documents setting out
the precise question in dispute (the pleadings) are then delivered to the court.
A decree for divorce can be obtained only after a hearing in court, whether
or not the case is defended.
Other civil proceedings can generally be abandoned or compromised at any
time without leave of the court (because they are of concern only to those
engaged in them).
In the great majority of cases, the parties to a dispute are able to settle
their differences through their solicitors before the stage of actual trial is
reached. Actions that are brought to court are usually tried by a judge
without a jury, except in cases involving claims for defamation, false imprison¬
ment, malicious prosecution, seduction, or breach of promise of marriage
when either party may insist on trial by jury, or in a case of fraud, when the
defendant may claim this right. In trials where a jury is present, the jury is
responsible for deciding questions of fact (as in criminal trials) and also the
amount of damages to be awarded to the injured party.
Judgments in civil cases are enforceable through the authority of the court.
Refusal to obey a judgment directing the defendant to do something or to
refrain from doing something may result in imprisonment for contempt of
court. Arrest under an order of committal may be effected only on a warrant
of the court.
As a rule, the court orders that the costs of an action (the barrister’s fees,
solicitor’s charges and essential disbursements) should be paid by the losing
party, although in practice the winning party always pays part of them. In
certain circumstances (for instance, extravagance or negligence in the conduct
of the case), the court may, at its discretion, refuse to order that one party’s
costs should be borne by the other.
CRIMINAL LAW
IN SCOTLAND
Courts of
Criminal
Jurisdiction
Burgh (or Police)
Courts
Justice of the Peace
Courts
The Sheriff Court
The High Court
of Justiciary
Criminal cases in Scotland1 are heard either under solemn procedure, when
proceedings are taken on indictment and the judge sits with a jury, or under
summary procedure, when the judge sits without a jury. All cases in the
High Court of Justiciary and the more serious ones in the sheriff court are
tried under solemn procedure. Proceedings are taken under summary pro¬
cedure in the less serious cases in the sheriff court, and in the justice of the
peace and burgh (or police) courts.
These courts are established in burghs. The judges are town councillors who
are serving (or have served) in the office of magistrate of the burgh. In
Glasgow stipendiary magistrates act as judges of two of the courts.
These courts are organised on a county (and county of city) basis, the judges
being the justices of the peace for the county (or county of city).
Scotland is divided into sheriffdoms, each consisting of a county or combina¬
tion of counties, and these sheriffdoms are further divided into sheriff court
districts. A sheriffdom has a sheriff-principal and a number of sheriffs who
act as the judges of the court. The sheriff courts exercise an extensive civil
jurisdiction, as well as a criminal jurisdiction.
The High Court of Justiciary is the supreme criminal court of first instance.
Any one of the following judges is entitled to try cases in the High Court: the
Lord Justice General (who is also the Lord President of the Court of Session),
the Lord Justice Clerk, or any one of the 16 Lords Commissioner of Justiciary
1 A departmental committee is studying trial and pre-trial procedure in Scotland with a
view to ascertaining whether any changes of law or practice are required.
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
who are also judges of the Court of Session. The seat of the court is in
Edinburgh, but the judges go on circuit to preside at trials in other
towns.
Criminal
Appeals
Proceedings
Before Trial
Prosecutions
Arrest
A person convicted in the High Court or in a sheriff court on indictment may
appeal to the High Court of Justiciary (a) against his conviction on any ground
which involves a question of law alone, or, with leave of the High Court or
upon the certificate of the judge who presided at the trial that it is a fit case
for appeal, on any ground, and (b) against his sentence, with the leave of the
High Court, unless the sentence is one fixed by law. Appeals are heard by
three or more judges, and there is no further appeal to the House of Lords.
A person convicted summarily may appeal to the High Court, but only on
questions of law and procedure, and not on issues of fact.
In Scotland the police make preliminary investigation of all cases of crime
discovered by or made known to them, but it is for the Public Prosecutor
concerned (the Lord Advocate in the High Court, the Procurators Fiscal in
the sheriff court, and the justice of the peace fiscal and burgh prosecutor in
the justice of the peace and burgh courts respectively) to decide whether or
not to prosecute and, in the case of the Procurator Fiscal, to decide whether
to proceed summarily or to charge the accused by petition with a view to
proceedings on indictment.
The police in Scotland have very broadly the same powers of arrest as have
the police in England and Wales. The Judges’ Rules do not apply in Scotland,
but when anyone is arrested he must be cautioned and have the charge read
over to him. Thereafter, only his voluntary statements are used in evidence
at his trial, and the court will reject any statements made by him unless it is
satisfied that they have been fairly obtained.
As in England and Wales, when anyone is apprehended in Scotland, he
must be brought before the court competent to deal with his case with the
least possible delay. Where a prosecution on indictment is contemplated,
the accused is brought before a magistrate for judicial examination and the
magistrate may then commit him for trial or for further examination. Eight
days may elapse between commitment for further examination and commit¬
ment for trial.
People in custody, other than those charged with murder or treason, may
be liberated on bail by the sheriff or, if the offence is within the jurisdiction
of a summary court other than the sheriff court, by that court or by the police.
Even in the case of murder or treason, bail may be granted at the discretion
of the Lord Advocate or the High Court of Justiciary. There is a right of
appeal to the High Court by the accused person against the refusal of bail,
by the prosecutor against the granting of bail, or by either party against the
amount fixed.
The writ of habeas corpus does not apply in Scotland, but the High Court
of Justiciary has power to release anyone unlawfully detained and trials must,
in any event, be brought to a conclusion within no days of committal.
Trial In trials on indictment, the first ‘pleading’ diet takes place in the sheriff court,
when the accused person is called upon to plead guilty or not guilty. If he
pleads not guilty, the case is continued to the second ‘trial’ diet in the appro¬
priate court. If he pleads guilty, and it is a case which is to be dealt with in the
sheriff court, the sheriff may dispose of it at once. If it is a High Court case
it is continued to the second diet in the High Court for disposal.
LAW AND ORDER
CIVIL LAW
IN SCOTLAND
Civil Courts
Sheriff Courts
The Court of
Session
The Scottish Land
Court
Civil
Proceedings
87
The second diet is held at least nine days after the pleading diet, either
before the sheriff or the High Court, with a jury. Evidence is led (without
opening speeches) and there are closing speeches for the prosecution and for
the defence, followed by the judge’s charge to the jury. The jury may return
a verdict of ‘not guilty’ or ‘not proven’, both of which result in acquittal,
or they may find the accused ‘guilty’, in which case the court proceeds to
deliver sentence. The verdict may be by a majority of eight to seven. Fairness
to the accused is ensured by the fact that, with a few minor exceptions, no
person may be convicted without the evidence of at least two witnesses, or
corroboration of one witness by facts and circumstances which clearly impli¬
cate the accused in the crime.
At summary trials the accused is asked to plead to the charge at the first
calling of the case and, if he pleads guilty, the court may dispose of the case.
Where the plea is ‘not guilty’, the court may proceed to trial at once or it
may appoint a trial diet for a later date.
The main courts of civil jurisdiction in Scotland are the sheriff courts which,
in their civil capacity, correspond roughly to the county courts in England
and Wales, and the Court of Session, which is the supreme civil court in
Scotland.
The civil jurisdiction of the sheriff court extends to nearly all actions and is
unlimited by the value of the case. Much of the work is done by the sheriff,
against whose decisions an appeal may be made to the sheriff-principal or
directly to the Court of Session. Minor civil matters (actions not exceeding
£5 in value) may be tried by justices of the peace.
The Court of Session has universal jurisdiction, sits only in Edinburgh, and
has sole jurisdiction, inter alia, in divorce actions. The court is divided into
two parts: the Outer House, a court of first instance, and the Inner House,
which is mainly an appeal court. The Inner House is divided into two divisions
of equal status, each consisting of four judges—the first division being
presided over by the Lord President and the second division by the Lord
Justice Clerk. From the Inner House an appeal may lie to the House of Lords.
The Scottish Land Court is a special court that deals with certain agricultural
matters. The court is presided over by a legal chairman, who has the rank
and dignity of a judge of the Court of Session.
In Scotland civil proceedings are initiated by the service on the defender of
a writ or summons, which sets out the nature of the decree which the pursuer
seeks, a statement of facts upon which the pursuer founds his claim, and a
statement of the legal propositions upon which the pursuer maintains that he
is entitled to the remedy which he seeks. In Court of Session actions the next
step is the calling of the summons, which is the publication of the action in
the court lists. If the defender intends to contest the action, he must ‘enter
appearance’ within two days of calling and thereafter lodge defences to it. In
ordinary sheriff court actions ‘entering appearance’ is followed by the ‘tabling
of the cause’, which involves a formal appearance in court by solicitors, or, in
some cases, by the parties to the dispute. In summary and small debt actions
the defender is simply given notice of the date on which the action will be
heard. It is much more common in Scotland than in England and Wales to
have legal debates in court as to the competency or relevancy of the written
pleadings prior to the proof.
In Scotland a pursuer can abandon his case, including any matrinwnial
D
CHILDREN’S
HEARINGS IN
SCOTLAND
COURTS IN
NORTHERN
IRELAND
SPECIAL COURTS
Coroners*
Courts
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
case, at any time, but where abandonment is sought after the commencement
of the proof or trial, only with leave of the court. Trial by jury in civil action
in Scotland is more common than in England and Wales, being the usual
form of procedure in actions for damages for personal injuries.
A new system of children’s hearings (see p. 102) is to be set up at the end of
1970 to replace the juvenile court system.
Both civil and criminal courts in Northern Ireland are similar to those in
England and Wales with some minor modifications to suit a smaller com¬
munity. The superior courts comprise the Supreme Court of Judicature
(consisting of the High Court of Justice and the Court of Appeal) and the
Court of Criminal Appeal. The High Court is the superior court of first
instance, is divided into the Chancery Division, the Queen’s Bench Division
(including probate, matrimonial and Admiralty proceedings) and the circuit
courts (assizes) and is constituted of the Lord Chief Justice, as president,
and four judges. The Court of Appeal, which is the appellate tribunal, is
constituted of the Lord Chief Justice and two Lords Justices of Appeal.
The inferior courts are the county courts and courts of summary jurisdiction
(petty sessions). The county courts exercise both civil and criminal jurisdic¬
tion and are presided over by county court judges, of whom there are five
(two of them having a title of Recorder—of Belfast and of Londonderry). At
least four sittings of the court are held annually in each division. Petty
session courts are composed of one resident magistrate (who corresponds to
a stipendiary magistrate in England and Wales) who sits alone except in some
specific cases, for instance in a special crimes court, where two may adjudicate.
Juvenile courts are composed of one resident magistrate and two lay members,
one of whom must be a woman.
Coroners’ courts are common law courts convened when a person appears to
have died a violent or unnatural death or a sudden death of which the cause
is unknown, and in certain other circumstances. In such cases, it is the duty
of the local coroner (who may be a barrister, a solicitor, or a medical practi¬
tioner of not less than five years’ standing, appointed by county, county
borough, or certain borough councils) to hold an enquiry into how, when
and where the deceased died; he may hold an inquest in court for this purpose,
and he must do so if he has reason to believe that the deceased has died a
violent or unnatural death or has died in prison or in circumstances for which
an Act of Parliament provides that an inquest must be held. If he has reason
to suspect that the death was due to murder, manslaughter, or infanticide, or
was caused by an accident arising out of the use of a vehicle on the public
highway, he must summon a jury.
Cases may be brought to the notice of the coroner by medical practitioners,
by the police, by various public authorities or by members of the public. The
amount of work varies considerably according to the type of locality.
In Scotland the office of coroner does not exist. The Procurator Fiscal
enquires privately into all sudden and suspicious deaths in his district and
may report the result of his enquiries to the Crown Agent in order that Crown
Counsel may consider what proceedings, if any, are required.
In Northern Ireland coroners are appointed by the Minister of Home
Affairs and must, on appointment, be either barristers-at-law of not less than
five years’ standing practising in Northern Ireland or practising solicitors of
LAW AND ORDER 89
the Supreme Court of Judicature in Northern Ireland of not less than five
years’ standing.
Administrative
Tribunals
Administrative tribunals consist of persons or bodies exercising judicial or
quasi-judicial functions outside the ordinary hierarchy of the courts. As a
rule, they are set up by Act of Parliament or under powers conferred by
statute, which also govern their constitution, functions and procedure.
The continuing expansion of governmental activity and involvement in the
social and economic affairs of the nation has greatly multiplied the occasions
on which the individual may find himself at issue with the administration,
with a group of people or with another individual; consequently there has
been a substantial growth in the number of tribunals (there are over 2,000 in
existence) and in the range of their activities during the past 20 years. Their
constitution follows a fairly general pattern: all, for instance, consist of an
uneven number of persons so that a majority decision can be reached;
members are usually appointed by the minister concerned with the subject
but other authorities (for instance, the Crown, the Lord Chancellor or the
Master of the Rolls) have the power of appointment in appropriate cases;
the Lord Chancellor, or the Lord President of the Court of Session in
Scotland, make appointments in most cases where a lawyer chairman or
member is required; and, with some exceptions, members of tribunals hold
office for a period specified in the warrant or instrument by which they are
appointed. Administrative tribunals may be broadly classified as follows:
1. those which have permanent members appointed for their special know¬
ledge, and a chairman who must be a lawyer of experience: for instance,
the Transport Tribunal, which hears appeals relating to road carriers’
licences throughout Great Britain, and the Lands Tribunal, which has
jurisdiction in a variety of matters relating to the value of property;
2. those which deal exclusively with matters of interest to one government
department or public authority: for instance, the Pensions Appeal
Tribunals, which hear appeals against the rejection by the Secretary of
State for Social Services of war service pension claims, and the Special
Commissioners of Income Tax who hear appeals on income tax matters
from the rulings of the Inland Revenue officials; and
3. those appointed by a minister to arbitrate between individuals: for
instance, the Rent Tribunals, which have jurisdiction in the determination
of rents of certain properties.
There are also tribunals which enforce professional discipline, such as the
General Medical Council and the Disciplinary Committee of The Law
Society, but these are entirely different in constitution from the statutory
tribunals and have no jurisdiction over the general public.
Although there is no general provision respecting appeals from statutory
tribunals, the Tribunals and Inquiries Act 1958 and other Acts provide for
an appeal, at least on a point of law, from all the more important tribunals to
the High Court, or, in Scotland, to the Court of Session. An appeal may also
lie to a specially constituted appeal tribunal, to a minister of the Crown or to
an independent referee. An advisory body known as the Council on Tribunals
(appointed jointly by the Lord Chancellor and the Secretary of State for
Scotland) exercises general supervision1 over tribunals and reports on par-
1 Excluding supervision of the professional disciplinary tribunals.
90
Criminal
Injuries
Compensation
Board
Courts Martial
ADMINISTRATION
OF THE
JUDICIAL
SYSTEM
BRITAIN I97i: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
ticular matters, those peculiar to Scotland being dealt with by the Scottish
Committee of the Council.
The Criminal Injuries Compensation Board consists of a chairman of wide
legal experience and eight other legally qualified members appointed by the
Home Secretary and the Secretary of State for Scotland after consultation
with the Lord Chancellor. Its function is to entertain applications for ex gratia
payments of compensation, in certain circumstances, to victims of crimes of
violence in Great Britain or on a British vessel or aircraft. Compensation,
which is assessed on the basis of common law damages and usually takes the
form of a lump sum payment, amounts to about ^2 million a year. Some
7,500 applications are received annually.
Courts martial have jurisdiction, under the Army Act and the Air Force Act
of 1955 (as amended) and the Naval Discipline Act of 1957 (als0 as amended),
over serving members of the armed forces and, in certain circumstances, their
dependants and other civilians who accompany them outside the United
Kingdom. Courts martial may not deal with charges involving treason,
murder, manslaughter or rape, if the offence is committed in the United
Kingdom. Civil offences committed in the United Kingdom by members of
the armed forces are normally also dealt with in the ordinary courts.
A court martial (which consists of a president and a number of serving
officers) may be convened by any authorised officer. A judge advocate is
appointed to sit with the court in more serious cases brought under the
Army and Air Force Acts (and at every trial brought under the Naval
Discipline Act) to advise upon law and procedure and, in the former case, to
sum up the evidence. The judge advocate in the case of the Army and the
Air Force is a civilian and a barrister appointed by the Office of the Judge
Advocate General. In the case of the Navy he is a legally qualified serving
officer appointed by the convening authority.
Appeals lie to the Courts Martial Appeals Court, and from that court to
the House of Lords if the court certifies that a point of law of general public
importance is involved and it appears to the court or to the House of Lords
that the point is one that ought to be considered by the House.
In the United Kingdom no single minister is responsible for the operation of
the law. Responsibility for the administration of the judicial system in
England and Wales, when it does not rest with the courts themselves, lies
partly with the Lord Chancellor and partly with the Home Secretary; in
Scotland it lies with the Secretary of State. In England the Lord Chancellor
is concerned with the composition of all courts, both criminal and civil, with
parts of criminal procedure and with everything relating to civil law, and the
Home Secretary with criminal law, preventing offences, apprehending
offenders, part of the process of trying them, and virtually the whole of their
treatment. The Prime Minister is also concerned in that he is responsible for
recommending to the Crown the highest judicial appointments.
The administrative business of the Supreme Court of Judicature and the
appointment of the officers of the court is partly in the hands of the Lord
Chancellor and partly in the hands of the appropriate judges. The Lord
Chancellor is concerned with legal procedure in that he is a member of the
Rule Committee (which makes the rules of the Supreme Court) and of the
Matrimonial Causes Rule Committee, appoints the County Court Rule Com¬
mittee, and has power to alter or disallow the rules made by it. He is concerned
LAW AND ORDER
91
THE PERSONNEL
OF THE LAW
Judges
with law reform in that he appoints the members of the Law Commission for
England and Wales, which is a permanent body consisting of five lawyers of
high standing, charged with the duty of scrutinising the law with a view to its
systematic development and reform, including the possibility of codification,
the elimination of anomalies, the repeal of obsolete and unnecessary enact¬
ments, and the reduction of the number of separate enactments. The Com¬
mission submits programmes of reform to the Lord Chancellor and may
recommend further examination of specified topics by itself or by some
other body, such as a Royal Commission or the Law Reform Committee or
Criminal Law Revision Committee.1 The Lord Chancellor may also ask the
Commission to prepare draft Bills or to advise government departments. In
the course of its work the Commission has power to consider the legal systems
of other countries.
Magistrates’ courts are mainly administered by the magistrates themselves,
chiefly through committees known as magistrates’ courts committees (com¬
mittee of magistrates in inner London) but the local authorities, with financial
assistance from the Government, are responsible for meeting their costs, and
the Home Secretary, besides exercising a general oversight, has certain specific
responsibilities, including the approval of boundary changes, approval of the
appointment of justices’ clerks, and deciding disputes on financial matters.
In Scotland the Secretary of State appoints the staff of the High Court of
Justiciary and the Court of Session and is responsible for the staffing and
general organisation of the sheriff courts. He is also responsible, jointly with
the Lord Advocate, for appointing the members of the Law Commission for
Scotland (which has functions similar to those of the English Law Com¬
mission).
In Northern Ireland the administration of the superior courts has been
reserved to the United Kingdom Parliament. The judges are appointed by
the Crown and are removable only on an address of both Houses of that
Parliament. The Minister of Home Affiairs for Northern Ireland is responsible
for the staffing and general organisation of the county and petty sessions
courts; the judges of the county court and resident magistrates of the
magistrates’ courts are appointed by the Governor of Northern Ireland.
The operation of the law requires the participation of judges, with whom,
aided in certain cases by juries, the decision of disputed cases rests, and of the
officers of the court, who have general or specialised functions of an adminis¬
trative (and sometimes of a judicial) nature in the courts to which they are
attached. Barristers (advocates in Scotland) and solicitors who are entrusted
with representing the interests of the parties to a dispute are also involved
because, although the law allows an individual to conduct his own case if he
wishes, most people prefer to be legally represented.
The courts of the United Kingdom are the Queen’s Courts (since the Crown
is the historic source of all judicial power) and the Sovereign, acting on the
advice of ministers, is responsible for all appointments to the judiciary. In
England and Wales appointments to the highest positions—the Lords of
Appeal in Ordinary, the Lord Chief Justice, the Master of the Rolls, the
President of the Probate, Divorce and Admiralty Division and the Lords
1 The Law Reform Committee and the Criminal Law Revision Committee are standing
committees of judges and lawyers, appointed respectively by the Lord Chancellor and
the Home Secretary, to examine such aspects of the civil and criminal law as may be
referred to them by the appropriate minister.
92
Juries
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Justices who are the judges of the Court of Appeal—are made on the recom¬
mendation of the Prime Minister, while the Lord Chancellor recommends
the appointment of the puisne judges, the county court judges (except in
Lancashire where they are recommended by the Chancellor of the Duchy of
Lancaster), the chairmen of quarter sessions, the recorders of boroughs, and
the metropolitan and other stipendiary magistrates. Justices of the peace are
appointed on behalf of the Crown by the Lord Chancellor,1 who is advised,
as to a county by the Lord Lieutenant2 with the assistance of a local advisory
committee, and as to the boroughs by separate advisory committees.
In Scotland the Prime Minister makes recommendations for the appoint¬
ment of the Lord Justice General and Lord President and also of the Lord
Justice Clerk. Power of submission for appointment of all other judges lies
with the Secretary of State for Scotland. The Secretary of State is responsible
for the appointment and removal of justices of the peace.
Judges do not engage in politics, except for the Lord Chancellor who, as
well as being head of the judiciary, is a leading member of the Government
in power. With the exception of justices of the peace, judges are normally
appointed from practising barristers, advocates or solicitors and neither their
training nor their career is in any way dictated by the State. Justices of the
peace need no legal qualifications, being appointed for their qualities of in¬
tegrity and understanding and as broadly representative of the community
which they serve. On appointment, however, they give an undertaking to com¬
plete a period of basic training, so that they may obtain a sufficient knowledge
of the law, including the rules of evidence, and may understand the nature
and purpose of sentencing. In certain circumstances (for instance, in cases of
misconduct or proven incapacity) judges of the inferior courts in England and
Wales may be removed from their position by the Lord Chancellor, and in
Scotland, subject to specified conditions, by the Secretary of State on a
report prepared at his instance by the Lord President of the Court of Session
and the Lord Justice Clerk. In order to safeguard and perpetuate the inde¬
pendence of the judiciary from the executive, however, superior judges in
England and Wales (other than the Lord Chancellor who, as a Cabinet
Minister, changes with the Government) are subject to a power of removal
only by the Sovereign on an address presented by both Houses of Parliament,
while in Scotland there is no statutory provision for removal of judges of the
Court of Session or High Court of Judiciary from office and it is probable
that special legislation would be required to effect such a dismissal.
A jury in England and Wales summoned to assizes or quarter sessions, or in a
civil action, consists of 12 persons (except in county courts, where it consists
of eight persons). In Scotland the jury consists of 15 persons in criminal cases
and 12 in civil cases and in Northern Ireland of 12 in criminal and seven in
civil cases. Most householders in Britain (men and women alike) are liable
for jury service if they are British subjects between the ages of 21 and 60, but
people following certain occupations can claim exemption and certain persons
with criminal records are disqualified.
A- jury is completely independent of both the judiciary and the executive.
In criminal cases the accused can have up to seven jurors (in Scotland, five)
] Except in Lancashire, where the Chancellor of the Duchy acts on behalf of the Crown
in this matter.
2 The office of the Lord Lieutenant of the county was first created in the sixteenth
century. Its holder was chief among the county justices and commander of the county
militia.
LAW AND ORDER
93
The Legal
Profession
changed without giving reasons and both defence and prosecution can object
for cause shown (for instance, lack of impartiality), but once members of the
jury have been sworn, they are protected by law from interference of any
kind.
At certain inquests at coroners’ courts in England and Wales and Northern
Ireland and at fatal accident enquiries in Scotland, a jury is required to be
present to return a verdict on how, when and where a deceased person died.
Juries in this instance consist of from seven to eleven jurors, and the coroner
may accept a majority verdict provided that the minority consists of not
more than two. A jury is also required at an inquest held by a coroner
to decide whether objects of gold or silver found in the ground are ‘treasure
trove’.
The legal profession is divided into two branches: barristers1 (advocates in
Scotland) and solicitors. Each performs distinct duties—solicitors undertake
legal business for lay clients, while barristers advise on legal problems sub¬
mitted through solicitors and conduct proceedings in the higher courts—
though certain functions are common to both.
To become a barrister in England a student must have reached an accepted
educational standard, have passed a legal examination prescribed by the
Council of Legal Education and have become a member of one of the four
Inns of Court—Lincoln’s Inn, the Inner Temple, the Middle Temple and
Gray’s Inn—where he must keep eight terms. He may then be called to the
Bar, but is normally not allowed to practise until he has kept a further four
terms and completed six months’ pupillage with a practising barrister of at
least five years’ standing. A barrister with a substantial junior practice may
apply to the Lord Chancellor for a patent appointing him Queen’s Counsel—
a proceeding known as ‘taking silk’. Most of the higher judicial offices are
filled from the ranks of Queen’s Counsel. The professional conduct of a
barrister is subject to the scrutiny of the General Council of the Bar; discipline
is vested in the Senate of the four Inns.
A prospective solicitor in England and Wales must be considered suitable
by the appropriate committee of The Law Society (the professional organisa¬
tion of solicitors) and he must enter into ‘articles of clerkship’ with a practising
solicitor of not less than five years’ standing before he can begin his profes¬
sional career. The term of articles lasts for two, three or five years, depending
upon the educational qualifications of the student. An articled clerk must
pass the necessary examinations prescribed by The Law Society and, unless
he has been a barrister or is a law graduate of a university, he is generally
required to attend a course of studies at a recognised law school. Once a
solicitor is qualified, he may become a member of The Law Society.
In Scotland a prospective advocate must show evidence of his general
scholarship (normally by holding an arts degree) and his knowledge of law
(normally by holding a law degree of a Scottish university). The conditions
applying for the admission of solicitors are broadly similar to those applying
in England and Wales. The analogous professional organisations are the
Faculty of Advocates and the Law Society of Scotland.
In Northern Ireland barristers are members of the Inn of Court of Northern
Ireland; there is also a General Council of the Bar of Northern Ireland. The
professional organisation for solicitors is the Incorporated Law Society of
Northern Ireland.
1 Known collectively as the ‘Bar’, and collectively and individually as ‘counsel’.
94
LEGAL AID AND
ADVICE
Legal Aid in
Civil Cases
Legal Aid in
Criminal Courts
BRITAIN IQyi: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
In Britain legal aid is available for nearly all types of civil and criminal
proceedings in nearly all courts of law. It is also available for oral legal
advice and in certain circumstances where the assistance of a lawyer is
needed but which do not (or do not yet) involve litigation.
Free legal aid in civil cases is available to persons with very small incomes and
capital, and contributory legal aid to those with larger but still limited means.
The majority of people are financially eligible for legal aid.
The legal aid scheme in England and Wales is run by The Law Society
under the general guidance of the Lord Chancellor, assisted by an advisory
committee. It is operated by 13 area committees and a network of local com¬
mittees composed of barristers and solicitors (who may be paid a fee), with a
salaried staff. The cost is met from the Legal Aid Fund, drawn from three
sources: contributions from assisted persons; costs recovered from opposite
parties in litigation; and a grant from the Exchequer.
Applicants for free legal aid must show that they have reasonable grounds
for asserting or disputing a claim. A successful applicant is allowed to select
from a panel a solicitor who, if necessary, instructs a barrister, and the case
is then conducted in the ordinary way. Certain types of action, including
libel and slander, are excluded from the scheme.
In Scotland the legal aid scheme is administered by the Law Society of
Scotland through a supervisory central committee, the Supreme Court
Committee and 16 local committees. To obtain legal aid for litigation an
applicant is required to show ‘probable cause’ and produce in support of his
application a statement corroborated according to the requirements of Scottish
law. Assistance is available in connection with appeals to the House of Lords
from the Court of Session, in civil proceedings before the Court of Session,
the Lands Valuation Appeal Court, the Scottish Land Court, the Scottish
Lands Tribunal, and the sheriff courts, and in matters not involving litigation.
Where litigation is not involved, the applicant must show he has reasonable
grounds for taking the proposed legal action.
In Northern Ireland the legal aid scheme is administered by the Incorpora¬
ted Law Society of Northern Ireland under the general guidance of the
Ministry of Home Affairs. The scheme provides for legal aid in proceedings
in the Supreme Court, the county courts and in certain civil proceedings in
magistrates’ courts.
In the criminal courts in England and Wales a legal aid order may be made
by the court or courts concerned if it appears that a defendant’s means are
such that he requires financial help in meeting the costs of the proceedings
in which he is involved (such an order must be made when a person is com¬
mitted for trial on a charge of murder or where the prosecutor appeals or
applies for leave to appeal from the Criminal Division of the Court of Appeal
or the Courts-Martial Appeal Court to the House of Lords. No limit of
income or capital above which a person is ineligible for legal aid is specified,
but the court has power to order applicants to pay a reasonable contribution
towards the cost of the case according to their means. Generally, legal aid in
criminal proceedings consists of representation by a solicitor and counsel
assigned by the court, but in most proceedings in magistrates’ courts the
recipient is entitled only to the services of a solicitor, and in assize and quarter
sessions proceedings the court may, in cases of urgency (when there is no
time to instruct a solicitor), order that legal aid shall consist of representation
by counsel only.
LAW AND ORDER
Legal Advice
Penalties
95
In appeal cases at quarter sessions legal aid may be granted by a magistrates’
court or a court of quarter sessions. The granting of legal aid for appeals to
the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division) rests with that court, which may
also grant legal aid for the purposes of a further appeal to the House of Lords.
The cost of legal aid in magistrates’ courts is paid out of the Legal Aid
Fund. In the higher courts payments are made in the first instance out of
local authority funds and the cost is reimbursed by the central Government.
Legal aid in criminal proceedings in Scotland is available to all persons in
custody on their first appearance in the High Court of Justiciary and the
sheriff courts. Otherwise, it is granted for proceedings in these courts at the
discretion of the courts themselves except in appeals, when the final decision
whether or not it should be granted is in the hands of the Supreme Court
Committee of the Law Society of Scotland.
In Northern Ireland free legal aid is available in trials on indictment before
courts of assize and in county courts and in criminal proceedings before
magistrates’ courts. It is also available for appeals from magistrates’ courts
to the county court and in appeals from county courts and courts of assize
to the Criminal Division of the Court of Appeal.
Oral advice on legal matters1 is available, both in England and Wales, and in
Scotland, free of charge to persons in receipt of social security benefit and at
a very reasonable cost, that is, at £0-12% for an interview of up to 30 minutes,
to those of limited means. Advice is given by practising solicitors paid out of
the legal aid funds of the two countries. The scheme is administered by the
two law societies, which also run voluntary schemes (for a fee of £1) for
those who do not qualify for statutory assistance.
TREATMENT OF OFFENDERS
The chief aims of the penal systems of the United Kingdom are to deter the
potential law-breaker and to reform the convicted offender. The element of
deterrence is intended to lie in the fear of detection, public trial and possibility
of punishment rather than in the severity of the punishment itself. In England
and Wales the Home Secretary is assisted by an Advisory Council on the Penal
System, which makes recommendations on specific aspects of the prevention
of crime and the treatment of offenders.
Methods current in British penal practice include imprisonment (and, for
certain categories of offender, other forms of custodial treatment); probation;
fines; and absolute or (in England, Wales and Northern Ireland) conditional
discharge for up to three years. In addition, an offender may be ‘bound over’—
that is to say, required to pledge money, with or without sureties, ‘to keep the
peace and be of good behaviour’. In England, Wales and Northern Ireland,
if sentenced to imprisonment for two years or less, an offender may be given
a suspended sentence, which means that the sentence will not actually be
served unless he commits a further offence punishable with imprisonment
within a period of between one and three years. If, however, he does commit
such an offence the suspended sentence will normally take effect and a further
sentence may be imposed.
The automatic penalty for murder in England, Wales and Scotland, where
1 An extended legal aid service has been recommended by the Lord Chancellor’s
Advisory Committee.
D#
96
Administrative
Authorities
BRITAIN I971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
the death penalty has been abolished, is imprisonment for life—a sentence
which may also be imposed for manslaughter and certain other offences,
including rape, robbery with violence, and arson. In Northern Ireland the
death penalty has been retained for two categories of ‘capital’ murder:
murder of a constable or other person in the service of the Crown in the
course of duty involving enforcement of the law, maintenance of law
and order, or the administration or advancement of justice; and murder
done in the course of furtherance of any seditious conspiracy or of the
activities of an unlawful organisation. For other kinds of murder it has been
abolished.
Except in cases of murder for which the penalty is prescribed by law, the
court which tries the offender has discretion to select the penalty that it
considers most suitable in the light of the nature and gravity of the offence
and the information available about the character and needs of the offender.
In certain cases this discretion is modified by statutory provisions (designed
for the most part to ensure that prison sentences are kept to a minimum):
for instance, in England and Wales, no offender under the age of 17 may be
sentenced to imprisonment; for those aged 17 and under 21 prison sentences
must be for less than six months or for more than three years except in the
case of a persistent offender, who may be sent to prison for 18 months or
more. In Scotland no offender under 21 may be sent to prison; where neither
borstal training nor detention in a detention centre is thought appropriate,
he may be sent to a young offenders’ institution. In England and Wales the
courts must suspend sentences of up to six months’ imprisonment unless the
offender has served a previous prison sentence or the crime involved violence.
On the other hand, special sentences of somewhat longer duration (extended
sentences) may be imposed on persistent offenders.
In England and Wales the Home Secretary is the minister generally respon¬
sible for legislation relating to the treatment of offenders, for collecting
statistical and other information about the operation of the penal system,
for keeping penal methods under review, and for bringing information about
these methods to the attention of the courts. He has specific responsibilities
in connection with accommodation for children in care, for promoting the
efficiency of the probation service, and for providing, maintaining and
managing prisons, borstal institutions, detention centres, remand centres and
attendance centres. Prison policy is carried out by the Prison Department of
the Home Office through the agency of the prison service which operates
under a director-general and includes a headquarters organisation, regional
directors, the governors and staff of the penal establishments and members
of particular professions, such as medical officers, chaplains and social workers,
with their own professional status.
Reports to the Home Secretary on the administration of local prisons are
made by visiting committees of justices of the peace appointed by the various
courts of quarter session in the area, in numbers fixed by the Home Secretary.
For all other prisons and for borstals, detention centres and remand centres
this function is performed by boards of visitors appointed by the Home
Secretary, not less than two members of which must be justices of the peace.
The other functions of these bodies include acting as the superior disciplinary
authority for reports of a more serious nature against prisoners and pro¬
viding an independent channel of complaint for any prisoner having a
grievance.
The boards of visitors also advise on the release on licence of the inmates
Prisons
Remission of
Sentence and
Parole
LAW AND ORDER 97
of borstals. The work of both committees and boards helps to preserve local
interest, and is voluntary.
The penal systems in Scotland and Northern Ireland are based on principles
similar to those applied in England and Wales. In Scotland the system is the
responsibility of the Secretary of State for Scotland, and in Northern Ireland
of the Ministry of Home Affairs.
The aims of the prison service are briefly to provide for the detention of those
committed to custody under the law in conditions generally acceptable to
society and to develop methods of treatment and training which will ‘en¬
courage and assist them to lead a good and useful life’.1 To this end prisoners
are classified into groups, according to their record, character, potentialities
and the risk they present to security, and assigned, so far as circumstances
permit, to the establishment best suited to their needs. Untried prisoners are
separated from convicted prisoners and, as far as practicable, those under 21
are separated from those over that age.
Prisons to which offenders may be committed directly by a court are
known as ‘local’ prisons; all are closed establishments. Other prisons, which
may be open or closed, receive prisoners on transfer from local prisons. To
relieve overcrowding in local prisons and generally to improve prisoners’
conditions, new prisons are being built and existing establishments re¬
developed and modernised. During the last ten years the number of men’s
prisons in England and Wales has increased from 46 to 58, and a further
seven are planned. In Scotland three new prisons are planned and three new
institutions for those under 21.
On reception under sentence, all prisoners, except those sentenced to im¬
prisonment for life, are credited with remission of one-third of their sentence
provided that this does not reduce their sentence below 31 days (in Scotland,
30 days). In addition, except in Northern Ireland, prisoners serving fixed
sentences become eligible for parole after serving one-third of their sentence,
subject to a minimum of one year. Each eligible prisoner is first considered
by a local review committee which reports to the Home Secretary or Secretary
of State for Scotland on his suitability for parole. The Minister concerned
then refers a selection of the recommendations to the Parole Board or Parole
Board for Scotland, each of which consists of a chairman and a number of
other members (20 in England and Wales and 12 in Scotland), appointed by
the Home Secretary and Secretary of State for Scotland respectively. Where a
Parole Board recommends favourably, the decision whether or not to release
the prisoner depends finally on the Minister, but where the Board does not
recommend release the Minister has no power to grant parole. The licence
remains in force until the date on which the prisoner would have been re¬
leased if he had not been licensed or, for prisoners serving extended sentences
(in England and Wales only) and offenders sentenced while under 21 years
of age, until the end of the sentence.
Prisoners serving life sentences are also eligible for release on licence. In
Great Britain, the usual practice in such cases is to seek the views of the local
review committee after the offender has served seven years. Each case is
considered by the Home Secretary or Secretary of State for Scotland and
forwarded to the Parole Board concerned. The Lord Chief Justice in England
and the Lord Justice General in Scotland (as the case may be) and, if he is
1 Rule 1 of the Prison Rules made by the Home Secretary for prisons in England and
Wales.
98
Training
Education
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
available, the judge who presided at the trial must, by law, be consulted
before any life sentence prisoner is released. In Northern Ireland, where the
Minister for Home Affairs is responsible for the release on licence of prisoners
serving life sentences, the judiciary is similarly consulted before any such
release takes place.
In prison training, efforts are being made to provide: (1) work of a type likely
to help fit prisoners to earn their living after release, (2) suitable educational
facilities, including vocational training courses, (3) opportunities for the
development of a sense of personal responsibility, including (for suitable
prisoners) training in open conditions, and (4) treatment techniques, such as
group counselling, which may help a prisoner to solve his problems and
improve his future life.
In England and Wales prison work is centrally controlled by the Directorate
of Industries and Stores of the Prison Department of the Home Office, which
comprises both executive and technical staff. Workshops are supervised by a
headquarters staff of travelling supervisors and by industrial managers at the
prisons; farms and gardens are in the charge of the Chief Farms and Gardens
Officer and the farm managers. In Scotland there is a Supervisor of Industries
and Training, who advises the Director of the Prison Service on industrial
employment (including agriculture) and training. A deputy supervisor, two
technical officers and four industrial managers work under the supervisor.
In Northern Ireland general supervision of prison work is exercised by the
Ministry of Home Affairs in consultation, where necessary, with other
government departments.
The primary source of work for prison inmates lies in the requirements of
the prison service itself, that is to say, building and maintenance, domestic
services and equipment. Goods and services are also supplied to other
government departments and, on an increasing scale, to other purchasers,
both inside and outside the public services. A few prisoners are employed
outside prison in agriculture and on work such as archaeological excavation
and the preservation of canals.
In England, Wales and Scotland, small payments (averaging ^0-35 a week)
are made to inmates for the work they do; in some prisons payments above
the minimum (up to ^1-65 a week) are made on the basis of output and skill;
in Northern Ireland a progressive system of earnings, related to work done,
is being gradually introduced.
Any prisoner serving a sentence of four years or more may be considered
for employment in an ordinary civilian job outside prison for about six
months before his discharge. Prisoners selected for the scheme may live
either in prison or in a prison hostel; they are paid normal wages, from which
they support their families and meet their own expenses.
Educational arrangements are made in prisons in Great Britain by local
educational authorities, advised in England and Wales by the Department
of Education and Science, and in Scotland by the Scottish Education De¬
partment. Most prisons have a tutor-organiser and a number of voluntary
teachers, and assistance is given by members of the prison staff. A wide
choice of evening classes and correspondence courses is available, and other
educational facilities, such as physical training, concerts, plays, films, lectures
and group discussions, are arranged where facilities allow; in addition
prisoners may use the prison libraries, which depend largely upon the local
public libraries for their stocks. Vocational training courses, leading to an
acknowledged qualification, such as that of the City and Guilds of London
LAW AND ORDER
99
Medical Services
Privileges and
Discipline
Welfare and
After-Care
Institute, are provided for selected prisoners. Education in prisons in Northern
Ireland is the responsibility of the Ministry of Home Affairs. Facilities,
similar to those in Great Britain, are provided under the direction of the
Prison Service Education Officer.
Medical attention is provided by full-time and part-time medical officers
whose duties include the care of the physical and mental health of prison
inmates, and the oversight of those services which affect health in prisons.
In a few prisons there are large, fully equipped hospitals where major
surgery can be undertaken and treatment by visiting specialists given both to
inmates and to prisoners from other establishments. There is also one
psychiatric prison (in England and Wales) with accommodation for some 350
people.
Several prisons have their own psychiatric clinics, to which prisoners
from other establishments may be referred and, in England and Wales, there
is a prison psychological service, whose officers assist governors and medical
officers in their work of examining and classifying prisoners. The hospital
facilities of the National Health Service (see Chapter 5) are available for the
treatment of prisoners in appropriate cases and arrangements may be made,
where necessary, for prisoners to receive treatment after release.
Depending on the facilities available at individual establishments prisoners,
from the beginning of their sentence, are granted such privileges as the use
of books, periodicals and newspapers, dining and recreation in association,
making purchases from the canteen with money earned in prison, and
watching television in the evening. They may also write and receive letters
regularly, and may be visited by their friends and relatives at specified
intervals.
Breaches of discipline are dealt with by the prison governor, visiting
committee or board of visitors, who have power to order, among other
penalties, forfeiture of remission and forfeiture of privileges.
Welfare in prisons is the general concern of the prison staff as a whole, and in
particular of the chaplains and assistant governors, but special responsibilities
attach to prison welfare officers, who, in England, Wales and Northern
Ireland, are probation officers seconded by the probation and after-care
service. (In Scotland, prison welfare officers are especially appointed for this
purpose.) The functions of these officers include helping the prisoner in his
relationships with individuals and organisations outside the prison, and
making plans for the prisoner’s after-care, working closely in this connection
with colleagues in the probation and after-care service and with other
agencies in the community whose help the prisoner or his family may need
either during sentence or after release.
For the spiritual welfare of the inmates, a chaplain of the Church of
England (in Scotland of the Church of Scotland, and in Northern Ireland of
the Church of Ireland and Presbyterian Church), a Roman Catholic priest
and a minister of the Methodist Church are appointed to every prison.
Ministers of other denominations are either appointed or specially called in as
required. Chaplains not only hold regular services, but also visit every
prisoner soon after reception, shortly before release and regularly during
sentence, and pay daily visits to all prisoners who are sick or confined to
their cells and to any others who apply to see them.
Prisoners may also receive visits from specially appointed prison visitors,
whose work is voluntary and in England and Wales is co-ordinated and
guided by the National Association of Prison Visitors.
100
Borstal
Training
Probation
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
In England and Wales pre-release courses are conducted at all prisons.
During these courses experts hold open forum with prisoners nearing their
release on the domestic, social and employment problems with which they
are likely to be faced. Two periods of home leave, one allowing five clear
days and the other two clear days at home, are extensively granted towards the
end of their sentences to many categories of prisoners with sentences of three
years or over to enable them to make family adjustments and contacts with
potential employers. Prisoners serving between two and three years are con¬
sidered for one period of home leave.
Offenders released on licence (see p. 97) are subject to statutory super¬
vision after release by probation officers of the probation and after-care
service, to which offenders not subject to compulsory supervision may also
apply for help. Those who fail to observe the conditions of statutory super¬
vision are liable to have their licences revoked.
In Northern Ireland after-care duties are likewise carried out by probation
and after-care officers; in Scotland responsibility for statutory and voluntary
after-care is vested in social workers from the local authority social work
departments.
The borstal training system, which is available for offenders who have
reached the age of 151 but are not yet 21 (16 to 21 in Scotland and Northern
Ireland), consists of different borstals specialising in different types of young
offender, classified according to such criteria as age, intelligence and criminal
sophistication. There are also a few borstals for special purposes, such as
allocation or recall. In England, Wales and Northern Ireland the period of
training ranges from six months to two years and is followed, in England and
Wales, by supervision for two years and in Northern Ireland for one year
from the date of release. In Scotland, where there is no minimum period of
detention, the maximum is two years and the supervision period is for one
year from the date of release from the institution. The system is essentially
remedial and educational, based on personal training by a carefully selected
staff. Emphasis is placed on vocational training in skilled trades; there is
much freedom of movement and many borstals are open establishments.
Probation is designed to secure the rehabilitation of an offender while he
remains at work or at school under the supervision of a probation officer,
whose duty it is to advise, assist and befriend him. A cardinal feature of the
service is that it relies on the co-operation of the offender. Before making a
probation order, the court must explain its effects and make sure that the
probationer understands that if he fails to comply with the requirements of
the order he will be liable to be dealt with for the original offence. A proba¬
tion order can be made only if the offender is 17 years of age or over and must
have his consent; it usually requires the probationer to keep in regular touch
with the probation officer, to be of good behaviour and to lead an industrious
life. It may also require him to live in a specified place, or to submit to treat¬
ment for his mental condition. A probation order is made for not less than
one year and not more than three years.
In England, Wales and Northern Ireland, the services of probation officers
(who also undertake social work in penal institutions, duties in connection with
1 This will become 17 when the relevant section of the Children and Young Persons
Act 1969 becomes effective.
LAW AND ORDER
101
the statutory supervision and voluntary after-care of discharged offenders) are
available to every criminal court. In England and Wales their appointment
is the responsibility of probation and after-care committees, composed for
the most part of justices, first appointments, except in the case of pro¬
fessionally trained officers, being subject to confirmation by the Home
Secretary. In Northern Ireland the Ministry of Home Affairs appoints
probation officers. Training facilities in England and Wales are provided by
the Home Office on the advice of the Advisory Council for Probation and
After-Care and are made available by arrangement to Northern Ireland
officers.
In Scotland, where there is no separate probation service, the local authority
social work departments provide the services and officers required by the
criminal courts in their areas. Offenders subject to probation orders and those
on after-care supervision following release from a penal institution are super¬
vised by specially approved social workers from these departments. Recruit¬
ment is the responsibility of the local authority concerned, and appointments
are not subject to ministerial confirmation. Unqualified staff appointed to posts
in social work departments may be seconded for professional training after a
number of years in post.
Young
Offenders
Children and
Young Persons Act
Changes in the law relating to the care and treatment of juveniles have been
made in England and Wales by the Children and Young Persons Act 1969
and in Scotland by the Social Work (Scotland) Act 1968. Both Acts reflect
the changing views of society on how best to deal with the problem of children
in trouble. The Children and Young Persons Act is designed to restrict
court proceedings for children under 17 to situations where the protection
of society and the welfare of the child cannot be secured by action taken by
his family, his school, or the social services. Its provisions are being brought
into effect by stages.
Although children of 10 and over remain capable, in law, of committing
offences, the Act enables the minimum age of prosecution (except for homi¬
cides) to be raised to 14. A child below the minimum age who is alleged to
have committed an offence may be subject to care proceedings in a juvenile
court (provided that it can be proved not only that he has committed the
offence, but also that he is in need of care and control), but criminal pro¬
ceedings cannot be brought against him.
The principal orders available to the juvenile courts in England and Wales
in both care and criminal proceedings will be: (a) an order requiring a
parent or guardian to take proper care of the child or young person and to
exercise proper control over him, (b) a care order, which commits the child
to the care of the local authority, (c) a supervision order, under which a child
will normally remain at home under the supervision of the local authority or
a probation officer, and (d) a hospital or guardianship order in accordance
with the Mental Health Act 1959. In criminal proceedings the courts also
have power to impose fines up to £50, to order payment of compensation,
or to grant a conditional or absolute discharge. They may also impose attend¬
ance centre or detention centre orders until other forms of treatment become
available.
If a young person under the age of 17 is charged jointly with someone
over 17, the case is heard in an adult magistrates’ court or higher court.
This practice will continue, but if the young person is found guilty, the
adult court will remit the case to a juvenile court, unless the case can be dis¬
posed of by discharge or a fine.
tS°’,/V ^
■ 5
102
The Social Work
{Scotland) Act
Northern Ireland
Methods of
Treatment
Care Orders
Supervision Orders
Measures of Care
in Scotland
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Social Work (Scotland) Act provides that children up to 16, or in certain
cases 18, who have committed offences, or have done or experienced certain
other things which suggest that they may be in need of compulsory measures
of care, are to be dealt with under a system of children’s hearings. The
children’s hearings, which consist of people drawn from a specially selected
lay panel in each local authority area, will decide on the most appropriate
form of treatment for the particular child or young person, and the local
authority social work department will ensure that the decision is imple¬
mented.
In Northern Ireland, a child or young person between the ages of 10 and 17
is normally dealt with in a juvenile court, unless charged jointly with an adult
or committed for trial by jury in the case of a more serious offence. Such
committal may take place at the request of the accused’s parents or at the
discretion of the juvenile court. In dealing with a child or young person found
guilty of committing an offence the court may grant an absolute or conditional
discharge, may impose a fine, or may commit the offender to the charge of a
fit person, normally the appropriate local authority, or to a remand home
or a training school approved by the Ministry of Home Affairs.
Under the Children and Young Persons Act a care order will commit a
child to the care of the local authority (see p. 101) in whose area he lives until
he has reached the age of 18 or, if he was over 16 when the order was made,
until he is 19. The term ‘care order’ also includes an interim order, which
commits a child to care for not more than 28 days, in cases where further
enquiries are necessary to enable the court to take a final decision.
A child or young person, or his parent or guardian on his behalf, will
have the right to apply to a juvenile court for the discharge of the order at
any time, subject to the consent of the court being obtained if the application
has been refused within the preceding three months. There will be a right of
appeal to quarter sessions against a refusal to discharge a care order.
The local authority to whose care a child or young person may be com¬
mitted will have powers and duties analogous to those of a parent or guardian;
it will have the duty of keeping him in care notwithstanding any claim by
his parent or guardian; but it may not cause a child committed to its care
to be brought up in any religious creed other than that in which he would
have been brought up apart from the order.
A supervision order under the Act will run for three years or for some
specified shorter period; if made in care proceedings, however, it will not
extend beyond the eighteenth birthday of the young person concerned. The
order may include a requirement that the person under supervision should
live with a particular individual or that he should have treatment for a
mental condition. It may also lay down that he shall comply with any direc¬
tions given to him by the supervisor, for instance that he shall stay for a
limited period in a community home, camp or other place which is likely to
introduce him to a new environment; that he shall attend a place for train¬
ing and recreation in the evenings or at week-ends; or that he shall take
part in some organised work project or social service or adventure training.
The juvenile courts will have wide powers to vary or discharge a super¬
vision order; there will be a right of appeal to quarter sessions against such a
variation unless it is of a favourable or of a minor kind.
In Scotland, the children’s hearings may impose treatment ranging from
supervision of a child while he continues to live in his home to differing forms
LAW AND ORDER
103
of residential care. Conditions may be attached to the way in which treatment
is carried out if these are considered to be in the best interests of the child.
Appeals both for finding whether the grounds for bringing a child before
a children’s hearing have been established and against the decisions of
children’s hearings may be brought before the Sheriff Court. For such appeals
and for any subsequent appeal to the Court of Session, legal aid would be
available.
Attendance Centres Over 50 attendance centres have been established in England and Wales
and they are to continue in existence until some alternative form of treat¬
ment can be devised for boys and youths under the age of 17 found guilty
of offences for which older people could be sentenced to imprisonment.
Boys ordered to attend must do so during their spare time on Saturday
mornings or afternoons; they may be required to attend for up to three
hours on any one occasion and for a total of not less than 12 hours (with
certain exceptions) and not more than 24. The activities include physical
training and instruction in handicrafts or some other practical subject. Efforts
are made at the centres to induce the boys to join a youth club or other
suitable organisation.
In Northern Ireland the first attendance centre will soon be established.
It will operate on the same lines as the centres in England and Wales, but will
cater for boys between the ages of 12 and 17.
Detention Centres Detention centres provide a means of training, and are intended to deter
from further crime, young offenders for whom a long period of residential
training does not seem necessary but who cannot be taught respect for the
law by such measures as fines or probation. In England and Wales five junior
centres are available for boys of not less than 14 and under 17, and 13 senior
centres for young men aged 17 and under 21. In Scotland there is one
senior centre’ Detention in England and Wales may be for not less than three
and not more than six months; if consecutive sentences are passed, the total
term may not exceed nine months at any one time. Remission of up to one-
third of the sentence may be earned for good conduct. In Scotland the fixed
period for alldetention centre sentences is three months and the age ranges
from 16 to 21.
The regime at detention centres, which is brisk and firm, with strong
emphasis on hard work and high standards of behaviour, provides a normal
working week of 44 hours, including one hour daily devoted to physical
training. Boys of compulsory school age have day-time and evening classes,
and further education is provided for others in the evenings. Nearly all young
offenders discharged from detention centres are subject to statutory super¬
vision for 12 months.
Criminological Criminological research, particularly research directed to the question of the
Research treatment of offenders, is carried out by the Home Office Research Unit
(which also serves the Scottish Home and Health Department), by university
departments and by various other research organisations; much of it is
financed by the Home Office and the Scottish Home and Health Department.
Studies undertaken by the Home Office Research Unit are mainly concentra¬
ted on subjects of direct interest to the home departments. Research and
teaching in criminology are provided at the Institute of Criminology at
Cambridge University and at Edinburgh University, at both of which post¬
graduate courses are available. Courses in criminology are also available at the
universities of Durham, Reading, Oxford, Manchester and Southampton;
104 BRITAIN I97i: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
the London School of Economics, and University College in the University
of London; and the universities of Glasgow, Edinburgh and Strathclyde in
Scotland. These institutions likewise conduct research.
THE POLICE SERVICE
The police service of Great Britain is organised in a number of large forces
linked with local government and subject to the influence and eventual control
of the Home Secretary in England and Wales and the Secretary of State for
Scotland in Scotland. In Northern Ireland there is a single police force;
final responsibility rests with the Minister of Home Affairs.
POLICE IN There are 67 regular police forces in Great Britain: 47 in England and Wales
GREAT BRITAIN an(j 2o in Scotland. Each police force is responsible for a separate police area,
but there is constant co-operation between them.
Police Forces In England and Wales the forces are defined according to area of res¬
ponsibility as: county forces (5); county borough forces (6); combined
forces (34), which are forces whose area of responsibility extends over two
or more counties or county boroughs; the Metropolitan Police Force, which
is responsible for an area of approximately 15 miles radius from Charing
Cross, but excluding the City of London; and the City of London force. In
Scotland there are four burgh forces, 15 combined forces, and one county
force.
The strength of the regular police force in Great Britain is approximately
100,000, the size of individual police forces depending on the area and
population which they serve. In England and Wales, outside Greater London,
establishments range from 700 to 7,000, the majority being in the 1,000 to
2,500 range. The strength of the Metropolitan Police Force is about 20,000.
In Scotland forces range in strength from about 100 to 3,000.
In addition to the regular police forces, there are constabularies maintained
by the statutory transport and other public authorities, and by the Ministry
of Defence.
Police Each of the regular police forces is maintained by a police authority. In the
Authorities counties of England and Wales the authority is a police committee and in the
and Chief county boroughs a watch committee. Both are committees of the local council
Constables an(j consist of councillors and justices in a proportion of two to one. Com¬
bined police authorities, which also consist of councillors and justices,
contain representatives from each constituent area covered by an amalgama¬
tion scheme.
The police authority for the Metropolitan Police Force is the Home
Secretary. In the City of London the Court of Common Council is the police
authority, although it usually appoints a standing committee to deal with all
police matters on its behalf.
In Scotland the police authority for the county is the county council; in
the burghs it is the town council; and where there are combined forces there
is a joint police committee.
The primary duty of the police authority is to provide an adequate and
efficient police force for the area for which it is responsible. To enable it to
carry out this duty, it is empowered, subject to the approval of the Home
Secretary or Secretary of State for Scotland, to appoint the chief constable
LAW AND ORDER
Central
Authority
Police Officers
105
and the deputy and assistant chief constables of the force, and fix the author¬
ised establishment. It may also retire the chief constable in the interests of
efficiency, if the Home Secretary or the Secretary of State for Scotland agrees,
and must keep itself informed of the way in which the chief constables deal
with complaints from the public against police officers. In addition, police
authorities, with the consent of the Secretary of State, provide the buildings
and equipment needed for their forces. In the Metropolitan Police District
the chief officer of police and his immediate subordinates are appointed by the
Crown on the recommendation of the Home Secretary.
Chief constables are responsible for the direction and control of police
forces and for the appointment, promotion and discipline of all ranks below
deputy or assistant chief constable; they are, however, generally responsible
to the police authorities on matters of efficiency, and are required to submit
a written annual report.
The Home Secretary and the Secretary of State for Scotland, who have a
general responsibility for the preservation of law and order throughout Great
Britain, are concerned both in the overall organisation of the police service
and in its administration and operation. In this regard, they must not only
approve the appointment of chief constables, but may require a police
authority to retire a chief constable in the interests of efficiency, call for a
report from a chief constable on any matters relating to the policing of his
area, or cause a local enquiry to be held. They are also empowered to make
regulations as to the government, administration and conditions of service
in police forces.
The police regulations cover such matters as rank; qualifications for
appointment, promotion and retirement; discipline; hours of duty, leave,
pay and allowances; and uniform and equipment. Some of these are first
negotiable on the Police Council; the others are discussed on representative
advisory bodies along with any general questions affecting the police
service.
The Home Secretary is advised on all matters concerning police efficiency
by Her Majesty’s Chief Inspector of Constabulary and nine inspectors, of
whom two are concerned with crime and traffic respectively, and one is con¬
cerned in the Home Office Police Planning Organisation. Six are individually
responsible for the inspection of a number of forces, and must be satisfied of
their continuing efficiency through formal annual inspection, and informal
visits and consultations when particular problems arise. The inspectors report
to the Home Secretary on the condition of all the forces, with the exception
of the Metropolitan Police Force. The Secretary of State for Scotland is
similarly assisted by Her Majesty’s Chief Inspector of Constabulary in
Scotland and one other inspector.
All police authorities receive a government grant equal to half their net
expenditure, except the Common Council of the City of London, which
receives one-third. The Home Secretary and the Secretary of State for Scot¬
land are empowered to withhold the grant, in whole or in part, permanently
or for such time as they may determine, if they are not satisfied that a police
area is efficiently policed, that a force is properly maintained and administered,
or that the rates of pay or allowances are as prescribed or approved by them.
In general, entry to the regular police force is open to men between the
ages of 19 and 30. Women entrants in England and Wales must be be¬
tween the ages of 19 and 35, and in Scotland between 20 and 30 years old.
106 BRITAIN I971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Men over 30 years old, and women over 35, may, however, be appointed on
the recommendation of the appointing authority in special circumstances
approved by the Home Secretary in England and Wales. In Scotland the
Secretary of State may approve appointments of both men and women over
30 years old.
There are about 190 graduates serving in the police forces of Great Britain.
There are also some 80 police officers at university, reading for degrees.
The standard police ranks1 in Great Britain, except in the Metropolitan
Police District, are: chief constable, superintendent, inspector, sergeant and
constable. Intermediate ranks may also be adopted in areas where varying
degrees of responsibility make them necessary. In the Metropolitan Police
District the chief officer is the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis.
He is assisted by a deputy commissioner and four assistant commissioners.
Next in rank are deputy assistant commissioners, commanders, chief superin¬
tendents and chief inspectors; the other ranks are the same as in the rest of
the country. In the City of London the ranks are the same as in the regions
except that the chief officer is the Commissioner of Police and the second in
command is an assistant commissioner.
No member of the police service may belong to a trade union, since it is a
basic principle of the service that its members must not only be free from
political bias, but must also be seen to be free of it. All ranks, however, have
their own associations which can make representations to ministers or to
police authorities on matters of interest or concern to their members.
Police Cadets Police cadets are recruited by most forces from among boys between 16 (15
in Scotland) and 18 years of age. They have no police powers but are given
some training in police work, partly as useful preparation for subsequent
appointment as constables and partly to give them sufficient insight into
police duties to enable them to decide whether or not they wish to make a
career in the police service. Some forces also recruit girl cadets.
Civilian Staff Most police authorities employ civilians as shorthand-typists, switchboard
operators, mechanics, canteen staff and cleaners, in order to release uniformed
personnel for police duties.
Special All police forces have an attachment of special constables, who are volunteers
Constables willing to perform police duties without pay in their spare time. In England
and Wales the function of special constables is to act as auxiliaries to the
regular force when required. In Scotland they are employed only in emer¬
gencies although they may be assigned for duty for training purposes.
Traffic Wardens Traffic wardens are extensively employed to discharge specified duties
connected with road traffic and vehicles, normally undertaken by the police.
In this connection they may be authorised to serve fixed penalty notices2 for
minor offences to which the fixed penalty system applies. They may also be
employed to act as parking attendants at street parking places, and as school¬
crossing patrols, if the police agree. Traffic wardens remain under the control
of the chief constable of the force to which they are attached, whatever duties
they may perform.
1 The rank structure of the police is being reviewed by a working party set up by the
Home Secretary and Secretary of State for Scotland in consultation with the local
authority associations and the police associations.
2 A fixed penalty notice gives the recipient the option of paying a specified sum to the
clerk of the appropriate magistrates’ court, instead of having his case tried in the
ordinary way.
LAW AND ORDER
Police Duties
Co-ordination
between
Police Forces
Home Office Police
Planning
Organisation
107
A police officer in Great Britain is an independent holder of a public office
and exercises his powers as a constable, whether conferred by statute or by
common law, by virtue of his office; he is an agent of the law of the land, not
of the police authority nor of the central Government and although his chief
officer of police has a vicarious liability for any wrongful act he may commit
in the performance of his functions as a constable, he himself may also be
sued in respect of his own wrongful act.
The many and varied functions of a police officer as a constable range from
the protection of persons and property, road or street patrolling and traffic
control to criminal investigation and the apprehension of offenders.
The main departments in all police forces are the uniform department and
the criminal investigation department; many forces have specialised depart¬
ments, including traffic departments, river police (in districts which include
long stretches of navigable waterway), a mounted branch (for maintaining
order and safety in large crowds), and police dogs.
In all aspects of police work, the application of scientific aids has reached
an advanced stage: nearly million is spent annually on police equip¬
ment, including .£2 million on radio communications; the police have 23,000
personal radio sets operational; and a national police computer project for
rationalising the keeping of records and speeding up the dissemination of
information is being developed.
During recent years a number of common services have been provided by
the central government departments for the benefit of all forces; they supple¬
ment those provided by the police authorities for their own use and by
communal arrangements made between the forces themselves. The most
important of these services are: training services, which in England and Wales
provide training centres for recruit training and a central police college for
higher training and in Scotland a central police college with courses of recruit
training and higher training; a forensic science service in England and Wales
which provides eight regional laboratories (in addition to the Metropolitan
Police Laboratory); regional wireless services and wireless depots, which in
England and Wales supply and maintain wireless equipment for the police;
and central and provincial criminal records which are available to all forces.
In addition, regional crime squads, consisting of teams of experienced
detectives from several forces, operating under a committee of chief con¬
stables, are employed in England and Wales to investigate major crimes
involving enquiries in more than one police area. In Scotland the Scottish
Crime Squad assists Scottish police forces in the investigation and prevention
of crime and in the collection and maintenance of information concerning
criminals. Arrangements are also made for everyday assistance by one force
to another.
The Home Office Police Planning Organisation is administered by a senior
civil servant acting with the advice of an Inspector of Constabulary and staffed
by senior police officers, scientists and accountancy and management experts;
it is charged with the planning of police methods, the development of new
equipment and the study of new techniques throughout Great Britain, and
with providing police forces with a management information system, based
upon programme budgeting to assist them in the allocation of resources. A
considerable amount of the work in which the organisation is engaged involves
the use of operational research techniques.
io8
Metropolitan
Police Force
Services
POLICE IN
NORTHERN
IRELAND
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Services provided by the Metropolitan Police Force for other forces include
(1) the publication of the Police Gazette,1 which contains particulars of people
wanted for crime and details of stolen property, and is supplied without
charge to the police forces of the United Kingdom and to certain other Com¬
monwealth and foreign forces; (2) the organisation and control of the special
branch of the criminal investigation department at New Scotland Yard,
whose duties include the protection of royalty, some ministers and dis¬
tinguished foreign visitors; and (3) the carrying out of extradition orders
made by the courts. The Metropolitan Police Force is also available, on
request, to assist any other police force in England and Wales in criminal
investigations. Similarly, the services of the Fraud Squad, run jointly by
the Metropolitan Police Force and the City of London Police, are available
throughout Great Britain for the investigation of serious company frauds.
The National Central Bureau, which handles the business of the Inter¬
national Criminal Police Organisation (Interpol) on behalf of Great Britain
and the British dependencies, is part of the Metropolitan Police Force. For
certain of these services, the Metropolitan Police Force receives an additional
Exchequer grant.
The Royal Ulster Constabulary (R.U.C.) operates under the direction of a
chief constable who is responsible, through a police authority, to Northern
Ireland’s Minister of Home Affairs.
The R.U.C., which has a strength of some 3,500, undertakes the policing
of the whole of Northern Ireland, its cost being borne by the Northern
Ireland Exchequer. The police authority, which consists of a chairman, a
vice-chairman and between 14 and 20 other members appointed by the
Governor of Northern Ireland, has the same powers and duties as the police
authorities in Great Britain.
The chief constable has under his command a deputy chief constable and
assistant chief constables. The area is divided into divisions under chief
superintendents and superintendents who have under their command
inspectors, sergeants and constables. Conditions of service and pay follow
closely on the lines of the police service in Great Britain, and the general
duties pertaining to the various ranks are much the same.
The R.U.C. is assisted in its normal police duties by a reserve of special
constables who are paid a small ‘bounty’ for their services. While on duty,
members of the reserve have the same powers, privileges and duties as (by
the law for the time being in force) may be exercised by, or are conferred
upon, a member of the R.U.C.
1 The Scottish Criminal Record Office in Glasgow is responsible for the publication of
the Scottish Police Gazette.
4 DEFENCE
Europe
Far East
Dependencies
The United
Nations
POLICY
The main function of British forces in the future will be to help in guarantee¬
ing peace and security for Europe through the North Atlantic Alliance.
Britain accordingly makes a major contribution to the full range of deterrent
capabilities, conventional and nuclear, required by the present NATO
strategy of flexible response. The British Government also looks forward to
the seventies as an era of negotiation between the opposing alliances, and
believes that all means must be explored to bring about a lasting peace which
does not rest on the effort to maintain a balance of power in a continuing
arms race. Britain has therefore supported NATO’s recent studies of issues
for exploration and possible negotiation with the Warsaw Pact countries such
as mutual force reductions, and hopes that progress in present negotiations
on such questions as Berlin could make improvements possible over a wider
field in Europe.
Within NATO Britain seeks the emergence of a closer European defence
identity: the European members of NATO can contribute more effectively
to East/West discussions if they develop a common viewpoint on the major
issues of European security. At the same time, closer co-operation in defence
planning and the procurement of defence equipment would enable them to
make the most efficient and economic use of the resources devoted to their
common defence. The concentration of Britain’s defence effort in and around
Europe presents Britain with new opportunities to lead in this co-operation.
Britain is also a member of the Central Treaty Organisation (CENTO) and
the South-East Asia Treaty Organisation (SEATO). In recent years Britain’s
overseas commitments have undergone a period of reappraisal, and there has
been some reduction in the forces deployed in the Middle and Far East, with
a greater reliance placed on the general capability, based on Europe, rapidly
to deploy forces overseas. Britain’s interest in the stability of these areas
remains, and in the Far East Britain is working with Malaysia, Singapore,
Australia and New Zealand to create an effective regional defence organisation.
Following the change of Government in June 1970, the policy of a major
withdrawal of British military forces from Malaysia, Singapore and the
Persian Gulf is being reviewed.
Britain is also responsible for the defence and internal security of her re¬
maining dependencies. During 1969 British troops operated within the
United Kingdom and abroad, in aid of civil authorities, to halt communal
disturbances. In general, Britain’s armed forces assist civil communities at
home and abroad, particularly in emergency and development tasks.
Britain supports the activities of the United Nations, and continues to play
an important part in international disarmament negotiations. Having played
a leading part in the negotiations for the 1963 partial nuclear test ban treaty,
and the 1968 Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, Britain put forward in
1969 at the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament in Geneva a
draft convention for the prohibition of biological methods of warfare, and
no
Service
Organisations
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
played a constructive role in the discussions for an arms control agreement
for the sea-bed.
Information about defence policy and the armed forces is provided by the
Government in an annual Statement on the Defence Estimates (Cmnd. 4290
in 1970) usually published in February.
The Government is concerned to keep defence costs within the country’s
resources, and since the 1965-66 estimates were published there have been
successive reductions in the annual defence estimates as calculated at constant
prices. Defence estimates for 1970-71 totalled £2,280 million, which repre¬
sents about 5-5 per cent of the gross national product.
PLANNING AND CONTROL
Supreme responsibility for national defence rests with the Prime Minister and
the Cabinet, who are responsible to Parliament. Defence problems and their
implications for foreign and economic policy are dealt with on the Cabinet’s
behalf by the Committee on Defence and Oversea Policy, under the chair¬
manship of the Prime Minister.
The formulation of defence policy is the responsibility of the Secretary of
State for Defence. In recent years the emphasis in defence organisation has
been on a greater degree of Service co-ordination, and on overall, functional
planning of the defence effort as a whole. Since the unified Ministry of
Defence was created in 1964, the headquarters organisation has been regularly
reviewed and a series of changes made to increase efficiency and economy.
The former two Ministers of Defence (for administration and equipment
respectively) were replaced during 1970 by a single Minister of State for
Defence who is responsible for the Armed Forces. The Minister, together
with the three Parliamentary Under-Secretaries of State for the Navy, Army
and Air Force respectively, the Chief of the Defence Staff, the three Service
Chiefs of Staff, the Chief Adviser (Projects and Research) and the Chief of
Personnel and Logistics, sit on the Defence Council, which deals with major
defence policy under the chairmanship of the Secretary of State. The Chiefs
of Staff Committee, comprising the Chief of the Defence Staff as chairman
and the Chiefs of Staff of the three Services, is responsible for giving pro¬
fessional advice on strategy and operations and on the military implications
of defence policy. The day-to-day management of the three Services is the
responsibility of the Admiralty, Army and Air Force Boards of the Defence
Council.
The Royal Navy has four main arms. These are: the Naval General Service,
which mans and maintains the surface fleet; the Fleet Air Arm; the Sub¬
marine Service; and the Royal Marines, who provide a seaborne and airborne
land striking-force.
The Army is organised into some 30 arms and services which include the
Household Cavalry, the Royal Armoured Corps, the Royal Regiment of
Artillery, the Corps of Royal Engineers, the Royal Corps of Signals, the five
regiments of Foot Guards, the Infantry of the Line (being grouped into
divisions), the Army Air Corps, the Royal Corps of Transport, the Royal
Army Medical Corps, the Royal Army Ordnance Corps and the Royal
Electrical and Mechanical Engineers.
The Royal Air Force is organised in commands, on a functional basis at
home and on a geographical basis overseas.
DEFENCE
III
Women’s
Services
COMMANDS
Royal Navy
Army
Royal Air Force
TRAINING
The three women’s services, the Women’s Royal Naval Service (WRNS), the
Women’s Royal Army Corps (WRAC) and the Women’s Royal Air Force
(WRAF), are integral parts of the Navy, Army and Air Force respectively.
Servicewomen serve alongside servicemen in Britain and overseas. Nursing
services are provided by Queen Alexandra’s Royal Naval Nursing Service,
Queen Alexandra’s Royal Army Nursing Corps and Princess Mary’s Royal
Air Force Nursing Service.
Operational control of the Forces in the Persian Gulf and Far East is exercised
through Unified Command Headquarters in Bahrain (see p. 115) and
Singapore respectively by single commanders, who may belong to any one of
the three Services; they are supported by inter-Service staffs, co-ordinated
by Chiefs of Staff.
The home and overseas commands of the Services are set out below.
Under a phased programme shore commands are being reorganised under a
single Commander-in-Chief, Naval Home Command, with subordinate
Area Flag Officers at Plymouth, Chatham and Rosyth. Sea command has
been reorganised to bring under a single major operational commander, the
Commander-in-Chief Western Fleet, an area comprising the North Sea, the
North and South Atlantic Oceans, the Mediterranean and part of the Pacific
Ocean. British naval forces in the North Atlantic and Mediterranean are ear¬
marked for assignment to the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO).
Naval forces in the Persian Gulf come under the Commander, Naval Forces
Gulf, and in the Far East under the Commander, Far East Fleet.
Army Strategic Command, Northern Command, Southern Command,
Western Command and two Independent Districts (HQ Northern Ireland
and HQ Scotland). The overseas commands are: British Army of the Rhine
(BAOR); Far East Land Forces; Near East Land Forces; Land Forces
Hong Kong; British Troops Malta and Gibraltar; and Land Forces Gulf.
Strike Command, which has a number of subordinate Groups, taking the
place of the former Bomber, Fighter and Coastal Commands; Air Support
Command, Training and Maintenance Commands. Overseas commands are
Royal Air Force, Germany; Near East Air Force; Air Forces, Gulf; and
Far East Air Force.
Britain’s armed forces consist of regular Service personnel. Entrants to the
non-commissioned ranks of the three Services are given basic training, and
further training is given during the course of their careers. Young service¬
men have the opportunity to read for the General Certificate of Education
‘O’ level (see p. 153). Trade and technical training, though primarily designed
for Service purposes, leads in many cases to nationally recognised qualifica¬
tions; completion of many Service trade or technical courses followed by
experience is recognised by trade unions as a qualification for membership
by men who have left the Services.
Commissions may be granted for short, medium or long terms. Promotion
from the non-commissioned ranks is possible in all three Services. In the
Royal Navy, the largest entry is through cadetships in the Britannia Royal
Naval College, Dartmouth; in the Army through cadetships in the Royal
Military Academy Sandhurst. This is followed by specialist training which
may include degree courses. In the RAF entry is through cadetships in the
112
Joint Service
Staff Training
RESERVE AND
AUXILIARY
FORCES
Royal Navy
Army
Royal Air Force
BRITAIN I971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
RAF College, Cranwell, or civilian universities. There is also a scheme in all
three Services for the award of University Cadetships, which enable young
men to take a degree before commencing their Service training. There are
also schemes for the entry of graduates and other qualified specialists.
Selected officers of all three Services who have had previous staff training or
have been to the Royal Naval Staff College, Greenwich (London), the Army
Staff College at Camberley (Surrey), or the Royal Air Force Staff College
at Bracknell (Berkshire) go to the Joint Services Staff College (to be re¬
named the National Defence College in 1971) at Chesham (Buckingham¬
shire). Here particular attention is paid to the inter-Service aspect of staff
work. A few specially selected and more senior officers from the Services,
the Civil Service, and from the Commonwealth, the United States, and
allied European countries are sent to the Imperial Defence College (to be
re-named the Royal College of Defence Studies) in London. Considerable
training is done through Joint-Service and inter-allied exercises, on which
increasing emphasis is being placed.
In the defence estimates for 1970-71 ^27 million is allocated to Reserve and
Auxiliary Formations.
The Regular Reserve consists of various categories of former full-time officers
and ratings liable to recall in emergency. The Volunteer Reserves comprise
the Royal Naval Reserve (with its associated women’s reserve) and the Royal
Marines Reserve; they carry out regular part-time training and man a number
of operational minesweepers.
The Royal Naval Auxiliary Service, a civilian organisation composed of
men and women volunteers, is responsible in time of war for minewatching
duties around the coast and the waterways, and other duties.
Men who have completed the Colour portion of their service with the Regular
Army are retained on the Regular Army Reserve to complete a total engage¬
ment of seven or 12 years, according to their initial commitment; they are
liable to recall to the Colours. Thereafter they are transferred to the Long
Term Reserve (LTR) where they remain until the age of 45 and are liable to
recall in an emergency. The Army General Reserve consists of certain former
National Service specialists.
The Territorial and Army Volunteer Reserve (T & AVR) consists of
independent and sponsored units. Independent units are raised on a terri¬
torial basis and each is based on one or more training centres. Sponsored
units consist of specialists and have to be recruited on a nation-wide basis.
These units are divided, for administration purposes, into Group A which
have a liability for call-out when warlike operations are in preparation or in
progress; and Group B, which consists of miscellaneous units (for example,
University Officer Training Corps) with various liabilities.
In January 1970 recruiting began for the Ulster Defence Regiment, a
locally recruited, part-time force under the General Officer Commanding,
Northern Ireland, whose role is to support the regular forces in the Command.
The annual cost will be some ^1 million, and numbers will not exceed
6,000 officers and men.
The Regular Reserve consists of former full-time officers and airmen, of
whom a few are detailed for specific tasks in emergency and the remainder
DEFENCE
”3
have a statutory liability for recall. The Royal Auxiliary Air Force, consisting
of three maritime headquarter units which would, in an emergency, reinforce
Strike Command (see p. in), and the Royal Air Force Volunteer Reserve,
which includes the 16 University Air Squadrons, are liable for part-time
training and for recall in an emergency.
HOME DEFENCE The Government decided in 1968 to put civil defence arrangements on a care
and maintenance basis. The physical assets of civil defence organisations are
being preserved so far as is practicable, and training and planning continues
at the minimum level required to maintain knowledge and techniques and to
enable more active preparations to be resumed if this should appear to be
necessary. Total annual public expenditure on civil defence is expected to
remain at between ^7 million and £8 million.
The arrangements being maintained include an emergency system for
decentralised governmental control and communications, and the United
Kingdom Warning and Monitoring Organisation, including the Royal
Observer Corps, which would provide public warning of an attack, of the
location and power of nuclear explosions, and of the distribution and level of
radioactive fall-out; also planning for the police and fire services. Central
training courses are provided at the Civil Defence Training Establishment,
near York.
NATO COMMITMENT
The new strategy of the North Atlantic Alliance, adopted in December 1967,
recognises that while the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO) must
be ready to use nuclear weapons if necessary, the capability of its conven¬
tional forces has to be maximised and their number maintained in western
Europe at a level which would give NATO an alternative to a nuclear response
against anything but a major deliberate attack. They have to be sufficient to
gain time for negotiations to end a conflict and for consultation among the
Allies about the initial use of nuclear weapons should negotiations fail.
Britain makes a major and essential contribution to the forces which NATO
needs. Virtually the whole of the Royal Navy is earmarked for assignment;
the British Army of the Rhine (BAOR) and RAF Germany (a tactical air¬
force) are assigned; and most of the air and ground combat units based in
the United Kingdom are also formally committed to NATO. The British
Army has had more recent and varied fighting experience than any other
European army; the Royal Air Force is well advanced with a major re¬
equipment programme involving some of the most modern combat aircraft
available; while the size and striking power of the Royal Navy is second
only to that of the United States within the North Atlantic Alliance.
DEPLOYMENT
In January 1970 forces (including locally enlisted troops and the Royal Navy
at sea) were distributed in the following proportions:
Britain, 237,500; European continent, 60,200 (nearly all in Germany);
Mediterranean and Near East, 19,600; Middle and Far East, 44,750
(including Gurkhas); and elsewhere, 37,000.
The deployment of forces is summarised below.
II4
Europe
Britain
Federal
Republic
of Germany
Mediterranean
and Near East
BRITAIN I971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Western Fleet operates in European sea areas; frigates, submarines and
coastal minesweepers carry out training, trials and fishery protection, and
ships of all classes spend periods at home for refitting. All major ships have
NATO commitments in the Channel, Eastern Atlantic, and Mediterranean;
a frigate is assigned to the Standing Naval Force Atlantic. Submarines of the
British Polaris force are on continuous deterrent patrol.
The majority of the field force headquarters and units stationed in the
United Kingdom are in the Army Strategic Command. This includes the
land elements of the United Kingdom Mobile Force (of which No. 38 Group,
Royal Air Force, provides the air element), the British contribution to the
land element of Allied Command Europe Mobile Force (Land), and 22 Special
Air Service Regiment, all of which have roles in support of NATO. Other
field force units and training organisations are stationed in the United King¬
dom together with units engaged on logistic tasks.
The combat units of the Royal Air Force in Britain are provided by Strike
Command and Air Support Command. The former provides strike and air
reconnaissance squadrons, interceptor squadrons for the air defence of
Britain, and long-range maritime reconnaissance squadrons. It also provides
forces for maritime air defence and strike as part of the plan for the transfer
to the Royal Air Force from the Royal Navy of the responsibility for fixed
wing operational maritime support. These forces are all committed to NATO.
Air Support Command is responsible for both strategic and tactical transport
forces, and for the force of Phantoms and Harriers in No. 38 Group designed
for the close support of the Army in the field. The Phantoms and short-
range transport aircraft in No. 38 Group provide the RAF part of the UK
Mobile Force which is committed to NATO, while the Harriers provide the
British contribution to NATO’s Allied Command Europe Mobile Force
(Air). There are also units of the Royal Air Force Regiment, responsible for
airfield defence.
Ground forces in the Federal Republic of Germany consist of the British
Army of the Rhine (BAOR) and an independent brigade in Berlin. BAOR
is organised as a corps of three divisions each of two brigades, plus corps
troops including two artillery brigades and an armoured reconnaissance
force. The BAOR brigades are in the process of reorganisation to produce a
better balance between armoured units and mechanised infantry. Royal
Air Force Germany is a tactical air force including tactical strike, tactical
reconnaissance, and air defence aircraft, all assigned to SACEUR. During
1970, further surface-to-air missiles and light anti-aircraft squadrons were
deployed for the defence of RAF Germany’s airfields.
In the Mediterranean Britain’s maritime presence generally includes an
aircraft carrier or a commando ship or an assault ship; two frigates and a
guided missile destroyer which are earmarked for assignment to SACEUR;
and a frigate for the NATO ‘on call’ force.
Royal Air Force units in the area consist of strike, maritime reconnaissance,
photographic reconnaissance, fighter and transport squadrons; surface-to-
air missiles; and RAF Regiment squadrons. These forces are based in Cyprus
and Malta. RAF support for NATO is provided from the forces in Malta,
while support for the Central Treaty Organisation comes from forces in both
locations. Britain also supplies at its own expense over 1,000 men for the
United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus (about 30 per cent of the
total). There are small garrisons in Malta and Gibraltar.
DEFENCE
Persian Gulf
Far East
Caribbean and
South Atlantic
Nuclear
Strategic Force
US
In January 1970 British land forces consisted of infantry supported by
artillery, armoured cars and engineers stationed at Bahrain and Sharjah.
RAF forces were also based at Bahrain and Sharjah and included ground-
attack and fighter reconnaissance, tactical transport and long-range maritime
reconnaissance aircraft. Royal Navy frigates and mine counter-measures
vessels, based at Bahrain, operated in the Gulf.
Britain maintains combat units in Malaysia, Singapore and Brunei, and a
garrison in Hong Kong but no longer declares forces to the contingency plans
of the South-East Asia Treaty Organisation (SEATO). Britain also maintains
joint training facilities with Australia and New Zealand, and British units
will continue to train in the area. The reduction of the Brigade of Gurkhas
has continued towards the level of 6,000 men to be reached by the end of
1971.
Naval forces in the Far East Fleet contain most types of warships and fleet
auxiliaries, including amphibious ships, destroyers, submarines and frigates.
These forces operate in the Indian and Pacific Oceans and undertake patrol
duties in the Mozambique channel. Ships of the Royal Australian and Royal
New Zealand Navies operate with the Far Eastern Fleet. The 3rd Commando
Brigade, Royal Marines, is stationed in Singapore.
The Far East Air Force is made up of units of the RAF and Royal Australian
and Royal New Zealand Air Forces. The Royal Air Force contribution
includes fighters and associated ground environment radars, long-range
maritime reconnaissance aircraft, support helicopters and a medium-range
transport squadron, together with a squadron of the Royal Air Force
Regiment.
Two frigates, equipped with helicopters and carrying a detachment of Royal
Marines, operate in the Caribbean. A small Royal Marine force and a hover¬
craft unit are maintained in the Falkland Islands, and the Navy’s ice-patrol
ship, HMS Endurance, operates there seasonally.
A small Army garrison remains in British Honduras. Some Royal Engineers
are stationed in Anguilla.
COMBAT FORCES
Combat forces are functionally divided into six major groups, as described
below.
Responsibility for the British contribution to the Western strategic deter¬
rent now rests with the Royal Navy Polaris submarine force whose four
nuclear submarines—Resolution, Repulse, Renown and Revenge—are opera¬
tional. Each has indefinite underwater cruising range, and carries 16
Polaris A3 missiles with a range of about 2,500 miles and thermonuclear
warheads.
The Polaris and other submarines are supported by the Clyde sub¬
marine base completed in 1968. Britain also provides facilities for a depot
ship for United States Polaris submarines at Holy Loch on the Firth of
Clyde.
Britain’s nuclear strategic force is assigned to NATO. Within the Alliance
Britain has played an active part in the discussions designed to associate
the non-nuclear members of NATO with the Alliance’s nuclear planning.
Il6 BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Procedures for consultation on the possible use of nuclear weapons have also
been refined.
The cost of nuclear strategic forces for 1970-71 is estimated at £32 million.
European The European theatre ground forces consist of the BAOR and an independent
Theatre Ground brigade in Berlin. Their cost in 1970-71 is estimated at £211 million.
Nine armoured regiments have been equipped with the Chieftain main
battle tank, which incorporates new features in protection and mobility
and mounts the fully stabilised 120 mm. gun. Armoured regiments are also
being equipped with Swingfire anti-tank guided missiles on a version of the
armoured personnel carrier. The field artillery has been re-equipped; its
weapons now include the 105 mm pack-howitzer, the British Abbot self-
propelled 105 mm gun, and the American self-propelled 155 mm and
175 mm guns; the issue of the new Field Artillery Computer Equipment
(FACE) gives improved accuracy and response times, as does the Cymbeline
light-weight mortar-locating radar. Surface-to-surface tactical nuclear
support is provided by the Honest John free-flight missile and the 8 in.
(203 mm) howitzer. Infantry mobility has continued to improve; infantry
battalions have tracked armoured personnel carriers (FV 432), some of
which are converted to carry the 81 mm mortar or the Wombat 122 mm anti¬
tank gun. The Stalwart (high mobility cross-country load-carrying vehicle)
has come into service. Mechanised infantry battalions have been equipped
with a new light anti-tank rocket during 1970. Surveillance and target
acquisition capability has been improved by a new drone (unmanned recon¬
naissance aircraft) and by the issue of ground surveillance radar and additional
night-fighting devices. Air defence is provided by Thunderbird and Rapier
anti-aircraft guided missiles, both systems are fully mobile. The field trunk
communications system, Bruin, has proved valuable and effective, and is
being extended.
The naval general purpose combat elements of the Fleet comprise the
following: amphibious forces; aircraft carriers and squadrons; submarines
(excluding the Polaris force); cruisers, destroyers and frigates; mine counter¬
measure forces; and support and other ships. Any of these forces can be sent
to other theatres if needed in an emergency, either as reinforcements or to
carry out joint operations with the Army and Royal Air Force. Their cost,
including aircraft and overseas bases, in 1970-71 is estimated at £295
million.
Equipment The aircraft carriers HMS Ark Royal, having been refitted to carry Phantom
aircraft, and HMS Eagle were in service during 1970; HMS Hermes is being
phased out from the fixed-wing flying role. The carrier-borne strike and
air-defence aircraft consist of the Buccaneer, Sea Vixen and Phantom. The
Buccaneer Mk 2 is a long-range, low-level strike aircraft, equipped with the
Bullpup air-to-surface missile. The Sea Vixen Mk 2 is an all-weather inter¬
ceptor/ground attack aircraft, and carries Firestreak and Red Top air-to-air
missiles in its air defence role: the Phantom, an advanced interceptor, is
equipped with Sparrow and Sidewinder air-to-air missiles.
Amphibious forces are provided by the commando ships HMS Albion
and HMS Bulwark, with Royal Marine Commandos, helicopters and landing-
craft, and the assault ships HMS Fearless and HMS Intrepid, both of
which have been fitted with a communications satellite terminal, working
through the Skynet system. The command-helicopter cruiser HMS Blake
Royal Navy
General
Purpose
Combat Forces
DEFENCE
Army General
Purpose
Combat Forces
Equiptnent
117
is in service, equipped to carry a squadron of Wessex 3 helicopters; HMS
Tiger's conversion, to equip her to carry Sea King helicopters, is in progress.
The County class series of eight guided missile destroyers is being com¬
pleted; they are equipped with Seaslug and Seacat ship-to-air guided
missiles (both of which have a capability against surface targets), an anti¬
submarine helicopter, and underwater detection equipment, and four 4-5 in.
(124 mm) fully automatic quick-firing guns with appropriate control equip¬
ment. Twenty-four Leander class frigates will have been completed by the
end of 1970, and a further two are under construction; they are equipped
with advanced anti-submarine equipment, including sonar and mortars;
they and the Tribal class carry Wasp anti-submarine helicopters and Seacat
anti-aircraft guided missiles. All ships of frigate size can carry helicopters;
the Wasp and Wessex 3 (with an advanced anti-submarine system) are at
present in service. The Sea King is being deployed during 1970 on the
carriers and major fleet units: the WG 13 (see p. 119) is expected to replace
the Wasp in the mid-seventies. These helicopters have an anti-submarine
role and a capability against surface vessels.
Progress is being maintained on the three classes of surface ships to be
introduced during the seventies: the first of the new frigates (Type 21) and
the first of the new destroyers (Type 42) to carry the Sea Dart surface-to-air
missile (with a surface-to-surface capability) are under construction. The
construction of HMS Bristol, the Type 82 guided missile destroyer, with
Sea Dart and Ikara, an anti-submarine missile, continues according to
schedule. Some of the Leander class frigates are being equipped with Ikara.
A new type of cruiser, to carry helicopters, with a ‘through-deck’ design
giving the option of operating V/STOL aircraft, is being designed; it will
also be armed with Sea Dart.
Four nuclear fleet submarines (hunter-killer) are now in service—
Dreadnought, Valiant, Warspite and Churchill. HMS Conqueror and HMS
Courageous have been launched; three more are under construction. A force
of 24 conventional patrol submarines is also in service.
Maintenance and repair facilities are provided by submarine depot ships,
a heavy repair and maintenance ship, and mine counter-measure support
ships—all manned by naval personnel. Ships of the Royal Fleet Auxiliary
Service provide afloat logistic support such as fuel, food, ammunition, stores
and spare gear. These ships fly the Blue Ensign and are manned by Mechant
Navy officers and seamen. The dockyards at Portsmouth, Devonport, Chat¬
ham and Rosyth provide the Navy with major repair and supply facilities in
Britain.
Army general purpose combat forces consist of the ground forces deployed
outside Europe; the Army Strategic Command; and other front line units in
Britain. Their cost in 1970-71 is estimated at ^143 million.
Army Strategic Command’s (see p. in) primary role is in support of
NATO, but the forces in the command also form part of the general capability
for deployment elsewhere.
Equipment is in general similar to that of the European Theatre Ground
forces. The standard NATO general purpose machine-gun and the 81 mm
mortar have been introduced. Some infantry battalions have the Combat
and Wombat heavy anti-tank guns, while others are equipped with Vigilant
anti-tank guided missiles.
The Army’s force of helicopters is being increased and will be equipped
Royal Air Force
General
Purpose
Combat Forces
Equipment
Air Mobility
Forces
Equipment
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
with the Anglo-French Gazelle (SA 341) and WG 13 helicopters (see p. 119).
Canadian Beaver light aircraft are used for liaison purposes. The Landing
Ship Tank (LST), for support operations, has been superseded by the
faster and more advanced Landing Ship Logistic (LSL). An Army Hover¬
craft Unit has been formed, of four Westland hovercraft modified for military
use.
The Royal Air Force general purpose combat forces comprise all front line
formations and units except those designated Air Mobility Forces (transport
and tanker forces). They fall into five main categories: air defence, ground
attack and fighter reconnaissance; tactical strike and reconnaissance; mari¬
time reconnaissance; headquarters; and general support. Their cost in
I970_7I is estimated at £365 million.
Interceptor squadrons are equipped with the Lightning, which is supersonic
and can carry Firestreak or Red Top air-to-air missiles. Bloodhound and
Tigercat surface-to-air missiles are also available for air defence. The
air defence system is fully co-ordinated, with ground radars. New military
radars and centralised data-handling equipment are being installed in
Britain as part of the integrated plans for air defence and national air traffic
control (the Linesman/Mediator system). The Ballistic Missile Early Warning
Station at Fylingdales would provide warning of a missile attack on Britain
and also detects, tracks and identifies objects in orbit.
The first Phantom FGR 2 and Harrier squadrons have been formed in
Air Support Command; further squadrons are being formed in RAF
Germany during 1970 and 1971. The Harrier with its unique vertical take¬
off and landing capacity will concentrate mainly on quick reaction close
support, while the Phantom will cover the longer range ground attack and
reconnaissance functions. It is planned that a ground attack version of the
Anglo-French Jiagwar (see p. 119) should release further Phantoms from this
role to replace in turn the Lightning interceptors. The Buccaneer MK 2
which is already in service in a maritime strike role, will deploy to RAF
Germany in early 1971 to start replacing the Canberra in the tactical strike
and reconnaissance role. The Shackleton is available for long maritime
reconnaissance and in an anti-submarine role. It is being replaced gradually
by the Nimrod, the only land based jet maritime reconnaissance aircraft in
service in the world, which entered service with the RAF in 1969.
Phantom FG 1 squadrons are now operational in Strike Command, in the
maritime air defence role; the Royal Air Force’s first Buccaneer 2 squadron
was formed in late 1969 in the maritime strike role.
Air mobility forces are made up of the strategic and tactical transport forces,
tanker aircraft to refuel combat aircraft in flight, support helicopters and
communications aircraft. Their cost in 1970-71, together with that of
associated stations and other support, is estimated at £105 million (which
includes £4 million on civil charter).
The strategic transport force is equipped with Comet 4C, Britannia, Belfast
and VC 10 aircraft. Tactical transport support over medium ranges is
provided by the Hercules and the Argosy, while for short-range tasks the
Wessex and Whirlwind helicopters and the Andover aircraft are available.
Also the Anglo-French Puma support helicopter will enter service late in
1970 to supplement the Wessex. A force of Victor tanker aircraft is available
for in-flight refuelling.
DEFENCE
119
Production
Co-operative
Projects
Research and
Development
DEFENCE PROCUREMENT AND SUPPORT
Responsibility for the supply of aircraft, guided weapons, nuclear weapons
and certain radar and other electronic equipment lies with the Ministry of
Technology. The Ministry of Defence is responsible for the procurement of
other weapons, stores and equipment.
A substantial part of the equipment used by the Services is developed and
produced in Britain, some by private industry on a contract basis and some
by the Royal Ordnance Factories, the Royal Dockyards and other establish¬
ments operated by the Ministry of Technology and the Ministry of Defence.
Because it is too costly for Britain or any other European country to
develop all its own defence equipment, a balance, which reconciles economic,
industrial, and political objectives with defence requirements, is maintained
between national development, development in collaboration with allies,
and foreign purchase.
There has been continued progress towards increased European co-operation
in the development and procurement of defence equipment. The most
important collaborative venture at present is the multi-role combat aircraft
(MRCA) in which Britain is co-operating with the Federal Republic of
Germany and Italy. Successful collaboration continues with France on the
Jaguar strike-trainer, the Martel air-to-surface missile, and the Gazelle
(SA 341), Puma (SA 330) and WG 13 helicopters. Britain is collaborating
with the Federal Republic of Germany on a 155 mm towed gun; with
Australia for the Ikara anti-submarine missile; and with Australia, Canada
and the United States for the Mallard trunk communication system.
Regular consultation takes place between Britain and her European allies
to harmonise the tactical doctrines on which joint operational requirements
for weapons systems are based.
The bulk of research work is carried out in the 26 defence research establish¬
ments under the control of the Ministries of Defence and Technology;
these establishments also evaluate the development work undertaken by
private industry for the Government. Consultation and collaboration be¬
tween Government and industry is secured through the National Defence
Industries Council and the Defence Scientific Advisory Council. The
establishments are being organised increasingly on a functional rather than
on a single service basis. Research and development work is in six major
fields—aircraft, guided weapons, military space, electronics, ship con¬
struction and naval weapons, ordnance and military vehicles.
Since 1967 efforts have been made to reduce the resources directed to
defence research and development, to make increased resources available for
civil research and development (see p. 190). The 1970 estimate for defence re¬
search is J222 million, a reduction at constant prices of about £25 million on
the 1969-70 estimate. Analysis of the implications of policy is made by the
Defence Operational Analysis Establishment. The Chief Adviser (Projects
and Research) (see p. no) is responsible for the oversight of the whole
equipment research and development programme, and exercises control
through the Defence Research Committee, the Operational Requirements
Committee, and the Weapons Development Committee, which evaluate the
options on the various weapons systems required by current strategy and
defence policy.
E
120
General
Logistic and
Administrative
Support
TABLE 7
Active Strength
of the Services
1970-71
TABLE 8
Cost of the
Defence
Programme
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Over 30 major projects are at present in hand, including the MRCA, the
Sea Dart and Sea Wolf ship-to-air guided weapons, Clansman, a net radio
system for field communications, the adaptation of hovercraft for naval
purposes, and Scorpion and Fox, two air-portable armoured combat recon¬
naissance vehicles. The defence research establishments also undertake
civil work, and publicise the many industrial applications of their research.
In addition to research and development, there is support of a general nature
supplied in Britain to the Services as a whole. The major items include:
general training; the overhead costs of naval dockyards, ordnance factories
and repair, maintenance and storage units; Ministry of Defence and local
administrative services in Britain; and military pensions. Work continues to
rationalise and reorganise these support services. The total estimated cost for
1970-71 is £838 million.
USE OF MANPOWER AND RESOURCES
Long-term reductions in defence manpower of some 75,000 uniformed
personnel and 80,000 civilians were originally envisaged in July 1967, to be
completed by the mid-1970s. Tables 7 and 8 below, and diagrams on p. 121
show the actual strengths of the three Services for 1st April 1970 and those
estimated for 1st April 1971, and the allocation of expenditure allowed for
in the Defence Estimates for 1970-71 between government departments
compared with 1969-70.
Thousands
Male:
Officers
Servicemen . .
Female:
Officers
Servicewomen
Totals
1 April 1970
Royal
Navy
11-0
72-3
04
2-9
86-6
Army
17-9
150-7
0-8
4-3
173-7
RAF
19-2
87-4
0-8
4-8
112-2
Total
48-1
310-4
2-0
12-0
372-5
1 April 1971 (estimate)
Royal
Navy
10-8
69-5
0-4
2-9
83-6
Army
17-4
148-7
0-8
4-1
171-0
RAF
19-1
84-8
0-8
5-0
109-7
Total
47-3
303-0
2-0
12-0
364-3
Vote: In addition, forces enlisted outside Britain totalled 20,234 and volunteer reserve
ind auxiliary forces 50,046 at 1st January 1970.
£ million
/linistry of Defence
Ministry of Technology
/linistry of Public Building and Works ..
itomic Energy Authority ..
1969-70
1,871-84
209-46
179-80
4-75
2,265-85
1970-71
(estimated)
1,912-12
182-52
180-84
4-50
2,279-98
DEFENCE
121
FUNCTIONAL ANALYSIS OF DEFENCE PERSONNEL 1970-71
I I MILITARY I   ICIVIUAN
Nuclear Strategic Forces
European Theatre Ground Forces
General Purpose
Combat Forces
Air Mobility jj|j
Reserve and Auxiliary Formations
Research and Development
Training
Production, Repa
Associated Facilities in the
r and | .
■ U K lilt
Other Support Functions
Average
Strengths
3,200
3,300
57.700
30.100
41,300
13.600
71,000
19,400
50.800
18,200
18,200
4,100
2,000
3,000
1,600
28.800
79.700
24.600
10.100
144,100
50,100
59,200
Total Military 385,700 (UK Forces 367,700, Non-UK Forces18,000)
Total Civilian 348,400 (Industrial205,000,Non-Industrial 143,400)
FUNCTIONAL ANALYSIS OF DEFENCE EXPENDITURE 1970-71
+
General Purpose
Combat Forces
Nuclear Strategic Forces*
European Theatre Ground Forces1
— Navy
Army
—‘Air Force
Air Mobility
Reserve and Auxiliary Formations
Research and Development
Training
Production, Repair and
Associated Facilities in the U K
War and Contingency Stocks
Other Support Functions
Miscellaneous Expenditure
and Receipts
Special Materials
£ million
32
211
295
143
365
105
27
222
222
196
25
420
-7
24
•Excludes Special Materials and Research and Development
tlncludes cost of units re-deployed from Germany to the UK,
which remain under command of C-in-C, BAOR
Total 2,280
5 SOCIAL WELFARE
STATE AND VOLUNTARY SERVICES
In Britain the State is responsible, through either central or local govern¬
ment, for a range of services covering family allowances, national insurance,
help for war victims, financial assistance when required, health and welfare
services for mothers and young children, the sick, mentally disordered,
elderly and handicapped and for families in difficulties of various kinds, and
the care of children lacking a normal home life (all described in this chapter);
and for education (see Chapter 6) and housing (see Chapter 7). Public
authorities in Britain are spending nearly £9,360 million a year on this range
of services, that is, over £168 a year per head of the population.
Voluntary organisations, especially the Churches, were the pioneers of
nearly all the social sendees. They provided schools, hospitals, clinics,
dispensaries, and social and recreational clubs before these were provided by
the State. They made themselves responsible for the welfare of the very young
and the very old, the homeless and the handicapped. Gradually the State
accepted the primary responsibility for the major services, supplementing the
voluntary services and developing a comprehensive structure that ensured a
minimum standard of living and well-being for all citizens.
State and voluntary social services are now complementary and co-opera¬
tive. The State may work through voluntary agencies specially adapted to
serve particular needs and ensures that necessary standards are maintained.
The officers of central and local government, in carrying out their duties,
co-operate with the workers of many voluntary social service societies, while
the residential provision made by the State and by local authorities for the care
of children, the chronic sick and the aged is supplemented by voluntary homes
of various types. Most of the sick and elderly receive State pensions or benefits.
The Charity Commission, a government department, gives free advice to
trustees of charities, making schemes to modify their purposes or facilitate
their administration when necessary; it maintains central and local registers
of charities which are open to public inspection; and it works to promote
co-operation between charities and State sendees.
Voluntary
Organisations
The number of voluntary societies and institutions in Britain runs into
thousands; they range from national organisations to small individual local
groups. Most organisations, however, are members of larger associations or
are represented on local or national co-ordinating councils or committees.
Some are chiefly concerned with giving personal service, others in the forma¬
tion of public opinion and exchange of information. A number are concerned
with giving help to immigrants. In recent years there has been an increase in
organised service by young people.
Organisations concerned with personal and family problems include the
voluntary family casework agencies like the Family Welfare Association,
Family Service Units, and the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty
to Children; marriage guidance centres affiliated to the National Marriage
Guidance Council; the National Council for the Unmarried Mother and her
Child and the Samaritans, who help people near to committing suicide.
Voluntary service to the sick and disabled in general is given among others
SOCIAL WET.FARE
T23
Social Workers
Urban
Programme
by the British Red Cross Society, the St. John Ambulance Association and
Brigade, the Women’s Royal Voluntary Service and the Leagues of Hospital
Friends, but an increasing number of societies exist to help people with
particular disabilities and difficulties, such as the Royal National Institute
for the Blind, the Royal National Institute for the Deaf, the National Associa¬
tion for Mental Health, the National Society for Mentally Handicapped
Children, the Spastics Society, the constituent members of the Central
Council for the Disabled, Alcoholics Anonymous, Narcotics Anonymous
and their Scottish equivalents.
Bodies working on a national scale whose work is specifically religious in
inspiration include the Salvation Army, the Church Army, Toe H, the
Committee on Social Service of the Church of Scotland, the Church of
England Children’s Society, the Church of England Council for Social Work,
the Young Men’s Christian Association, the Young Women’s Christian
Association, the Society of Friends, the Crusade of Rescue, the Society of
St. Vincent de Paul, the Catholic Marriage Advisory Council and the Jewish
Welfare Board.
A wide range of voluntary personal service is given by the Women’s Royal
Voluntary Service, which gives help in every kind of practical difficulty, brings
‘meals on wheels’ to housebound invalids and old people, provides flatlets
and residential clubs for the elderly, helps with family problems and assists in
hospitals and clinics, as well as doing relief work in emergencies.
A central link between voluntary organisations and official bodies concerned
with social welfare is provided in England and Wales by the National Council
of Social Service, which brings together most of the principal voluntary
agencies for consultation and joint action, either as a whole or in groups of
those concerned with particular aspects, such as jmuth work or old people’s
welfare. There are also the Scottish Council of Social Service and the Northern
Ireland Council of Social Service, which perform similar functions. The
Citizens’ Advice Bureaux, of which there are now some 500 in Britain,
are steadily increasing in number. The primary role of the bureaux is to give
explanation and advice to the citizen who is in doubt about his rights or who
does not know about the State or voluntary services which could help him.
While the voluntary worker giving full-time or part-time service has done
pioneer work in many of Britain’s social services and continues to play an
essential part, social services of all kinds increasingly depend for their opera¬
tion chiefly on professional social workers, that is, full-time salaried workers
trained in the principles and methods of social work. Most professional social
workers are employed by local authorities (for child care, welfare, mental
welfare and probation work), by hospitals (for medical and psychiatric work),
or by voluntary organisations. Training for many forms of social work con¬
sists of a basic university degree, diploma or certificate course in social
science followed by a university course in applied social studies or specialised
training for a particular service. The Council for Training in Social Work also
promotes the training, in the first instance, of workers in the local authority
health and welfare services and similar services run by voluntary bodies.
Full-time courses lasting two years, which may be taken at colleges of further
education, lead to the Council’s Certificate in Social Work. Advice on social
work training is given by the Social Work Advisory Service.
A four-year urban programme providing for Government-aided local
authority expenditure of some ^20-^25 million was launched at the end of
124
Reciprocity
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
1968 to assist areas of special social need, in particular to relieve problems
resulting from overcrowding, inadequate housing and schools, and other
forms of deprivation. Projects being undertaken include help for play-groups
and the provision and improvement of nursery schools and classes, day
nurseries and playgrounds, language classes for immigrants, in-service train¬
ing courses for teachers, children’s homes and family advice centres.
An experiment in community development has also been started by
the Government. This involves bringing together those services, both
statutory and voluntary, which are concerned with relieving various forms
of social handicap and encouraging the resources of self-help within the
community.
SOCIAL SECURITY
National insurance, industrial injuries insurance, family allowances and
supplementary benefits together with (in a special category) war pensions
constitute a comprehensive system of social security in the United Kingdom.
The Department of Health and Social Security administers these services
in Great Britain; within the Department the Supplementary Benefits Com¬
mission is responsible for the system of supplementary benefits. In Northern
Ireland the first four of these schemes are administered by the Ministry of
Health and Social Services which contains the Supplementary Benefits
Commission for Northern Ireland. Pensions and welfare services for war
pensioners and their dependants are the responsibility of the Department of
Health and Social Security throughout the United Kingdom. Appeals
relating to claims for insurance benefits, family allowances, war pensions, or
for supplementary benefit, are decided by independent authorities.
Although the development of public provision for social security in Britain
can be traced back for several centuries (the Poor Relief Act of 1601 may
be regarded as specially important in England and Wales), the modern system
of comprehensive provision is a creation of the twentieth century. Non¬
contributory old age pensions were introduced in 1908, and the first con¬
tributory pensions for old people, widows and orphans in 1926. A contributory
National Health Insurance Scheme was begun in 1912, and in the same year
a scheme of unemployment insurance was introduced which in 1920 was
extended to cover the great majority of employees. By the beginning of the
second world war social security provision in Britain was among the best in
the world, but lacked co-ordination because of its piecemeal development,
and not everyone came within its scope. In the immediate post-war years a
series of Acts introduced the present comprehensive system, which became
fully operative on 5th July 1948. Statutory provision for the war disabled goes
back to the end of the sixteenth century, but the main lines of the present war
pension provisions were laid down during the first world war.
Family allowances and national insurance and industrial injuries benefits
or allowances, other than maternity, unemployment, sickness, injury or dis¬
ablement benefit, are included in the taxable income on which income tax
is assessed. On the other hand, various income tax reliefs and exemptions
are allowed on account of age or liability for the support of dependants. War
disablement pensions are not taxable.
The national insurance, industrial injuries and family allowances schemes of
Great Britain and those of Northern Ireland and the Isle of Man operate as a
single system. Reciprocal agreements on industrial injuries, family allowances
FAMILY
ALLOWANCES
NATIONAL
INSURANCE
Contributors
SOCIAL WELFARE I25
and most national insurance benefits are in operation with Belgium, Denmark,
Finland, the Federal Republic of Germany, Jersey and Guernsey, Norway,
Sweden, Switzerland and Yugoslavia. Agreements with Cyprus, France, the
Republic of Ireland, Israel, Italy, Luxembourg, Malta, the Netherlands and
Turkey cover industrial injuries and most national insurance benefits. With
Australia and New Zealand there are agreements on family allowances and
most national insurance benefits. There are limited agreements with Bermuda,
Canada and the United States. Northern Ireland and the Isle of Man are
also party to most of these agreements with other countries.
Family allowances are provided in Great Britain under the Family Allowances
Act 1965 (which consolidated the Acts of I945-^4)> an(^ Northern Ireland
under its own legislation. Nearly 7 million allowances are being paid in Great
Britain to more than 4 million families, and in Northern Ireland to 137,000
families. The allowances are payable to families with two or more children
below the age limits which are 15 years for children who leave school at that
age, 16 years for certain incapacitated children, and 19 for children who
remain at school or are apprentices.
The rates of the allowances are £o-go a week for families with two children
below the age limits and a further £1 a week for each additional child.
Family allowances are paid from the Exchequer and their object is to benefit
the family as a whole; they belong to the mother, but may be paid either
to the mother or to the father. There is no insurance qualification for title to
the allowances, but there are certain residence conditions.
The National Insurance Acts apply, in general, to everyone over minimum
school-leaving age living in Great Britain. There are similar schemes in
Northern Ireland and the Isle of Man. (The National Insurance Act 1965
consolidated the provisions of the National Insurance Acts 1946-64.)
The national insurance scheme provides benefits in specified contingencies
where contribution conditions have been fulfilled. T. he benefits are paid for
partly by insured persons’ contributions, partly by contributions of employers
in respect of their employees, and partly by a contribution made by the
Exchequer out of general taxation.
The original system was based on flat-rate contributions and benefits.
Contributions varied only with the sex and insurance class of the insured
person and benefits were at standard rates. (In both cases lower rates apply to
those under 18.) Two modifications were subsequently introduced to provide
additional earnings-related contributions and benefits. For retirement,
graduated contributions and pensions were introduced in 1961. For the first
six months of sickness, unemployment or widowhood the National Insurance
Act 1966 introduced a scheme for earnings-related supplements to the flat-
rate benefit and contributions. In November 1969 the graduated contribution
was increased to help pay for improvements in the rates of the flat-rate
benefits. These higher contributions also count towards a graduated pension.
In July 1970 legislation was passed to introduce (from November 1970)
pensions for elderly people who were over pension age when the scheme
started, pensions (from April 1971) for widows aged between 40 and 50, and
an attendance allowance (from April 1972) for severely disabled people need¬
ing constant supervision.
Contributors under the national insurance scheme are divided into three
classes:
126
Contributions
BRITAIN I971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Class 1. Employed people. Most of those who work for an employer under a
contract of service or are paid apprentices—over 23 million.
Class 2. Self-employed people. Those in business on their own account and
others who are working for gain but do not work under the control of an
employer—about i| million.
Class 3. Non-employed people. All those insured who are not in class 1 or
class 2—about a quarter of a million.
There is a general liability to pay flat-rate contributions according to this
classification but certain people are excepted. These include full-time students,
prisoners and most people in receipt of national insurance benefits. Self-
employed and non-employed persons whose income is below ^3123 year can
apply for exception. Married women can choose to pay contributions and
receive benefit in their own right or not to pay fiat-rate contributions (if they
are working they must pay graduated contributions) and rely upon their
husband’s insurance for maternity grant, retirement pension (at a lower rate),
widow’s benefit and death grant. If a married woman works for an employer
he must pay his full share of the flat-rate contributions even if she has chosen
not to pay fiat-rate contributions.
Flat-rate contributions are credited to students up to the age of 18, and
to most people in receipt of national insurance benefits. People who are
excepted from liability to pay but are not entitled to credits may pay con¬
tributions at the non-employed rate if they wish to safeguard entitlement to
retirement pension and widowT’s benefit.
An employed person ceases to be liable for national insurance contributions
at the age of 70 for men, 65 for women, or when he retires from regular
employment after reaching minimum pension age (65 for men, 60 for women),
whichever is the earlier. If he does any work as an employed person there¬
after, he must pay an industrial injuries contribution; the employer still has
to pay his full share of the flat-rate contribution.
Flat-rate contributions are normally paid by means of national insurance
stamps bought from a post office and fixed, for each contributor, to a single
contribution card. All three classes pay flat-rate contributions (see Table 9).
The stamps for class 1 contributors also include the employer’s redundancy
contribution (to help to provide for payments in certain circumstances to
employees whose work is terminated, see p. 419) and the selective employ¬
ment tax paid by employers (see p. 365); and for all contributors the National
Health Service contribution (which for convenience is paid with the national
insurance contribution although the two services are separately administered).
It is the employer’s responsibility in the first place to see that the class 1
contributions are paid, but he can deduct the employees’ share from their
wages. The self-employed and non-employed must stamp their own cards.
Flat-rate contributions are usually credited for weeks of unemployment,
sickness or injury, or if widow’s benefit is being paid.
In general graduated contributions are payable by employed people
(including married women but not retirement pensioners) aged between 18
and 70 (65 for women) who earn more than £9 a week. The range of graduated
contributions is given in Table 9. Employees whose job provides them with
an occupational pension of at least ^3'48 a year for each year of service
(^2-90 for women) may be ‘contracted out’ of the graduated pension scheme.
Contracted out employees pay graduated contributions at the rate of half
per cent of that part of their weekly pay lying between £9 and £18 and 31 per
SOCIAL WELFARE
TABLE 9
Weekly National
Insurance,
National Health
Service and
Employers’
Redundancy
Contributions
and Selective
Employment Tax'1
Benefits
127
cent on earnings between ^18 and £30; their employers pay the same
amount. Employees who are not contracted out pay graduated contributions
at the rate of 4I per cent of the part of their weekly earnings between £9
and j£i8 and 3^ per cent of the part between ^18 and £30. Their employers
pay the same amount.
Graduated contributions provide a graduated addition to retirement
pension and meet the cost of earnings-related supplements to sickness and
unemployment benefit and to widow’s allowance. The contributions are col¬
lected through the same machinery as is used to collect pay-as-you-earn
(deduction at source) income tax.
National
Insur¬
ance
flat
rate6
Health
Service
Employ¬
ers’
redun¬
dancy
contribu¬
tion
Selec¬
tive
employ¬
ment
tax
Total
flat
rate
Graduated
contribution
(additional)
from to
CLASS 1
Employed men (18-
70) not contracted
out of the
graduated pension
part of the scheme
and not retired:
Paid by employee
Paid by employer
Total ..
Employed men (18--
70) contracted out
and not retired:
Paid by employee
Paid by employer
Total ..
CLASS 2
Self-employed
persons ..
CLASS 3
Non-employed
persons..
0-722
0-804
0-842
0-924
1-073
0-823
0-158
0-083
0-063
2-40
0-158
0-083
0-167
0-167
0-063
2-40
0-88
3-35
4-23
1-00
3-47
4-47
1-24
0-99
0-01
0-01
0-82
0-82
0-01
0-01
0-43
0-43
0 Rates given to three decimal places are expressed in this way for accounting purposes
only. Lower rates of contribution are payable for boys and girls and for certain married
women.
6 Including, for classi, the industrial injuries insurance contribution of £0 04 from
employee and £0 05 from employer.
The scheme provides payments to contributors in the event of unemploy¬
ment (if normally working for an employer), sickness (if normally working
for an employer or self-employed), and confinement and the weeks immedi¬
ately before and after (for women normally working for an employer or self-
employed and paying national insurance contributions at the full rate).
Retirement pensions are paid to people who have reached 65 (60 for women)
if they have retired from regular work and from the age of 70 (65 for women)
even if they continue to work; widows receive benefit in the first 26 weeks
E*
128
Amounts
BRITAIN I971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
after bereavement and subsequently while they have young children or if they
have reached the age of 50 (40 from April 1971) when widowed or when their
children have grown up; and there are two kinds of allowance in respect of
orphan children where a widow’s pension is not payable. The scheme also
provides lump-sum cash grants for two expensive contingencies—the birth
of a child and a death.
For most of the benefits there are two contribution conditions. First, before
benefit can be paid at all, a minimum number of contributions must actually
have been paid since entry into insurance; secondly, the full rate of benefit
cannot be paid unless a specified number of contributions have been paid or
credited over a specified period. There are special rules to help a widow who
does not become entitled to a widow’s pension at widowhood or when her
children have grown up, to qualify for sickness or unemployment benefit in
the period before she can have established or re-established herself in insur¬
ance through her own contributions; there are also provisions to help a
divorced woman who was not paying contributions during her marriage.
The basic amount of the majority of flat-rate benefits is £5 a week which
may be reduced if insufficient contributions have been paid, but is not
affected by other unearned income or the previous level of earnings. Earnings
received while the benefit is in payment, however, may cause its reduction or
withdrawal: unemployment benefit cannot be paid to a person earning more
than a specified amount from a subsidiary occupation; retirement pensioners
under the age of 70 (65 for women) have their pensions reduced in step with
earnings over certain specified amounts; sickness benefit, though not affected
by continued payment of wages during illness, is not normally payable to a
person doing any actual work. Exceptions to the basic flat rate are the higher
rate of £7 a week payable to widows during the first 26 weeks after bereave¬
ment and the increased retirement pension earned by someone who has
continued at work and paid contributions beyond minimum pension age;
and the lower rate of ^3-50 a week unemployment or sickness benefit payable
to married women who pay contributions and the rates for widows below 50
which reduce on a scale to ^1-5 for a woman aged 40 at the date of entitle¬
ment. The standard rate of retirement pension for a woman on her husband’s
insurance is ^3’10 a week.
Standard increases of flat-rate benefit are payable for dependants at the
rate of ^3-10 for an adult (generally a wife), £i*55 for the first or only child
under the family allowances age limits; £0-65 for the second child and ^0-55
for each other child over and above any family allowances payable (see
p. 125). The sum payable to a widow for her children is j£2’45 for each child
inclusive of family allowances.
A guardian’s allowance of 5^2-45 a week is payable to a person who has in
his or her family a child who has lost both parents, one of whom was insured
under the National Insurance Acts. The allowance can sometimes be paid
on the death of one parent. For certain fatherless children there is a child’s
special allowance also of £2’45 a week inclusive of family allowances; this is
payable to a woman whose marriage has been dissolved or annulled and who
has not remarried, if her former husband dies and she has a child to whose
support he was contributing before he died.
The graduated addition to retirement pension is at the rate of £o'Oz\ a
week for each £7.50 of all graduated contributions paid by a man and for
each £9 of such graduated contributions paid by a woman (with, in each case,
the matching amount of graduated contribution coming from the employer).
The earnings-related supplements to flat-rate unemployment and sickness
SOCIAL WELFARE
129
Duration
NATIONAL
INSURANCE
(INDUSTRIAL
INJURIES)
Benefits
Injury Benefit
benefits are one-third of that part of a person’s average weekly earnings
between £9 and £30, but the supplements cannot raise the total benefit,
including increases for dependants, beyond 85 per cent of earnings. The
supplement is also paid to widow beneficiaries who have the appropriate
record of earnings, if they become unemployed or sick.
An earnings-related supplement is paid on top of the widow’s allowance to
widows whose husbands were under 70 and had not retired from regular
employment; this supplement is one-third of that part of the husband’s
average weekly earnings between £9 and £30.
The rates of grants are varied: £25 maternity grant is payable for a con¬
finement and a further £25 for each additional child born at the same con¬
finement living 12 hours after birth; and £30 death grant on the death of an
adult (less for a child, or for an adult who was within 10 years of minimum
pension age when the scheme started).
In general, national insurance payments are paid as long as the situation
requiring them lasts. However, sickness benefit cannot be paid for more than
a year if fewer than 156 contributions have been paid (possible in three years
for a contributor continuously at work) and unemployment benefit is payable
for a maximum of one year. The supplement to unemployment and sickness
benefit is paid for a maximum of six months starting from the thirteenth day
of unemployment or incapacity for work. Maternity allowance begins 11 weeks
before the expected week of confinement and ends after the sixth week
following the expected week or the actual confinement if this is later.
Similarly, a widowed mother’s allowance at the full rate ceases when her
children are no longer dependent on her, though a mother can continue to
receive £5 a week for herself while she has living with her a son or daughter
under 19. The widow’s pension payable to the childless widow, provided she
is over 50 (40 from April 1971) and had been married at least three years
when her husband died (this ‘three year rule’ is to be discontinued from
April 1971), or the similar pension normally paid to the widowed mother
who has reached 50 (40 from April 1971) when her v/idowed mother’s allow¬
ance ends, continues until she has reached minimum pension age and retired,
or at most till the age of 65. If she has satisfied the conditions she then
becomes entitled to a retirement pension.
The industrial injuries insurance scheme, which, in July 1948, replaced the
workmen’s compensation scheme (first introduced by the Workmen’s
Compensation Act of 1897), provides benefits for personal injuries caused by
accidents arising out of, and in the course of, employment, and for prescribed
diseases due to the nature of employment. It covers practically everyone in
class 1 of the national insurance scheme and certain others. Like the national
insurance scheme, the industrial injuries scheme is financed partly from
contributions (see Table 9) and partly from taxation. The legal basis of the
scheme is the National Insurance (Industrial Injuries) Act 1965 which
consolidated the 1946 Act and subsequent legislation. Similar cover against
industrial injuries and diseases is provided by Northern Ireland’s legislation.
Injury benefit for an adult is £7*75 a week plus ^3‘io for an adult dependant,
£1-55 for the first or only child under the family allowances age limits, ^0-65
for the second child and ^0-55 for each other child in addition to any family
allowance payable. It is paid when the insured person is incapable of work as
a result of an industrial accident or prescribed disease, and payment can
130
Disablement
Benefit
Death Benefit
SUPPLEMENTARY
BENEFITS
BRITAIN I971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
continue for a maximum of 26 weeks beginning on the date of the accident or
development of the disease. A person entitled to sickness benefit who draws
injury benefit instead, also receives any earnings-related supplement (see
p. 127) to which he is entitled.
Disablement benefit may be paid (but not at the same time as injury benefit)
when, as the result of industrial accident or prescribed disease, there is a loss
of physical or mental faculty. The amount depends on the extent of the
disablement as assessed by a medical board; it varies from X^‘4° f°r 100 Per
cent disablement to ^1*70 a week for 20 per cent disablement, but for
disablement of less than 20 per cent a gratuity of up to £55° is normally paid.
In certain circumstances disablement benefit may be supplemented as
follows: unemployability supplement, at the weekly rate of ^5; constant
attendance allowance of up to weekly normally, or a special rate of
j£6-6o a week in exceptionally severe cases; an allowance of £3 a week
for a person entitled to constant attendance allowance at more than the
normal maximum rate whose need for an allowance at such a rate is likely
to be permanent; a special hardship allowance of up to £3-35 for a person
who is unfit to return to his regular job or work of an equivalent standard;
and hospital treatment allowances which raise the benefit to that for a 100
per cent assessment during hospital treatment for the industrial disability.
Increases of benefit for dependants are payable with unemployability sup¬
plement and hospital treatment allowance.
If the accident or disease results in the insured person’s death, death benefit
may be paid to the dependants.
For a widow a pension of ^7 a week is payable for the first 26 weeks of
widowhood. In addition she receives any earnings-related supplement (see
p. 129) that would have been paid had she claimed widow’s allowance under
the main national insurance scheme. Thereafter, the widow can receive a
pension of £5-55 a week if she was aged 50 at the date of her husband’s death,
or has dependent children or other special needs; otherwise she receives
£1-50 a week. If she had been living apart from her husband, the pension is
limited to the weekly rate of maintenance he was paying, if less than the rate
otherwise appropriate.
In addition, allowances are paid for children under the family allowances
age limits. For widows, these allowances together with any family allowance
payable amount to ^2*45 a week for each child. For other beneficiaries, the
rate is ^1*55 each.
Certain other dependants, such as parents and other relatives, may be
entitled to pensions (of up to £1 a week), allowances or gratuities.
The Ministry of Social Security Act 1966 provided for a scheme of supple¬
mentary benefits to replace the system which has been administered by the
former National Assistance Board since 1948. The Act established within the
then Ministry of Social Security a Supplementary Benefits Commission re¬
sponsible for guiding the scheme and for determining awards of benefit.
Parallel legislation in Northern Ireland made similar provision.
Every person in Great Britain aged 16 or over who is not in full-time work,
attending school or involved in a trade dispute and whose resources are
insufficient to meet his requirements is entitled to a supplementary benefit.
The benefit takes the form of a supplementary pension for those over the
statutory retirement age, and of a supplementary allowance for others. The
benefit is the amount by which a person’s requirements exceed his available
WAR PENSIONS
AND RELATED
SERVICES
SOCIAL WELFARE 131
resources, both being defined by rules laid down by the Act. The calculation
of requirements is based on different amounts for single people and family
groups (for blind people there are special higher amounts) with, in each case,
an addition for rent. For the old and most other long-term cases a special
addition is made. Available resources include certain income and capital; the
main national insurance and industrial injury benefits, family allowances and
maintenance payments from a husband or the father of the claimant’s children
are taken into account in full but some part of all other resources is dis¬
regarded. There is a right of appeal against the decision of the Commission.
The payment of a supplementary allowance in the case of an able-bodied
person of working age may be conditional on registering at an employment
exchange of the Department of Employment and Productivity and in the case
of fit people under the age of 45 may be limited to four weeks in areas where
there is plenty of work available. The allowance is then paid at the exchange;
otherwise it is paid weekly through a post office.
The Supplementary Benefits Commission also has a duty to influence
people without a settled way of living to lead a more normal life. The Com¬
mission provides temporary accommodation for them in 18 reception centres,
four of which are administered by local authorities on behalf of the Com¬
mission. For men who have been unemployed for long periods and who are
receiving supplementary allowances or are using reception centres, it runs 13
re-establishment centres, four of which have residential accommodation where
they are given help to fit them again for work.
Pensions and allowances for people disabled or bereaved through war or
service in the Forces since the second world war are paid under Royal
Warrants and other instruments administered by the Department of Health
and Social Security.
The current basic pension for 100 per cent disablement for a private soldier
is ^8-40 a week, but the amount varies according to rank and the degree of
disablement. The latter is assessed by comparing the condition of the person
disabled by service with that of a normal healthy person of the same age and
sex. Allowances for a wife and children are paid in addition to the basic
pension. There is a wide range of supplementary allowances, the main ones
being for unemployability (^5-45 a week), constant attendance (up to £3-30
and, exceptionally, £6-6o a week), comforts (£0-63 or /i-25 a week), and
lowered standard of occupation (up to £3 *3 5 a week). An additional allowance
of £2 a week is payable to war pensioners who are receiving constant atten¬
dance allowance at a rate above the normal maximum. An age allowance
(between ^0-38 and £1 a. week) is payable to disablement pensioners who are
aged 65 or over and whose assessment is 40 per cent or more.
Both the basic disablement pension and the supplementary allowances are
free of income tax, and children’s allowances are paid in addition to any
allowances payable under the Family Allowances Acts.
Pensions are also paid to war widows and war orphans. The standard rate
of pension for widows of private soldiers is £6-50 a week, with additional
allowances for their children (a maximum of £2*65), and, in certain cases,
an allowance for rent (up to £2-50 a week). There is an additional allowance
of £075 a week for widows aged 70 or over. Parents or other relatives who
were dependent on a person whose death resulted from service in the Forces
may receive pensions if they are in financial need.
The Department of Health and Social Security maintains a welfare service
for war pensioners and war orphans which is available to help any who
132
PUBLIC HEALTH
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
require advice and assistance. War pensioners have priority for treatment of
their war disablements in National Health Service hospitals subject only to
needs of emergency and other urgent cases.
Many voluntary associations and ex-Service organisations give financial aid
and personal service to disabled ex-Service men and women and their families.
The Department’s welfare officers work in close co-operation with these
voluntary bodies and with the specialist government welfare agencies.
HEALTH
The concern of the State with the nation’s health is chiefly a development of
the years since the passing of the Public Health Act of 1848. The second half
of the nineteenth century was notable for the growth of the environmental
or public health services, such as provision of pure water, sewerage, disposal
of refuse and cleaning of streets, and the first half of the twentieth century
for the development of publicly provided personal health services, as distinct
from environmental services, culminating in the introduction in 1948 of a
comprehensive National Health Service available to every resident. Scientific
discoveries of importance to medicine and health, including the development
of new drugs, and the improved services of the last 60 years, particularly in
maternity and child welfare, school health services and school meals, are
reflected in declining mortality rates (see p. 9) and improved physique. The
infant mortality rate has more than halved since the National Health Service
was inaugurated; this and the maternal death rate are among the lowest in the
world. The health of children has steadily improved and emphasis is now
placed on prevention or early detection of disease or disability. Deaths from
such diseases as tuberculosis, poliomyelitis and diphtheria have fallen so
markedly that they are no longer major health problems. Diseases now in the
forefront of research programmes include cancer and diseases of the central
nervous system, such as muscular dystrophy. Efforts are also being made to
combat some of the most prevalent diseases, which include, besides the
common cold and influenza, bronchitis, rheumatism and arthritis, and heart
diseases.
The Public Health Acts of 1936 and 1961 and the Health Services and
Public Health Act 1968 constitute the present basic public health code in
England and Wales. Local authorities (under the general direction of the
Department of Health and Social Security or the Welsh Office and the
Ministry of Housing and Local Government) have extensive powers for
making and administering by-laws on matters of public health. The local
authorities chiefly concerned are the councils of county and non-county
boroughs, London boroughs and the City of London, urban and rural district
councils and, to a limited extent, parish councils.
Public health services in Scotland and in Northern Ireland have developed
on much the same lines as in England and Wales, although they are based on
separate Acts and there is a different allocation of services between the various
types of local authority (working under the direction of the Scottish Home and
Health Department and the Northern Ireland Ministry of Health and Social
Services). The Public Health (Scotland) Acts 1897-1945 and the Burgh
Police (Scotland) Act 1892 as amended by later statutes constitute the basic
legislation for Scotland. The local authorities concerned are the councils
of counties and burghs. In Northern Ireland the councils of county and
Control of
Infectious
Diseases
Pure Food
Other Public
Health Duties
THE NATIONAL
HEALTH SERVICE
SOCIAL WELFARE 133
non-county boroughs and urban and rural districts are mainly responsible
for administering the Public Health Acts (Northern Ireland) 1878-1966.
The Medical Officers of Health of local authorities are responsible for
investigating outbreaks of infectious diseases and for disinfection and other
preventive measures.
Port health authorities supervise health control at seaports and airports, the
primary object of which is to prevent the introduction of infectious disease
into the country. This health control is undertaken by health authorities using
the services of medical officers, public health inspectors, rodent inspectors
and others.
The purity, hygiene and description of food are controlled by the Food and
Drugs Act 1955 in England and Wales, by the Food and Drugs (Scotland) Act
1956 in Scotland and by the Food and Drugs Act (Northern Ireland) 1958
in Northern Ireland.
In England and Wales the question of the composition, adulteration and
description of food are the concern of food and drugs authorities (county,
county borough, London borough and City of London councils and, generally,
the larger borough and urban district councils) and questions of soundness,
purity and hygiene are the concern of all local authorities, except parish
councils. The Department of Health and Social Security and the Ministry of
Agriculture, Fisheries and Food are the central departments responsible for
giving advice and making regulations. Places where food for sale for human
consumption is prepared, sold or stored must conform to certain hygienic
standards. Authorised officers of the councils may take for analysis or for
bacteriological or other examination samples of any food for sale for human
consumption. Special regulations are in force for certain foods such as milk,
meat and ice-cream.
In Scotland the local authorities chiefly concerned are the councils of
counties and large burghs.
In Northern Ireland administration is in the hands of the county and
county borough health authorities, the central department being the Ministry
of Health and Social Services.
Local authorities are also responsible for the public health aspects of water
supply, sewerage and drainage; street paving and housing; and the abatement
of noise nuisance. They have power to establish smoke-controlled areas to
secure cleaner air, and to arrange with statutory water undertakings for the
addition of fluoride to water supplies to reduce dental decay.
The Acts setting up the National Health Service—the National Health
Service Act 1946, the National Health Service (Scotland) Act 1947 and the
Health Services Act (Northern Ireland) 1948—came into force simultaneously
on 5th July 1948.
The object of the National Health Service Act 1946 was ‘to promote the
establishment in England and Wales of a comprehensive health service
designed to secure improvement in the physical and mental health of the
people of England and Wales and the prevention, diagnosis and treatment of
illness, and for that purpose to provide or secure the effective provision of
services’. The service is available to all according to medical need without
regard to any insurance qualification; it was originally free to users but certain
small charges were introduced under subsequent legislation. The removal of
134
BRITAIN I97i: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
ORGANISATION OF THE NATIONAL HEALTH
SERVICE IN ENGLAND
PARLIAMENT
SECRETARY OF STATE
FOR SOCIAL SERVICES
CENTRAL
HEALTH SERVICES COUNCIL
(advisory)
REGIONAL HOSPITAL
BOARDS
HOSPITAL
MANAGEMENT
COMMITTEES
SPECIAL
HOSPITALS
Broadmoor
Rampton
Moss Side
Teaching Hospitals
& Consultants
GENERAL
PRACTITIONER
SERVICES
EXECUTIVE COUNCILS
aided by professional
committees
Ancillary Seivices :
Blood Transfusion Service
(operated by R.H. Boards)
Drugs & Appliances —
LOCAL HEALTH
AUTHORITY
SERVICES
County, County Borough,
London Borough &
City of London Councils
Ophthalmic Services
Maternity & Child Health
Domestic Help in Sickness, etc.
Prevention of Illness
(including Mental Illness)
Care and After-Care
Vaccination & Immunisation
Health Centres
Note: In Wales the responsible minister is the Secretary of State for Wales; in Scotland the Secretary of State for Scotland; and
in Northern Ireland the Minister of Health and Social Services.
anxiety about the cost has encouraged people in need of treatment to seek it
where previously they might not have done so.
National insurance contributors are required to pay a separate weekly
national health contribution (see Table 9) but contributors and non-contri¬
butors are entitled to the same full range of services. Visitors from other
countries who come to Britain for treatment are expected to pay for it, but
treatment can be given under the emergency provisions of the National
Health Service to any who fall ill during a visit to Britain.
Health Service
Administration
in Great Britain
The services provided by the National Health Service fall into three main
groups1:
1. The hospital and specialist services for which the Secretary of State for
Social Services, the Secretary of State for Wales, or the Secretary of State
for Scotland is directly responsible. These are administered through
20 regional hospital boards and some 450 hospital management com¬
mittees, or, in the case of teaching hospitals in England and Wales,
boards of governors. The three special psychiatric hospitals in England
for people with criminal propensities are directly administered by the
Secretary of State for Social Services and the similar hospitals in Scotland
by the Secretary of State for Scotland.
1 Proposals to integrate the threefold structure of the National Health Service in
England and Wales under a network of area health authorities directly responsible to the
Secretary of State for Social Services were published in February 1970. The health
authorities would be responsible for the hospital and specialist services, the family
practitioner services, the school health service, and many of the health services provided
by local authorities. Local authorities would retain their responsibility for public health
matters and social work services for families, children, the elderly, the physically handi¬
capped and the mentally disordered. Separate proposals have been published for Wales,
Scotland and Northern Ireland.
ARCHITECTURE
New Housing at: {above and left)
Motherwell, Scotland; {below)
Craigavon, Northern Ireland.
■ : ’ M :
ARCHITECTURE
Birmingham office
block.
Student quarters,
University of East
Anglia, Norwich.
Civic centre,
Newcastle upon Tyne.
Shopping centre and hotel,
Falkirk, Scotland.
Coventry railway station.
The Makings concert
hall and opera house,
Snape, Suffolk.
High Wycombe
General Hospital,
Buckinghamshire.
ARCHITECTURE
Reactor buildings at
the nuclear power
station, Winfrith,
Dorset.
Gas research station,
Killingworth,
Northumberland.
Power house of a
pulp and paper mill
near Fort William,
Scotland.
SOCIAL WELFARE
Health Service
Finance
135
2. The general practitioner services consist of the family doctor service, the
dental service, the eye service and the pharmaceutical service, for which
the health ministers are indirectly responsible. They are administered by
159 local executive councils on which doctors, dentists, pharmacists and
opticians are represented. Each council in England and Wales has an oph¬
thalmic services committee; in Scotland there are five joint ophthalmic
services committees.
3. The local authority health and welfare services.
In addition, the Secretary of State for Social Services has power to conduct,
or assist others to conduct, research wrork and he provides a public health
laboratory service and a blood transfusion service. He is advised by the
Central Health Services Council, by standing advisory committees on
various aspects of the service and by the Hospital Advisory Service, set up
in 1969, on hospital problems, in particular those of ‘long stay’ hospitals.
Medical and dental schools are not under the control of the health ministers
in England and Wales but it is their responsibility to provide hospital clinical
facilities for the training of medical students. The universities are responsible
for the provision of teaching.
The Secretary of State for Scotland has similar duties. The teaching
hospitals in Scotland come under the control of the regional hospital boards,
but special medical education committees consider matters relating to medical
teaching. The Scottish Health Services Council and the standing advisory
committees advise the Secretary of State and keep closely in touch with the
Central Health Services Council on common issues.
The Northern Ireland Health Services are described separately on page 141.
Expenditure on the health and welfare services in Britain was estimated at
£1,973 million in 1969-70. The greater part of the cost falls on the Exchequer
and is met from general taxation, and a small part is met from local rates.
Other income is derived from the national health service contribution paid
with the national insurance contribution and from charges paid by people
using certain services.
There are charges for prescriptions (except for children, expectant and
nursing mothers, the elderly, patients suffering from certain medical condi¬
tions, war pensioners and people in receipt of supplementary benefits), for
treatment in the dental service (but not for examination only or for treatment
given to people under 21 years or to nursing or expectant mothers), for den¬
tures (except for children under 16 or still at school, and expectant and
nursing mothers) and spectacles (except children’s spectacles in standard
frames), and for some local health authority services. Certain exemptions or
refunds are made and anyone may apply to the Supplemental Benefits
Commission for help in meeting any of these charges. A limited number of
beds may be made available for hospital patients wishing for privacy, pro¬
vided that this accommodation is not needed on medical grounds for non¬
paying patients; a charge for part of the cost of the accommodation and
treatment is made. Provision is also made at certain hospitals for patients to
be treated as private patients on payment of the whole cost of their accom¬
modation and treatment. Such patients may make private arrangements for
treatment by doctors of their own choice.
Hospital medical staffs are either full-time and salaried, or part-time;
part-time medical officers are usually paid on a sessional basis and are free
BRITAIN I97i: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
to accept private patients. General medical practitioners in the National
Health Service are paid according to the amount of work and responsibility
they undertake; certain practice expenses are also directly reimbursed.
Dentists providing treatment in their own surgeries are paid on a pre¬
scribed scale of fees according to the treatment they have carried out.
Pharmacists dispensing on their own premises are paid on the basis of the
prescriptions they dispense. Ophthalmic medical practitioners and ophthal¬
mic opticians taking part in the general ophthalmic service are paid prescribed
fees for each sight test made; opticians who dispense spectacles are paid
according to the number and type of pairs supplied.
Practitioner The general practitioner services cover the medical attention given to indivi-
Services duals by doctors and dentists of their own choice from among those enrolled
in the service. Doctors and dentists normally work at their own surgeries;
practice in health centres established under the National Health Service
Acts is developing. About 24,000, or almost all, general medical practitioners
(principals and assistants) in Great Britain take some part in the service,
more than three-quarters of them in partnership. The attachment of local
authority midwives, health visitors and home nurses to doctors’ practices is
increasing.
Doctors wishing to enter practice have to apply through their executive
councils to the central Medical Practices Committee, so that a balanced
distribution of doctors throughout the country may be facilitated. The maxi¬
mum number of patients’ names permitted to be on a family doctor’s list is
normally 3,500; the average number in England and Wales is about 2,480.
It is normally through the patient’s own doctor that access to most other parts
of the health service is obtained.
There are over 10,500 dentists in England and Wales and over 1,100 in
Scotland in the general dental service.
Some 890 ophthalmic medical practitioners and nearly 6,100 ophthalmic
and dispensing opticians in England and Wales, and 63 ophthalmic medical
practitioners and 641 ophthalmic and dispensing opticians in Scotland
are engaged in the supplementary ophthalmic service. These services provide
for the testing of sight and provision of spectacles. Cases requiring treatment
are dealt with through the hospital eye service.
Over 13,400 retail pharmacists take part in the National Health Service.
They are responsible for the dispensing of all prescriptions except for the
small number dispensed by certain general practitioners.
Hospital and
Specialist
Services
Hospitals
The hospital and specialist services provide hospital accommodation of all
kinds, including district general hospitals with treatment and diagnostic
facilities for in-patients, out-patients and day-patients, hospital maternity
departments, infectious disease units, psychiatric hospitals and units, con¬
valescent homes and rehabilitation centres, and all forms of specialised
treatment.
A large proportion of the hospitals in the National Health Service were built
in the nineteenth century; some trace their origins to much earlier charitable
foundations, such as the famous St. Thomas’s and St. Bartholomew’s
Hospitals in London. Much has been done in recent years to improve and
extend existing hospitals, some of which are housed in inconvenient buildings,
and a number of new hospitals have been built. In 1962 long-term plans for
hospital building were published by the Government and revisions were made
Rehabilitation
Medical and
Psychiatric Social
Work
Blood Transfusion
SOCIAL WELFARE 137
in 1963, 1964 and 1966. The plans set out the probable future pattern of the
hospital service and contain assessments of the work to be undertaken in the
ten years ahead; it is expected that roughly £1,000 million will be spent in
England and Wales on hospital buildings during the ten-year period beginning
1966-67 and over £60 million in Scotland during the five-year period
1966- 71.
Over 2,500 of the existing hospitals in the National Health Service are in
England and Wales, including the 26 teaching hospitals in London (actually
groups of hospitals, convalescent homes, branches, annexes, or treatment
centres, numbering over 100 altogether) and the 10 teaching hospitals else¬
where in England and Wales (comprising some 80 hospitals and other
establishments). They have 465,000 beds available for use and a nursing and
midwifery staff of some 189,000 full-time and about 83,000 part-time.
There are 380 hospitals in Scotland with over 63,000 beds and more than
27,000 full-time and over 11,000 part-time nurses and midwives.
A small number of hospitals remain outside the service for special reasons.
Most of these are run by religious orders. Some, such as the Italian and Jewish
Hospitals, serve a special group of patients; others are maintained for the
chronic sick or for convalescents by charitable organisations. There are also
private nursing homes—including those licensed under the Abortion Act
1967— which must be registered.
Rehabilitation is an important aspect of medical care and today treatment
is not limited to the relief of pain or cure of pathological conditions but aims
at helping people to resume normal living as soon as possible. Experience
has shown that efficient medical rehabilitation reduces the stay in hospital,
the incidence of permanent disability and the period of incapacity for full
work. It has been applied with advantage in the care of many patients,
including the chronic sick, the mentally disabled, the aged and the handi¬
capped and has enabled many patients to become self-sufficient and to resume
an independent life in their own homes. Specialised rehabilitation facilities
are provided at the main hospitals and at medical rehabilitation centres.
The work is carried out under the guidance of the appropriate medical
specialist by physiotherapists, remedial gymnasts, occupational therapists
and social workers acting as a team. The hospital departments work closely
with the Disablement Resettlement Service of the Department of Employ¬
ment and Productivity.
Medical rehabilitation includes the provision, free of charge, of artificial
limbs and eyes, hearing aids, surgical supports, invalid chairs, certain types of
invalid vehicles, and other appliances. Nursing aids for the handicapped at
home can be borrowed through the service.
The hospital service plays a major part in the treatment of drug addicts,
providing withdrawal treatment for in-patients and medical supervision in
special out-patient clinics.
Most hospitals have social workers who are an integral part of the hospital
team and help those patients who have difficulties connected with their ill¬
ness. They help in tackling social and emotional problems and are concerned
with the rehabilitation and resettlement of patients especially where the illness
has been long or where the disability results in changes in the patient’s life.
The National Blood Transfusion Service in England and Wales is adminis¬
tered by the regional hospital boards under the National Health Service.
Donors give their blood voluntarily without payment. There are two central
BRITAIN I971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
laboratories administered by the Medical Research Council on behalf of the
Department of Health and Social Security: the Blood Group Reference
Laboratory, which prepares grouping serum and investigates blood grouping
problems referred to it, and the Blood Products Laboratory, which prepares
dried plasma and plasma fractions. In Scotland the Blood Transfusion
Service is under the direction of the Scottish National Blood Transfusion
Association, which is an independent voluntary body but is supported in the
main by a grant from the Scottish Home and Health Department. In Northern
Ireland the Blood Transfusion Service is operated by the Northern Ireland
Hospitals Authority.
Chest Radiological
Service
Bacteriological and
Virological
Laboratory Services
A Chest Radiological Service, which is freely available, is provided by chest
clinics and the radiological departments of general hospitals. The success of
mass radiography units has been such that their work is being phased into
the hospital radiography service. Mobile X-ray units are still used among
specially susceptible groups.
The Public Health Laboratory Service provides a network of bacteriological
and virological laboratories throughout England and Wales which conduct
research and assist in the diagnosis, prevention and control of epidemic
diseases. Its largest establishment is the Central Public Health Laboratory
at Colindale, in north-west London, which includes the National Collection
of Type Cultures, the Food Hygiene Laboratory, and reference laboratories
specialising in the identification of infective micro-organisms.
In Scotland there is no separate public health laboratory service and
bacteriological work is done mainly in hospital laboratories. In Northern
Ireland a central public health laboratory shares the bacteriological work with
hospital laboratories.
Drug Safety
The Committee on Safety of Drugs, set up by the health ministers, reviews
and assesses new drugs before they are put to clinical trial or marketed in the
United Kingdom. It is also responsible for collecting and studying reports of
suspected adverse reactions to drugs in use. The activities of the committee
are to be transferred to the statutory bodies set up under the Medicines Act
1968.
Local Health Local authorities play a major part in promoting the health and welfare of
and Welfare people in the community often in co-operation with voluntary organisations,
Services to which they may make grants, lend premises or give help in other ways.
Most of the needs for which the services are designed arise among four
broad groups of people: mothers and young children; the elderly; the
mentally disordered; and the physically handicapped. Other smaller groups
include the ill and convalescent at home, and the temporarily homeless. To
ensure that the services bring the maximum benefit to those who use them,
local authorities work in close co-operation with the general practitioner and
hospital and specialist branches of the National Health Service.
The authorities responsible for health and welfare services are the councils
of counties, county boroughs, London boroughs and the City of London and,
in Scotland, counties and large burghs. Plans for the development of health
and welfare services in England and Wales over the ten years ending 1975-76
were published in 1966 and the authorities keep the plans constantly under
review. The Local Authority Social Services Act 1970 provides for each local
authority to set up a new social services committee to integrate local authority
personal social service functions, including the care and control of children
Vaccination
Services for
Mothers and
Young Children
SOCIAL WELFARE 139
and the welfare of the elderly, the physically handicapped and the mentally
disordered.
In Scotland, the Social Work (Scotland) Act 1968, which also provides for
the reorganisation of the personal social services, including the child care
service, into one social welfare service, is being implemented.
Charges may be made for some local authority health and welfare services
(for example, domestic help, welfare foods for young or handicapped children
and nursing or expectant mothers, supplies from family planning clinics, day
nurseries, the loan of equipment and laundering of bed linen for people being
nursed at home, and chiropody services) but arrangements are made for free
provision to people with very low incomes.
Under the National Health Service all local health authorities have planned
programmes of vaccination and immunisation against diphtheria, measles,
rubella, poliomyelitis, smallpox, tetanus, tuberculosis and whooping cough.
Such protection is usually given by the family doctor or at child health clinics.
Maternity and child health centres offer regular supervision by doctors,
midwives and health visitors to expectant and nursing mothers and young
children. Special sessions are held for vaccination and inoculation and for
early testing of babies for deafness and other defects. A feature of the service
is the education of mothers before and after the birth by means of talks,
discussion groups, demonstrations and classes. Some 78 per cent of babies
born in England and Wales and some 64 per cent of those born in Scotland
are taken to the centres. Family planning clinics, often run by the Family
Planning Association on behalf of local authorities, are frequently held at
maternity and child health centres. Health visitors also visit the homes of
babies and young children to give advice on their care and health, and under¬
take school nursing and tuberculosis visiting (for all age groups).
The expectant mother may arrange to have her baby in hospital or at home
according to the advice given by the doctor or midwife. Some 79 per cent
of confinements in England and Wales and 94 per cent in Scotland take place
in hospital. For a home confinement the services of either a general practitioner
obstetrician or her own family doctor besides those of a trained midwife and,
if necessary, a consultant obstetrician, are available to every mother.
The majority of premature babies are cared for in hospital but special
arrangements for premature babies who are fit to remain in their own homes
are made by many local health authorities who lend equipment and appoint
experienced nursing staff to supervise their care.
Domestic help (commonly called ‘home help’) is made available by local
authorities during periods of special need, for example, confinement or during
the absence of the mother when children might otherwise have to be cared
for away from home.
Some local authorities make direct provision for the special needs of un¬
married mothers and their babies, but most contribute to the cost of work
done by voluntary organisations and other bodies (see p. 142).
Under the welfare foods service expectant and nursing mothers, children
up to five years and one month and certain handicapped children can obtain
a pint of milk a day at a reduced price. Where three or more members of a
family are entitled to welfare milk, it is provided free for all but two of them.
Other welfare foods distributed by local health authorities to the same group
of people are dried milk, as an alternative to liquid milk, orange juice, cod
liver oil and, for expectant and nursing mothers only, vitamins A and D
tablets all at welfare price. Welfare foods, including liquid milk, may be
140
The Elderly
The Mentally
Disordered
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
provided free of charge to all beneficiaries in families of low income. Some
authorities also provide other proprietary foods at special clinic prices.
There are about 545 day nurseries (apart from nursery schools and play
groups) for children under five in Great Britain provided by local health
authorities or voluntary associations working with them. Private nurseries
must be registered with the local authority to ensure that their premises and
management are satisfactory. People who mind children (other than relatives)
under five years of age in their homes for payment must also be registered.
A number of services for elderly people in their own homes are provided by
statutory and voluntary bodies to help them to live there for as long as
possible. Local authorities supply, under the National Health Service Acts,
home nursing and domestic help and many arrange a chiropody service,
sitters-in, night attendants and special laundry services. Under the National
Assistance Amendment Act 1962 the authorities may provide day centres,
clubs, recreational workshops and meals for old people. Health visitors and
social workers employed by local authorities are spending an increasing pro¬
portion of their time helping old people with their problems and in most
areas ‘good neighbour’ and friendly visiting services are also arranged by the
local authority or a voluntary organisation.
Local authorities provide residential accommodation, under the National
Assistance Act, for the elderly and infirm and have powers to register homes
run by voluntary organisations or privately (see p. 142). The newer homes
provided by local authorities for elderly and other infirm people usually have
accommodation for 30 to 50 residents; for the elderly mentally infirm the
present development is towards homes of not more than 35 places. Over
2,100 new homes have been opened in England and Wales since 1945.
For many years local authorities have, under the Housing Acts, provided an
increasing number of smaller dwellings for old people, and flatlets for frail or
infirm old people who can lead independent lives with some help. County
councils may make grants to district councils towards the cost of providing a
resident warden and other welfare services for elderly people occupying these
special groups of dwellings.
Treatment for mental disorder is provided as part of the National Health
Service. Patients can consult the family doctor, and receive specialist advice
at hospital out-patient clinics as they would for any other kind of illness, and
can enter hospital for in-patient treatment without formalities.
In England and Wales under the Mental Health Act 1959, and in Scotland
the Mental Health (Scotland) Act i960, mentally disordered patients can,
where necessary in the interests of their health or safety or for the protection
of other people, be compelled to enter hospital for treatment. There are
procedural safeguards to protect patients from unnecessary detention in
hospital; in England and Wales patients may apply to a Mental Health
Review Tribunal for discharge and in Scotland to the sheriff.
Local health authorities have a duty to make arrangements for helping the
mentally disordered in the community, and before or after hospital treatment.
Recent developments in the treatment of mental illness, which enable patients
to be discharged from hospital more quickly provided support is available in
the community, are adding to the demands for these services. Arrangements
include training centres for the mentally handicapped, occupational centres
for the mentally ill, as well as social centres and residential accommodation
for the mentally disordered of all ages. If necessary, the local health authority
can place a mentally disordered person under guardianship within the
The Physically
Handicapped
Health Centres
Health Education
Ambulance Services
health
AND WELFARE
SERVICES IN
NORTHERN
IRELAND
SOCIAL WELFARE 141
community. In Scotland education authorities share the responsibility for
providing training or occupation.
Local authorities have a duty to provide welfare services for people who are
blind, partially sighted, deaf, hard of hearing, or otherwise substantially and
permanently handicapped. Voluntary organisations give important help in
providing these services. A wide range of facilities is available under authori¬
ties’ welfare schemes, including advice on occupational, social and personal
problems arising from disability; assistance in overcoming the effects of
disability; help in carrying out adaptations in the home—for example, by
fitting ramps, wide doorways, ground floor toilets, guide rails, and the pro¬
vision of various aids to living to meet individual needs; social and occupa¬
tional centres and clubs; teaching of handicrafts and other occupations either
at home or in centres; and the provision of recreational facilities, outings and
holidays. The blind welfare services are staffed by social workers who are
specially qualified to assist the blind in all matters including teaching them
craftwork and the use of embossed symbols for reading and writing. Services
for the deaf are also staffed by specialist welfare officers qualified to com¬
municate with the deaf.
Benefits available from other sources include financial aid, preventive and
medical treatment, special education, training for employment and placement
in suitable occupations.
(For the provision of special educational treatment for handicapped children
see p. 152, and the child health clinics and the school health service, which
keep a watch for abnormalities, pp. 139 and 151.)
There has been a marked increase of interest in health centres at which
facilities can be made available for the provision of medical, dental and
pharmaceutical services and consultant and other hospital out-patient
services in association with local authority services. In December 1969, 131
were in operation in England and Wales, 79 were under construction and many
more planned. In Scotland, where the provision of health centres is the
responsibility of the Secretary of State for Scotland, there were 14 centres in
operation, eight under construction and many more planned.
Health education in England, Wales and Northern Ireland is the responsi¬
bility of the Health Education Council which was set up in 1968 to take over
the promotional activities of the respective health departments and the
former Central Council for Health Education. There is a separate body in
Scotland. The Council expenditure is met from both central and local
government funds.
Free conveyance by ambulance in England and Wales between home and
hospital is provided, where needed, by local authorities either directly or by
arrangement with voluntary organisations. The Hospital Car Service (orga¬
nised by the St. John Ambulance Association and Brigade, the British Red
Cross Society, and the Women’s Royal Voluntary Service) augments the
ambulance service in many areas by the conveyance of sitting patients. In
Scotland ambulances are run by the St. Andrew’s Scottish Ambulance
Service on behalf of the Secretary of State for Scotland. In Northern Ireland
they are run by the Northern Ireland Hospitals Authority.
The health services established under the Health Services Acts (Northern
Ireland) 1948-67 correspond fairly closely to the medical care system
established under the National Health Service in Great Britain and they are
financed in the same way as in the rest of the United Kingdom. Welfare
142
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
services are provided under the Welfare Services Acts (Northern Ireland)
1949-61 by separate statutory welfare authorities.
The hospital and specialist services, which include mental health services,
are administered on behalf of the Ministry of Health and Social Services by
the Northern Ireland Hospitals Authority (which corresponds approximately
to a regional hospital board in Great Britain) through hospital management
committees. The Northern Ireland Hospitals Authority has under its control
83 hospitals containing in all about 17,000 beds. The administration of the
general medical, dental, pharmaceutical and supplementary eye services is in
the hands of the Northern Ireland General Health Services Board, which
takes the place of the executive councils in Great Britain. There are some
745 general practitioners (with an average of 2,080 patients each), 332 dentists,
13 ophthalmic medical practitioners and 127 ophthalmic and 14 dispensing
opticians. The provision of health centres is the responsibility of the Ministry
of Health and Social Services. Local health and welfare services are adminis¬
tered by the six county councils, one county borough council and one De¬
velopment Council in Northern Ireland. The range of local authority services
and the arrangements made by the Northern Ireland General Health Services
Board for the provision of services, and for the remuneration of the people
providing them, are similar to those already described for the rest of the
United Kingdom.
VOLUNTARY AID Voluntary organisations provide extensive health and welfare services in co¬
operation with, or supplementary to, the provision made by central and
local authorities.
In many areas invalid children, old people and others needing care in their
own homes are visited and helped by voluntary organisations. The National
Society for Mentally Handicapped Children, for example, gives help through
advice and services. The National Association for Mental Health does
advisory, educational and therapeutic work. There are specialist societies
concerned with the blind, the deaf and people with other disabilities. The
extensive work done for elderly people is co-ordinated by Old People’s
Welfare Committees which have been established in 1,600 areas. They and
corresponding bodies in Scotland and Northern Ireland are affiliated to
the National Old People’s Welfare Council. The National Corporation
for the Care of Old People, established by the Nuffield Foundation, stimu¬
lates and undertakes research into the welfare of the elderly. At the end
of 1969, 2,914 homes for old and disabled people, run by voluntary bodies
or privately, were registered with local authorities under the National Assis¬
tance Act. In Northern Ireland voluntary homes are registered with the
Ministry of Health and Social Services and private homes with the welfare
authorities.
Most of the homes and hostels for unmarried mothers and their children
are provided by voluntary organisations, which employ specially trained
workers to help the mothers to plan their future.
Community service of many kinds is given by young people belonging
to a number of national and local organisations, for example, the Young
Volunteer Force Foundation, Community Service Volunteers, Task Force,
Scouts, Guides and school groups.
A great deal of help is given to hospitals by voluntary bodies and individual
voluntary helpers. Many hospitals have their own Leagues of Friends or
similar groups of voluntary workers who organise and undertake a variety of
services. Many hospitals also have help from the British Red Cross Society,
SOCIAL WELFARE
PRIVATE
MEDICAL
SCHEMES
THE MEDICAL,
DENTAL,
NURSING AND
ALLIED
PROFESSIONS
H3
St. John Ambulance Association and Brigade, the Women’s Royal Voluntary
Service, and other organisations. The operation of canteens for out-patients,
and trolley-shops and book and picture library services for in-patients, visit¬
ing in the wards, and escort services in out-patient departments, are among
the tasks commonly undertaken. Many convalescent homes are provided by
voluntary effort.
There are a number of private health insurance schemes, membership of
which has grown considerably in recent years. It is estimated that over
2 million people are now covered by these schemes. Subscribers who wish for
private medical treatment outside the National Health Service can insure
against all or nearly all the cost of hospital treatment and certain medical
treatment outside hospital.
Only people whose names are on the medical and dental registers respectively
may practise as doctors and dentists under the National Health Service.
Registered medical practitioners may practise dentistry in spheres other than
the general dental service of the National Health Service. Dental auxiliaries
(who have undergone a two-year training course) may carry out some kinds of
simple dental work under the direction of a registered dentist. The minimum
qualification for registration as a doctor requires five to seven years’ training
in medical school and hospital, with an additional year’s experience as a
resident assistant doctor in a hospital; for a dentist, four or more years at
a dental school are required. The governing body of the medical profession is
the General Medical Council, first set up in 1858; that of the dentists is the
General Dental Council, which succeeded the Dental Board in 1956. The
British Medical Association is the doctors’ main professional association;
that of the dentists is the British Dental Association.
The minimum period of hospital training required to qualify for registra¬
tion as a general trained nurse is normally three years. Training may be for
general, sick children’s, mental or mentally sub-normal nursing qualification.
An enrolled nurse takes a two-year course. The examining bodies of the
nursing profession in England and Wales and in Scotland are the General
Nursing Councils, and in Northern Ireland the Joint Nursing and Midwives
Council. Midwives in England and Wales and in Scotland must have the
certificate of the appropriate Central Midwives Board, and in Northern
Ireland of the Joint Nursing and Midwives Council. Most pupil midwives are
already registered general nurses or sick children’s nurses; for them the two-
year midwifery training period is reduced to one year and, for enrolled nurses,
to 18 months. The Royal College of Nursing and the Royal College of
Midwives are the professional bodies for nurses and midwives. Health visitors
are registered general nurses who have undergone at least the first part of
the midwifery course or obstetric nursing before taking a year’s course in
health visiting, promoted by the Council for the Training of Health Visitors.
To practise as a pharmacist, a pharmaceutical chemist must have his or her
name entered in the register maintained by the Pharmaceutical Society of
Great Britain, the governing body of the profession, or by the Pharmaceutical
Society of Northern Ireland. Four or five years’ academic study and practical
training are necessary for registration. The sale of certain specified medicines
and their dispensing on National Elealth Service prescriptions can be carried
out only by, or under the supervision of, a registered pharmaceutical chemist.
Under the Opticians Act 1958 the General Optical Council regulates the
professions of ophthalmic optician and dispensing optician; only registered
144
MEDICAL
RESEARCH
CHILD CARE
Local Authority
Services
BRITAIN I97i: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
ophthalmic opticians (or registered medical practitioners) may test sight.
Training of ophthalmic opticians takes four years including a year of practical
experience under supervision. Dispensing opticians may take a two-year
full-time course with a year’s practical experience or a part-time course.
State registration may be obtained by chiropodists, dietitians, medical
laboratory technicians, occupational therapists, orthoptists, physiotherapists,
radiographers and remedial gymnasts. The governing bodies are eight boards
(called, for example, the Chiropodists Board or the Dietitians Board) under
the general supervision of the Council for Professions Supplementary to
Medicine. A professional training lasting two to four years is needed to
qualify for registration. Only members of these professions who are state
registered may be employed in the National Health Service and some other
public services.
Medical social workers must obtain the certificate of the Institute of
Medical Social Workers, or have taken a recognised university course to
qualify them for membership of the Institute. Psychiatric social workers are
required to have a certificate showing they have attended the mental health
course provided at certain universities. Speech therapists need a good general
education and three years’ professional training.
Government funds for medical research in Britain are channelled through
the University Grants Committee whose general grants to universities cover
research as well as teaching; the Medical Research Council which administers
two research institutes and numerous research units as well as providing
grants for research teams and individuals; and the Health Departments which
suoport research in aid of the National Health Service in universities, hospitals,
other government departments and industry. Further support is provided
by a large number of charitable foundations and organisations, such as the
British Empire Cancer Campaign and the Nuffield Foundation; and there is
substantial investment in medical research and development by the pharma¬
ceutical and medical equipment industries (see also p. 198).
Local authorities in England and Wales have a duty under the Children and
Young Persons Act 1963 to make available such advice, guidance and assis¬
tance as may promote the welfare of children by diminishing the need to
receive or keep them in the authority’s care or to bring them before a juvenile
court. The Children and Young Persons Act 1969 (for England and Wales)
provides for the care and treatment of young offenders and gives local authori¬
ties wider responsibilities for undertaking, through social workers, enquiries
and consultations with parents, schools and the police, and for the super¬
vision of a child or young person alleged to be an offender and in need of
care and control. In England and Wales a child may be committed to the
care of a local authority under a care order (v/hich replaces a ‘fit person’ and
approved school order) if the juvenile court, having considered all the child’s
circumstances, is satisfied that he is in need of care or control which he
would be unlikely to receive unless the court made an order. Similar pro¬
visions exist in Scotland under the Social Work (Scotland) Act 1968. At
the end of 1970 children’s hearings replaced the juvenile courts and the
care and treatment of children is secured by orders made by the hearings.
In England and Wales local authorities have a further duty, under the
Children Act 1948, to receive into their care any child under the age of 17
who has no parent or guardian, or who has been abandoned or whose parents
are unable to provide for him temporarily or permanently. A child so received
SOCIAL WELFARE
145
remains in the care of the local authority until he is 18 years old unless the
authority finds it to his advantage to return him sooner to his parents or
guardian or to entrust him to friends. Both categories of children are
treated so as to further their best interests and afford them opportunity for
their proper development. These provisions are enacted for Scotland in the
Social Work (Scotland) Act 1968.
When practicable, children in care are boarded out with foster parents,
who receive an allowance to cover the cost of maintenance. If a foster home
cannot be found for a child, or he is not suitable for boarding out, he may be
placed in residential accommodation usually provided by a local authority
or a voluntary organisation. The Children and Young Persons Act 1969
provides for the regional planning of accommodation for children in the care
of local authorities and the provision of community homes. These homes
will comprise local authority children’s homes and the voluntary homes which
become ‘assisted’ or ‘controlled’ together with approved schools and remand
homes which will gradually cease to function as such. In Scotland local
authorities are responsible for providing appropriate accommodation for
children in their care. The desirability of returning a child to his family circle
as soon as possible is fully appreciated, and work is carried out to rehabilitate
the family where this is necessary.
The Local Authority Social Services Act 1970 provides for local authority
child care functions in England and Wales to be the responsibility of the new
social services committees. In Scotland child care work is undertaken by
local authority social work departments set up under the Social Work
(Scotland) Act 1968. Regulations for England and Wales for children in care
of local authorities and voluntary organisations and the conduct of children’s
homes are made by the Home Secretary, and, for Scotland, by the Secretary
of State for Scotland. The cost of the local authorities’ child-care service is
shared between the local authorities and the Exchequer.
In Northern Ireland the welfare authorities of each county and county
borough (under the general direction of the Ministry of Home Affairs) are
responsible for caring for homeless and neglected children under the Children
and Young Persons Act (Northern Ireland) 1968. Legislation relating to
children and arrangements for their care follow the same general principles
as in Great Britain.
War orphans are the responsibility of the Department of Health and Social
Security.
Voluntary organisations, many of which were pioneers in child care, continue
to play a valuable part in this work. The larger societies, such as Dr. Barnardo’s,
the Church of England Children’s Society and the Catholic Child Welfare
Council are constituent societies of the National Council of Voluntary Child
Care Organisations, to which a large number of smaller voluntary homes are
also affiliated. In Scotland a valuable contribution is made by the churches
and by many other voluntary organisations. Children’s homes provided by
voluntary organisations (of which there are some 620 in Britain) are required
to be registered under the Children Act in England and Wales, in Scotland
under the Social Work (Scotland) Act and in Northern Ireland under the
Children and Young Persons Act. The boarding out of children and all
children’s homes, whether local authority or voluntary homes, are subject to
inspection by the Children’s Department Inspectorate of the Home Office,
by the Social Work Services Group of the Scottish Education Department or
the Northern Ireland Ministry of Home Affairs.
146
Adoption
Welfare of
Immigrants
Community
Relations
BRITAIN I971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Voluntary bodies concerned with the welfare of children in their own
homes include local family casework agencies and the Family Service Units,
which undertake prolonged and intensive casework with families. The old-
established National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children and
its Scottish counterpart between them maintain inspectors and visitors
throughout the United Kingdom for the investigation of cases of reported
cruelty to, or neglect of, children in their ow7n homes; when necessary, they
resort to law after consultation with the local authority, but they prefer to
achieve their purpose by warning and advice.
Provision for legal adoption was first made in England and Wales in 1926, in
Northern Ireland in 1929 and in Scotland in 1930. About 25,000 adoption
orders are made annually by the courts in Great Britain and some 400 in
Northern Ireland. Adoption is now regulated by the Adoption Act 1958 in
Great Britain and by the Adoption Act (Northern Ireland) 1967 in Northern
Ireland. The Registrars General keep registers of adopted children; adoption
societies (over 70 societies arrange adoptions) must be registered with the
local authority (in Northern Ireland with the Ministry of Home Affairs).
Local authorities have had the power since 1959 to act as adoption agencies
and increasingly do so.
IMMIGRATION AND COMMUNITY RELATIONS
Since the 1950s considerable numbers of people have entered Britain from
Commonwealth countries in the West Indies, Asia and Africa to take up
employment, many with the intention of settling permanently (see pp. 11
and 416). It is estimated that coloured Commonwealth immigrants and their
families number about million, about 2 per cent of the total population of
Britain.
Commonwealth immigrants are making an important contribution to the
economy and public services by relieving shortages of labour; but their
concentration in areas where opportunities for employment are greatest—
60 per cent have settled in Greater London and the West Midlands, including
Birmingham—has led to an increased demand for housing and additional
pressures on the social services. The problems of these inner urban areas are
being met by continuous social service programmes in housing, education,
hospitals and health and welfare, which benefit the whole community, and
the urban programme (see p. 123) which is directed at areas of special need.
Additional teachers have been appointed to schools in immigrant areas and
government grants are available to local authorities with substantial immigrant
populations towards the salaries of extra staff, such as interpreters, health
visitors and helpers in schools and community homes. The welfare of
immigrants and good relations between immigrant groups and the local
community are promoted in a variety of ways by voluntary community
relations councils and other voluntary bodies.
The co-ordination of government action to promote the welfare of immigrants
is the responsibility of the Home Office. Voluntary efforts to achieve the
integration of immigrants as part of a wider aim of promoting harmonious
community relations are co-ordinated nationally by the Community Relations
Commission, a statutory body set up under the Race Relations Act 1968.
The Commission co-ordinates the activities of local community relations
Race Relations
Acts
SOCIAL WELFARE 147
councils, of which there are now over 80 operating in areas where there is an
immigrant population. It makes grants towards the salaries of full-time
community relations officers and assistants and towards special projects
which help improve community relations.
Discrimination on grounds of colour, race, or ethnic or national origin in
places of public resort was made unlawful in Great Britain by the Race
Relations Act 1965, which established a Race Relations Board to secure com¬
pliance with the Act. The Race Relations Act 1968 replaced the 1965 Act
and is much wider in scope, making discrimination unlawful in the provision
of goods, facilities and services, and in employment and housing. The Race
Relations Board has a statutory duty to receive and investigate complaints
and seeks to resolve them by conciliation. The Board constitutes regional
conciliation committees which between them cover all areas of Great Britain.
If conciliation fails the Board can seek remedies in the courts. Employment
complaints are dealt with in the first instance by the Department of Employ¬
ment and Productivity whose function it is to see whether voluntary machinery
exists within industry to deal with them. Where no such machinery exists
the complaints are investigated by the Board.
6 EDUCATION
Educational
Administration
There are over 10 million children and young people in full-time attendance
at schools, universities, colleges of education and technical colleges in Britain.
The great majority of schools, attended by over 90 per cent of school children,
are publicly provided or assisted. Most technical colleges and other centres of
further education are also publicly maintained. Universities are autonomous
self-governing institutions but are aided from public funds.
The bulk of expenditure on education in Britain comes from public funds
although many of the older-established schools and colleges continue to
benefit from private endowments. In 1969-70 estimated total public expendi¬
ture on education, including university education, school meals and milk,
and local libraries, was £2,365-5 million (more than double the expenditure in
1960-61), which was 12 per cent of all public expenditure.
In England and Wales the main development of publicly provided primary
education started a hundred years ago. In 1833 the Government had begun to
make annual grants to the voluntary societies which were providing schools,
but the Elementary Education Act of 1870 first established the principle of
compulsory education. By the end of the nineteenth century elementary
education had become virtually both compulsory and free of charge. Public
provision of secondary education (already begun in Wales) started in England
under the Act of 1902. The Education Act of 1944 now governs public
education in England and Wales. The Scottish and Northern Ireland educa¬
tional systems both have long histories independent of that of education in
England, but the same general policy is now being implemented throughout
Britain, with some national variations. The governing acts are the Education
(Scotland) Act 1962 (a consolidating measure) and the Education Act
(Northern Ireland) 1947.
All aspects of education in England and Wales, and of universities, civil
science and the arts (see p. 50) throughout Great Britain are the responsibility
of the Secretary of State for Education and Science. (The Secretary of State
for Wales is concerned with the general oversight of the national educational
policy in Wales.) The Secretary of State for Scotland and the Minister of
Education for Northern Ireland have corresponding educational responsi¬
bilities, except that the Secretary of State for Scotland is consulted about
Scottish universities but is not responsible for them.
Administration of publicly provided schools and further education is divided
between the central government departments, local education authorities, and
various voluntary organisations. The relation between these three groups is
based on consultation and co-operation, both by direct contact between them
and through Her Majesty’s Inspectors of Schools who act as liaison officers,
particularly between local education authorities and the departments.
The local education authorities are responsible for ensuring that adequate
provision is made in their areas for the two stages of school education (primary
and secondary), and that those pupils who would profit by proceeding to
higher education are not deterred by lack of financial means. They are also
responsible for the provision of further education (see pp. 161-2).
EDUCATION
H9
SCHOOLS
Management
In England and Wales colleges of education (for teacher training) are under
the financial and administrative control of local education authorities or
voluntary organisations. The organisation of courses is based on university
institutes of education. The Scottish colleges of education are under the
control of specially appointed governing bodies; in Northern Ireland they are
under the control of the Government or voluntary agencies.
The universities are administratively independent of the Department of
Education and Science (in Northern Ireland the Ministry of Education); the
Government exercises its responsibilities in relation to the universties through
the University Grants Committee (see p. 159). Their governiing bodies are
appointed according to the terms of their individual charters.
Parents in Britain are required by law to see that their children receive efficient
full-time education, at school or elsewhere, between the ages of 5 and 15.
(The school-leaving age is to be raised to 16 in 1972-73.)
At present there are over 9-6 million school children at about 37,940 schools.
In England and Wales there were 7-8 million children in publicly maintained
schools in 1969 besides some 128,450 others at schools receiving direct grants
from the Department of Education and Science; there were also about 417,250
children of all ages at some 2,920 independent schools. In Scotland 951,195
children were attending education authority or grant-aided schools and over
17,000 were at independent schools. In Northern Ireland about 335>9°0
children were attending publicly maintained or assisted schools; there were
few at independent schools.
The number of school children in Britain is increasing mainly because the
birth rate rose steadily between 1955 and 1964. Each year, too, more children
stay on at school beyond the minimum leaving age. The school population is
expected to rise, altogether, by 2 million by 1975. There is, therefore, a
continuing need for more teachers and more school buildings.
In England, Wales and Northern Ireland it is usual for boys and girls to
be taught together in primary schools but about half the secondary schools
are for boys or girls only. Mixed schools are more common in Wales and in
Scotland. In the independent sector most of the schools for younger children
are co-educational; but of those providing secondary education the majority
are either for boys or for girls.
Schools supported from public funds are of three kinds in England and
Wales: county schools (the largest group) which are provided and maintained
by local education authorities wholly out of public funds; voluntary schools
(mostly ‘aided’ or ‘controlled’ schools) which have been provided by a
voluntary body, usually of a religious denomination1; and direct-grant schools
which are completely independent of local education authorities but receive a
grant-in-aid from the Department of Education and Science. These last (the
smallest group) are mainly grammar schools; they include some schools of
ancient foundation. In Scotland most of the schools supported from public
funds are provided by education authorities and are known as public schools
(in England this term is used for a type of independent school, see p. 153).
1 The local education authority is responsible for the running costs of all voluntary
schools and for the cost of all building work at controlled schools. Aided schools have
more independence than controlled schools and are responsible for part of the cost of
external repairs and any building work (see p. 154). Over a third of the 28,510 schools
maintained by local education authorities in England and Wales are voluntary schools
and the majority of these are Church of England schools. There are some 2,440 Roman
Catholic voluntary schools and smaller numbers belonging to other religious bodies.
BRITAIN I97i: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
There are also 29 grant-aided secondary schools comparable to the English
direct-grant schools. In Northern Ireland county schools, managed by local
education authorities, and voluntary schools, under voluntary (usually
clerical) management, are both grant-aided by the Government.
In England, Wales and Scotland no fees are charged to parents of children
attending schools maintained by local education authorities (that is over 90
per cent of the school population) and books and equipment are supplied
free. The direct-grant grammar schools in England and Wales and a few of the
grant-aided secondary schools in Scotland take pupils paid for by local
education authorities as well as those whose fees are paid wholly or partly by
parents. (For independent schools, see p. 153.) In Northern Ireland no fees
are charged to parents of children attending grant-aided schools, with the
exception of grammar schools, where qualified pupils receive from the local
education authorities scholarships which cover the whole or most of the fees
charged by the school.
In England and Wales school curricula are under the control of the local
education authorities, though there is in practice a high degree of devolution
to the schools themselves. Teachers may seek help and advice from Her
Majesty’s Inspectors, who are responsible for the inspection of all schools
including independent schools; they review and report on the content and
value of the education provided and are available as advisers. Local education
authorities also employ inspectors to advise on the schools which they
maintain. Further advice and encouragement for school-based research and
development is made available to teachers through the Schools Council for
Curriculum and Examinations. The council, an independent body representa¬
tive of all educational interests in England and Wales, acts as an advisory
body and carries out research and development work on curricula, teaching
methods and examinations in primary and secondary schools. In Scotland
the function of Her Majesty’s Inspectors is in general the same as that
of the Inspectorate in England and Wales. The content and balance of the
curriculum is kept under continuous review by the Consultative Committee
on the Curriculum. In Northern Ireland the curriculum of each grant-aided
school is subject to the approval of the Ministry of Education. In each
country considerable latitude is afforded in the scope both of the curriculum
and the teaching methods employed (see pp. 151-2).
The schools’ freedom to frame their own curricula has facilitated a rapid
increase in study and experiment in recent years, partly stimulated by the
Schools Council and other organisations and partly prompted by the plans
to raise the school-leaving age in 1972-73. The general purpose is to adapt
the curriculum to the everyday life and needs of children and young people.
Many interesting developments are taking place in the teaching of reading,
mathematics, science, foreign languages, physical education, drama and art.
In England and Wales by law all children in county or voluntary schools
receive religious instruction and take part in a daily corporate act of worship
unless their parents wish them to be withdrawn. In county schools, and in
certain circumstances in voluntary schools, religious instruction of an
undenominational Christian character is given. In all kinds of voluntary school
there is opportunity for denominational instruction. In Scotland, subject to
safeguards for the individual conscience, religious instruction must be given,
but the content is entirely in the hands of the education authorities; in the
EDUCATION
Health and
Welfare of
School Children
’rimary
Schools
151
more populated areas there are separate schools for Roman Catholics. In
county schools in Northern Ireland clergy have a right of access to give
religious instruction to children of their denomination for a limited period
each week. The voluntary schools in Northern Ireland are almost all Roman
Catholic schools.
Physical education, including organised games, is a part of the curriculum
of all schools. Those receiving financial assistance from public funds must
have the use of a playing field and most secondary schools have a gymnasium.
Organised games include tennis, cricket, football, hockey, lacrosse and netball.
The School Health Service provides medical inspection and arranges,
usually in co-operation with the National Health Service, for free medical and
dental treatment for all children attending schools maintained by local
education authorities. Treatment facilities include dental clinics and child
guidance centres.
Milk (normally one-third of a pint a day) is given free to children of primary
school age and to those in special schools who wish to have it. The Schools
Meals Service provides a midday meal at a subsidised price (remitted where
there is need) to 70 per cent of the pupils in England and Wales and 45 per
cent of the pupils in Scotland in education authorities schools. Education
authorities have a duty to provide free transport for children who live more
than a certain distance from the schools they attend.
Nursery schools provide informal educational and play facilities for a small
proportion of children between two and five years old; many more are needed
to meet the demand and under the Urban Aid Programme started in 1968
(see p. 123) additional schools and classes are being provided in areas of special
need. Compulsory education begins at five when children in England and
Wales go to infant schools or departments; at seven they go on to junior
schools or departments. At present the usual age of transfer from primary to
secondary schools is n in England, Wales and Northern Ireland but an
increasing number of local authorities in England are adopting the recom¬
mendation of the Plowden report on the establishment of ‘middle schools’
(see p. 152). In Scotland, the primary schools take children from 5 to 12,
normally having infant classes for children under 7, although in some areas
there are separate infant schools.
The content of curricula is very largely a matter for the schools themselves.
In England, Wales and Northern Ireland there are no compulsory secular
subjects but generally a curriculum includes the teaching of reading, writing,
arithmetic, English, music, art and handwork, nature study, history and
geography. Additionally, in Wales, the Welsh language is taught. Children
who speak Welsh at home normally receive the early stages of their primary
education in Welsh and are taught English as a second language. Following a
report on Primary Education in Wales, published in 1968 (see Bibliography,
p. 477), local authorities in Wales have been advised to review their policy
with a view to meeting the demand for bilingual education. In Scotland the
scope of the curriculum is outlined in the Schools (Scotland) Code, but it is
for each head teacher and his staff to determine precisely what is to be included.
The principles on which it is thought primary education should be based are
set out in Primary Education in Scotland, published in 1965 (see Bibliography,
P- 477)- , . , , • „ .
Primary education is undergoing considerable change with the introduction
of new subjects and new teaching methods, and a greater emphasis on meeting
F
..
152 BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
the needs of the individual child. In England recommendations of the
Plowden report, Children and their Primary Schools, published in 1967 (see
Bibliography, p. 477)> are being adopted by a number of local education
authorities, including the establishment of ‘middle schools’ (see below), the
increased use of teachers’ aides in primary schools, more in-service training
for teachers facilitated by the rapid growth of the number of teachers’ centres
(now about 400) for the dissemination of new ideas, and the channelling of
special help to ‘educational priority areas’ in poorer neighbourhoods in the
form of more teachers and increased salaries for teachers in schools of
exceptional difficulty.
Secondary
Schools
England and Wales
Scotland
Northern Ireland
The public or state system of education aims to give all children an education
suited to their particular abilities. The majority of school children in England
and Wales receive their secondary education in schools to which they are
allocated after selection procedures at the age of 11 (often referred to as the
‘eleven-plus’ examination). Schools receiving pupils on this basis are: about
1,025 grammar schools providing academic education (including a small
number of direct-grant grammar schools); some 2,690 secondary modern
schools giving a general education with a practical bias; a few secondary
technical schools offering a general education related to industry, commerce
and agriculture; and schools providing all three, or any two, types of education,
in separately organised streams and known as multilateral or bilateral schools.
Nearly a third of maintained secondary school population, however, attend
some 1,335 comprehensive schools which take pupils without reference to
ability or aptitude and provide a wide range of secondary education for all or
most of the children of a district. They can be organised in a number of ways
including schools that take the full secondary school age-range from 11 to 18;
the middle schools whose pupils move on to senior comprehensive schools at
12 or 13, leaving at 16 or 18; and the comprehensive school with an age-range
of 11 or 12 to 16 combined with a sixth-form college for pupils over 16.
Secondary education in Scotland is largely organised on comprehensive
lines and in 1969 nearly 176,000 pupils (about 60 per cent of all pupils in educa¬
tion authority secondary schools) were in schools with a comprehensive intake.
Where a selective system still exists Scottish secondary schools fall mainly
into one of three categories or are a combination of all three: (1) junior
secondary schools for pupils likely to leave school at the statutory leaving age
(15, rising to 16 in 1972-73); (2) schools which, in addition to junior secondary
courses, provide courses leading to the Ordinary grade of the Scottish Certifi¬
cate of Education; and (3) senior secondary schools which provide Certificate
courses of four, five and six years.
In Northern Ireland there are grammar schools, secondary (intermediate)
schools, which are the equivalent of the secondary modern schools in England
and Wales, and technical (intermediate) schools, which offer the same facilities
as secondary technical schools in England and Wales. Some comprehensive
type schools exist, and arrangements for transfer between the other types of
schools are flexible.
Special
Educational
Treatment
Special educational treatment is provided for children who require it because
of any physical or mental disability, including maladjustment, either in
ordinary schools or special schools (including hospital schools). For children
at special schools attendance is compulsory up to the age of 16, and a number
of children remain at school beyond this age. There are over 1,14° special
EDUCATION
153
schools in Britain, including hospital schools, day and boarding schools. There
are also boarding homes for handicapped children attending ordinary schools.
There are ten categories of handicapped pupils in England, Wales and
Northern Ireland and nine in Scotland for whom local education authorities
must provide special educational treatment: blind, partially sighted, deaf,
partially hearing, delicate, educationally subnormal, epileptic, maladjusted,
physically handicapped and children suffering from speech defects. There is
no separate category for the delicate in Scotland.
Independent Independent schools in England and Wales receive no grants directly from
Schools public funds but all are open to inspection and must register with the Depart¬
ment of Education and Science which has power to require them to remedy
any objectionable features in their premises, accommodation or instruction
and to exclude any person regarded as unsuitable to teach in or to be the
proprietor of a school. In default, the Department can, in effect, close a school,
but schools have a right of appeal to an Independent Schools Tribunal against
any of the Department’s requirements. The schools whose standards are
regarded by the Department as broadly comparable with those of well-run
maintained schools are, on application, granted the status of ‘recognised
as efficient’. Such schools (some 1,450 of about 2,920 independent schools
registered) contain 72 per cent of the pupils in independent schools. In
Scotland where there are about 111 registered schools, the position is the same
except that there is no ‘recognised as efficient’ status.
Independent schools cater for pupils of all ages and abilities. They include
the preparatory schools and the public schools.1 A high proportion, parti¬
cularly among the recognised efficient schools, provide a boarding education.
(All registered boarding schools are being required to reach the standards
for recognition as efficient within the next few years.) The preparatory schools
cater mainly for boys from about 8 to 13 years of age who are intending to
enter public schools, the largest and most important of the recognised
efficient independent schools. Combined tuition and boarding fees in public
schools generally range between £500 and £758 a year. There are some
270 public schools about half of which are for girls. The boys’ schools in
particular include a high proportion of boarding schools and it is among
these that some of the most famous schools are numbered.
School Leaving The minimum school-leaving age for all but children at special schools (see
and Secondary above) is 15; it will be raised to 16 in 1972-73. Most grammar school pupils
School remain at school at least until they are 16; many leave between the ages of 17
Examinations an(i ^ The number of pupils in all schools staying on beyond the minimum
leaving age has been steadily increasing, and in 1969 34-5 per cent of the
16-year-old age group in England and Wales was still at school.
There is no national leaving examination in England or Wales, but secondary
school pupils (and candidates not attending school) may take the General
Certificate of Education (GCE) or the Certificate of Secondary Education
(CSE). The GCE is conducted at ‘Ordinary’ (O) and ‘Advanced’ (A) levels.
Most candidates for the O-level are about 16 years of age, although some
take it earlier, at the discretion of their head teacher. Most grammar, direct-
grant and independent school pupils and a number from other secondary
1 ‘Public schools’ are usually taken to mean those schools in membership of the Head¬
masters’ Conference, the Governing Bodies Association or the Governing Bodies of
Girls’ Schools Association. Some other schools, mainly direct grant, which are not
independent schools, are also represented on these bodies. They should not be confused
with the state-supported public schools in Scotland.
i54
School Building
FURTHER
EDUCATION
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
schools take the O-level examination, and passes in various subjects are widely
accepted for entry to courses of further education and training. Between 1959
and 1969 the annual number of O-level GCE passes almost doubled. The
advanced examination is at university entrance level and is accepted also for
purposes of entry to many forms of professional training. Since 1955 the
number of school-leavers obtaining two or more A-levels (often regarded as
the minimum qualification for university entrance) has almost trebled. The
CSE is designed for pupils completing five years’ secondary education at the
age of 16; it is controlled by teachers serving in the schools providing candi¬
dates. The highest grade of pass in the CSE is widely accepted as being of the
same standard as a pass in the GCE O-level. Control over the scope and
standards of examinations is exercised by the Schools Council (see p. 150) to
ensure national comparability. It does not lay down model syllabuses or
examination papers but it puts forward ideas and promotes research and
development. Proposals for changing the examinations system in England and
Wales are under discussion.
In Scotland examinations are conducted by the Scottish Certificate of
Education Examination Board. School pupils in the fourth year of secondary
courses sit an examination at 16 years for the award of passes on the Ordinary
grade of the Scottish Certificate of Education, and pupils in the fifth or sixth
year are presented for the Higher grade. For those who have completed their
main studies at the Higher grade but wish to continue their studies in
particular subjects there is a Certificate of Sixth Year Studies.
In Northern Ireland candidates may take the Junior Certificate Examination
at about the age of 14 and the Northern Ireland General Certificate of
Education at about the age of 16.
Local education authorities and voluntary bodies are responsible, under the
general supervision of the central departments, for providing the schools and
other buildings needed for public education in their areas. The central
departments decide on the size and nature of the authorities individual
programmes in the light of national priorities; they also offer guidance to
authorities by means of building bulletins and in other ways.
An extensive school building programme has been carried out in recent
years. This has resulted in the completion of over 12,270 new schools in
Britain since 1945; together with extensions, alterations and remodelling of
existing state schools, over 6’4 million new places have been provided, at a
cost of about £1,805 million. In England and Wales new work to the value
of £178 million is planned for the year 1970-71. In Scotland the authorisation
is about £27 million, and in Northern Ireland nearly £10 million.
Grants of up to 80 per cent of the approved cost are normally available from
the Department of Education and Science for the building of new voluntary
aided schools and for alterations and external repairs to existing aided schools.
The extensive school building programme has been accompanied by new
ideas and methods in design and construction. Industrialised building
techniques have been widely adopted. The new schools are light, airy and
colourful, with a high standard of finish and generous provision of teaching
area and outdoor games space. In primary schools especially, traditional
classroom designs are being modified to allow more flexible use of space.
Further education is a broad term which covers all education beyond the
secondary stage; it may be full-time or part-time, vocational or non-voca-
tional. It includes adult education (see p. 156) and higher education (defined
EDUCATION
155
Institutions
Finance
Students
Courses
Technical Courses
on p. 158). For convenience, advanced work at the level of higher education,
but carried out at institutions regarded as within the further education system,
is included below.
In England and Wales there are 733 major establishments of further education
providing some full-time education, including polytechnics (see p. 162),
technical colleges, colleges of commerce, colleges of art, and a number of
agricultural colleges and institutes. They provide courses up to the levels of first
and higher degrees. There are also nearly 7,240 evening institutes (see p. 157).
In Scotland there are about 90 local further education colleges offering
full- and part-time day courses and a number of evening courses and 10 central
institutions for further education doing advanced work.
In Northern Ireland there are 31 institutions of further education, of which
7 conduct advanced courses.
Since most of the technical colleges and other further education establishments
in Britain are either maintained or aided from public funds, tuition fees are
moderate, and often remitted for young people under 18 or 19 years of age.
Many full-time students are helped by awards from local education authorities.
The awards, generally based on the results of the General Certificate of
Education or a corresponding examination, are assessed to cover tuition fees
and a maintenance grant, but parents who can afford to contribute towards the
cost are required to do so. There are also some scholarships available from
endowments, and from particular industries or companies for the most
promising of their young workers.
Capital expenditure on further education institutions in England and Wales
totalled £338-6 million in the ten years to 1969-70. In Scotland the total for
these ten years was more than £33 million, and in Northern Ireland over
£6 million.
In 1968 there were 277,778 full-time and sandwich course (see below)
students and over 1 -7 million (including evening) part-time students in tech¬
nological, technical, art and commercial colleges in Britain (a total of i-8
million in England and Wales, 161,300 in Scotland and 34,496 in Northern
Ireland). In 1969 the total number of students on advanced courses in Eng¬
land and Wales was about 197,000, in Scotland 18,322 and in Northern Ire¬
land 2,908.
The courses provided are full-time, sandwich (up to five years in length,
generally consisting of alternate periods of about six months of full-time study
in a technical college and supervised experience in industry), block release (on
similar principles, but with shorter periods in college), day release (generally
attendance at a technical college for one day a week during working hours),
and evening classes.
Sandwich courses in higher education are becoming increasingly popular.
At the lower levels the numbers of day release and block release courses are
expanding, and to a large extent replacing evening classes in certain vocational
subjects through the work of the Industrial Training Boards (see p. 417).
There is a wide variety of courses for young people in various trades and
occupations, leading to appropriate qualifications at the end of a course of up
to five years. Other, more academic, courses lead to the National Certificates
and Diplomas approved by joint committees consisting of representatives of
education departments, teacher organisations and the appropriate professional
156
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
bodies.1 These courses are normally at two levels, ordinary and higher. The
Ordinary National Certificate courses normally last two years part-time and
students usually follow them between the ages of 16 and 19; the level of the
certificate is generally considered to approach that of GCE A-level. The
Ordinary National Diploma courses are the full-time or sandwich counterparts
of the Ordinary National Certificate but involve study to a greater depth. In
1969 1,827 Ordinary National Diplomas were granted, more than three times
the number for 1963. The Higher National Diploma, which requires a further
two years’ full-time or three years’ sandwich study, is recognised, within its
more restricted field, as approaching the standard of a pass degree; the Higher
National Certificate (after two further years’ part-time study) is somewhat
lower in standard because it is more narrowly based. (For degree courses,
see p. 160).
Business and Many technical colleges, evening institutes and independent colleges offer
Secretarial Courses courses in shorthand, typing and book-keeping. Most local technical colleges
offer some lower-level work in business and commerce; higher-level work is
generally concentrated in colleges with a department of business studies or
in specialised colleges of commerce. There are a number of courses for young
entrants to clerical and other non-technical posts including two-year part-
time courses leading to the Certificate or Higher Certificate in Office Studies.
Some business education is related to the specialised examination require¬
ments of various professional bodies; large numbers of the candidates taking
such courses do so through correspondence courses. In England, Wales and
Northern Ireland there are part-time courses leading to the Ordinary National
Certificate and Higher National Certificate in Business Studies. There are
also full-time and sandwich courses leading to the Ordinary National Diploma
and Higher National Diploma in Business Studies. In Scotland, broadly
similar courses lead to the Scottish National Certificate, the Scottish Higher
National Certificate and the Scottish National Diploma in Business Studies
awarded by the Scottish Council for Commercial, Administrative and
Professional Education.
Adult Education Adult education is generally taken to mean courses of non-vocational education
for people over 18. In 1969 an estimated 2-2 million people registered for
these courses which were provided by local education authorities, various
voluntary bodies, of which the Workers’ Educational Association (WEA) is
the most notable, certain residential colleges, and the adult education (‘extra¬
mural’) departments of universities. The aim and effectiveness of adult
education provision is under examination in England and Wales and in
Scotland.
The residential colleges, the university departments and the voluntary
bodies, such as the WEA, recognised as competent to provide adult education,
receive government grants. So do various national bodies which promote
educational activities of a non-political kind, such as the National Federation
of Women’s Institutes and the National Council of Young Men’s Christian
Associations. Many of these bodies also receive grants from local education
authorities for services rendered locally.
A major share in the provision of adult education is increasingly being
1 Proposals for the establishment of a Technician Education Council and a Business
Education Council to administer technician and business courses at all levels in
England and Wales are under consideration by the Government (the Haslegrave
Report, see Bibliography, p. 477), and a committee is investigating the position in
Scotland.
EDUCATION
157
assumed by local education authorities. Most of it is on a part-time basis,
mainly in evening institutes (day schools used by adults in the evening) which
have a total of well over a million students, and also in colleges of further
education, schools of art, adult education centres, community centres, literary
institutes and youth clubs. There are about 30 short-term residential colleges
or centres in Great Britain maintained or aided by local education authorities,
providing courses varying in length between a weekend and a fortnight. Many
of the courses are practical, but there are widespread opportunities for
academic study.
The Village Colleges pioneered in Cambridgeshire and variously adapted in
Cumberland, Monmouthshire, Leicestershire, Peterborough and Somerset
are a local education authority development mainly in rural areas. The
colleges are secondary schools planned also as cultural community centres,
providing educational, social and cultural opportunities for adults in the areas
served. Community centres in general have a more social character and,
though aided by the local education authorities, are usually managed by
voluntary community associations many of which are affiliated to the National
Federation of Community Associations. The training of community centre
wardens is linked with that of youth leaders (see p. 167).
Seven residential colleges (six in England and Wales, one in Scotland)
provide courses of one or two years, some of which lead to a diploma. The
colleges vary in character, although they all aim at providing a liberal educa¬
tion and do not apply academic entry tests.
In general, courses at the highest levels in liberal studies are provided by
the extra-mural departments of the universities, many of which have full-time
staff appointed for this purpose and can call on the services of other members
of the university staff; and by the Workers’ Educational Association, which
also employs organising tutors and works closely with the university extra¬
mural departments. In 1969 over 272,000 students in Britain attended such
courses. Similar work is also promoted in some of the centres maintained by
local education authorities.
The National Institute of Adult Education provides in London a centre of
information, research and publication for adult education, as well as a channel
of co-operation and consultation for the many organisations in England and
Wales which are interested in this subject. It is mainly financed by contri¬
butions from local education authorities and assisted by a grant from the
Department of Education and Science. The Scottish Institute of Adult
Education is the corresponding body in Scotland.
In Northern Ireland the extra-mural department of the Queen’s University
of Belfast organises and staffs adult education classes which are supplemented
by classes organised by various non-official bodies. The Workers’ Educational
Association is responsible for classes at other than university level and
receives grants from the Ministry of Education.
TEACHERS AND Teachers are appointed by local education authorities or school governing
TEACHING bodies or managers. In 1969 there were about 380,800 full-time and 47,800
part-time (equivalent to 22,490 full-time) teachers in publicly maintained
primary and secondary schools in Britain, an average of one teacher to 22‘6
pupils. The increase in teachers is more than keeping pace with the rise in
the school population so that there continues to be improvement in the ratio
of teachers to pupils; greater numbers are entering the colleges of education
(see p. 161), more university graduates are turning to teaching, and many
married women, formerly teachers, are returning to the profession. Many
158 BRITAIN I971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
more are needed if the Government’s aim of eliminating all classes over 30 is
to be achieved. In 1969 there were about 53,500 full-time teachers in grant-
aided establishments of further education in Britain, and many more part-time
teachers. Most teachers in technical colleges have had some industrial and
professional experience.
There are national salary scales for teachers in schools and other educational
institutions maintained from public funds in England and Wales, in Scotland,
and in Northern Ireland.
Teaching Aids Radio broadcasts to schools and colleges of further education are well
and Educational established. In 1969-70 the School Broadcasting Department of the BBC sent
Techniques out about 70 different radio series, some of which were repeated within each
week to make it easier for the schools to arrange their listening times. These
programmes were used by about 31,000 schools in Britain. Television reached
some 21,000 schools and the British Broadcasting Corporation and the
Independent Television Authority between them provided some 21 hours of
educational programmes a week during term time.
Radio provides a great variety of educational programmes for adults, both
vocational and non-vocational; most of them are grouped in the ‘Study
Session’ hourly programmes on five nights a week. Television programmes
for similar audiences have grown fast; they are mostly shown on Saturday
and Sunday mornings and in the evening during the week. There have also
been a number of experimental projects sponsored between the BBC, some of
the independent television companies, universities, local education authorities
and a voluntary body, the National Extension College. (For the Open
University see p. 159).
There has been a rapid development in the use of programmed learning and
its integrated use with other media. Language laboratories (using tape
recorders in individual booths) are being used at all levels of the educational
system. Most universities in Britain use closed circuit television in one or
more of their departments; it is also used increasingly in medical schools,
colleges of education, technical colleges and schools; and a system being
established in central London to link some 1,300 educational establishments is
thought likely to be the world’s biggest closed-circuit network.
Schools and colleges co-ordinate different methods of audio-visual pre¬
sentation, i ncluding radio, television, films, colour slides, wall charts, maps,
models and tape recordings. For example, the BBC’s ‘Radiovision’ pro¬
grammes for schools use coloured film strips synchronised with sound
programmes. The National Council for Educational Technology and the
Educational Foundation for Visual Aids advise all bodies connected with
education and with training in industry and in the Services on the availability
and use of audio-visual aids and other media.
HIGHER The system of higher education includes universities, colleges of education
EDUCATION an(j advanced courses at various colleges in the further education system.
(Advanced courses are dealt with on p. 161 and higher education in Northern
Ireland on p. 162.) The expansion of higher education has been accelerated by
the report of the Committee on Higher Education under Lord Robbins’s
chairmanship (published in 1963, see Bibliography, p. 477), which suggested
that by 1973-74 there should be 390,000 places in higher education in Great
Britain, of which 218,000 should be in university institutions. These aims
have already been achieved—there were 437,000 students pursuing higher
education courses in 1969-70, of which 219,000 were in the universities.
EDUCATION
Universities
University Finance
159
There are 44 universities (not counting the Open University) in Britain,
compared with 17 in 1945. Although the Government is responsible for
providing about 80 per cent of universities’ income it does not control their
work or teaching nor does it have direct dealings with the universities. The
grants are distributed by the University Grants Committee, a body appointed
by the Secretary of State to advise him on state aid to the universities; its
members are drawn from the academic and business worlds. Universities as
such are not represented on it.
The English universities are: Aston1 (Birmingham), Bath,1 Birmingham,
Bradford,1 Bristol, Brunei1 (London), Cambridge, City1 (London), Durham,
East Anglia,1 Essex,1 Exeter, Hull, Keele, Kent at Canterbury,1 Lancaster,1
Leeds, Leicester, Liverpool, London, Loughborough,1 Manchester, Newcastle
upon Tyne, Nottingham, Oxford, Reading, Salford,1 Sheffield, Southampton,
Surrey,1 Sussex,1 Warwick1 and York.1 The federated University of Wales
includes four university colleges, the Welsh National School of Medicine,
the University of Wales Institute of Science and Technology and St. David’s
College, Lampeter. The Scottish universities are: Aberdeen, Dundee,1
Edinburgh, Glasgow, Heriot-Watt1 (Edinburgh), St. Andrews, Stirling,1
and Strathclyde1 (Glasgow). In Northern Ireland there is Queen’s University,
Belfast, and the New University of Ulster1 in Coleraine (see p. 162).
The Universities of Oxford and Cambridge date from the twelfth and
thirteenth centuries and the Scottish Universities of St. Andrews, Glasgow,
Aberdeen and Edinburgh from the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. All the
other universities were founded in the nineteenth or twentieth centuries.
There are five other institutions where the work is of university standard:
University of Manchester Institute of Science and Technology; the two post¬
graduate business schools which are supported jointly by industry and the
Government—the Manchester Business School and the London Graduate
School of Business Studies, associated with the London School of Economics
and the Imperial College of Science and Technology; Cranfield Institute of
Technology for mainly postgraduate work in aeronautics and other subjects;
and the Royal College of Art.
The Government has established the Open University, which received its
charter in 1969, to provide degree and other courses, using a combination of
television and correspondence courses together with a network of viewing and
listening centres. No formal academic qualifications are required to register
for these courses, but the standards of its degrees (to be awarded on a system
of credits for each course completed) will be the same as those of other
universities. The university is financed by fees and a grant direct from the
Department of Education and Science. Student enrolments began in the
autumn of 1970 and courses (based on the calendar year) will begin in
January 1971.
In spite of the large sums of public money spent on universities they have
remained autonomous institutions, due largely to the existence of the
University Grants Committee. The Committee acts as a link between the
Government from which it receives a block grant and the universities to
which it allocates this grant. In this way the Government contributes over
70 per cent towards the current income of universities and about 90 per cent
towards their capital programmes for building work, purchasing sites and
properties, professional fees and furniture and equipment. Further sums are
raised by the universities themselves.
1 Has received its charter since i960.
p#
i6o
Studies and
Degrees
Students
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
In Great Britain the recurrent grants for the academic year 1970-71 are
provisionally estimated at some £182 million, over three times the amount for
1960-61. Capital grants paid out during 1970-71 are expected to be about
^59 million, approaching three times the 1960-61 figure. In 1945 the total
public expenditure, capital and current, on universities was £4 million. The
Comptroller and Auditor General (see p. 361) has access to the books and
records of the University Grants Committee and the universities to check that
the funds entrusted to the universities are efficiently administered. He cannot
question policy decisions or decisions reached on academic grounds.
Courses in arts and science are offered by most universities. Imperial College,
London, University of Manchester Institute of Science and Technology, the
University of Strathclyde and some of the newer universities concentrate on
technology although they may also offer a number of courses in social studies,
modern languages and other non-technological subjects. About 44-2 per cent
of full-time university students in Great Britain are taking arts or social studies
courses and 42 per cent science and technology: more than 10 per cent are
studying medicine, dentistry and health, and the remainder agriculture,
forestry, veterinary science, architecture and town and country planning.
University degree courses generally extend over three or four years, though
in medicine, dentistry and veterinary science five or six years are required.
The first degree of Bachelor (Master for Arts, in the older Scottish univer¬
sities) is awarded on the completion of such a course, depending on satisfactory
examination results. Further study or research is required at the modern
universities for the degree of Master and by all universities for that of Doctor.
Actual degree titles vary according to the practice of each university. Diplomas
and certificates are awarded after shorter courses in some subjects. A uniform
standard of degree throughout the country is ensured by having external
examiners on all examining boards. In the last decade there has been a
tendency for degree courses to become more broadly based in subject matter,
particularly in the new universities.
University teaching combines lectures, practical classes (in scientific
subjects) and small group teaching in either seminars or tutorials, the last
being a traditional feature of the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge.
Most members of the academic staffs devote time to research and at all
universities there are postgraduate students engaged in research.
Admission to the universities is by examination and selection; there is no
religious test and no colour bar. Women are admitted on equal terms with
men for most subjects, but at Cambridge their numbers may be limited by
ordinance. The general proportion of men to women students is nearly three
to one; at Oxford it is nearly five to one, and at Cambridge eight to one.
A third of all full-time university students in Britain are living in colleges and
halls of residence, slightly under a half are in lodgings, and the remainder live
at home.
Despite recent expansion programmes, applications for places at universities
for arts studies still exceed the number available. Prospective candidates for
nearly all the universities apply for places through the Universities Central
Council on Admissions. The only students to apply directly are applicants to
the Open University and Scottish candidates for the universities of Glasgow,
Aberdeen, Strathclyde and Dundee.
At the beginning of the academic year 1969-70 there were over 219,000
full-time university students in Great Britain. About 38,000 were post¬
graduate. There were also in 1969-70 some 24,050 part-time students, more
Staff
Colleges of
Education
Advanced
Courses in
Further
Education
EDUCATION l6l
than 98 per cent of whom were working for university-level qualifications. A
further 19,560 were admitted to London University’s external first degree
examinations, the main external degree available in Britain.
In 1968-69 there were about 26,070 full-time university teachers in Great
Britain; about 11*5 per cent of them were professors. The ratio of staff to
students was about one to eight, one of the most favourable in the world.
Teachers in maintained schools must hold qualifications approved by the
education departments. In England and Wales the majority qualify by under¬
taking a three-year course at a college of education. Some college students
obtain a degree—Bachelor of Education (B.Ed.)—and a professional qualifica¬
tion by means of a four-year course. For well-qualified older students there
are special shortened courses. Compulsory professional training for people
with degrees and certain other specialist qualifications, hitherto qualified by
virtue of their qualifications, is gradually being introduced. A one-year
training course is already compulsory for those who have obtained such
qualifications since 1st January 1970 and wish to teach in primary schools,
and the same will be required in order to teach in secondary schools for those
who acquire such qualifications after 1st January 1974. In Scotland all teachers
in secondary schools must be graduates (or have equivalent qualifications) and
must have taken a course of teacher training but primary school teachers may
qualify by taking a three-year course at a college of education. The General
Teaching Council has almost complete powers over the profession excluding
salary matters but including the function of maintaining a register of qualified
teachers. Proposals for a similar body for England and Wales is under
consideration.
In England and Wales there are 160 colleges of education 16 of which are
for day students only, 6 departments of education in technical colleges and
polytechnics, 28 university departments of education, 4 colleges for training
teachers for technical institutions and 13 art teacher training centres. In
1969-70 there were about 110,000 students in colleges and departments of
education outside universities (including over 7,500 in day colleges), about
5,900 in university departments of education, and nearly 2,150 in colleges of
education (technical) and art teacher training centres. The total of 118,050
students is nearly three times that for 1960-61. In Scotland there are 10
colleges of education; the number of students in training in 1969-70 was over
12,030 with a proposed increase to over 14,000 in 1970-71. Thus the Robbins
report target of 122,000 teacher training places in Great Britain by 1973-74
has been achieved already.
The education departments, universities, local education authorities and
other bodies provide a variety of short in-service training courses for practising
teachers.
In 1969-70 over 218,000 students in Great Britain were taking advanced
courses other than in universities and colleges of education in a wide variety
of subjects including architecture, art and design (see p. 155), catering,
engineering, natural sciences and business studies. An increasing proportion
of the students were taking courses leading to the awards of the Council for
National Academic Awards. The Council has power to award degrees and
other academic qualifications, comparable in standard with those granted by
universities, to students who successfully complete approved courses of
study in establishments which do not have the power to award their own
162
Awards
Northern
Ireland
BRITAIN I971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
degrees. In 1969-70 there were 271 courses being followed by about 20,116
students in 47 colleges. These courses were mainly in science and technology
but included the arts, social studies, business studies and law, and some
subjects in which there are few or no courses offered in universities.
The Government is concentrating higher education provision outside
universities and colleges of education within 30 major national institutions
being renamed ‘polytechnics’ and formed from some 60 existing colleges.
They will have, ultimately, at least 2,000 full-time students each and will be
comprehensive institutions providing all types of courses (full-time, sandwich
and part-time) at all levels of higher education. By September 1970 28
polytechnics had been designated.
Management studies are provided by universities, polytechnics and other
further education colleges by individual companies and by trade and industrial
federations. (For the two postgraduate business schools, see p. 159.) Certain
independent colleges specialise in management training. Many universities
have introduced management studies into the curriculum and courses for the
postgraduate Diploma in Management Studies are run by some technical
colleges. In Scotland courses leading to the Certificate of Business Adminis¬
tration are provided for students in junior supervisory positions.
Awards to enable students to undertake higher education are made under one
of the most generous grant systems in the world. It is national policy that no
boy or girl should be prevented by lack of means from taking an advanced
course at a university or elsewhere. As a result, over 90 per cent of students in
higher education in Great Britain are aided from private or public funds.
A UNESCO survey has indicated that university students in Britain come
from a wider social background than those in any other western European
country.
In England, Wales and Scotland most adequately qualified British students
can obtain awards from public funds in order to attend full-time at a university,
college of education or major further education establishment. In England and
Wales local education authorities provide awards. In Scotland students’
allowances for advanced courses are granted by the Scottish Education
Department. The amount of these awards depends upon the income of the
student and his parents. Grants for postgraduate study are offered annually
by the Department of Education and Science, the Research Councils and the
Scottish Education Department.
Two institutions provide university education in Northern Ireland—Queen’s
University of Belfast and the New University of Ulster, Coleraine, which
will incorporate Magee University College, Londonderry. The New University
consists of four schools (biological studies, social and economic studies,
physical sciences and humanities) and an education centre with the status of a
school. Technological studies are concentrated at Queen’s University, Belfast.
The report of the committee on higher education published in 1965 (the
Lockwood Report, see Bibliography, p. 477), estimated that the number of
full-time university places required in Northern Ireland by 1980 would be
between 12,000 and 13,000. About 7,000 will be in Queen’s University and the
remainder in the New University. In 1969-70 there were 6,513 students at
Queen’s University, 902 at the New University and 165 at Magee University
College. Between 1959 and 1969 over j£i8*i million was spent on university
building projects and further expansion is planned. Recurrent expenditure
in 1969-70 was estimated at nearly ^4-1 million. Government grants are made
EDUCATIONAL
RESEARCH
INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS
Overseas
Students
in Britain
EDUCATION
by the Ministry of Education which usually first seeks the advice of the
University Grants Committee.
Teacher training takes place in the university departments of education
and six training colleges, with a total of 2,662 students in 1969-70. In Belfast
there are three general colleges of education which provide three-year
certificate courses and four-year degree courses (awarded by Queen’s
University). In addition, they provide one-year courses for university
graduates and others, including serving teachers. The other three colleges
provide more specialised teacher training courses. A new college, the Ulster
College, is being set up in which much of the higher education provided
outside the universities and the colleges of education will be concentrated.
University and further education scholarships are awarded by local authorities
and postgraduate awards and teacher training scholarships by the Ministry of
Education, the conditions of award being the same as those for Great Britain.
Research into the theory and practice of education and the organisation of
educational services is supported financially by the educational departments,
local education authorities, philanthropic organisations, universities and
teachers’ associations. The Social Science Research Council is an additional
channel for government support.
The great proportion of educational research is done in the universities,
particularly within departments or institutes of education and departments
concerned with sociology, psychology, statistics and problems of physical and
mental handicap. Outside universities, the major research institute is the
National Foundation for Educational Research, an autonomous body which
derives its income mainly from corporate members, including local education
authorities, teachers’ organisations and universities and from an annual grant
from the Department of Education and Science. There are also the Scottish
Council for Research in Education and the Northern Ireland Council of
Educational Research. The Schools Council sponsors a number of projects in
England and Wales.
There is no single central organisation for the co-ordination of educational
research, but the central departments, by their allocation of funds for projects,
exercise some influence on the direction of research effort. At the end of
March 1970 the Department of Education and Science had a total commit¬
ment of about £830,000 spread over 103 projects. Expenditure during 1969-70
exceeded £620,000. The Scottish Education Department’s grant to the
Scottish Council and other research bodies totalled about £60,000.
Among philanthropic organisations that provide generously for research are
the Nuffield Foundation and Ford Foundation, the Gulbenkian Trust, the
Leverhulme Trust, the Rockefeller Foundation, the Carnegie United King¬
dom Trust, the Wolfson Foundation and the Foundation for Management
Education.
There are many opportunities for overseas students to study in Britain and
for British students to study abroad and British teachers are encouraged to
serve overseas for a period.
Students come to Britain from countries throughout the world to study at
universities or other educational institutions or for professional training. In
the academic year 1968-69 there were 69,819 overseas students in Britain,
of whom about 15,975 were at universities, another 13,798 at technical
colleges and the remainder learning English or training as teachers, doctors
164
BRITAIN 197U AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
and nurses, for the law, banking and accountancy, or in industry. About 60
per cent of all overseas students were from the Commonwealth.
A wide range of public and private fellowships and scholarships for advanced
study in Britain are awarded annually to students and research workers from
other countries. Under the Commonwealth Scholarship and Fellowship Plan,
the Governments of certain Commonwealth countries have made awards
available at their own institutions of higher education to men and women from
other Commonwealth countries. At the beginning of the academic year
1969-70, 600 scholarships and fellowships (including medical awards) were
held in Britain. In addition the Commonwealth Bursary Scheme achieved
a total of 550 teachers and others training in Britain. Examples of smaller
government schemes are the Athlone Fellowship Scheme, under which about
40 fellowships a year are awarded to Canadian engineering graduates for up to
two years’ further study, training and research in institutions or industries in
Britain, and the Indian Centres of Advanced Study Scheme in which, as part
of a plan for establishing links between British and Indian universities,
academic staff from 12 Indian universities spend a period with British
universities.
About 500 British Council1 scholarships, tenable usually for one year in
Britain, are offered annually to graduates of overseas universities. Twenty-four
Marshall Scholarships for two years’ study at any university in Britain are
offered annually by the British Government to graduates from the United
States of America and over 60 Rhodes Scholarships are awarded annually to
Commonwealth and United States graduates for two years of study at the
University of Oxford. A further two Rhodes scholarships are awarded to
graduates from the Federal Republic of Germany. Other universities and
colleges themselves offer many scholarships for which graduate students of
any nationality are eligible.2
Fellowships and training awards for study in British institutions are avail¬
able under the Central Treaty Organisation, the Colombo Plan, the Special
Commonwealth African Assistance Plan and British technical assistance
programmes for many other countries. Large numbers of awards for study or
training in Britain are also made under the United Nations Programmes of
Technical Assistance and by the United Nations specialised agencies such as
UNESCO, FAO and WHO.
The Commonwealth Education Liaison Committee supplements normal
1 The purpose of the British Council (founded in 1934) is defined in its Royal Charter as
the promotion of a wider knowledge of the United Kingdom and the English language
abroad and the development of closer cultural relations between Britain and other
countries. The Council is governed by an executive committee of 30 members,
broadly representative of many elements of the life of Britain and including eight
members nominated by ministers. It is financed almost entirely from public funds.
The activities of the Council, which has staff in 75 overseas countries, are concerned
with: English language teaching and other educational work including science;
fostering personal contacts between British and overseas people, especially in the
educational, professional and scientific fields; running, or helping to maintain, libraries
of British books and periodicals overseas; and presenting overseas the best in the arts
in Britain. Its work in Britain is concerned mainly with professional visitors and with
the welfare of overseas students.
2 The Association of Commonwealth Universities publishes every two years a hand¬
book, United Kingdom Postgraduate Awards (see Bibliography, p. 476), listing post¬
graduate awards tenable at universities in Britain (and a short list of awards at overseas
universities for which British students are eligible). The Association promotes
co-operation between Commonwealth universities. It provides publication and
information services, and also makes available secretariats for various bodies affecting
its member institutions, such as the Commonwealth Scholarship Commission and the
Marshall Aid Commemoration Commission.
EDUCATION
Arrangements
for Overseas
Students
British Students
Overseas
165
direct dealings on education between the countries of the Commonwealth.
The fourth Commonwealth Education Conference was held in Lagos in 1968.
The national representatives in London (Office of the High Commissioner or
Embassy) of a number of countries accept certain special responsibilities for
their students in Britain. The British Council acts as an agent for the overseas
departments of State in matters affecting the welfare of overseas students,
and provides certain services, such as meeting on arrival, introduction courses,
an accommodation bureau and student centres in London and other university
cities. The Council also organises a varied programme of lectures, discussions
and social and other activities and arranges introductions of students to people
who wish to invite them to their homes. In the vacations there are courses in
many parts of the country which offer opportunities for getting to know more
about British life in town and country. In term time there are visits to various
places of interest, and theatre and concert parties are arranged.
Among many voluntary organisations which offer a welcome to overseas
students are the East and West Friendship Council, Rotary, Round Table,
the Victoria League, the Royal Over-Seas League, the Royal Commonwealth
Society, the National Union of Students, the English-Speaking Union and
Churches of all denominations. The United Kingdom Council for Overseas
Student Affairs, established in July 1968, is an independent central body
serving overseas students and organisations and individuals concerned in
overseas students affairs; it provides both a forum for the exchange of ideas
and machinery for consultation with government and other authorities. The
London Conference on Overseas Students, for which the British Council
provides the secretariat, co-ordinates work of voluntary organisations for
overseas students in the metropolis. In many London boroughs and in other
large cities there are committees which help students to make contact with
local residents and organisations. Similar conferences have come into being
in other large cities in Britain. These organisations also help by entertaining
overseas students and many of them have established hostels with the
financial help of the Overseas Students Welfare Expansion Programme
which is administered by the British Council. By the beginning of 1970
grants had been approved for 130 projects, providing places for about 4,500
students.
Under the Commonwealth Scholarship and Fellowship Plan, a number of
scholarships are made available annually to United Kingdom students by the
Governments of other Commonwealth countries for study in their universities,
colleges and other institutions of higher learning. In 1969-70, 27 awards were
accepted by United Kingdom students in seven Commonwealth countries. In
addition the Study and Serve Scheme enables British students to undertake
a year’s postgraduate study at universities in the developing countries on
condition that they also work for a period in appropriate employment in the
country concerned.
The United States/United Kingdom Educational Commission (still some¬
times called the Fulbright Commission) offers travel grants for postgraduate
study in the United States. Notable among more recently established scholar¬
ships are the Kennedy scholarships, to enable British students to study at three
American universities, and the Churchill travel scholarships, for men and
women in all walks of life. British students are also offered scholarships at
institutions of higher education in 22 European and 10 non-European countries
outside the Commonwealth.
i66
Teachers
Serving
Overseas
Other
Educational
Aid
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
About 2,020 teachers were recruited in Britain during 1969 for posts in
schools, colleges of education, technical colleges and universities in developing
countries, including about 1,780 for posts in the developing countries of the
Commonwealth; almost all of them are supported by public funds. Steps
taken by the Government to help school teachers to serve for a period overseas
have included the establishment of a National Council for the Supply and
Training of Teachers Overseas and the introduction of special measures to
safeguard their interests both while abroad and on their return home. Recruit¬
ment is carried out by the Ministry of Overseas Development, the British
Council and the voluntary teacher recruiting agencies, such as the Catholic
Overseas Appointments and the Overseas Appointments Bureaux.
There are about 1,000 British university teachers serving overseas, most of
them recruited through the Inter-University Council for Higher Education
Overseas in collaboration, in some cases, with the Association of Common¬
wealth Universities and the British Council. Government encouragement also
includes support for a number of schemes of assistance for overseas univer¬
sities which are administered by the Inter-University Council, including the
scheme for Special Commonwealth Awards, which are made to leading scholars
from British universities who are willing to work for a minimum of two years
in important posts in the universities of developing Commonwealth countries.
Outside the schemes, an increasing number of graduate and qualified
volunteers, also cadet volunteers (school leavers), 1,899 1969-70, are going
overseas for one or two years, a large number to teach. Many of them go with
the support of voluntary bodies (co-ordinated under the British Volunteer
Programme) which receive financial assistance from the Government.
Interchange schemes, under which teachers in Britain exchange posts for
a year with teachers overseas, include one with the United States and another
with Commonwealth countries whereby each year over 100 British teachers
exchange posts with teachers from Canada, Australia and New Zealand. Official
exchange schemes also operate between Britain and several European countries
both for teachers and for temporary assistants’ posts for language specialists.
Britain provides, on request, assistance to the developing countries in several
other ways, including the loan of educational experts for technical and
consultant services and specialist missions, through various educational
organisations and the Ministry of Overseas Development. The Centre for
Educational Development Overseas (CEDO) was established in April 1970
and has taken over the activities of the Centre for Educational Television
Overseas, the Overseas Visual Aids Centre and the Centre for Curriculum
Renewal and Educational Development Overseas. It is intended that CEDO
will become the British centre to which those who are concerned with the
modernisation of education in developing countries will apply for information,
advice and assistance.
YOUTH SERVICES
The object of youth services in Britain is to provide for the leisure-time
activities of young people and to offer them opportunities—complementary to
those of home, formal education and work—for discovering and developing
their personal resources, so that they may be better equipped to be responsible
members of the community. Membership of youth organisations is voluntary
and the facilities are sufficiently varied to appeal to every type of boy and girl.
EDUCATION
State and
Voluntary
Partnership
Training
The Voluntary
Organisations
167
A number of youth organisations have spontaneously developed over the last
century, mainly by voluntary effort. These organisations now work in partner¬
ship with local education authorities and the central government in the Youth
Service. There is no attempt to impose uniformity or to create any national
youth organisation. The status of the Youth Service as an essential part of the
educational system of Great Britain was confirmed by the Education Act 1944
and the Education (Scotland) Act 1945; in Northern Ireland, youth welfare
work is promoted under the Education Act (Northern Ireland) 1947, and the
Youth Welfare, Physical Training and Recreation Act (Northern Ireland)
1962.
The education departments provide grants in aid of the administrative and
training work of some national voluntary youth organisations, towards the
expense of training full-time youth leaders and towards the cost of premises
and equipment of youth clubs provided by voluntary bodies.
Local education authorities co-operate with voluntary organisations in their
areas: most give some financial help and lend premises and equipment
(though the local voluntary organisations still raise most of their day-to-day
running expenses by their own efforts). In recent years more and more
authorities have undertaken the building and running of youth clubs. Almost
all have appointed youth committees on which official and voluntary bodies
are represented, and most employ youth organisers to help in the promotion
and encouragement of youth work.
Ministers are advised on the finance and development of the Youth Service
in Scotland and Northern Ireland by the Standing Consultative Council on
Youth and Community Service and the Youth and Sports Council respec¬
tively. Annual grants to the value of over £600,000 are made towards the
headquarters expenses of the national voluntary youth organisations in Britain
and there are special grants for voluntary projects. The Department of
Education and Science authorised a £5 million building programme for
England and Wales for the period 1970-71, compared with £4*5 million for
1969-70. Local authorities’ contributions to the youth service in England and
Wales amounted to some £12-4 million in 1969-70. In Scotland annual
expenditure on the youth services is estimated at about £460,000.
In England and Wales there is a basic two-year period of training for youth
workers, undertaken in conjunction with the training of community centre
wardens. Courses are provided at colleges of education and further education..
There are at present over 1,800 qualified full-time workers. In addition a
youth work option is provided at more than 30 colleges of education in order
that trainee teachers may have the opportunity of achieving dual qualification.
In Scotland the basic period of training for the youth and community
service has been extended to three years. Courses are offered at two colleges
of education.
The voluntary organisations vary greatly in character since nearly all of them
were formed to serve specific groups of young people; some of them provide
educational and religious activities as well as social and recreational pursuits
for their members, and all of them encourage high ideals of personal conduct
and service to the community.
Twenty-five national voluntary youth organisations, all with memberships
of at least 10,000, are constituent members of the Standing Conference of
National Voluntary Youth Organisations, a consultative body which takes
action only in the name of its member bodies and with their consent. A further
168
BRITAIN I97I: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
32 bodies are associate or observer members. The corresponding body in
Scotland is the Scottish Standing Conference of Voluntary Youth Organisa¬
tions, in Northern Ireland the Standing Conference of Youth Organisations,
and in Wales the Standing Conference for Wales of Voluntary Youth Organisa¬
tions. It is estimated that some 3-5 million young people belong to voluntary
youth organisations in Britain.
Among the youth organisations with a mainly religious origin and purpose
are the Young Men’s Christian Association (YMCA) and Young Women’s
Christian Association (YWCA), with about 88,000 and 30,000 members respec¬
tively; the Boys’ Brigade (172,000), the Church Lads’ Brigade (13,000), the
Girls’ Brigade (98,000), the Girls’ Friendly Society (24,000), the Methodist
Association of Youth Clubs (115,000), the Salvation Army Youth Organisa¬
tions (99,000), the Catholic Young Men’s Society of Great Britain (15,000),
the Catholic Youth Service Council (62,000), the Young Christian Workers
(18,000), and the Association for Jewish Youth (25,000).
The Scouts Association and Girl Guides Association have world-wide
affiliations; they are undenominational and non-political, and were founded
by Lord Baden-Powell in 1908 and 1910 to develop character and good
citizenship in boys and girls. Their total membership in Britain under 21
is about 530,000 scouts and 772,000 guides.
The National Association of Boys’ Clubs, with about 2,000 affiliated clubs
and 170,000 members, and the National Association of Youth Clubs, with
nearly 3,500 affiliated clubs and 282,000 members, are concerned mainly with
the 14 to 20 age group. Each affiliated club has its own rules, but all aim at
giving young people opportunities to develop into mature members of society.
A notable trend in recent years has been the growth in voluntary service by
young people to those in need in the community, such as the elderly and the
sick, the mentally ill and the handicapped. Through organisations such as
International Voluntary Service, Community Service Volunteers, Task Force,
Toe H and others, thousands of young people are doing valuable voluntary
work, both within and outside Britain. The Government has set up the Young
Volunteer Force Foundation which controls a team of 40 young people
available on request to assist local authorities, hospitals and other organisations
in encouraging and organising voluntary service.
The pre-Service organisations for boys (the Combined Cadet Force,
Army Cadet Force and Air Training Corps) combine social, educational and
physical development with training for possible entry into the armed forces;
their combined membership is about 120,000. The Combined Cadet Force
(CCF) contingents are based on schools in which education is continued to the
age of 17 or beyond. Training normally begins at 14 and the boys can choose
whether they will join the Royal Navy, Army or Royal Air Force sections.
The Army Cadet Force and the Air Training Corps are for boys in schools
that do not have CCF contingents or for those who have left school. The Sea
Cadet Corps, although not a pre-Service organisation, helps boys who wish
to make their career at sea; its membership is about 18,000. The Girls’
Venture Corps, with about 8,000 members, has an Air Wing offering aviation
courses.
The National Federation of Young Farmers’ Clubs in England and Wales
has about 38,000 members between 10 and 25 years old, the Scottish Associa¬
tion of Young Farmers’ Clubs has over 6,000 and Northern Ireland Young
Farmer Clubs about 4,000 members: in addition to encouraging interest in
agriculture and appreciation of country life, the clubs provide training in the
arts of citizenship and develop ability to serve the community.
EDUCATION
Other
Organisations
Concerned with
Youth Work
169
The Welsh League of Youth (Urdd Gobaith Cymru) has a membership of
about 43,000; its aim is the ‘development of Christian citizenship among the
youth of Wales’.
The Youth Hostels Associations in England and Wales, Scotland and
Northern Ireland have a network of hostels for walkers and cyclists, particu¬
larly intended for young people of limited means. They seek to promote
knowledge and love of the countryside, and are closely linked with each other
and with similar organisations in other countries.
Adult organisations with youth sections include the British Red Cross
Society, St. John Ambulance Association and Brigade and the political parties.
King George’s Jubilee Trust was established in 1935 by King George V to
promote the welfare of the younger generation. Since its inauguration it has
disbursed over £2 million to the headquarters of the principal voluntary
youth organisations and to many local projects, particularly those of an
experimental nature.
In 1969 about 140,000 young people between the ages of 14 and 21 took
part in the Duke of Edinburgh’s Award Scheme. This scheme is operated by
local authorities, schools, youth organisations, industrial firms and other
bodies, and is designed as a challenge to young men and women to reach
certain standards of achievement in leisure-time activities. There are three
separate levels of Awards—Gold, Silver and Bronze—each comprising four
sections. Three of the sections, entitled service, pursuits and interests, and
expeditions, are common to boys and girls. For the Silver and Bronze Awards
the fourth section is physical activity for boys, and design for living for girls,
though for the Gold Award boys and girls may choose either option. Some 35
Commonwealth countries, including Canada, Australia and New Zealand,
now operate the scheme.
The Outward Bound Trust maintains six schools in Great Britain, five for
boys and one for girls, training about 6,000 young people between 14 and 20
years of age each year. The training on the 26-day course is designed to
challenge a young person’s powers of determination, self-control and initiative,
and to develop his sense of responsibility.
The aims of the Central Council of Physical Recreation, the Scottish
Council of Physical Recreation and the National Playing Fields Association
bring them into touch with many youth organisations (see Chapter 19),
7 PLANNING AND
HOUSING
TOWN AND COUNTRY PLANNING
Britain is one of the most densely populated areas in the world: it is, therefore,
essential to plan land use for a satisfactory national distribution of employment
and population, to undertake a programme of urban renewal, to build new
towns and to preserve the amenities of the countryside.
From 1909 successive Acts of Parliament recognised the principle of the
planned use of land, but because the pattern of development over much of
the country had already hardened into large unplanned urban concentrations
the powers granted to local planning authorities were inadequate.
The period between the two world wars—one of rapid social change and of
development in industry, engineering, housebuilding and transport—brought
a greater need for systematic land planning. The Town and Country Planning
Acts of 1932, which remained the basis of the law for 15 years, attempted to
strengthen planning law and to extend the planning powers of central and
local authorities. Although there were improvements in sanitary and en¬
vironmental conditions, the general effect of the legislation was unsatisfactory,
partly because it was permissive and not compulsory and partly because local
authorities wishing to exercise planning control were deterred by fears of
incurring heavy liabilities for compensation.
After studies of the major problems of planning had been conducted in the
years following 1937, the Government introduced in 1947 two comprehensive
Town and Country Planning Acts (one for England and Wales and one for
Scotland). These Acts provide the basis of the modern system of land planning
(the law in England and Wales has been consolidated in the Town and
Country Planning Act 1962). They impose compulsory planning duties on all
local planning authorities (the councils of counties and county boroughs, the
London authorities and, in some cases, joint planning boards) and establish a
centralised planning structure under the Minister of Housing and Local
Government and the Secretary of State for Scotland (and since 1965 the
Secretary of State for Wales).
All local planning authorities are required to prepare development plans for
their areas stating their proposals and objectives, and to submit them for
ministerial approval. The authorities have powers to undertake development
themselves, including the compulsory acquisition of land. Development1
generally is subject to the consent of the local planning authority, with a right
of appeal to the Minister if the consent is refused.
The Town and Country Planning Act 1968 (and a similar Act for Scotland
passed in 1969) provides for a new procedure to reduce administrative delays;
to place a positive emphasis on the provision of pleasant surroundings in
which people can live and work, rather than on negative controls; and to
enable the public to play a greater part in the planning process than hitherto.
1 In planning law ‘development’ includes most forms of construction, mineral extraction
and any material change made in the use of land or existing buildings.
Regional
Planning
The Location
of Industry
New Towns
PLANNING AND HOUSING 171
Structure plans are drawn up by local planning authorities and submitted for
approval to the Minister of Housing and Local Government or the Secretaries
of State for Scotland or Wales. The plans set out ‘broad policies’ for land use
in counties and major towns and relate these policies to transport patterns.
They also indicate ‘action areas’ where development is expected to start
within a specified period. In addition, local planning authorities prepare and
formally adopt (generally without the need for ministerial approval) local plans
containing detailed proposals, including plans for the action areas, within the
framework of the structure plans. All the plans may be amended periodically.
The new procedure is being introduced progressively where the local
planning authorities are suitably staffed and organised to draw up satisfactory
structure plans, as, for example, in Greater London.
The interests of the public are safeguarded in several ways.1 All proposals
for development must be widely advertised and there is a system of appeals
against such proposals. Appeals against major developments are dealt with at
ministerial level, but in England and Wales in order to speed up planning
procedures, the making of decisions on small-scale residential development is
delegated to inspectors. In the case of large development schemes of national
or regional importance or of a technical or scientific nature the Minister
responsible may decide to set up planning enquiry commissions to study the
proposals in depth. Where highway development is proposed, the Minister of
Transport and the Minister of Housing and Local Government (for England
and Wales) and the Secretary of State for Scotland can hold such enquiries as
they consider appropriate.
In Northern Ireland applications for planning permission to undertake
development are decided by local planning authorities, with a right of appeal
to the Northern Ireland Ministry of Development. The future structure and
functions of the authorities are under review.
Advisory machinery for planning on a regional basis has been set up by the
Government (see p. 236). Local planning authorities and the regional econo¬
mic planning councils have consultations before development plans are drawn
up within the framework of the economic planning and development of each
region as a whole. Studies showing the economics and social resources in
all the regions have been made (see Bibliography, pp. 481-82) and certain
areas, where land, communications and facilities are favourable, have been
proposed as places where development should be concentrated.
Provisions relating to the location of industry and offices have been made in
the Town and Country Planning Acts, the Local Employment Acts 1960-70,
the Control of Office and Industrial Development Act 1965, and the Industrial
Development Act 1966. General problems of industrial development are
dealt with jointly by a number of government departments, but the consent
of the local planning authority is, as a rule, required for any new industrial
building, any extension of a building or any change in the use of an existing
building. Financial incentives to encourage the location of industry in particu¬
lar areas have been made available by the Government. There is special
control of office building in south-east England and the Midlands.
The New Towns Act 1946 (now consolidated in Acts passed in 1965 and 1968)
gave the Minister of Housing and Local Government and the Secretary of
1 Proposals for associating people more fully with planning processes have been
suggested in a report, People and Planning (see Bibliography, p. 478).
172
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
State for Scotland (and since 1965 the Secretary of State for Wales) power to
make an order designating as the site of a new town any area of land (which
may include any existing town or other centre of population). The Minister of
Development in Northern Ireland can designate areas as new towns or for
special development under the New Towns Act (Northern Ireland) 1965.
In Great Britain the appropriate minister must consult the local authorities
in the area about the proposal and an opportunity is given for objections to be
made by the public. Once the site has been designated, the Minister appoints
a development corporation (a development commission in Northern Ireland),
to be responsible for the development of the new town, including the pre¬
paration of a ‘master plan’.
The development corporations have powers in general (subject to the
consent of the appropriate minister) to acquire, by agreement or compulsory
purchase, land or property within the designated areas, or, in some cases,
land near to or outside those areas, and they may provide buildings, roads and
services essential for the development of the towns. Ministerial approval of
proposals for development, given after consultation with the local planning
authority, constitutes planning permission.
The capital cost of developing the new towns is advanced from public
funds and is repayable over 60 years out of the income from the property.
The corporations submit annual reports (which include copies of their
audited accounts) to Parliament.
Thirty-two new towns have been, or are being, established in Britain;
twenty-three in England and Wales, five in Scotland and four in Northern
Ireland. Eleven of the new towns in England and Wales (Basildon, Bracknell,
Crawley, Harlow, Hatfield, Elemel Hempstead, Milton Keynes, Northamp¬
ton, Peterborough, Stevenage and Welwyn) are designed to help relieve
housing problems in the Greater London area. Of the others, Aycliffe, Corby,
Cwmbran, Peterlee and Washington are serving the special needs of their
areas; Runcorn and Skelmersdale are helping to meet the overspill needs of
Liverpool and north Merseyside; Telford and Redditch are taking population
from Birmingham; Warrington is being expanded to take people from
Manchester; and as a further measure to ease the housing problems in
Manchester and Liverpool and to provide a growth point for the economy of
Lancashire, a new town has been designated for the Preston-Leyland-
Chorley area. Newtown in mid-Wales is being developed to promote economic
growth in the area.
The Scottish new towns (Cumbernauld, East Kilbride, Glenrothes, Irvine
and Livingston) are helping to house people from Glasgow. They are also to
be centres for industry in the central belt of Scotland. In Northern Ireland,
Craigavon is being developed as a new city and is expected to become an area
of major industrial growth. Other new towns (Antrim and Ballymena) are
also being developed as centres of economic growth. Londonderry and the
surrounding district has been designated as an area of special development.
Four new towns (Crawley, Platfield, Hemel Hempstead and Welwyn) have
been substantially completed and their development corporations dissolved.
Their assets and liabilities have been handed over to the Commission for the
New Towns—a government-appointed agency set up in 1959-
The new towns represent a notable achievement in positive land use. They
are generally recognised as one of the most successful post-war experiments,
both socially and industrially, and as a profitable long-term investment. More
than half a million people have moved into the new towns during the past
20 years; young people form a higher proportion of their populations than of
Town
Development
Schemes
Urban
Renewal
PLANNING AND HOUSING 173
the country as a whole. An extensive building and civil engineering programme
has provided houses, flats, factories, schools, shops, churches, health centres
and libraries as well as public buildings including town halls and law courts.
Roads, water supplies, sewerage, gas and electricity, police, fire and bus
stations, postal, telegraph and telephone facilities have also been provided;
most of the towns are well equipped with parks and playing fields of various
kinds. All towns have become concerned with the increasingly high level of car
ownership of their inhabitants and are making more adequate provision for
parking and the segregation of pedestrians from motorists.
A number of the more developed towns are becoming regional centres and,
as the populations grow large enough to give the necessary support, offices,
hotels and department stores, as well as arts centres and full entertainment
and recreational facilities (skating rinks, dance halls, bowling alleys,
swimming pools, sports stadia, golf courses and youth centres) are gradually
being provided. The proposed expansion of such large existing towns as
Peterborough—a further development in the evolution of new towns policy—
has the advantage, among others, that many of these facilities are already
available.
Under the New Towns Act 1946 Parliament approved a fund of £50 million
to provide for advances to the development corporations for work on the new
towns. This fund was increased by subsequent Acts and now stands at £1,100
million; a total of some £759 million had been advanced to the corporations
by March 1970.
The Town Development Act 1952 makes provision for the relief of congestion
in large industrial towns in England and Wales (such as London and
Birmingham) by encouraging the transfer of population to areas suitable for
expansion where employment is provided. Schemes have been approved,
providing some 151,000 dwellings in this way, of which about half have been
completed or are under construction. Some of the expanding towns (for
example, Aylesbury, Basingstoke, Swindon and Thetford) are already well
established, providing new opportunities for people from large cities. In some
places, like Cramlington and Killingworth, the expansion is based on relatively
undeveloped areas. The Housing and Town Development (Scotland) Act
1957 makes similar provision for Scotland, where the only congested town
so far involved is Glasgow. Schemes have been approved for some 24,000
dwellings; more than half of these have been completed.
Existing towns and cities are being renewed and re-shaped to meet the growth
in population and traffic. Glasgow, for example, has a programme to rebuild
29 areas accommodating nearly a third of its population and much of its in¬
dustry and commerce; eight areas have been approved by the Secretary of
State for Scotland. The Government believes that greater integration of land
use and transport planning is of basic importance. Integration was the theme
of the Buchanan Report (see p. 335) which assessed the conflicting demands of
traffic and the environment and which has influenced many authorities’ re¬
development plans. In Leeds, where planning policies have also stressed the
importance of integration, development is following the proposals of a plan,
Planning and Transport—the Leeds Approach, published in 1969 in association
with the Ministry of Housing and Local Government and the Ministry of
Transport. The Government is setting up a centre for advanced training in
transport and environmental planning. Research into urban planning prob-
i?4
Historic
Buildings
and
Monuments
Green Belts
Other Measures
to Protect the
Environment
BRITAIN I97i: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
lems is undertaken by a number of institutes and university departments and
by the Centre for Environmental Studies.
Lists of buildings of special architectural or historic interest are compiled, as
required by the planning Acts, by the Minister of Housing and Local Govern¬
ment and the Secretaries of State for Scotland and Wales; 125,000 buildings
are already listed. It is an offence to demolish or alter any listed building
without special consent from the local planning authority; where consent is
given, the National Monuments Record keeps a photographic record of the
building. Emergency ‘building preservation notices’ can be served by the
local authority to protect buildings not yet listed. The respective Ministers
(on the recommendation of the appropriate Historic Buildings Council) can
make grants for the repair or maintenance of buildings of outstanding interest,
and local authorities can make grants for any building of architectural or
historic interest even if it is not listed. Over 1,690 buildings in Great Britain
have received grants totalling ^8-1 million under the Historic Buildings and
Ancient Monuments Act 1953. The Civic Amenities Act 1967 requires local
planning authorities to designate ‘conservation areas’ of special architectural
or historic interest. Special studies have been made in Bath, Chester, Chiches¬
ter and York of the difficulties of preserving features of historic interest in
ancient towns in the face of commercial development and increasing motor
traffic. The Minister of Public Building and Works and the Secretaries of State
for Scotland and Wales are responsible for the maintenance of royal parks and
palaces and for the protection of ancient monuments of which over 720 of the
more important are in their care and are visited by some 12 million people
annually. The Royal Commission on Historical Monuments (for England) and
similar bodies for Scotland and Wales survey monuments and specify those
worthy of preservation.
In order to restrict the further sprawl of large built-up areas, to prevent
adjacent towns merging into one another, and in some cases to preserve the
special character of a town and the amenities of the countryside, the policy has
been adopted of establishing ‘green belts’ around all or part of certain urban
areas. Green belts are areas which it is intended should be left permanently
open and free from new development.
Local planning authorities have power to protect trees and woodlands by
means of tree preservation orders and to ensure that trees are protected or
replaced on sites undergoing development. Increasing use is being made of
the planting of semi-mature trees for landscaping purposes. The authorities
have powers to prevent mineral workings becoming permanent eyesores by
attaching suitable conditions to planning permissions, to regulate the display
of advertisements in the interests of amenity and safety and to make it an
offence to leave litter, including bulky rubbish such as old cars, on open land.
They may, for health reasons, declare ‘smoke control areas’, in which the
emission of smoke from chimneys constitutes an offence. River authorities
(see p. 271) are responsible for the prevention of pollution of rivers. Govern¬
ment departments are advised about the problems of pollution by a standing
Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution. Government departments
and other public bodies exercising functions relating to land have a legal
duty to keep in mind the desirability of conserving the countryside’s natural
beauty and amenity.
Voluntary organisations are particularly active in ensuring that development
PLANNING AND HOUSING
175
Countryside
Commissions
National Parks
takes full account of considerations of amenity. The National Trust for
England, Wales and Northern Ireland, founded in 1895 and now with some
180,000 members, is the largest private landowner in Britain. For the benefit
of the public it owns and protects from harmful development 420,000 acres
(169,964 hectares) of land, 200 historic buildings and 280 miles (451 km.) of
coastline—often acquired through gifts (sometimes by arrangement with the
Treasury in lieu of death duties, see p. 364). In 1969 over million people
visited Trust properties. The Trust is engaged, with government aid, on
Enterprise Neptune, a £2 million campaign to preserve 900 miles (1,448 km.)
of coastline. The National Trust for Scotland, an independent body founded
in 1931, has some 33,000 members and cares for nearly 100 properties,
covering in all about 80,000 acres (32,375 hectares).
The Civic Trust, founded in 1957 and financed through covenants from
leading industrial firms, encourages high quality in architecture and planning,
and stimulates public interest in the protection of beauty in town and country.
It has produced plans for the redevelopment of town centres and for a re¬
creation area in the Lee Valley to the north-east of London. The Trust makes
use of local initiative; it has separate sections in the north-east and north-west
of England and in Wales and Scotland, and advises some 800 local civic
societies. Other amenity societies dependent upon their members’ support
include: the Town and Country Planning Association; the Council for the
Protection of Rural England, the Association for the Preservation of Rural
Scotland and the Council for the Protection of Rural Wales; the Commons,
Open Spaces and Footpaths Preservation Society; the Ramblers’ Association;
the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings; the Georgian Group and
the Scottish Georgian Society; the Victorian Society; the Pilgrim Trust; and
the Historic Churches Preservation Trust. The Committee for Environmental
Conservation, comprising many of the main voluntary organisations, acts as a
liaison body and takes action on environmental problems.
Under the Countryside Acts 1967 (for Scotland) and 1968 (for England and
Wales) Countryside Commissions (with an advisory committee for Wales)
encourage the provision and development of facilities for open-air recreation
in the countryside. These include the creation by local authorities (sometimes
in association with other bodies) of country parks within easy reach of towns;
the establishment of camping sites and picnic areas; and the increased use of
reservoirs, canals and other waterways for bathing, sailing and other activities.
By May 1970, 9 country parks and 10 picnic sites had been approved in
England by the Minister of Housing and Local Government. The Commis¬
sions are also responsible for encouraging and promoting measures to conserve
and enhance the natural beauty and amenity of the countryside and may
undertake research projects and experimental schemes, working in con¬
sultation with local authorities and such bodies as the Nature Conservancy
and the Sports Council (see p. 450). Grants to local authorities are available
from the Government for certain approved schemes and the Commissions
have powers to make grants or loans to people working for the same purposes.
The Countryside Commission for England and Wales replaced and assumed
the functions of the National Parks Commission set up under the National
Parks and Access to the Countryside Act 1949 to select national parks and
‘areas of outstanding natural beauty’ and to make proposals for the creation of
long-distance footpaths and bridleways. Ten national parks have been estab¬
lished: Northumberland, the Lake District, the Yorkshire Dales, the North
176
Forest Parks
Nature
Reserves
BRITAIN I971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
York Moors and the Peak District in northern England; Snowdonia, the
Pembrokeshire Coast and the Brecon Beacons in Wales; Exmoor and Dart¬
moor in south-west England. They cover a total area of 5,258 square miles
(13,618 sq. km.), or 9 per cent of the area of England and Wales. They have
various forms of administration, based on representation of the local planning
authorities of the areas concerned, as well as members appointed by the
Minister of Housing and Local Government or by the Secretary of State for
Wales. By August 1970, 27 areas of outstanding natural beauty had been
designated, covering some 4,422 square miles (11,453 sch km.).
The land in the national parks and designated areas generally remains
privately owned, but agreements or orders to secure additional public access
may be made by the local authorities. Steps are taken to preserve and enhance
the landscape’s natural beauty by high standards of development control, and
by positive measures, for which government grants are available, such as
tree planting and preservation, and the removal of eyesores. In the national
parks, other measures for the benefit of the public include the provision of
car parks and camping and caravan areas, for example, and the setting up of
information centres. All national parks and some other designated areas have
warden services. More than 1,400 miles (2,253 km.) of long-distance foot¬
paths and bridleways had been approved by 1970. Large stretches of these
paths are already public rights of way; the 250 miles (402 km.) of the Pennine
Way form Britain’s first long-distance footpath and the South Downs Way,
stretching for some 80 miles (129 km.) is the first long-distance bridleway.
Further routes are being established.
Under the Amenity Lands Act (Northern Ireland) 1965 the Ulster Country¬
side Committee advises on the establishment of national parks and the
designation of areas of outstanding natural beauty. Seven areas have been
designated. Four amenity areas, acquired by the Ministry of Development, are
being managed as country parks. Although there are no national parks as such
in Scotland, five large areas are subject to special planning control under
ministerial supervision. The areas are: Loch Lomond-Trossachs; Glen
Affric-Glen Cannich-Strath Farrar; Ben Nevis-Glen Coe-Black Mount; the
Cairngorms; and Loch Torridon-Loch Maree-Little Loch Broom. Over 98
per cent of the land in Scotland has been designated as countryside within the
jurisdiction of the Countryside Commission for Scotland.
The Forestry Commission (see p. 323) has formed, and opened to the public,
seven Forest Parks in some of the finest country in Britain: Argyll, Glen Trool,
Glen More and the Queen Elizabeth Forest Park in Scotland; the Forest
of Dean and the Wye valley woods on the borders of England and Wales;
Snowdonia in Wales; and the Border Forest Park on the borders of England
and Scotland. The total area of the parks approaches half a million acres
(202,340 hectares). Camping and other recreational facilities provided in all
the parks are used by thousands of holidaymakers each year. The historic
New Forest, in Hampshire, although not a Forest Park, is also open to the
public. Northern Ireland has five forest parks, Tollymore Park, Gortin Glen
Forest, Castlewellan, Gosford and Drum Manor.
Responsibility for nature conservation in Great Britain is exercised by the
Nature Conservancy on behalf of the Natural Environment Research Council
(see p. 202), of which the Conservancy is a component body. The Conservancy
derives its powers from its royal charter and the National Parks and Access to
the Countryside Act 1949, as amended by the Science and Technology Act
PLANNING AND HOUSING
177
1965. In Northern Ireland nature reserves are designated on the advice of the
Nature Reserves Committee under the Amenity Lands Act (Northern
Ireland) 1965.
In the reserves wild plants and animals and their environment are pro¬
tected, and facilities for the enjoyment and understanding of nature are pro¬
vided. There are 128 national nature reserves in Great Britain, covering
some 265,100 acres (107,285 hectares); the largest more than 64,000 acres
(25,900 hectares), is in the Cairngorms. Twenty-one local nature reserves are
managed by local authorities in consultation with the Conservancy.
Thirteen forest nature reserves have been created by agreement between
the Forestry Commission and other owners, and the Nature Conservancy
and are managed by their owners for research and conservation.
There are also over 2,000 sites of special scientific interest in Britain
scheduled by the Conservancy and the Northern Ireland Ministry of
Development.
The Council for Nature (established in 1958) is an independent voluntary
organisation of some 450 natural history and conservation societies concerned
with averting threats to wild life in Britain.
HOUSING
There are some i8‘9 million dwellings in Britain: nearly ib-y million in
England and Wales, i-8 million in Scotland and almost 450,000 in Northern
Ireland. Although nationally the numbers of households and dwellings in
Britain are about equal they are unevenly distributed and there is a heavy
demand for housing in the areas of economic prosperity, like London and
Birmingham.
Over 7 million new dwellings have been built in Britain since 1945—over
378,000 in 1969—and more than one family in three now lives in a post-war
dwelling. It was estimated in 1967 that some 6 million dwellings in England
and Wales were more than 50 years old, and these included i‘8 million which
were below the standard considered necessary, of which a million needed
to be demolished (see p. 181).
The provision of housing in Britain is undertaken by both private and public
sectors, the former building houses and flats principally for sale to owner-
occupiers, the latter providing dwellings mainly for renting.
About one-half of all dwellings in Britain are now owned by their occupiers,
while about a third are owned by public housing authorities (in Scotland the
figure is almost one in two). Dwellings rented from private landlords (over
60 per cent of all dwellings in 1947) have now dwindled to about one-sixth of
the total housing stock.
Most of the post-war dwellings in Britain are houses (usually of two storeys)
with gardens; the remainder are flats or maisonettes mostly in blocks of from
two to 20 storeys, although a few may be higher. Multi-storey blocks are
generally built in central urban areas where they replace old dwellings.
The standard of new local authority housing in England and Wales has
improved significantly in recent years, particularly in the floor space provided
and heating systems installed (see p. 179). Accommodation in a house
designed for a family of five people includes one or two living rooms, a
kitchen, a bathroom and a water closet and three bedrooms; in England in
1969 it had a superficial area of about 965 square feet (90 square metres)
and cost an average of 3,194.
Comparative European statistics show that the degree of overcrowding in
178
Housing
Policy
Research and
Development
Standards of
Building
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Britain is lower than in most other countries. Housing costs represent 12-7 per
cent of the total weekly expenditure of the average British family.
Responsibility for formulating government housing policy and supervising
the housing programme is borne by the Minister of Housing and Local
Government in England, by the Secretaries of State for Scotland and Wales
and by the Minister of Development in Northern Ireland. The execution
of policy is carried out principally by the 1,500 or so local housing authorities,
whose job it is to ensure an adequate supply of housing in their areas. They
are in England, Wales and Northern Ireland the councils of county boroughs,
boroughs, urban districts and rural districts; in London the Greater London
Council, the London borough councils and the Common Council of the
City of London; and in Scotland the town and county councils. Housing is
also provided by certain other public authorities, including most new town
authorities, the Scottish Special Housing Association (SSHA) and the
Northern Ireland Housing Trust (NIHT).1 The SSHA, established in 1937
to supplement building by local authorities in Scotland, now owns about
70,000 houses and builds at the rate of some 3,000 houses a year, mainly in
support of economic expansion in the development areas. The NIHT was
established in 1945 for a similar purpose.
An important part of the Government’s policy is to encourage the provision
by the public sector of houses to let at moderate rents to meet the needs of
those who, because of income or family circumstances, are unwilling or unable
to buy their own homes. About 200,000 new dwellings of this type are built
each year, mostly by the local authorities. More than a quarter of these are of
the single bedroom type, suitable for smaller households including the elderly.
At the same time the Government seeks to encourage the spread of home
ownership, and about half of the new houses built each year are intended for
owner occupation. In 1967 a scheme was introduced by the Government to
help people with lower incomes to buy their own homes (see p. 179).
The Government is specially concerned to ensure the best use of the existing
housing stock. A survey carried out in 1967 showed that there were some
4-5 million old dwellings in England and Wales which were structurally sound
but needed repair or the installation of amenities, such as bathrooms. Under
two Housing Acts 1969 (one for England and Wales and one for Scotland) the
Government has increased financial incentives for the rehabilitation of older
houses and their environment (see p. 181).
Research into building techniques and into new methods of house construction
as well as into the needs of families, is carried out by the Research and
Development Groups of the Ministry of Housing and Local Government and
the Scottish Development Department, the Building Research Station, the
architects’ departments of major local authorities and the research groups in
big constructional firms. All government building research and development
is co-ordinated by the Directorate-General of Research and Development at
the Ministry of Public Building and Works. Advice on ways of increasing
productivity in housebuilding is given by the National Building Agency.
Control of building standards is generally exercised through regulations made
by the central departments, which also give guidance on design and layout to
local authorities in circulars and bulletins.
1 Proposals have been made to transfer the NIHT housing stock, along with those of
local authorities, to a central housing authority responsible for all publicly provided
housing in Northern Ireland.
PLANNING AND HOUSING
Industrialised
Building
Home
Ownership
Housing
Associations
and Societies
T79
The Central Housing Advisory Committee, a statutory body, advises the
Minister of Housing and Local Government and the Secretary of State for
Wales on housing matters. The Parker Morris report, prepared by a sub¬
committee, suggested standards that should be achieved in new dwellings (see
Bibliography, p. 478). Some relating to space and heating have been made
mandatory for local authority housing schemes, and now over 90 per cent of all
new local authority dwellings in England and Wales have central heating to
these standards. For building in the private sector the National House-
Builders’ Registration Council sets standards and enforces them by inspection
and certification.
About 40 per cent of dwellings in the public sector are built by industrialised
methods, which offer the advantages of rapid construction on the site with the
use of fewer skilled workers and greater independence of weather conditions
compared with traditional methods. A number of local authorities work in
consortia to make the best use of industrialised systems (with standardised
components) in their housebuilding programmes.
Loans to enable people to buy their houses by a system of instalment purchase
are available from various sources, including building societies, insurance
companies, industrial and provident societies and local authorities. The local
authorities are expected to concentrate their efforts primarily on helping people
with special housing needs who are unable to obtain loans from other sources.
Building societies, of which there are some 480 in Great Britain, are the
most important of these agencies. They do not build houses themselves but
provide long-term loans on the security of property bought for owner-
occupation. They usually advance 80 to 90 per cent of the value of the houses.
Loans are repayable over periods of up to 25 or even 30 years, by equal monthly
instalments to cover capital and interest. The societies advanced more than
£1,540 million in 1969, the average price of houses mortgaged being £4,775.
In response to the demand for owner-occupation a scheme to help people
with low incomes to buy their dwellings on mortgage was introduced under
the Housing Subsidies Act 1967. Under the scheme borrowers have the option
of either claiming income tax relief on interest payments on their loan (a
system which helps people who pay a high rate of tax more than those who
pay little or none), or of receiving through the lending agency a government
subsidy, which reduces the rate of interest they pay by up to 3 per cent,
subject to a minimum remaining interest charge which in most cases is 4 per
cent.
The option scheme has been extended to include a provision by which
mortgage loans of up to 100 per cent of the valuation of a house (not exceeding
£5,000) may be made to those participating in the scheme.
Since the early 1960s the Government has done much to encourage the growth
of non-profit-making housing associations and societies.
Housing associations have long existed as voluntary bodies set up for the
purpose of providing low-rent housing for people in need. The Housing Act
1957 made money available to local authorities for the granting of 100 per cent
loans to such associations. Encouragement to housing associations to purchase
and convert old houses into new dwellings was offered by the Housing Act
1969 which provided for a 20-year subsidy equivalent to three-eighths of all
charges (capital and interest) on loans raised for this purpose.
Housing societies build dwellings either for co-ownership by a group of
occupants or to let at unsubsidised rents. Following a pilot scheme introduced
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
by the Housing Act 1961, a Housing Corporation was set up under the
Housing Act 1964 to stimulate the formation of such societies. Two-thirds of
the money needed for approved housing society schemes is advanced by
building societies, with the Housing Corporation providing the remainder.
The actual building of dwellings for public housing authorities is mostly
carried out by private firms under contract, although a number of authorities
employ direct labour. The capital cost of houses built by or for local authorities
is met by raising loans; current expenditure, including loan repayment and
interest on loans, is met from rents supplemented by subsidies from the
Exchequer and, in some cases, from the rates (see p. 73). Local authorities
may raise loans for housing on the open market or by borrowing from the
Public Works Loan Board (see p. 74). In Northern Ireland local authorities,
the Housing Trust and housing associations may borrow from the Government
Loans Fund.
Housing subsidies, at varying rates and for different purposes, have been
provided in Britain since 1919, when they were first introduced to enable
local authorities to build houses for letting at moderate rents. Because of the
erosion of the usual flat-rate subsidies by rising building costs and interest
rates, a new kind of subsidy was introduced by the Housing Subsidies Act
1967, which provides a basic subsidy equal to the difference between the
interest charge (at current borrowing rates) on a loan raised to cover the
approved capital cost of a dwelling and the charge if the loan had borne
interest at 4 per cent. Supplementary subsidies are paid for high building; to
councils with insufficient resources to provide urgently needed houses; for
houses required in connection with a major transfer of industry; for expensive
sites; for precautions against subsidence; for building in certain materials;
and for overspill. Similar subsidies are paid in Scotland. In Northern Ireland
annual subsidies are paid to housing authorities and associations and ‘lump-
sum’ subsidies are paid to private people who build dwellings for letting or
owner-occupation.
In selecting tenants for council dwellings local authorities must give pre¬
ference to families living in overcrowded or unsatisfactory conditions. Rents
are generally low in comparison with current building costs. Over two-thirds
of the housing authorities in England and Wales operate rent-rebate schemes,
under which tenants with low incomes or with large families are able to claim
a reduction in the standard rent. In Scotland half of the councils operate
rebate schemes, although rents generally are lower than in England and
Wales. The Government is encouraging the expansion of such schemes so
that housing subsidies are used to help people who need them most.
A declining proportion of the available housing in Britain (about one-sixth)
is rented from individual landlords and property companies.
Rent control was originally introduced in 1915 as a temporary war-time
measure and successive Acts have varied its scope. Under the Rent Act 1957
there was a large measure of de-control but the Rent Act 1965 re-introduced
control over most privately rented unfurnished dwellings—those of annual
rateable value up to £400 in London and £200 elsewhere. Most rent legislation
for England and Wales has been consolidated in the Rent Act 1968. Tenants
have a wide degree of security of tenure and (except for dwellings whose rents
are still controlled by the Rent Act 1957) a fair rent may be fixed on application
by landlord or tenant. Fair rents are determined by rent officers or, if the
landlord or tenant objects to the rent determined by the rent officer, by a rent
PLANNING AND HOUSING
Improvement
of Houses
Slum Clearance
181
assessment committee on the assumption that, for similar dwellings, demand
does not greatly exceed supply. Once determined, the rent is not normally
reviewed for at least three years. For furnished premises under the rateable
value limits a tenant may go to a rent tribunal for determination of a reasonable
rent and may be given security of tenure for up to six months with a possibility
of further periods if the tribunal so decides. Eviction without a court order
from furnished or unfurnished premises of any rateable value and harassment
of occupiers are criminal offences with severe penalties.
Measures of control and de-control also apply in Northern Ireland. In 1951
and 1956 legislation was passed which permitted prescribed increases in the
rents of certain controlled houses. The 1956 Act also released from control
houses with a net annual value of over ^50 (with certain safeguards) and
houses with a net annual value of over ^26 of which the landlord was in actual
possession when the Act came into force, or of which he subsequently
obtained possession.
Private owners in Great Britain can obtain grants from local authorities to
improve their houses by providing amenities such as baths and for carrying
out other works to modernise their properties. Grants are also available for
converting large houses or other buildings into flats. The grant amounts to
half the approved cost of the works up to a normal grant limit of £1,000
(£1,200 in Scotland). If a house of three or more storeys is converted into
flats the upper limit of grant is £1,200 for each flat provided. A Government
contribution amounting to three-quarters of each grant is paid to the local
authority. Aid on a similar basis is given by the Government to local authorities
and housing associations, but this includes the cost of buying properties for
conversion and improvement as well as that of carrying out works.
To enable local authorities to tackle systematically the improvement of
whole areas of older housing, the Housing Act 1969 gives them powers to
declare ‘general improvement areas’. The aim in these areas is to encourage
householders to improve their dwellings with the aid of grants, while the
local authority uses its comprehensive powers to improve the environment.
A Government grant is given of half the local authority’s expenditure on
environmental improvements on costs of up to £100 a house. Grants for
house improvement are also provided in Northern Ireland.
Nearly 2| million people have been rehoused since the mid-1950s as a result
of slum clearance programmes. It is expected that within the next ten years
the great majority of the housing authorities in Great Britain will have suc¬
ceeded in getting rid of all their present slums. In certain areas, however,
particularly the older industrial towns, including Birmingham, Glasgow,
Liverpool and Manchester, clearance may take longer. Local authorities with
major slum and overcrowding problems are being given priority to clear their
slums and to undertake major programmes of urban renewal. Their house¬
building programmes have increased sharply in recent years and in many cases
the designation of new towns nearby has further eased their housing problems
(see p. 171). Housing authorities are obliged to see that other accommodation
exists, or can be provided by them, for people displaced by slum clearance.
The Housing Act 1969 changed the basis of compensation paid to the
displaced owner-occupiers of unfit houses. Those subject to compulsory
purchase orders now in effect receive compensation to the full market value,
while those subject to clearance orders, who retain their land, receive a
payment amounting to the difference (if any) between the site value and the
market value.
8 THE CHURCHES
The Church of
England
Every person living in Britain has the right of religious freedom and may
manifest his faith in teaching, worship and observance without interference
from the community or the State. Churches and religious societies of all kinds
may own property, conduct schools, and propagate their beliefs in speech
and in writing.
Freedom of conscience in religious matters was achieved gradually from the
seventeenth century onwards; the laws discriminating against minority
religious groups were gradually administered less rigorously and then finally
repealed. Heresy ceased to be a legal offence with the passing of the Ecclesias¬
tical Jurisdiction Act 1677, and the Toleration Act 1688 granted freedom
of worship to protestant dissenters. In 1828 the repeal of the Test and
Corporation Acts freed nonconformists from political disabilities and made it
possible for them to be appointed to public offices; Roman Catholics gained
political emancipation under the Roman Catholic Relief Act 1829; the Jewish
Relief Act 1858 enabled Jews to become members of Parliament; while
religious tests that had been imposed on prospective students and members
of the academic staff of the universities of Oxford, Cambridge and Durham
were successively abolished by Acts of 1854, 1856 and 1871. Nowadays, there
is no religious or denominational bar to the holding of public office, except in
the case of the Lord Chancellor, where there is some doubt whether existing
statutory provisions would permit this office to be held by a Roman
Catholic.
In the services administered by the State, such as the armed forces, the
national hospitals and the prisons, the clergy of the established Church of
England or the Church of Scotland provide the principal ministrations and
are paid a salary by the State for this part of their work. Priests of the Roman
Catholic Church and ministers of other denominations may also be appointed
or specially called in as required. Voluntary schools (see p. 149) provided by
churches of any religious denomination may be wholly or partly maintained
from public funds.
There is no precisely accurate or uniform method of assessing the number
of adherents to the various churches in the United Kingdom, since no en¬
quiries are made about religious beliefs in population censuses or other
official returns, and each church adopts its own criteria in counting its
members. The membership figures given in this chapter are therefore
approximate.
The Church of England is the established church, and claims to be the ancient
catholic church of the land. At the Reformation in the sixteenth century, it
repudiated the supremacy of the Pope, but retained the historic episcopate,
and the creeds and sacraments upon which its doctrines are based; therefore
it claims to be both ‘catholic’ and ‘reformed’. Its form of worship is embodied
in the Book of Common Prayer, which was first compiled in 1549.
The Church is uniquely related to the Crown in that the Sovereign, who
must be a member of the Church of England, is called ‘Defender of the Faith’
(a statutory title as protector of the Church) and promises on his or her
THE CHURCHES
Church
Organisation
and Government
183
accession to uphold it. The coronation of the Sovereign is performed by the
Archbishop of Canterbury; prayers for the Sovereign and other members
of the royal family are said in all the statutory services of the Church; Church
of England archbishops, bishops and deans are appointed by the Sovereign
on the advice of the Prime Minister1; and all clergymen take the oath of
allegiance to the Crown.
The Church is also linked with the State through the House of Lords, in
which the archbishops of Canterbury and York and 24 senior diocesan bishops
have seats (see p. 32). This makes it possible for the views of the Church
leaders to be expressed freely on any moral issue raised in connection with the
corporate conduct of the State as well as on specifically ecclesiastical issues—
a matter of particular significance in view of the fact that the clergy of the
Church of England (together with those of the Church of Scotland, the
Church of Ireland and the Roman Catholic Church) are legally disqualified
from sitting in the House of Commons.
The Church must obtain Parliament’s consent2 to change its form of
worship, as laid down in the authorised Book of Common Prayer; canons
(Church rules) cannot be made or amended without the consent of the Queen;
and the Measures of the General Synod (as distinct from its regulations)
also require parliamentary approval and the Royal Assent.
The Church of England is organised geographically into two provinces and
43 dioceses. The Province of Canterbury contains 29 dioceses and that of
York 14. Each diocese is subdivided into ecclesiastical parishes, of which there
are about 14,300. The Archbishop of Canterbury is Primate of All England
and bishop of his own diocese of Canterbury; the Archbishop of York is
styled Primate of England and is bishop of his own diocese of York. Of the
population born and resident in the two provinces, about three-fifths (27-6
million) are baptised into the Church of England and almost one-fifth
(9*9 million) are confirmed members of the Church.
Until 1970 the government of the Church was of a dual nature. Spiritual
authority rested with the Convocations of Canterbury and York, each pre¬
sided over by its archbishop and consisting of an Upper House of all the
diocesan bishops in the province and a Lower House of representatives of
each cathedral chapter, archdeacons and elected clergy. The legislative and
central administrative body was the National Assembly of the Church of
England (the Church Assembly) consisting of three houses: Bishops, Clergy
and Laity. Under the Synodical Government Measure 1969, a new system of
church government is being established in order to strengthen the voice and
status of the laity. A General Synod is invested with the powers of the Con¬
vocations and the Church Assembly, and bishops, clergy and laity become
equally involved in decisions affecting the whole range of the Church’s
concern. (The Assembly ceases to exist, but the Convocations continue to
meet, although less often than before.) Certain important issues must be
referred to the dioceses before they are finally decided by the General Synod,
and they can only then be passed if a majority of the dioceses are in favour.
The General Synod meets several times a year. Administrative measures
which have been passed by the Synod are presented to an ecclesiastical
committee of both Houses of Parliament, consisting of 30 members, of whom
1 A Church commission is considering what constitutional modifications are desirable
and practicable in the present relationship between Church and State.
2 Consent has been obtained for the experimental use of alternative forms, if and when
authorised by the Church.
G
184
Church Finance
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
15 are appointed by the Lord Chancellor and 15 by the Speaker of the House
of Commons. This committee lays the measures, together with a report, before
both Houses, which may reject but not alter them. If both Houses so resolve,
the measures are sent to the Sovereign for Royal Assent, after which they
have the same force and effect as Acts of Parliament.
The General Synod replaces the Church Assembly as the centre of an
administrative system consisting of boards and councils dealing with various
aspects of the Church’s work, such as education, recruitment and training
for the ministry, and Church work at home and overseas. Through the
Schools Council of its Board of Education the Synod is responsible for the
Church of England schools. More than one in nine of the 7-6 million pupils
in the maintained schools of England and Wales in 1968 attended the Church’s
maintained schools. There are also about 40 direct grant and about 45 in¬
dependent Church of England schools.
In 1969 the Church spent million on building and improving its
schools. The Council is in close touch with the Department of Education
and Science, professional and educational bodies and the educational depart¬
ments of other churches; it co-operates with the National Society which is
the Church’s only body for advancing religious education in schools.
There are 25 Church colleges of education in England and two in Wales,
run by independent governing bodies. With substantial grants from the
Department of Education and Science a major programme of expansion,
including the opening of two new colleges, was completed in 1967; this has
increased the number of college places to over 18,500 at an estimated cost to
the Church of over £2 million. Under the Church Assembly a programme
was completed for the modernisation and improvement of theological
colleges and establishments for the training of women in the pastoral work
of the Church. A reorganisation of the theological colleges, which envisages
an amalgamation of the 21 existing colleges to provide a maximum of 14,
was approved by the Assembly in 1970.
The Church of England has its own ecclesiastical courts whose jurisdic¬
tion today consists largely of ‘faculty’ cases, with very occasional cases of
discipline against clergy for moral or ecclesiastical offences. A faculty is the
permission required for various church matters, including any specific
alteration or addition to the fabric or ornaments of a church or to a churchyard.
Parochial church councils were set up in 1921 to associate the laity with
the government of the Church in the parish. The members of these councils
are appointed by the parochial church electors, that is, the people who are
baptised, are not members of any other church, are 17 years or over, and have
applied for membership of the electoral roll of the parish where they usually
live or worship. The estimated number on the rolls is some million.
Each parish is responsible for its own finances, and also contributes an annual
apportioned quota to diocesan funds, and each diocese similarly contributes
to the General Synod. In the diocese, the financial authority is the diocesan
board of finance, which administers the money contributed by the parishes,
and acts as trustee on behalf of the parochial church councils, which have only
limited powers of holding property. The Central Board of Finance administers
the General Synod Fund, supported by diocesan contributions and devoted
to the maintenance of central services, including capital expenditure on
training colleges and theological colleges and the grants for training candidates
for ordination.
Although the State pays for or contributes towards services provided by the
The Anglican
Communion
The Church of
Scotland
THE CHURCHES 185
Church (see p. 182), it makes no direct financial contribution to the expenses
of the Church as such.
The endowment income of the Church (from its assets amounting to over
£412 million in land and investments) is mainly administered by the Church
Commissioners, the body largely responsible for the payment of clergy
stipends and the provision of finance for pensions. The total net income
(£23-3 million in 1968-69) has greatly increased during the past ten years;
in broad terms, this has meant a rise in the stipends of the poorer clergy
and that the Commissioners have been able to embark on schemes of assis¬
tance for providing better parsonage houses, for Church buildings in new
areas of population, and for better pensions for clergy and their widows.
The present basic pension for a clergyman is £650 (and ^325 for a clergy
widow). Retired Church dignitaries receive larger pensions.
The Anglican Communion comprises 21 autonomous provinces in Britain
and overseas and two regional councils overseas with a total membership of
over 47 million.
In the British Isles, in addition to the established Church of England, there
are unestablished Anglican Churches in Ireland, Scotland and Wales: the
Church of Ireland has 14 dioceses; the Episcopal Church in Scotland,
7 dioceses and some 94,000 members; and the Church in Wales, 6 dioceses
and some 160,000 Easter communicants.
The Lambeth Conference for unofficial consultation between all Anglican
bishops meets every ten years; the latest meeting was in july-August 1968.
The conference is presided over by the Archbishop of Canterbury; it has
no executive authority, but enjoys great moral prestige, and its findings on
doctrine, discipline, relations with other communions, and on the attitude of
the Anglican churches to political and social questions are widely studied.
The Anglican Consultative Council is concerned with following up the
resolutions of the Lambeth Conference, particularly in matters of com¬
munication, missionary activities and inter-church relations. It will meet
for the first time in Kenya early in 1971 and then every two years between
the Lambeth Conferences.
The Church of Scotland, established by law, has a presbyterian form of
government. It has been described as ‘the supreme example of a church which
is established and yet is free’. Its position, defined in the Treaty of Union
1707, was further safeguarded by the Church of Scotland Act 1921, under
which it has complete internal self-government within the terms of the
schedule to the Act, ‘Articles Declaratory of the Faith of the Church of
Scotland’.
Whereas in episcopacy church government is a hierarchy of persons, in
presbyterianism there is a hierarchy of courts. All ministers are of equal status,
and each of the 2,126 congregations is governed locally by the Kirk Session,
consisting of the minister and elected elders (of whom there are about
49,000); above this is the Court of the Presbytery, then the Court of the Synod,
and finally the General Assembly, which meets annually and consists of
elected ministers and elders presided over by an elected Moderator who serves
for one year. The Sovereign, when not present in person, is represented at the
General Assembly by the Lord High Commissioner. The Church of Scotland
has complete freedom in all spiritual matters and the right to appoint its own
officers and to decide all matters of doctrine and discipline. Its decisions are
i86
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
not subject to parliamentary debate, modification or appeal to the civil courts.
Women may now be admitted to its ministry.
The training for the ministry, which lasts at least six years, has given the
Church a high reputation for scholarship and has in turn influenced the
standard of education in Scotland. The membership of the Church of Scotland
is estimated at about i'2 million.
The Free
Churches
The Methodist
Churches
The Congregational
Church
The Baptist
Churches
The Unestablished
Presbyterian
Churches
The phrase ‘Free Churches’ is now commonly used to describe those churches
in England which were more generally known in the past as ‘nonconformist’
•churches; and protestant churches in Scotland (except the established Church
of Scotland), Wales and Northern Ireland. The main Free Churches are the
Methodist, Baptist and Congregational Churches, and the unestablished
presbyterian churches throughout Britain. In addition, there are a number of
other protestant denominations in the United Kingdom as well as such
religious associations as the Society of Friends and the Salvation Army, which
have certain links with the main Free Churches.
The word ‘nonconformist’ signifies dissent from certain of the formularies
and practices of the established church. In general, the Free Churches base
their reason for existence on their distinctive convictions regarding organisa¬
tion and worship.
The largest of the Free Churches, the Methodist Church, which originated
in the eighteenth century following the evangelical revival by John Wesley,
took its present form in 1932, with the union of the majority of separate
Methodist Churches. It has some 651,000 adult full members. The supreme
authority is the annual conference and the system of government is in many
ways presbyterian, the leaders’ meeting corresponding to the kirk sessions,
with circuit meetings and district synods resembling presbytery and synod.
One of the characteristics of Methodism is its strong emphasis on lay leader¬
ship. There are over 20,000 trained lay preachers sharing the work of about
4,000 ministers and preaching in many local churches.
Methodist Churches which did not join the union in 1932 include: the
Independent Methodists (over 6,800 members), in which ministerial service
is on a purely voluntary basis and women (many of whom are ministers)
have full equality with men; and the Wesleyan Reform Union (with some
5,000 members) which, while retaining the essential Methodist doctrine, gives
autonomy to each of its 157 individual churches.
The Congregationalists are the oldest community of dissenters in Britain. In
1831 most of their churches were formed into the Congregational Union
(which in 1966 was reconstituted as the Congregational Church in England
and Wales). Local churches have formed county and national unions, whose
secretariat and assemblies have much influence, but no compulsive authority
over them, since great importance is attached to the autonomy of local church
meetings. Adult membership is about 181,000.
The Baptists are for the most part grouped in associations of churches and the
majority of these belong to the Baptist Union formed in 1813. Baptists differ
from nearly all other Churches in that they practise the baptism of believers
only; they do not baptise infants. The 2,200 churches within the Baptist
Union have a total membership of some 210,000.
The Presbyterian Church in Ireland has about 143,000 regular communi¬
cants in Northern Ireland. The Presbyterian (or Calvinistic Methodist)
Church of Wales, which arose from the revivalist movement led by Howell
Harris in 1735, numbers some ii7,oo°- The Presbyterian Church of England
THE CHURCHES
Other
Denominations
The Roman
Catholic Church
187
has some 63,000 members; its highest court is its general assembly; women
are admitted to the eldership and ministry. Other presbyterian Churches in
Britain include: the Free Church of Scotland; the United Free Church of
Scotland; the Free Presbyterian Church of Scotland; the Reformed Presby¬
terian Church of Scotland; the Reformed Presbyterian Church of Ireland;
and the Non-Subscribing Presbyterian Church of Ireland.
Among other protestant denominations in the United Kingdom are: the
Unitarian and Free Christian Churches; the Churches of Christ (known also
in the United States of America as Disciples of Christ), which have been an
organised community in Britain since early in the nineteenth century; the
British Province of the Moravian Church, which is an international missionary
church; the Free Church of England (or Reformed Episcopal Church), which
was formed in 1844 as a direct result of the Oxford Movement; the Society of
Friends; the Salvation Army; the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day
Saints (the Mormon Church); and the Christian Scientists.
The Society of Friends (Quakers) came into being in the middle of the
seventeenth century under the leadership of George Fox. A distinctive
feature is the way of worship: outward sacraments are not observed and there
is no separate ministry. The Society places great emphasis on work for peace,
and their influence in many parts of the world, especially in social reform and
in the relief of suffering, is very wide in relation to their numbers. There are
440 Quaker Meetings in Britain and nearly 21,000 members; and the Society
has nine schools (the pupils and staff of which are not exclusively Quaker).
The Salvation Army, founded in 1865 (as the Christian Mission), is a
religious movement, composed of men and women who seek the spiritual and
social betterment of their fellows, primarily by preaching the gospel to those
hitherto untouched by religious effort. The movement, which is quasi-
military in structure, carries out its work in 71 countries. Internationally it
provides a greater variety and volume of social service than any other single
voluntary society.
The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints first came to Britain in
1837 and has some 85,000 members; the Christian Scientists, who emphasise
the Christian ministry of healing, have about 320 branch churches and
societies in Britain.
The Roman Catholic hierarchy in England and Wales, which became
temporarily extinct during the sixteenth century, was restored in 1850; the
Scottish hierarchy became extinct in the early seventeenth century and was
restored in 1878, while the Irish hierarchy never became completely extinct.
The normal government of the Roman Catholic Church, namely the territorial
archbishops and bishops, is once again the rule in the whole of the United
Kingdom.
The central territorial unit of the Roman Catholic hierarchical organisation
is the province or archdiocese under the metropolitan, who is always an
archbishop. A province normally comprises several dioceses, each under a
bishop aided by a chapter of canons and others, and by priests in charge of
the parishes into which the diocese is subdivided. In England and Wales
there are five provinces and archdioceses (Westminster, Liverpool, Birming¬
ham, Cardiff and Southwark), 14 dioceses, and nearly 2,400 parishes (the
chairman of the Bishops’ Conference in England and Wales is the Archbishop
of Westminster); in Scotland there are two provinces and archdioceses (St.
Andrews and Edinburgh, and Glasgow), six dioceses, and about 400 parishes;
i88
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
in Northern Ireland there are six dioceses (several of which have territory
partly in the Irish Republic and partly in Northern Ireland since there is one
hierarchy for the whole of Ireland) and about 170 parishes. In the whole of
the United Kingdom there are some 6 million adherents (including children)
to the Roman Catholic faith.
The Roman Catholic Church attaches great importance to the education of
its children in their own faith, and requires that the children of marriages
between its own members and members of any other denomination should be
brought up as Roman Catholics. Many schools for Roman Catholic children
in the United Kingdom are staffed by members of the religious orders for men
and women, who also undertake other social work such as nursing, child care,
and the conduct of homes for old people.
Jewry Jews first settled in England at the time of the Norman conquest, but were
expelled at the end of the thirteenth century by an edict of Edward I. The
present Anglo-Jewish community dates from 1656, the earliest arrivals being
the Sephardi (from Spain and Portugal). At the end of the seventeenth
century an Ashkenazi community (from Germany and East Europe) was
established, which increased rapidly and spread to the principal provincial
cities. As a result of the virtual destruction of whole Jewish communities on
the Continent during the second world war, the Anglo-Jewish community of
some 410,000 has become the third largest group of Jews in Europe.
The Anglo-Jewish community is divided into two schools of thought, each
of which has its own form of worship and its own services: the Orthodox (the
original groups) and the Reform. The Reform Movement, which does not
insist on the permanently binding character of Jewish law and therefore
attaches less religious importance to some of the traditional rituals and
practices of the Jewish faith, began in 1840. It was followed in 1901 by the
establishment of the Liberal Jewish Movement which made the breach with
the traditional section wider by laying emphasis on the reinterpretation of
traditional Judaism in the light of modern thought and custom. Of the Jews
in Great Britain who belong to any kind of synagogue, about 90 per cent
are Orthodox. The Chief Rabbi is the head of the largest group (Ashkenazi)
within Orthodox Jewry; the Haham is the head of the Sephardi group.
Synagogues in Britain number about 300. There has been an increase in the
number of Jewish denominational schools, which are now attended by about
one in five Jewish children; other Jewish children attend the ordinary State or
independent schools and extra-curricular instruction in Hebrew and religious
subjects is provided at synagogue classes.
Other Religious Many immigrants to Britain from overseas Commonwealth countries and
Communities foreign countries have established centres for worship for their own com¬
munities in the United Kingdom, and especially in London. The Christian
communities include the Greek, Russian, Polish and Serb Orthodox, with
some Estonian and Latvian Orthodox, and also the Armenian Church. There
are also churches belonging to the Lutheran Churches of Denmark, Finland,
Germany, Norway and Sweden, and centres where Estonian, Latvian and
Polish Lutherans worship according to their creed. In addition, the French,
Dutch, Swiss, Hungarian and Polish Reformed Churches are represented in
Britain, the first three having their own places of worship. There are also a
number of other religious sects of British or foreign origin; figures of member¬
ship in Britain of most of them are not available.
The Muslims
The Buddhists
Co-operation
between the
Churches
THE CHURCHES 189
The principal non-Christian communities in Britain, apart from the Jews,
are the Muslims and the Buddhists.
The Muslims are the more widely represented, their number in Britain being
estimated at about half a million, of whom some 90,000 are in London
where the London Central Mosque and Islamic Cultural Centre, the Shiah
Islamic Assembly Centre and the East London Mosque are situated. The
Shah Jehan Mosque is at Woking, Surrey, and there are mosques or Islamic
centres in Manchester, Liverpool, Bradford, Cardiff and in many of the other
larger cities in Britain.
There are several thousand adherents of Buddhism in Britain. The Buddhist
Society has its headquarters in London, with a Shrine Room; there are also
Shrine Rooms in the three Viharas in London, one of which is run by Thai
monks and supported by the Thai Government. In Scotland there is a
Shrine Room at the Tibetan Centre.
The British Council of Churches, composed of official representatives or
consultant observers from almost all the Christian Churches in the British
Isles and presided over by the Archbishop of Canterbury, facilitates common
action between the Churches and seeks to further the cause of Christian unity.
The Free Church Federal Council (which has a concordat with the British
Council of Churches) comprises most of the Free Churches in England and
Wales and aims to promote unity and joint action among the Free Churches
and to provide a channel through which the Churches can communicate and
negotiate with central and local government authorities. The Anglican-Roman
Catholic Permanent Joint Commission explores points of possible unity
between the two Churches. Proposals for union between the Anglican and
Methodist Churches, which have gained a large measure of support, have not
yet been finally accepted. A union between the Congregational and Presby¬
terian Churches has also been proposed.
The Anglican, Presbyterian and Free Churches in the British Isles also
participate in the World Council of Churches, which links together nearly
240 churches in over 70 countries for co-operation and the study of common
problems. The Council of Christians and Jews works for better under¬
standing among members of the two religions and deals with problems in the
social field.
The New English Bible, which was completed in 1970, is a translation
into modern English; in its preparation there was co-operation between
representatives of the Church of England, the Church of Scotland, the Church
in Wales, the Free Churches, the Churches of Ireland and bible societies.
The Sharing of Church Buildings Act 1969 enables agreements to be made
by two or more Churches for the sharing of church buildings.
9 PROMOTION OF THE
SCIENCES AND
THE ARTS
THE PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES
The Government is the main source of funds for scientific research and
development as a whole though private industry contributes a larger propor¬
tion of funds for civil research and development. Considerable sums are also
provided by public corporations, independent trusts and foundations, and
learned societies. The Government also keeps under review facilities for
training scientists and ensures that adequate research is directed to matters of
national interest.
THE GOVERN¬
MENT AND
SCIENTIFIC
RESEARCH
The Pattern of
Expenditure
Central Advisory
Council for
Science and
Technology
According to Statistics of Science and Technology Ity6g (see Bibliography,
p. 479) total expenditure in Britain on scientific research and development has
risen from ^657-7 million in 1961-62, £771‘4 million in 1964-65, ^926-3
million in 1966-67 to ^962-1 million in 1967-68, while remaining at about 2-7
per cent of the gross national product at factor cost. Even though there are
various discontinuities in these years the proportions of total research and
development carried out in the various sectors have not changed appreciably
since 1964-65 with the Government (including the research councils)
carrying out 25 per cent and universities and establishments of further educa¬
tion between 7 and 8 per cent. The proportion of research and development
financed by the Government remained at about 50 per cent in 1967-68, a
decline in defence research and development being balanced by the rise in
civil research and development. The total grant-in-aid to the research councils
for 1969-70 amounted to about £96 million.
The Central Advisory Council for Science and Technology was established in
January 1967, under the chairmanship of the Chief Scientific Adviser to the
Government, to advise the Government on the most effective national strategy
for the use and development of the country’s scientific and technological
resources. The Council includes members who are also members of the
Council for Scientific Policy (see p. 191), the Advisory Council on Technology
(see p. 191), and the Royal Society (see p. 193), and independent members.
Under the Science and Technology Act 1965 central responsibility for
basic and applied civil science rests with the Secretary of State for Education
and Science, who, advised by a Council for Scientific Policy in relation to
the natural sciences as a whole, is responsible for directing and financing the
research councils (see p. 191). Responsibility for technology rests with the
Minister of Technology, who is advised by an Advisory Council on Techno¬
logy. Other government departments are responsible for research and
development related to their executive responsibilities.
The Department
of Education
and Science
The Department of Education and Science (see also p. 50) is responsible,
among other things, for Government policy regarding the universities and for
promoting civil science throughout Great Britain. The Department’s relations
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS
The Council for
Scientific Policy
The Ministry
of Technology
Advisory
Council on
Technology
Advisory
Boards and
Committees
I9I
with the universities are conducted through the University Grants Committee
(see p. 159); and its responsibilities for basic and applied civil science are
discharged mainly through the five research councils: the Science Research
Council (see p. 196), the Medical Research Council (see p. 198), the Agricul¬
tural Research Council (see p. 199), the Natural Environment Research
Council (see p. 201), and the Social Science Research Council (see p. 203).
Others may be established under the terms of the Science and Technology
Act. The Department also has, in consultation with other departments,
general governmental responsibility for Britain’s scientific space research
programme, which is co-ordinated by the Science Research Council. Tne
Department is responsible for some aspects of international scientific relations
(see p. 205), and for Government policy regarding libraries and information
systems, including the Office for Scientific and rechnical Information.
In the exercise of his responsibilities for the formulation and execution ox
government scientific policy (but excluding, at present, the social sciences)
the Secretary of State for Education and Science is advised by the Council
for Scientific Policy (CSP), which replaced the former Advisory Council on
Scientific Policy. The Council, which was set up in January 1965, consists of
a chairman and 13 independent members. There are, in addition, assessors
from the research councils and from the University Grants Committee.
Among the issues with which the Council is concerned is the balance of
scientific effort in those areas for which the Secretary of State is responsible.
The Ministry of Technology (see also p. 56), which came formally into being
in 1964, took over responsibility for the United Kingdom Atomic Energy
Authority (AEA) (see p. 200) and the National Research Development
Corporation (see p. 205). On the dissolution of the Department of Scientific
and Industrial Research (DSIR) in 1965 many of its functions and resources
were transferred to the Ministry, which in February 1967 incorporated the
functions and responsibilities of the former Ministry of Aviation with the
exception of those civil aviation responsibilities which were transferred to
the Board of Trade (see p. 57). As a result of changes announced in October
1969, the Ministry of Technology absorbed the Ministry of Power, together
with certain industrial functions of the Board of Trade and of the former
Department of Economic Affairs. Its responsibilities now include the sponsor¬
ship of most industries in both the public and private sectors.
The Ministry, among other things, has responsibility for engineering
standards and weights and measures for the British Standards Institution
(see p. 249) and for the Metrication Board set up in 1969 to facilitate the transi¬
tion to the metric system of weights and measures in Britain by 1975 (see
p. 467). It has direct control of a number of research stations and establish¬
ments (see p. 197); it also aids with grants 43 autonomous industrial research
associations (see p. 197).
The Minister of Technology is chairman of the Advisory Council on Tech¬
nology, set up to advise on the application of advanced technology in British
industry. There is a deputy chairman and 14 other members, representing
scientific, economic, trade union and industrial interests.
Three new advisory boards to replace steering committees were created in
1969 in consultation with the Royal Society (see p. 193) an<^ Confederation
of British Industry (see p. 242) to advise the Minister of Technology on
matters relating exclusively to three research establishments. Advisory
committees were also set up to advise on certain research programmes.
G*
iy2
Other
Government-
sponsored
Research
Transport
Fuel and Power
Meteorology
Building
Environmental
Pollution
Land Use and
Planning
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
A number of other government departments remain responsible for certain
branches of research.
The Ministry of Transport is concerned with research and development
relating to inland transport and ports. Research into road construction,
traffic flow and safety is carried out mainly at the Ministry’s Road Research
Laboratory (see p. 340) at Crowthorne, Berkshire. There are also collaborative
arrangements for research in inland transport with the Ministry of Tech¬
nology. Economic, technical and operational research studies are carried out
in the Ministry of Transport’s headquarters and some are commissioned also
from consultants and universities. The Ministry of Technology is responsible
for sponsoring research and development in aviation.
Research on radio aids for marine navigation is undertaken by the Ministry
of Defence, which is also responsible for inter-Service electronic valve
research at the Services Electronics Research Laboratory. Research on marine
nuclear propulsion is undertaken by the AEA. The Civil Aviation Research
and Development Board was set up in February 1970 by the President of the
Board of Trade in consultation with the Minister of Technology to co-ordinate
research and development work for civil aviation equipment other than aircraft
and engines.
The Ministry of Technology (see pp. 56 and 191) is responsible for research
into safety and health of mineworkers. The coal, electricity and gas industries
are required to settle their general programmes of research in consultation
with the Minister, who is assisted by an Advisory Council on Research and
Development. Similar provisions apply to the British Steel Corporation’s
general programme of research and technological development.
The Ministry of Defence finances the Meteorological Office, which is respon¬
sible for research in meteorology and geophysics, mainly for civil purposes.
The headquarters of the Office and most of its research sections are at
Bracknell, Berkshire. The Ministry also makes grants for fundamental
meteorological research carried out under the auspices of the Royal Society or
in university departments.
The Ministry of Public Building and Works has a Directorate General of
Research and Development (see p. 273) and is responsible for the Building
Research Station, Garston, Watford, Hertfordshire, which is concerned with
the techniques of building design and construction, and the organisation,
productivity and economics of building work.
A permanent Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution, with a mem¬
bership which includes the Chief Scientific Adviser to the Government, was
set up in December 1969 to advise on matters both national and international
concerning the pollution of the environment; on the adequacy of research;
and the future possibilities of the danger to the environment. There is also a
small central advisory unit within the Cabinet Office, consisting mainly of
scientists, to co-ordinate matters related to the prevention of environmental
pollution.
A Clean Air Council was set up in 1956 and an Advisory Council on Noise
in 1970.
The Ministry of Housing and Local Government sponsors certain geo¬
graphical, geological, economic and sociological research relating to the use
and development of land in England. Similar arrangements are made in
Scotland by the Scottish Home and Health Department, in Wales by the
Welsh Office, and in Northern Ireland by the Ministry of Development. A
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS
193
Communications
Botany
Select
Committee
on Science
and
Technology
The
P ar liamentar y
and Scientific
Committee
THE LEARNED
SOCIETIES
Royal Society
Centre for Environmental Studies has been set up as an independent educa¬
tional trust for research into the problems of urban planning and dealing with
the effects of a fast-growing mobile population.
The Post Office undertakes research and development on many aspects of the
science and engineering of communications, both in its own laboratories and
in close association with industry, the universities and government depart¬
ments. The main research station is at Dollis Hill, London, and there are
laboratories at Backwell, near Bristol, at Castleton, near Cardiff, and also at
Martlesham, near Ipswich, where a new research station is being built.
The Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew (founded in 1759), together with its
400-acre estate at Wakehurst Place, Ardingly, Sussex, is administered by
the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food and has the largest collection
of living plants in the world. Its research departments are: the herbarium,
concerned primarily with the classification and accurate determination of
plants; and the Jodrell Laboratory, for the study of plant anatomy and plant
physiology, cytology and genetics. There are two museums concerned mainly
with the economic exploitation of plants. The library, attached to the
herbarium, was founded in 1852; it consists of more than 100,000 botanical
books, about 140,000 reprints and separately issued items and a collection of
over 160,000 drawings and paintings of plants. The Royal Botanic Garden,
Edinburgh, founded about 1660, has, since April 1969, been administered
by the Department of Agriculture and Fisheries for Scotland.
A Select Committee of the House of Commons on Science and Technology
was set up in December 1966. It is one of the specialist committees established
to give back-bench Members the opportunity to investigate the policies and
administration of the Government and to participate in the formation of
policy. The Members of the Committee (not more than 15 in number) are
nominated by the House. The Committee has power to call witnesses,
generally takes evidence in public, and reports its findings to the House from
time to time. Its functions, together with those of other Select Committees,
are being re-examined by the Government.
The Parliamentary and Scientific Committee, founded in 1939, provides for a
regular exchange of information between members of Parliament and
scientists. Membership is open to members of Parliament of any party in both
Houses, and also to nominated representatives of such non-profit-making
scientific and technological organisations in Britain as may be affiliated under
its constitution.
Although today most research is conducted under other auspices, the learned
societies have retained their traditional function of facilitating the spread of
knowledge. At present there are over 200 of them in Britain with approxi¬
mately 400 scientific publications. The most eminent of those concerned with
science in its broadest aspects (as distinct from those societies with specialised
interests and activities) are the Royal Society, Royal Society of Arts, Royal
Institution and British Association.
The Royal Society, or, more fully, the Royal Society of London for the
Improvement of Natural Knowledge, founded in 1660, occupies a unique
place in the country’s scientific affairs and corresponds to national academies
of sciences in other countries. Election to it is regarded by scientists as a high
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
I94
honour. The Queen is Patron. There are today three main categories of
Fellowship: Royal Fellows, comprising the Queen Mother and three Royal
Dukes; Foreign Members, of whom there are about 70, and the main body of
Fellows numbering about 730. Election to the Fellowship, which is for life,
was for many years restricted to 25 persons a year and the foreign membership
to four a year but in 1965 the former was increased to 32 with the intention of
awarding some of the new places to applied scientists in both the physical and
biological sciences. The Society is governed by a council of 21 members.
Its activities include the holding of scientific meetings; publication of
research work, mainly in the Philosophical Transactions and the Proceedings',
the presentation of medals; the giving of endowed lectures; and the award of
research appointments and grants. Among its research appointments are the
Foulerton, Wolfson and Sir Henry Dale Research Professorships and ten
other research professorships supported by parliamentary grant-in-aid, The
highest medal awarded is the Copley Medal, for which scientists from all
countries are eligible; there are also three Royal Medals, and the Rumford,
Darwin, Buchanan, Sylvester, Hughes, Leverhulme and Mullard Medals.
There are six lectureships: the Croonian (biology); the Bakerian (physical
sciences); the Ferrier (nervous system); the Wilkins (history of science); the
Leeuwenhoek (microbiology); and the Bernal (social functions of science).
The Society has set up committees, some of them jointly with other bodies, to
promote improvements in education in science and to emphasise the
importance of applied sciences, especially engineering.
Although an independent private corporation, the Society has always had
a special relationship with the Government, which makes grants for certain of
its activities. The President of the Society is consulted on scientific appoint¬
ments to government research councils and Fellows serve on most govern¬
mental advisory councils and committees concerned with research.
The international relations of the Royal Society are extensive. It represents
the United Kingdom in the international unions comprising the International
Council of Scientific Unions and appoints national committees for each of
them. It also plays a leading part in international scientific programmes such
as the International Biological Programme (1965-70), and promotes exchange
visits of scientists with many academies throughout the world. Its Inter¬
national Fellowship Scheme to foster relations with scientists of Western
European and other countries receives financial support from the Government
and other sources.
Royal Society The Royal Society of Arts (properly, the Royal Society for the Encouragement
of Arts of Arts, Manufactures and Commerce) has a character at once scientific,
artistic, technical, industrial and commercial. Since its foundation in 1754, one
of the Society’s principal objects has been to promote the progress and
application to useful ends of all departments of science. Today it fulfils this
purpose chiefly by disseminating new scientific knowledge. The Society
regularly holds lectures, and publishes a monthly Journal, thus providing
effective media for the exposition and assessment by leading authorities of
developments which have a public as well as a specialist interest.
Royal
Institution
The Royal Institution was founded in 1799 as a public body for facilitating
the introduction of useful mechanical inventions and improvements, and for
teaching the application of science to everyday life. Later it undertook the
‘promotion of chemical science by experiments and lectures for improving
arts and manufactures’, and ‘the diffusion and extension of useful knowledge’.
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS
195
British
Association
Professional
Institutions
THE UNIVER¬
SITIES AND
INSTITUTIONS
OF UNIVERSITY
STATUS
Its character, however, was largely determined by the work of Sir Humphry
Davy and Michael Faraday, who established a tradition of research. Today,
the Royal Institution has extensive research laboratories, and lectures are
given on recent developments in science and other branches of knowledge. Its
library includes many early scientific works and manuscripts.
The British Association for the Advancement of Science was founded in 1831
to promote general interest in science and its applications. One of its chief
activities is the Annual Meeting, attended by many young students as well as
by eminent scientists. In addition the Association plans special lectures,
exhibitions and discussions (some designed for young audiences), the publica¬
tion of pamphlets, the organisation of conferences, the appointment of study
groups and liaison with the Press and with sound and television broadcasting
services. The Association has area committees and three lectureships for
young scientists—-the Kelvin, the Darwin and the Lister lectureships, dealing
respectively with the physical, biological and sociological sciences—to
encourage scientists to make their activities known to wider audiences. The
British Association has an organised relationship with over 150 scientific
bodies and learned societies. It has also made an important contribution to the
development of science by taking or recommending action to remove obstacles
to the discovery and application of scientific knowledge.
There are numerous technical institutions and professional associations, many
of which are playing a distinguished part in promoting their own disciplines
or are interested in the education and professional well-being of their members.
The Council of Engineering Institutions, the federal body for the chartered
engineering institutions established in 1965, promotes the co-ordination of the
engineering profession. The Council of Science and Technology Institutes—
a federal body with five member institutes representing biologists, chemists,
mathematicians, metallurgists and physicists—was formed in 1969.
Of total estimated university expenditure on research in the Academic year
1968-69 (over £80 million), the largest government contribution (£52-5
million) was through the University Grants Committee (UGC) (see p. 159).
Scientific research in the universities is also supported through the research
councils. This support takes two forms. First, about half the postgraduate
students in science and technology in the universities receive maintenance
awards from the research councils, through postgraduate scholarships,
studentships or fellowships. These awards are in some cases for periods of up
to three years for training in research work and in others for shorter periods
for advanced studies. The cost of these awards is currently about ^8-3 million
a year. Second, grants are given to the universities by the research councils
for specific projects, particularly in new or developing fields of research. In
recent years the research councils, in addition to making grants of this kind,
have made funds available for expensive items of university equipment
required for specific programmes of research. The research councils’ support
for research in the universities, excluding expenditure by the Medical
Research Council and the Agricultural Research Council on their own research
units within the universities (which remain under the control of, and are
wholly financed by, the councils) amounted in 1969-70 to £277 million.
The other main channels of support for scientific research in the universities
are various government departments, the Royal Society, industry and the
independent foundations. The contributions from sources other than the
196 BRITAIN I97i: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
University Grants Committee amount to nearly a third of the total university
expenditure on research.
Universities in industrial centres have tended to acquire outstanding
reputations in studies relating to their local industries, and on a national scale
close relationships are fostered between the universities, industries and the
Government in numerous joint projects. The Ministry of Technology’s
industrial liaison officers (see p. 204) are based on universities or technical
colleges. Six Industrial Units have been opened (five at universities and one at
the College of Aeronautics, Cranfield) under a Ministry of Technology scheme.
They offer consultancy and research and development resources and are
expected to become self-supporting within a few years.
Statistics of
Qualified
Manpower
Of those in employment in Great Britain in 1966 there were 93,490 persons
holding at least a degree or an equivalent qualification in medicine, dentistry
or health. Of these 74-9 per cent were employed in medical and dental services,
13-8 per cent in distributive trades and 3-9 per cent in education. Of the
192,940 persons qualified in engineering and technology 41-2 per cent were
employed in manufacturing industry, 9-5 per cent in construction, 9-3 per cent
in public administration and defence, 8 per cent in scientific and technical
services and 7-4 per cent in education. There were also 122,790 persons
qualified in science (including agriculture) of whom 417 per cent were
employed in education, 27-3 per cent in manufacturing industry, 7 per cent in
research and development services and 5-1 per cent in public administration
and defence.
SCIENCE
RESEARCH
COUNCIL
The Science Research Council (SRC), which came into formal existence on
1st April 1965 and consists of a chairman and up to 15 other members, covers
all branches of fundamental science other than those for which the other
research councils are responsible. It also supports research projects in the
universities and technical colleges. Provision is made for it to carry out research
and development through its own establishments; to encourage and support
similar research by any other person or body; to provide and operate equip¬
ment for common use by universities, technical colleges and similar institu¬
tions ; to make grants for postgraduate studies; and to disseminate knowledge
of science and technology. Its establishments include the Royal Greenwich
Observatory, Herstmonceux, the Royal Observatory, Edinburgh, the Radio
and Space Research Station, the Rutherford High Energy Laboratory, the
Daresbury Nuclear Physics Laboratory, the Atlas Computer Laboratory, and
the Astrophysics Research Unit at the Culham Laboratory. The SRC also
co-ordinates the British scientific space research programme (see p. 201) and
provides the United Kingdom contribution to the European Organisation
for Nuclear Research (CERN) and the European Space Research Organisation
(ESRO).
INDUSTRIAL The greater part of industrial research in Britain is undertaken in government
RESEARCH establishments and in the research organisations of the larger firms. Research
organisations in industry vary widely between the largest firms employing
thousands of qualified staff and some employing very few; though the
emphasis is on commercial development, some fundamental research is done.
Other main agencies are universities and technical colleges, industrial
research associations, independent institutes for sponsored research and
consultant laboratories.
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS
197
Ministry of
Technology’s
Elesearch
Resources
Research
Associations
Public
Corporations
Private
Industry
The Ministry of Technology’s net total expenditure for 1969-70 on its
establishments was about £53-9 million, made up of about £11-6 million for
the ten industrial research establishments and £42-3 million for the eight
aviation establishments; these figures include £o-8 million in respect of the
Safety in Mines Research Establishment. Most of the latter was on supporting
and monitoring contracts with industry for developing defence projects. Of
the Ministry’s total expenditure on research and development (excluding the
AEA) less than one-fifth is spent in Ministry establishments. Its non¬
industrial staff numbered about 25,600 on 1st January 1970 including about
3,100 qualified scientists and engineers employed on research and develop¬
ment. These resources are estimated to represent the largest block of research
and development facilities and manpower available to any government outside
the United States and the Soviet Union.
Besides research and development for industry the industrial research
establishments are engaged on the application of techniques and discoveries to
design, production, quality control, distribution, marketing and sales. In
addition, there are the industrial research associations grant-aided by the
Ministry of Technology.
The scheme by which the Government gives financial help to groups of firms
with similar interests to form organisations known as research associations, to
carry out industrial research co-operatively, was started in 1917 and is now
operated by the Ministry of Technology. There are now 43 such associations,
with a combined income of ^15 million (compared with £5-1 million in 1955),
of which a little more than a quarter was contributed by the Government.
Suitably specialised associations are now available for about 50 per cent of
British industry. The largest are those dealing with ships, production
engineering, electrical manufacturing, cotton and man-made fibres, welding
and scientific instruments. (Particulars of these and other associations are
given in Chapter 11, Industry.) The amounts of the government grants are
related to the contributions made by the industries concerned.
The research associations are autonomous bodies governed by their own
councils, the members of which are mostly representatives of industry,
although the Ministry of Technology is also represented. The councils are
advised in preparing research programmes, for which they have complete
responsibility, by research committees representative of their industrial
members, often with the addition of university or government scientists.
Nearly all research associations admit to membership manufacturers in
Commonwealth countries and many also admit those in foreign countries.
A Conference of Industrial Research Associations was set up in 1969.
Some of the public corporations which run the nationalised industries have
their own research organisations (see Chapter 11), in particular those con¬
cerned with fuel and power, steel and transport. They also give support to
organisations concerned with research on matters of interest to them.
According to Statistics of Science and Technology igjo, expenditure on research
and development carried out within private industry (excluding enterprises of
less than 25 employees) in 1967-68 was as follows (in f million): aerospace
163-1; electronics 105-6; other electrical engineering 30-4; petroleum products
10-9; other chemical products 71-4; mechanical engineering 51-3; motor
vehicles 44; scientific instruments 12-7; food, drink and tobacco 18-1;
textiles io-8. For these groups the increase since 1966-67 was 3 per cent.
198
MEDICAL
RESEARCH
Medical
Research
Council
BRITAIN I971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
These figures include funds from government sources. Firms in science-
based industries commit large private funds to research and development in
the course of business.
A number of institutes for sponsored research have been established to
extend the facilities for private research for industrial firms by studying
problems which are not within the scope of the average industrial laboratory.
In these institutes research for private firms is carried out confidentially, the
results remaining the property of the sponsor.
A Medical Research Committee was appointed in 1913 to administer the
research funds provided under the National Health Insurance Act 1911. In
1920 the Committee was superseded by the Medical Research Council
(MRC), established under Royal Charter and supported by a grant-in-aid
provided by Parliament, now through the Secretary of State for Education and
Science. The MRC was granted a new charter in 1966.
In addition to financing the MRC, the Government gives substantial
support to medical research through block grants to universities distributed
through the University Grants Committee; and to clinical research through
the National Health Service. Certain government-financed research for defence
purposes, for example, at the Microbiological Establishment at Porton,
Wiltshire, has civil applications related to medical science.
Important contributions to the support of research in particular subjects
are made by industry, especially the pharmaceutical industry, and by private
charities or voluntary organisations, such as the Nuffield Foundation and the
British Empire Cancer Campaign.
The Medical Research Council is responsible to the Secretary of State for
Education and Science and consists of a Chairman, a Deputy Chairman, and
from 10 to 14 other members. Not less than three-quarters must be scientific¬
ally qualified, representative of the different branches of medical knowledge
and actively engaged in research. All members are appointed by the Secretary
of State, the scientific members after consultation with the President of the
Royal Society and the existing Council; and the Chairman and Deputy
Chairman after consultation with the Council.
The MRC’s chief function is to promote research into all aspects of health
and disease. In planning and carrying out its research programme the Council
is assisted by bodies specially appointed to advise on particular subjects.
Three of the more important of these are the Clinical Research Board, set up
in consultation with the health departments to assist the development of
clinical research; the Tropical Medicine Research Board, appointed in
consultation with the Ministry of Overseas Development, to advise on the
promotion and co-ordination of research in this field; and the Biological
Research Board, which advises on the promotion of research in the non-
clinical field. In addition, the MRC is advised by committees concerned with
particular aspects of its work. The MRC’s arrangements for the support of
research fall under four main headings: (1) investigations by members of its
scientific staff, mostly working in its own establishments; (2) short-term
grants to workers in universities and elsewhere; (3) long-term grants in sup¬
port of specific research programmes in university medical departments
(‘research groups’); and (4) fellowships and scholarships tenable both at home
and abroad. The research undertaken ranges from basic biological research at
the molecular level and the extensive laboratory work that forms the scientific
AGRICULTURAL
RESEARCH
Agricultural
Research
Council
The
Government
Agricultural
Departments
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS IQ9
basis of the practice of medicine to the study of patients and epidemiological
and population surveys carried out in the field.
The National Institute for Medical Research, at Mill Hill and Hampstead,
London, is the MRC’s main research establishment. Its clinical counterpart,
the Clinical Research Centre is being built at Northwick Park in north-west
London (the first patients were admitted in 1970) as an integral part of the
new district hospital for the North West Metropolitan Regional Hospital
Board. In addition the Council has over 70 smaller establishments, known as
research units, which are in most cases located in university departments,
medical schools and hospitals in Britain.
The MRC also undertakes work overseas and, with additional support
from the Ministry of Overseas Development, maintains laboratories in The
Gambia and units in Uganda and Jamaica.
Agricultural research is carried out by the Agricultural Research Council, the
government agricultural departments and by private industry.
The Agricultural Research Council (ARC), established in 1931, consists of not
less than 15 and not more than 18 members, including the Chief Veterinary
Officer and certain appointments made by the Ministers of the agricultural
departments. In addition to distinguished scientists, the membership includes
people with practical farming experience. The ARC is under the general
oversight of the Secretary of State for Education and Science.
The ARC is responsible for 14 independent state-aided agricultural
research institutes and also has eight institutes under its direct control and
14 units which it has established under distinguished scientists associated with
universities. Also there are eight independent institutes in Scotland financed
by the Department of Agriculture and Fisheries for Scotland with advice
from the ARC on their scientific programmes, staffing and equipment.
The ARC makes special research grants to support promising new lines of
work in university departments. It awards a limited numbei of postgraduate
training awards for those wishing to undertake a career in veterinary research.
The Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food carries out applied and basic
research in its own veterinary laboratories at Weybridge, Surrey, and at
Lasswade, Midlothian, and also at its plant pathology laboratory at Harpenden,
Hertfordshire; while at its infestation control laboratory at Tolworth, Surrey
(with a field station at Worplesdon), it co-ordinates work on the control of
insect pests of stored food and conducts research on the control of harmful
mammals and birds. The Central Veterinary Laboratory at Weybridge has
been appointed by the World Health Organisation (WHO) as the third
international laboratory for biological standards. In Scotland research work
at East Craigs, Edinburgh, by the Agricultural Scientific Services of the
Department of Agriculture and Fisheries is mainly concerned with the
problems of healthy seed potato production, seed pathology, cultivation,
taxonomy and vertebrate pest control. In Northern Ireland the Ministry of
Agriculture is responsible for the promotion of agricultural research and
has research divisions dealing with a variety of aspects.
The Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food maintains four laboratories
for marine, shellfish, and salmon and freshwater fisheries research, and four
marine research vessels. The Department of Agriculture and Fisheries for
Scotland maintains a marine research laboratory and six research ships at
Aberdeen, and a freshwater fisheries research laboratory at Pitlochry.
200
NUCLEAR
ENERGY
BRITAIN I971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
With the guidance of the Chief Scientific Adviser (Food), the Food
Standards and Sciences Division of the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and
Food is responsible for formulating the Ministry’s general policy on the
acquisition and dissemination of scientific and technical information about
food and the food handling and processing industry; for furnishing scientific
advice to the other divisions of the Ministry; and for sponsoring or carrying
out experimental work. The division has its own experimental laboratories in
London and Norwich. The Food Research Advisory Committee advises on
food problems requiring investigation or research.
The Forestry Commission undertakes experimental work relating to
silvicultural and allied problems (see p. 325). By means of grants, it also aids
forest research work undertaken by various universities and other institutions,
including the Commonwealth Forestry Institute, Oxford.
The United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority (AEA), set up under the
Atomic Energy Authority Act 1954, is responsible for research and develop¬
ment in nuclear energy. It is answerable to the Minister of Technology, who
is responsible under the Atomic Energy Acts 1946 and 1949 for promoting and
controlling the development of nuclear energy and ensuring that the proper
degrees of importance are attached to its various applications. As an essential
part of the British Government’s nuclear power programme, the AEA has
carried out research and developed new types of nuclear power stations for
the generation of electric power on a commercial scale and for this purpose it
builds and operates experimental and prototype nuclear reactors. Construc¬
tion of commercial nuclear power stations is carried out by industry to the
order of the electricity generating boards which operate them. Two new
design and construction companies, with AEA participation, to design and
construct nuclear power stations were formed in 1968 and 1969. Under the
Science and Technology Act 1965 the functions of the AEA have been
extended so that the Minister may, after consultation, require it to undertake
research and development outside nuclear energy. Non-nuclear work is
absorbing a rising proportion of the AEA’s research resources and includes
research into desalination, hydrostatic extrusion, satellite design, biological
centrifuges, tribology, non-destructive testing, ceramics, atmospheric pollu¬
tion, biomedical technology and carbon fibres.
As at present constituted the AEA has a London office, a Radiochemical
Centre at Amersham (producing and marketing radioisotopes) and estab¬
lishments divided into the Research, Weapons, Reactor and Production
groups.
The Secretary of State for Defence became responsible for the development
and production of nuclear weapons for the Services in 1966; in practice,
however, the AEA produces the explosive nuclear material and assemblies for
nuclear weapons under contract and carries out weapons research.
The Department of Education and Science and the AEA collaborate with
a number of other government departments and with the Radiological
Protection Service on various aspects of health and safety in relation to atomic
energy. Expert advice on radiation hazards is provided by the Medical and
Agricultural Research Councils and by the Radioactive Substances Advisory
Committee, appointed by the Secretary of State for Education and Science.
The Radiological Protection Act 1970, provides for a national Radiological
Protection Board which will amalgamate the Radiological Protection Service
and part of the AEA’s Central Health and Safety Branch. The Act also
provides for the Board to replace the Radioactive Substances Advisory
High Energy
Physics
SPACE
ACTIVITIES
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS 201
Committee. The Board will be funded by the Secretaries of State for Social
Services and for Scotland, the AEA and the Medical Research Council.
The Ministry of Technology and the AEA are jointly responsible for
co-operation with other countries in nuclear energy, partly through the
medium of bilateral agreements with a large number of individual countries
and partly through British membership of bodies such as the International
Atomic Energy Agency and the European Nuclear Energy Agency.
The provision of expensive facilities for research in high energy physics is the
function of the Science Research Council (see p. 196). The SRC establish¬
ments concerned are the Rutherford High Energy Laboratory, Chilton, with
a 7,000 million electron volt (MeV) proton synchrotron (particle accelerator),
completed in 1963, and the Daresbury Nuclear Physics Laboratory, Cheshire,
with a 4,000 MeV electron accelerator, completed in 1966.
Government responsibility for space activities is divided between the Secretary
of State for Education and Science, the Secretary of State for Defence, the
Minister of Technology and the Minister of Posts and Telecommunications.
Total expenditure on space activities in 1969—70 is estimated at about ^35
million; of this, some ^15 million represents contributions to international
bodies. Of these bodies two were set up to give European countries the
opportunity of participating more fully in space research and technology. The
European Space Vehicle Launcher Development Organisation (ELDO) was
established to develop large satellite launchers; the British Blue Streak has
been used as the launching vehicle for ELDO’s Europa rockets. The European
Space Research Organisation (ESRO) was founded to provide facilities for
scientific experiments in space; it has a programme of launchings of sounding
rockets and satellites of various sizes. Under two inter-related international
agreements reached in 1964 in Washington (being re-negotiated), Britain,
together with the US and other countries in Europe and elsewhere, is taking
part in International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium (Intelsat).
The Government announced in April 1968 that it could not undertake addi¬
tional financial commitment to ELDO but would be prepared to accept a
growth rate of up to 6 per cent a year for ESRO.
The execution of the civil scientific space research programme is the
responsibility of the Secretary of State for Education and Science, through
the Science Research Council.
Scientific space experiments are arranged by scientists in the universities
and in government research establishments, under the general supervision of
the Space Research Management Unit of the Science Research Council. The
Royal Society represents Britain in non-governmental international scientific
groups such as the Committee on Space Research (COSPAR) of the Inter¬
national Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU).
In addition, Britain is co-operating with the United States in a programme
which includes the launching of the Ariel series of satellites and the incorpora¬
tion of British experiments in US satellites. The third such artificial earth
satellite, Ariel 3, launched in May 1967, and the upper atmosphere Skylark
rockets used in the British national and the ESR.0 programmes were designed
and produced in Britain, as will be UK—\ due to be launched in I971*
The Ministry of Technology provides technical advice and support in
relation to the space research programme and space applications work; it is
responsible for executing satellite and sounding rocket programmes for
customer Departments and for the development of the space technology
202
OPTICAL AND
RADIO
ASTRONOMY
THE NATURAL
ENVIRONMENT
RESEARCH
COUNCIL
BRITAIN I971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
required in support of current and future programmes. The Ministry’s
National Space Technology Programme includes the development of experi¬
mental satellites and a launch vehicle {Black Arrow).
The Ministry of Technology leads the UK delegations to the European
Space Conference and also provides the UK representatives and contributions
to ELDO.
The Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications, through the Post Office, is
responsible for the use of satellites for civil communications purposes and
undertakes research work in connection with communications systems using
satellites. The Post Office ground stations at Goonhilly in Cornwall are among
the most successful in the world, and British firms have built and are building
such stations overseas.
The satellite prediction centre at the Radio and Space Research Station,
Slough, also the home of one of the three World Data Centres for space
research, co-ordinates optical tracking activities in Britain. Optical observation
of satellites is carried out regularly by many individual observers in Britain
and by the Royal Edinburgh Observatory’s outstation (see below); radio
tracking is undertaken at the Radio and Space Research Station and by radio
telescopes at Jodrell Bank and the Royal Radar Establishment at Malvern.
Large optical telescopes were first constructed in Britain by Herschel and
Rosse in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. The latest addition to the
equipment at Herstmonceux is the 98-inch Isaac Newton telescope, the largest
in Western Europe, completed in 1967. Grants by the SRC to the Radcliffe
Trustees have enabled British optical astronomers to have continued access to
the 74-inch telescope at the Radcliffe Observatory in South Africa for
observations in the southern skies. In April 1967 the SRC assumed responsi¬
bility for supporting and managing this telescope. The Royal Edinburgh
Observatory has been re-equipped with modern instrumentation for use in
stellar spectroscopy and photometry. The British and Australian Governments
are building jointly a 150-inch optical telescope in New South Wales.
Radio astronomy, developed since 1931, is carried out mainly at Cambridge
University, at the Jodrell Bank Experimental Station of Manchester University
in Cheshire, and at the Royal Radar Establishment at Malvern. Britain
occupies a pre-eminent position in this branch of research.
The Natural Environment Research Council (NERC) was established by
Royal Charter in June 1965 under the Science and Technology Act 1965 to
encourage, plan and conduct research in those sciences, both physical and
biological, that relate to man’s natural environment. The work of the NERC
falls into five main groups: the solid earth, its physical properties and mineral
resources (geology, geophysics and geochemistry); the inland waters and their
living resources (hydrology, freshwater biology, ecology and fisheries); the
terrestrial communities, their resources and amenities (terrestrial ecology,
forestry and conservation); the seas and oceans, their behaviour and their
living and mineral resources (oceanography, marine biology and ecology, and
fisheries); and the atmosphere (some aspects of meteorology). The Nature
Conservancy forms part of the NERC which is also responsible for the British
Antarctic Survey, the Institute of Geological Sciences, the Institute of
Hydrology, the National Institute of Oceanography, the Institute of Coastal
Oceanography and Tides, the Unit of Coastal Sedimentation; the Culture
Centre of Algae and Protozoa and the Research Vessel Unit. It is also respon¬
sible for supporting the Marine Biological Association, the Scottish Marine
THE SOCIAL
SCIENCES
OTHER
RESEARCH
Zoological
Gardens
Scientific
Museums
DISSEMINATION
and applica¬
tion OF
results of
research
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS 203
Biological Association, the Freshwater Biological Association, the Fisheries
Helminthology Unit and the Marine Invertebrate Biology Unit, the Fisheries
Biochemical Research Unit and the Insect Pathology Unit.
Many of the activities of the NERC are related to university research in the
environmental sciences, which it supports by postgraduate training awards,
research grants and fellowships.
Further responsibilities of the NERC include the support of long-term
forestry research in consultation with the Forestry Commission; financial and
policy control of research in seismology and geomagnetism carried out by the
Meteorological Office; and the co-ordination of research in meteorology
generally with that carried out by the Meteorological Office.
The Social Science Research Council (SSRC) was set up in December 1965,
to encourage support and carry out research in, and to disseminate knowledge
about, the social sciences. It provides grants for research projects at univer¬
sities and other institutions, and makes training awards to postgraduate
students. The SSRC’s fields of interest include economics; political science;
psychology; social anthropology; social and economic statistics; sociology and
social administration; social science and government, education; management
and industrial relations; human geography planning and various aspects of a
wide range of other disciplines.
Several government departments have funds allocated for social research
related to their responsibilities, including the Home Office, which has a large
research unit which carries out a wide variety of sociological studies. The
Social Survey conducts sample survey enquiries at the request of government
departments and from time to time also carries out studies in collaboration
with universities and other independent research organisations.
Zoological research is among the activities of the world-famous Zoological
Gardens, extending over 34 acres in Regent’s Park, London, which were
opened by the Zoological Society of London in 1828. A natural zoo of 500
acres was opened in 1931 at Whipsnade, in Bedfordshire, by the Society.
Among other well-known zoos are those at Edinburgh, Bristol, Chester and
Dudley, and a small, private one at Chessington, Surrey.
The British Museum (Natural History) is the principal centre in the
Commonwealth for the general study of natural history; it has extensive
collections of extant and fossil animals and plants and of minerals, rocks and
meteorites. The Science Museum illustrates the development of pure and
applied science in all countries, but chiefly in Britain, which has always held
a leading place in engineering, agriculture, navigation, mining, aeronautics,
and in the development of industrial machinery and processes. The geology of
Britain is probably known in more exact detail than that of any other country
in the world, and the Geological Survey has an outstanding collection of
exhibits in its Geological Museum. These three museums are in South
Kensington, London. Other important collections are those of the Museum
of Science and Industry, in Birmingham, and the Museum of the History of
Science, at Oxford.
The dissemination of the results of research to other research workers and
to ultimate users has become a problem of some magnitude as the volume of
information has grown. The traditional method of scientific publication, in
which results are written up into papers and published in journals, is still
204
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Information
Services
the main means of communication among scientists. The leading learned
societies have for long been important agencies for communicating scientific
information.
A Libraries and Information Systems Branch was set up in the Department
of Education and Science in 1969 to concentrate the Department’s responsi¬
bilities in relation to libraries and information systems. The new Branch
includes the Office for Scientific and Technical Information (OSTI), set up
in 1965 to promote research; develop new techniques and systems; im¬
prove existing services and experiment with new ones; to stimulate training
of scientists for information work and in the use of information sources; and
help to co-ordinate information activities at home and overseas.
The National Lending Library for Science and Technology (NLL) at
Boston Spa, Yorkshire, also within the Department, aims to collect for loan
purposes all literature which is likely to be of interest to the practising
scientist and technologist, covering all branches of science and technology
(including agriculture and medicine) and, since 1967, the periodical literature
of the social sciences. Besides collecting all available translations of Russian
scientific literature the library is responsible for arranging the translation of
some Russian periodicals, books and articles. Details are published monthly
in the NLL Translations Bulletin. The Library acts as a centre for MEDLARS,
a computerised medical literature search service, produced by the US
National Library of Medicine. (A description of general library services which
also cater for scientific needs is given on p. 220.)
Aslib, representing special libraries and information units in industry,
government departments, universities, colleges and other institutions, carries
out research into the collection, utilisation and dissemination of information,
provides consultancy and advisory services and training courses and offers
members an enquiry and reference service covering all subjects. Publications
include directories to sources of information, research reports, handbooks and
monographs on information science. It also operates the Commonwealth Index
to Unpublished Translations.
The National Reference Library of Science and Invention, administered
by the British Museum, is at present divided between two separately housed
divisions. The Holborn Division, formerly the Patent Office Library, is one
of the great scientific libraries of the world. The Bayswater Division has
substantial collections, especially in the life sciences.
An Advisory Committee for Scientific and Technical Information was set
up in October 1965 to advise the Secretary of State for Education and Science
particularly in relation to the work of OSTI and the co-ordination of this
work with other government departments and independent organisations.
The Ministry of Technology and the AEA devote considerable sums to
advisory information services. The former has nine regional offices and
sponsors over 70 industrial liaison centres, based on universities or technical
colleges which make contacts with local industries to promote greater use
of existing scientific and technical knowledge. A Production Engineering
Advisory Service equipped with mobile demonstration units brings knowledge
of new techniques directly to the workshop floor. The grant-aided industrial
research associations circulate research reports and provide information
services to members. Besides information services provided by its various
groups, which include the Ceramics Centre and the Non-destructive Testing
Centre at Harwell, the AEA has an information centre at its London head¬
quarters, and a network of regional advisers on the use of radioisotopes.
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS
205
National
Research
Development
Corporation
OVERSEAS
SCIENTIFIC
RELATIONS
In agriculture, the Commonwealth Agricultural Institutes and Bureaux
(see p. 206) provide abstracts and an information service in various branches
of agricultural science. The ARC publishes an Index of Agricultural Research
in Progress, and gives an account of current developments in its annual reports.
The advisory services of the agricultural departments bring research results
directly to the farmer.
Medical research results are communicated mainly through journals and
periodicals; but the MRC issues special reports and includes special articles
in its annual reports.
The National Research Development Corporation (NRDC), an independent
body for which the Minister of Technology has statutory responsibility, was
set up under the Development of Inventions Act 1948 to secure the develop¬
ment and exploitation of inventions in the public interest. The NRDC can
also assist research work where this is likely to lead to an invention. The limit
on the outstanding amount of Government advances to the NRDC, originally
£5 million, has been progressively increased to £50 million.
Projects so far sponsored include hovercraft, computers, advanced types of
electric motor, towed flexible barges (Dracones), diesel engines, insecticides,
fuel cells and antibiotics. NRDC is increasingly funding speculative projects
on a joint venture basis with industrial firms. NRDC support for hovercraft
development has been given mainly through a wholly owned subsidiary,
Hovercraft Development Ltd., which holds and manages the hovercraft
patents. Another subsidiary, Tracked Hovercraft Ltd., was formed in 1967 to
develop an air-cushioned tracked vehicle. NRDC is a minority shareholder
in the British Hovercraft Corporation Ltd., a company formed in 1966 to
design and build hovercraft.
Most government departments concerned with science and technology make
special arrangements for dealing with international scientific relations but the
DES, through its International Scientific Relations Division, has a number
of inter-departmental responsibilities including the recruitment and scientific
support of Britain’s scientific counsellors overseas, who are seconded to the
Diplomatic Service. In areas of non-governmental collaboration, the primary
representative of the United Kingdom is the Royal Society.
The Government is concerned with inter-governmental organisations.
These include: specialised agencies of the United Nations, for example, the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO),
the World Health Organisation (WHO), the Food and Agriculture Organisa¬
tion (FAO); nuclear energy, for example, the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), the European Nuclear Energy Agency (ENEA) and the
European Organisation for Nuclear Research (CERN); space research, for
example, ESRO; and the International Agency for Research on Cancer
(IARC). There are agreements between the United Kingdom AEA and other
atomic energy authorities, including that of the Soviet Union (and there are
permanent representatives of the United States Atomic Energy Commission
in London and of the United Kingdom AEA in Washington). Also, there are
inter-governmental agreements with Euratom, and bilateral agreements with
other countries. Britain is also represented on the three scientific committees
of the OECD.
Commonwealth The Commonwealth Scientific Committee (CSC) consisting of the heads of
Scientific the national research organisations of Commonwealth countries, formed in
Committee 1958 from the previous Standing Committee set up in 1946, meets biennially.
206 BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Operating under the CSC is an executive sub-committee, membership of
which consists of officials responsible for scientific matters in the Common¬
wealth Missions in London, and representatives from British Government
departments, the research councils and the Royal Society. There are various
specialist committees. The secretariat for the Committee and its executive
sub-committee is provided by the Commonwealth Scientific Liaison Offices.
The
Common wea 1 th
Scientific
Liaison
Offices
A British Commonwealth Scientific Conference held in 1946 recommended
the continuance and extension of the scientific collaboration of the war years
by the creation of the Commonwealth Scientific Liaison Offices, a group at
present consisting of the Scientific Liaison Offices in London of Australia,
Canada and New Zealand together with the International Scientific Relations
Division of the Department of Education and Science.
Commonwealth The Commonwealth Agricultural Bureaux, financed by contributions from
Agricultural all Commonwealth countries, comprise four Institutes and nine Bureaux, all
Bureaux of which except one Institute are in Britain and each of which is concerned
with a particular branch of agricultural science. They act as clearing houses
for the interchange of information of value to research workers in agricultural
science throughout the Commonwealth and increasingly throughout the
world. Seventeen Abstract Journals, one Primary Journal and an Index are
published periodically and have a combined annual circulation of about 29,000
copies. The Institutes and Bureaux also issue monographs on their own
particular subjects and deal with enquiries received from research workers in
all parts of the Commonwealth.
Ministry of The Ministry of Overseas Development’s (ODM) promotion of scientific
Overseas research in the interests of developing countries covers specialist advice from
Development Britain, advisory visits, conferences for exchange of information, training
scientists from overseas in universities and research institutions in Britain,
recruiting scientific staff from Britain, and providing support for existing
research services and research projects overseas, for example, in East Africa
and the Caribbean. Some equipment is also given to encourage scientific
training and applied research. The Anti-Locust Research Centre in London,
internationally recognised as a world centre for locust research since 1931, is
part of ODM; and so is the Tropical Products Institute in London, which
aims at improving the economic viability of the less-developed tropical
countries, especially those within the Commonwealth, by research into new
uses for tropical plant and animal products. The ODM provides over £2
million a year for research for the benefit of developing countries.
The British The principal aims of the British Council (see p. 164) in the sciences (including
Council agriculture, medicine and technology) are to foster co-operation between
British scientists and scientists of other countries, to promote among overseas
specialists a better understanding and knowledge of Britain and its scientific
achievements, and, in the developing countries, to assist in curriculum reform
at school level and in the training of teachers of science and mathematics.
Much emphasis is placed on the interchange of scientists between Britain
and other countries. Overseas tours and advisory visits by British specialists
are arranged and scientists recruited for overseas posts. In the other direction
the Council invites senior specialists to Britain for visits and discussions with
British experts, and makes awards to postgraduate students; it also administers
the programmes of a large number of senior specialists and students who
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS
207
travel to Britain under the auspices of the UN specialised agencies, or under
various bilateral technical assistance schemes, or as private individuals. The
Council is also responsible for administering travel grants awarded under the
Foreign and Commonwealth University Interchange Schemes.
Information on Britain’s scientific achievements is provided either through
the Council’s overseas libraries or direct from the London headquarters
which includes specialist departments (and libraries) for medicine and science.
Material published or compiled by these London departments includes
British Medical Journal, British Medical Book List, British Medical Index
(see also Bibliography, p. 479), and publications listing facilities for educa¬
tion and training in Britain.
THE PROMOTION OF THE ARTS
This section describes the assistance and encouragement given to the arts
by the Government, local authorities, voluntary societies and other organisa¬
tions. Although valuable support comes from private sources, including trusts
and commercial concerns, the Government and local authorities are taking an
increasingly active part. The Paymaster General under the general supervision
of the Secretary of State for Education and Science is responsible for the arts.
The Government considers that its role is not ‘to dictate taste or restrict the
liberty of even the most unorthodox and experimental of artists but to
support the arts so that a high level of artistic achievement can be sustained
and the best in the arts made more widely available (A Policy for the Arts, see
Bibliography, p. 480).
The main educational functions concerning the arts are carried out in
England and Wales through the Department of Education and Science, in
Scotland through the Scottish Education Department and in Northern
Ireland by the Ministry of Education. In partnership with local education
authorities and voluntary bodies, they are concerned with schools, colleges
of further education and community centres. The Department of Education
and Science is also concerned with public libraries in England and Wales
and is responsible for the Victoria and Albert Museum, and the Scottish
Education Department is responsible for the Royal Scottish Museum.
The Government aids the preservation of Britain’s cultural heritage by
means of grants which largely finance most of the national museums and
galleries; through the Ministry of Public Building and Works, which looks
after ancient monuments, and the Ministry of Housing and Local Government,
which is responsible for historic buildings; and by giving financial help to
independent bodies concerned with preservation, such as the National Trust.
General help for the arts is given through government grants for music,
drama, literature, painting and sculpture; these are channelled for the greater
part through the Arts Councils of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, which
contribute to the aspects of the arts not provided for by other agencies. Other
state-aided organisations include the British Film Institute and the Council of
Industrial Design.
Estimated government expenditure on the arts in Great Britain in 1970-71
is ^24-7 million. Direct allocations included ^9-3 million for the Arts Council
of Great Britain (j£i*i million more than in 1969-70) and about £9*8 million
for the running costs of national museums and galleries. In addition over
£3-3 million was allocated for the preservation of historic buildings and ancient
monuments.
The Arts Council of Great Britain was established in 1946 under a Royal
208
BRITAIN I97i: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Local Support
Private
Contributions
Arts Festivals
and Regional
Arts
Associations
DRAMA
Charter. (A new charter was granted in 1967.) Its members are appointed by
the Secretary of State for Education and Science, in consultation with the
Secretaries of State for Scotland and Wales. Its main objects are to develop
and improve the knowledge, understanding and practice of the arts, to increase
the accessibility of the arts to the public, and to advise and co-operate with
government departments, local authorities and other organisations.
The Arts Council of Northern Ireland, which has similar aims, receives a
grant from the Northern Ireland Government. In 1970-71 this grant
amounted to some £220,000.
The British Council (see footnote, p. 164) takes an active part in displaying
overseas the best in British drama, ballet, music and the visual arts.
Local authorities do valuable work in encouraging the arts. Under the Local
Government Act 1948 they may levy up to a sixpenny rate in England and
Wales for expenditure on entertainment in all its forms, including cultural
activities. By amending legislation (the Local Government (Scotland) Act
1966), the same rate applies to Scotland. They may also spend money on
buildings for the arts and provide and maintain museums and art galleries;
the Arts Councils are authorised to give financial help to house the arts. Many
towns support orchestras and theatres. The Greater London Council which,
as the London County Council, built the Royal Festival Hall, has agreed to
contribute equally with the Government towards the cost of the National
Theatre on the south bank of the Thames. Building work started in September
1969 and the theatre is expected to be completed in 1973.
Many voluntary bodies are concerned with promoting the arts and include
charitable trusts and foundations which give financial support. Industrial
patronage includes support from the independent television companies.
The arts benefit most when the patrons—central and local government,
voluntary bodies, industry, the universities and individuals—combine. The
outstanding example is the Edinburgh Festival Society. Other arts festivals
organised on a similar basis include those held in the City of London,
Aldeburgh, Bath, Belfast, Brighton, Cheltenham, Harrogate, King’s Lynn,
Leeds, Norwich and York.
Regional co-operation in arts patronage is growing with support from the
Government which encourages the formation of regional arts associations to
ensure that the whole range of the arts is more widely available to people
throughout the area. Such associations have been established in the north,
the north-west, Lincolnshire, the midlands, the south-west, Greater London,
southern England, north Wales and Yorkshire.
Government support for drama is given through the Arts Councils of Great
Britain and of Northern Ireland which grant subsidies to drama companies
which are registered as charities (that is, are non-profit making), provided
that such companies have given evidence of serious aims and of consistently
high standards of practical competence. The Arts Council of Great Britain
operates a scheme to promote new drama: guarantees may be offered to
managements giving the first professional production of selected new plays;
and promising authors may be awarded bursaries. Schemes are also in
operation to train stage designers, producers and those wishing to take up
theatre administration.
The British Council makes the British theatre better known abroad by
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS
209
Professional
Theatre
organising and sponsoring international tours by leading British theatre
companies and individual actors and producers, by sending overseas exhibi¬
tions of books dealing with the British theatre, and by providing newly pub¬
lished plays through its overseas libraries.
There are about 140 professional theatres in full-time use in Britain. Of these
some half are owned or rented by non-profit-making companies receiving Arts
Council subsidies, while the remainder are operated commercially. In 1969-70
Arts Council support for the theatre in Britain amounted to over ^2 million.
The centre of theatrical activity is in London where there are over 30
principal theatres in or near the West End and several more in the suburbs.
Most of the theatres are let to producing managements on a commercial basis
for each production, but there are four theatres occupied by important sub¬
sidised companies—the National Theatre Company, the Royal Shakespeare
Company, the English Stage Company and the Mermaid Theatre Company.
. The National Theatre Company was formed in 1963; it receives grants
towards its running costs from the Arts Council and from the Greater
London Council. Its repertoire consists of classical and modern plays from all
countries, and it is large enough to undertake simultaneous productions both
in London (where it plays at the Old Vic Theatre) and in the provinces or
overseas. The company will eventually occupy the new National Theatre
being built on the south bank of the Thames in London.
The Royal Shakespeare Company presents Shakespearean plays at the Royal
Shakespeare Theatre, Stratford-upon-Avon, and international classical and
modern plays at the Aldwych Theatre, London. It will eventually have a per¬
manent London home in the proposed Barbican arts centre.
Outside London there are some 40 large commercial theatres in the main
cities of Britain and about 60 theatres occupied by subsidised ‘repertory
companies’. The commercial theatres, which accommodate pre- and post-
West End tours by the major London productions and by companies specially
formed for touring, have been declining in numbers, and several have now been
purchased by local authorities.
Compensating for this decline, there has been a growth in the activities of
the repertory companies, which receive financial support from the Arts
Council and also from the local authorities. The repertory companies employ
many leading dramatists, producers, designers and actors, and standards are
high. Some companies have the use of their own theatres, while others rent
from local authorities. Over a dozen new repertory theatres have been built
since 1958 including Coventry’s Belgrade Theatre, Leicester’s Phoenix
Theatre, the Nottingham Playhouse, the Yvonne Arnaud Theatre, Guildford,
the Octagon Theatre, Bolton, and the Thorndike Theatre, Leatherhead.
Northern Ireland has five professional theatres, whose productions are
eligible for grants from the Arts Council of Northern Ireland. The Ulster
Group Theatre in Belfast specialises in Ulster comedy, the Belfast Arts
Theatre presents international drama and lighter theatrical entertainment,
while the Lyric Players Theatre, a non-profit-making organisation, presents
Irish and international drama in a small theatre recently built with Arts
Council support.
All plays produced in Great Britain are subject to the provisions of the
Theatres Act 1968. This repealed the Theatres Act 1843 which gave the Lord
Chamberlain (the senior officer of the Royal Household) powers to censor
stage plays. There is now no censorship, but the new Act makes it a criminal
offence to present or direct an obscene performance of a play in public or in
210
Professional
Organisations
and Trade Unions
Amateur
Theatre
Dramatic
Training
and Study
Theatre for
Young People
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
private (including theatre clubs), an obscene performance being defined as
one which tends ‘to deprave and corrupt persons who are likely ... to attend
it’. Provision is made in the Act for a defence against a charge of obscenity on
the grounds that the performance is for the public good in the interests of,
for example, drama, opera or literature.
Most managers and artists are members of professional organisations such
as the Theatres’ Advisory Council, the London Theatre Council, the Pro¬
vincial Theatre Council, the Society of West End Managers, the Theatrical
Managers’ Association, the Council of Repertory Theatres, British Actors’
Equity (the actors’ trade union) and the League of Dramatists. The trade
union of theatre staffs is the National Association of Theatrical and Kine
Employees.
There are thousands of amateur dramatic societies in Britain with an active
membership of some half a million. They are encouraged by local education
authorities, by other public bodies, and by four special organisations—the
British Drama League, the Standing Conference of Drama Associations, the
Scottish Community Drama Association and the Association of Ulster Drama
Festivals. Amateur companies which stage productions in their own theatres
belong to the Little Theatre Guild of Great Britain; for instance, the People’s
Theatre in Newcastle upon Tyne and the Questor’s Theatre, Ealing.
Most universities have active amateur drama clubs and societies; an
International Festival of University Theatre, inaugurated by Bristol in 1959,
is held annually.
Training for the theatre is provided mainly in drama schools. Among the
most important are the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art (which provides a
two-year course in all branches of stage work), the Central School of Speech
and Drama, the Rose Bruford Training College, the London Academy of
Music and Dramatic Art, the Webber-Douglas School, the Guildhall School
of Music and Drama and the Arts Educational Schools, all of which are in or
near London; and the Old Vic School in Bristol. In Scotland there is the
Royal Scottish Academy of Music and Drama in Glasgow which is grant-aided
by the Scottish Education Department. An increasing number of universities
offer courses in drama.
The Society for Theatre Research brings together those interested in the
history and technique of the British theatre. The International Theatre
Institute has a British centre in London. The main purpose of the institute is
to foster international goodwill and understanding by interchange of students,
theatrical companies, personnel and theatrical information.
Young people’s theatre has been developing in recent years. In 1970, under
the aegis of the National Theatre, the Young Vic was opened as a permanent
theatre for the young. The National Youth Theatre has a permanent home in
London and the Unicorn Theatre for Young People operates at the Arts
Theatre. There are about 12 companies, including Theatre Centre and the
Polka Company, which tour schools and theatres throughout the country. In
the provinces nearly 30 repertory companies provide programmes for children.
Nottingham has its own Youth Theatre Workshop and Birmingham has the
Midlands Arts Centre for Young People, which attracted over 73,000 young
people to performances in its two theatres in 1969-70.
Many schools and youth clubs put on plays and provide some education in
drama. Drama centres for the London education service are provided at
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS
211
MUSIC, OPERA
AND BALLET
Music
I Orchestras
Ohoral Societies
the Cockpit Youth Arts Centre and at the Curtain Theatre; there are youth
theatres in the London boroughs of Camden and Hillingdon.
In 1969-70 the Arts Council’s grants totalled .£186,500 in support of
young people’s theatre activities. The National Council of Theatre for Young
People represents all those actively concerned.
Audiences for broadcast music, concert attendances and sales of gramophone
records serve to indicate the importance of music in all its forms in British
cultural life. In 1969 nearly 60 million long playing records were produced,
mostly for the home market. Top’ music has achieved very great popularity
particularly with young people and concerts of folk music also attract large
audiences, while jazz, light music and brass bands maintain substantial fol¬
lowings. A more widespread interest in ‘serious’ music is reflected both in the
size of attendances at orchestral concerts and performances of opera, ballet
and chamber music, and in sales of gramophone records.
Through the Arts Council of Great Britain, the Government encourages
interest in the various forms of ‘serious’ music. The Council makes grants to a
number of orchestras, soloists, opera and ballet companies and music societies.
The British Council gives financial assistance to overseas tours by British
musicians; it sponsors recordings of work by British composers and maintains
103 libraries of British music (scores and records) in 67 countries overseas
and, at its London headquarters, a reference library of records, scores and
books on music.
In Britain many libraries have collections of records and musical scores
which are available on loan to the public. The City of Westminster houses the
Central Music Library which lends to other libraries and to individuals.
z\nother well-known music collection is the Henry Watson Music Library at
the Manchester Central Library.
The National Music Council, representative of many aspects of British
musical activity, is affiliated to the International Music Council, which is
associated with UNESCO.
Seasons of orchestral concerts are promoted every year in many of the large
towns and cities of Britain. In London the principal concert halls are the
Royal Festival Hall on the south bank of the Thames, adjacent to which are
the Queen Elizabeth Hall and the Purcell Room which were opened in 1967
for smaller-scale performances; the Royal Albert Hall, Kensington, where the
annual summer season of Promenade Concerts is given; and the Wigmore Hall,
an important recital centre.
Among the leading British orchestras are the London Philharmonic, the
London Symphony, the Royal Philharmonic, the New Philharmonia, the
Royal Liverpool Philharmonic, the Halle (Manchester), the City of Birming¬
ham Symphony, the Bournemouth Symphony, the Scottish National and the
BBC Symphony, Northern and Scottish orchestras. There are also specialised
string and chamber orchestras such as the Northern Sinfonia, the Philomusica
of London, the English Chamber Orchestra and the London Mozart Players.
Many of these receive financial aid from the Arts Council of Great Britain and
local authorities; some of them also receive assistance from commercial
television and other business organisations. In Northern Ireland the Ulster
Orchestra receives financial aid from the Arts Council of Northern Ireland.
The principal choral societies in Britain are the Royal Choral, the BBC
Choral, the Huddersfield Choral, the Halle Choir, the Liverpool Philharmonic
212
Music Festivals
Amateur Interest
Professional
Organisations
Opera and
Ballet
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Choir, the London Philharmonic Choir, the New Philharmonia Chorus, the
Bach Choir, the Edinburgh Royal Choral Union and the Belfast Philharmonic
Society. These and many other choral societies are associated with famous
orchestras in major choral works; most of them, together with hundreds of
similar choral and orchestral societies and music clubs, are affiliated to the
National Federation of Music Societies, through which they are supported
with funds provided by the Arts Council. Among societies which specialise
in encouraging the performance of the work of living musicians are the
Society for the Promotion of New Music, the Music Section of the Institute
of Contemporary Arts, and Macnaghten Concerts.
Music festivals in Britain, originating with the Three Choirs Festival held
annually in Gloucester, Worcester or Hereford in rotation, have been in
existence for over 200 years. The famous Edinburgh International Festival
lasts three weeks; other festivals such as that at King’s Lynn, last a week or
less. Among the better known are the Royal National Eisteddfod of Wales; the
Llangollen International Eisteddfod; the National Gaelic Mod, held at a
different place in Scotland each year; the Cheltenham Festival, largely devoted
to contemporary British music; the Aldeburgh Festival; the Bath Festival;
the Coventry Festival; the Haslemere Festival; the biennial York Festival;
and the Leeds and Norwich Festivals, which include important choral music,
and which are held triennially. An annual international festival of folk song
and dancing is held by the English Folk Dance and Song Society.
Interest in amateur music-making is encouraged by the work of County
Music Committees (some of which are voluntary and some sub-committees
of local education authorities), which are aided by the Carnegie United
Kingdom Trust and united in the Standing Conference for Amateur Music.
The Rural Music Schools Association is concerned with music-making by
amateurs in country districts; it brings together professional musicians,
teachers, administrators and amateurs. The National Federation of Music
Societies, which receives an annual grant from the Arts Council, assists
amateur groups with the cost of engaging professional soloists.
Professional organisations which look after the interests of music and
musicians include the Musicians’ Union, the Incorporated Society of Musi¬
cians, the Composers’ Guild, and the Songwriters’ Guild.
Regular seasons of opera and ballet are given at the Royal Opera House,
Covent Garden, London, leased by the Government on behalf of the Royal
Opera House, Covent Garden, Limited, which was formed in 1944 to make
the famous opera house the home of a national opera and ballet, and which
receives a grant from the Arts Council. The Royal Opera House has its own
company (The Royal Opera) and a ballet company (The Royal Ballet). The
opera company numbers about 200 and has a permanent orchestra. The Royal
Ballet has a high international reputation and has made many overseas tours.
It has a regular London season, tours abroad and performs in the provinces
for 12 weeks each year. There is also a smaller group of 25 dancers, which
performs in the regions as well as touring abroad.
Seasons of opera and operetta in English are also given by the Sadler’s Wells
Company which plays in modernised premises at the London Coliseum from
August to March each year. The Company then makes a provincial tour
during April and May. Its former home, the Sadler’s Wells Theatre, pro¬
vides a London stage for visiting opera and dance companies from the
provinces and from abroad.
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS
213
Opera Groups
Ballet Companies
Education in
Music, Opera
and Ballet
At Glyndebourne, in Sussex, an opera season, for which an international cast
is specially assembled, is held every summer. Other opera companies include
the English Opera Group, noted for its performances of chamber operas by
Benjamin Britten and other composers; the New Opera Company, formed by
members of the Cambridge Opera Group to produce new operas in London;
the Handel Opera Society; the Intimate Opera Company, which performs
works for very small casts in any hall available; and the Welsh National Opera
Company. Scottish Opera presents annual seasons in several Scottish towns.
Opera in Northern Ireland is promoted by the Northern Ireland Opera Trust
with financial support from the Arts Council of Northern Ireland. The Arts
Council of Great Britain presents three small operatic groups (Opera for All)
which specialise in introducing opera to audiences in small towns. There are
also a number of amateur opera societies.
Among other ballet companies are London’s Festival Ballet, the Ballet
Rambert (Britain’s oldest ballet company) and the Scottish Theatre Ballet
which specialises in contemporary works. The work of the Patricia Mulholland
Irish Ballet Company in Northern Ireland, which is sponsored by the Arts
Council of Northern Ireland, combines traditional music, dancing and mime.
Professional training in music is given at colleges of music, of which the Royal
Academy of Music and the Royal College of Music in London, and the Royal
Scottish Academy of Music and Drama in Glasgow are grant-aided. Other
leading colleges include the Trinity College of Music and the Guildhall School
of Music and Drama, both in London, the Royal Manchester College of
Music and the Birmingham School of Music.
The London Opera Centre for Advanced Training and Development
provides some rehearsal and other facilities for the Royal Opera House,
Covent Garden. Its courses last two or three years. The leading ballet schools
are the Royal Ballet School, the Rambert Ballet School and the Royal
Academy of Dancing which, with many private schools, have played an impor¬
tant part in raising British ballet to its present high standard. Other schools
offering general education combined with drama and/or ballet are run by the
Arts Educational Trust and the Italia Conti School.
Young people are encouraged to take an interest in music, opera and ballet.
There are frequent concerts for children and the National Youth Orchestra of
Great Britain, the National Youth Orchestra of Wales and the London
Schools’ Symphony Orchestra are noted for their high standard of perfor¬
mance. A Youth and Music organisation, affiliated to the international
Jeunesses Musicales, encourages opera, ballet and other performances for
young people.
In schools, more children are learning to play musical instruments; and
nearly 160,000 candidates a year (children and other students) take the exami¬
nations of the Associated Board of the Royal Schools of Music. The most
popular instrument with candidates is the piano (some 55 per cent) followed
by the violin, the clarinet and the cello.
The Royal Ballet sponsors a small group, Ballet for All, to give lecture-
demonstrations to the public and to schools.
Although cinema attendance has been steadily declining in Great Britain since
its peak of 1,635 million in 1946 to about 220 million in 1969, and the number
of licensed cinemas has declined from 4,709 to 1,601 over the same period,
British films, actors and creative and technical talent are appreciated both at
UMS
214
Feature Films
Documentary
Films
Foreign Films
Production and
Distribution
BRITAIN I97i: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
home and abroad and frequently achieve success at international film events.
Television offers very large potential audiences for films and provides
opportunities of employment for technicians and actors.
London is one of the most important centres for the making of films for
international markets and export earnings are an important part of total
earnings. The Film Production Association of Great Britain is the trade
association to which the majority of feature film producers belong.
The documentary tradition in short film production in Britain goes back to
1929, when a group of directors began making factual films of a distinctive
and imaginative kind on behalf of the Government, and later for commercial
organisations. The war years saw a big expansion in this field and, since then,
British documentary technicians have continued to produce high quality
factual films which have won numerous international awards. The British
Industrial and Scientific Film Association promotes the use of films in
industry, science and commerce. The Federation of Specialised Film Associa¬
tions, the trade association of documentary, short, industrial, advertising and
cartoon film makers, has about 75 members.
Films from abroad made in languages other than English often draw large
audiences in London and other large cities. They form a considerable part of
the repertoire of the growing number of film clubs and societies.
Although much of British main feature production is supported by United
States interests at present, the Associated British Picture Corporation (now
owned by Electrical and Musical Industries Ltd.) and the Rank Organisation
maintain a substantial interest in production, distribution and exhibition.
Most British film producers are independent but make films in association
with these major interests. There are numerous companies, many of them
small, which produce short films.
There is no state-owned film production unit in Britain, but the National
Film Finance Corporation lends money for feature film production. Its
members are appointed by the Board of Trade and its funds are limited by
statute to £13 million. The Corporation was formerly involved in financing
about half the main feature films made in British studios, but this proportion
has now fallen considerably.
There is also a levy on cinema admissions to provide a film production fund.
The money so raised is paid out in proportion to a film’s takings, so that the
more successful a film is at the box-office, the more it receives from the fund.
Started by the industry in 1950 on a voluntary basis, the scheme became
statutory in 1957.
The Government sponsors a wide range of films to inform audiences
overseas about British life and achievements, including documentary films,
television programmes and newsreels; they are produced through the Central
Office of Information (COI), which commissions their production by private
companies. These, together with films acquired from private industry and
public bodies, are distributed throughout the world, in English and many
foreign languages, by British Information Services. The British Council also
distributes overseas a wide range of specialised films mainly on the arts,
education, medicine, science and technology.
Films are also sponsored by the Government for specialised audiences on
such subjects as science, agriculture, health and industry, and for the general
public on, for example, road safety and health education.
A large number of films are sponsored by industrial concerns and other
Quota System
Cinema Licensing
and Film
Censorship
Appreciation
of the Film
Society of Film
and Television
Arts
National
Film School
British Film
Institute
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS 215
organisations, such as the British Tourist Authority and the British Pro¬
ductivity Council. The best of these and industrial films from other countries
are available through the COFs Central Film Library and other agencies.
The Films of Scotland Committee promotes the production of Scottish
films covering the industries and cultural traditions of Scotland.
To help British films to meet the keen American competition, legislation
passed in 1927 introduced the quota system under which a certain proportion
of British films must be shown in British cinemas each year. The proportion
is considered annually by the Board of Trade after consultation with the
Cinematograph Films Council. For main feature films it has stood at 30 per
cent since 1950 and for supporting programmes it has remained at 25 per
cent since 1948.
The State takes no part in the censorship of films in Britain, but before it can
be shown a film must be licensed by the local licensing authority. There are
about 700 of these (usually the local authorities or, in some areas, magistrates).
In considering the suitability of films the authorities normally rely on the
judgment of an independent body, the British Board of Film Censors, to
which are submitted all films (other than newsreels) for public showing.
The British Board of Film Censors was set up in 1912 on the initiative of
the cinema industry, to ensure that a proper standard was maintained in the
films offered to the public. The Board, which does not use any written code of
censorship, may require cuts to be made before granting a certificate to a
film; very rarely, it refuses a certificate. Films passed by the Board are placed
into one of four categories: ‘IT (suitable to be seen by any person not less than
five years of age); ‘A’ (for persons of not less than five years of age but
containing material that some parents might prefer their children not to see);
‘AA’ (for persons of not less than 14 years of age); and ‘X’ (for persons of not
less than 18 years of age).
Film reviews appear regularly in the press and on sound and television
programmes and many organisations are interested in different aspects of the
film. There are numerous private film societies.
The Society of Film and Television Arts, formed in 1958 by the amalgama¬
tion of the British Film Academy and the Guild of Television Producers and
Directors, has as its aim to improve the standard of film and television
production and to stimulate public appreciation of the arts.
An independent National Film School is being established and is expected to
open in the autumn of 1971.
The development of the film as an art is promoted by the British Film
Institute, founded in 1933, which is financed partly by an Exchequer grant
and by the Scottish Film Council which also receives a government grant.
The Institute encourages the making and showing of good films. It also
administers the National Film Theatre in London and the National Film
Archive, runs an annual summer school, and maintains a film library from
which films may be hired, a library of books on the film and an information
service. It makes grants to the Federation of Film Societies, the British
Universities Film Council and the Society for Education in Film and
Television.
The National Film Archive contains over 18,000 films, including newsreels
and other miscellaneous items, besides scripts, art designs, posters and about
2i6 BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
750,000 photographic stills, selected to illustrate the history and the art of the
film and as significant social and historical records.
The National Film Theatre, on the south bank of the Thames in London,
has two cinemas showing films of outstanding historical, artistic or technical
interest; it holds a unique position as a cinema offering regular programmes
unrestricted by commercial considerations or by the age or nationality of the
films shown. The British Film Institute has promoted the development of
some 40 regional film theatres on the lines of the National Film Theatre and
may make grants towards their recurrent and capital costs. Grants in Northern
Ireland are made by the Arts Council of Northern Ireland.
Festivals The National Film Theatre organises an annual London Film Festival, which
includes films receiving their first showing as well as films which have been
successful in international competitive festivals. A council on which leading
British film organisations are represented organises a film festival as part of
the Edinburgh International Festival.
The Cinematograph Act 1952 (which came into force in January 1956)
provided for the making of regulations by the Home Secretary to protect the
health and welfare of children attending film shows. Cinemas which give
children’s shows require a special licence from the licensing authority, which
may impose conditions. There are about 750 children’s cinema clubs which
provide special programmes on Saturday mornings. An important contribu¬
tion to these programmes is made by the Children’s Film Foundation, which
produces and distributes entertainment films specially designed for children
and publishes at intervals a list of films particularly suitable for children and
for exhibition at children’s matinees. The Foundation is a non-profit-making
body set up by the British film industry in 1951 and, under the Cinematograph
Films Act 1957, it receives grants from the British Film Fund Agency.
VISUAL ARTS A number of modern British painters and sculptors have a high international
reputation, winning 98 international prizes since 1949 and commissions for
major works in foreign cities. The growth of interest in the visual arts at
home has been stimulated by an increasingly lively attitude towards display
on the part of museums and galleries, and by the activities of many institutions,
societies, private galleries and the growing number of local art centres.
Painting and sculpture receive state support by grants to national institu¬
tions and, indirectly, through purchase grants made to local art galleries and
museums, to local education authorities for art schools and other means of
promoting education in art. The Arts Council organises exhibitions and main¬
tains its own collection of contemporary British art. The Government is
advised on grants and policy towards museums by the Standing Commission
on Museums and Galleries and the Royal Fine Art Commissions for England
and Wales and for Scotland.
Knowledge of Britain’s fine arts is fostered overseas by the British Council’s
exhibitions and lectures. In 1969-70 fine art exhibitions organised by the
Council were shown in 32 countries and the Council was also responsible for
British participation in seven international exhibitions.
Over 900 museums and art galleries are open to the public in Britain.
There are 20 national museums and art galleries. Those in London probably
contain between them the most comprehensive collection of objects of artistic,
archaeological, scientific, historical and general interest ever to exist within
Museums and
Art Galleries
National
Collections
Children and
the Cinema
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS
217
Scotland, Wales
and Northern
Ireland
Other Collections
Co-operation
one city. They are the British Museum, the Victoria and Albert Museum,
the National Gallery, the Tate Gallery, the National Portrait Gallery, the
Imperial War Museum, the National Maritime Museum, the London Museum
(to be amalgamated with the Guildhall Museum into the Museum of London),
the Wallace Collection, the British Museum (Natural History), the Geological
Museum and the Science Museum (see p. 203).
There are six national museums and art galleries in Edinburgh: the National
Museum of Antiquities of Scotland, the National Gallery of Scotland, the
Royal Scottish Museum, the National Portrait Gallery of Scotland, the
Scottish United Services Museum, and the Scottish National Gallery of
Modem Art. The National Museum of Wales, in Cardiff, has a branch at
St. Fagan’s Castle where the Welsh Folk Museum is housed; and in Northern
Ireland there is the national Ulster Museum in Belfast.
Other important collections in London include the Armouries (Tower of
London), the Public Record Office (see p. 221) and the Sir John Soane’s
Museum. In Buckingham Palace there is a small gallery for exhibition of
pictures from the extensive royal collections. Most cities and large towns and
many other towns have a museum devoted to art, archaeology and natural
history, usually owned by the municipal authority but sometimes by a local
learned society or privately by individuals or trustees. Both Oxford and
Cambridge are rich in museums, many of them, as in other towns, associated
with the universities—for example, the Ashmolean Museum in Oxford,
founded in 1683, the oldest in the country, and the Fitzwilliam Museum in
Cambridge. There are important museums and art galleries in Birmingham,
Bristol, Glasgow, Leeds, Leicester, Liverpool, Manchester, Norwich, Read¬
ing, Southampton and York. In Northern Ireland there are notable museums
and galleries in or near Belfast (the Ulster Folk Museum and the Northern
Ireland Arts Council Gallery), in Armagh City and in Londonderry.
A notable development has been the establishment of ‘period-house
museums’, for which outstanding private houses have been taken over by
national and municipal authorities, and of folk museums. Many private art
collections housed in historic family mansions, including those in the owner¬
ship of the National Trust (see p. 175), are open to the public.
In recent years several new or extensively altered museum buildings have
been opened, including those at Coventry, Derby, Doncaster, Durham (the
Gulbenkian Museum at the university), Leicester (Jewry Wall Archaeological
Museum), Liverpool, Manchester (Whitworth Art Gallery), Scunthorpe and
Sunderland. Developments are planned for museums in Belfast, Bristol,
Cardiff, Hull, London and Newcastle. County councils are playing a greater
part in the provision of museums and museum services; there are schemes in
Oxfordshire (jointly with Oxford City Council), County Durham, Stafford¬
shire, Pembrokeshire, Rutland, Worcestershire and Hampshire. New projects
are also being initiated by local associations for the arts.
A function of the Standing Commission on Museums and Galleries is to
advise the Government on the relationship between national and provincial
institutions. Close relations are fostered by the eight area museum councils
which cover the whole of Great Britain. They are grant-aided by the Govern¬
ment and help to improve technical facilities.
The Museums Association, to which museums and art galleries and their
staffs throughout the country belong and which also has many overseas
members, is an independent organisation. The Association serves as a central
2l8
Exhibitions
Finance
Art Education
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
body for the collection of information and the discussion of matters relating
to museum administration, and as a training and examining body for
professional qualifications.
Temporary exhibitions organised and sent on tour by the Arts Councils, the
Circulation Department of the Victoria and Albert Museum, the Science
Museum and the Art Exhibitions Bureau are a regular feature of many
museums. The Tate Gallery, the Victoria and Albert Museum and the Royal
Academy show loan exhibitions; the Whitechapel Art Gallery, the Camden
Arts Centre and the Institute of Contemporary Arts (at their new premises in
The Mall) also show temporary exhibitions. The Greater London Council
exhibits modern sculpture in one of its parks on the south bank of the Thames
periodically and in the summer of 1968 opened a new exhibition gallery, the
Hayward Gallery, administered by the Arts Council, where major exhibitions
are shown. Commercial exhibitions of works by old masters and living artists
are held throughout the year in the galleries of the art dealers of London
(largely in the Bond Street area).
The various national art exhibiting societies include the Royal Academy;
the Royal Scottish Academy; the Society of Scottish Artists; the Royal
Society of British Artists; the Royal Society of Painters in Water Colours; the
Royal Society of Portrait Painters; the Artists’ International Association; the
Women’s International Art Club; and the London Group (all associations
of professional painters). Some of these societies, notably the Royal Academy
at Burlington House, have their own galleries in London. In Northern Ireland
there are the Royal Ulster Academy of Arts, the Ulster Society of Women
Artists and the Ulster Arts Club. Among regional societies are the Newlyn
Society of Artists, the Midland Group of Artists (Nottingham), the Birming¬
ham Society of Artists and the Penwith Society of Arts, while an increasing
number of amateur art societies throughout Britain hold local exhibitions and
encourage local interest in the fine arts. There are also exhibitions of children’s
art, including the National Exhibition of Children’s Art sponsored annually
by the Sunday Mirror.
All national collections are financed from government funds, both those that
are the direct responsibility of the Department of Education and Science (the
Victoria and Albert and the Science Museums) and of the Scottish Education
Department (the Royal Scottish Museum) and those run by trustee bodies.
Besides meeting the administrative costs, provision is made for annual
purchase grants which totalled £1,937,000 in 1970 -71. 1 he Government also
provides special ad hoc purchase grants and collections may receive works of
art acquired by the Treasury in lieu of estate duty. The buildings are main¬
tained by the Ministry of Public Building and Works. Local museums and art
galleries, which are maintained from rates or endowments, can be helped in
building up their collections through the annual government grant (£152,000
in 1970-71) administered by the Victoria and Albert and Royal Scottish
Museums. Financial help and pictures are also given to museums and galleries
by certain trusts and voluntary bodies, particularly the National Art-
Collections Fund and the Contemporary Art Society.
Formal art education is given in publicly supported art colleges, university
art schools, the Royal Academy Schools and a few private art schools. There
are the colleges, art schools and classes administered by the local education
authorities; and at a senior level there is the Royal College of Art, London,
whose students have usually completed a course at a local education authority
Architecture
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS 2I9
college, and which awards its own degrees. Art is also taught at an advanced
level at the four Scottish Central (Art) Institutions administered by the
Scottish Education Department. University art schools include the Slade
School of Fine Art and Goldsmiths’ College (London), the Ruskin Drawing
School (Oxford), the Reading School of Art, the Department of Fine Art of
the University of Newcastle upon Tyne, and the School of Art of University
College, Aberystwyth.
The leading academic institutions for the teaching and study of the history
of art are the Courtauld Institute of the University of London, the Depart¬
ment of Classical Art and Archaeology in University College, London, and
the Warburg Institute, also a part of London University.
In England and Wales three-year full-time courses leading to a Diploma in
Art and Design are available to students who have successfully completed a
foundation course. The Diploma is broadly comparable to a university pass
degree, and is administered by the National Council for Diplomas in Art and
Design (an independent self-governing body set up by the Government in
1961). The Council also administers a scheme of post-diploma studies in a
small number of colleges. In Scotland each of the four schools of art awards
a diploma which is roughly equivalent to the pass degree of a university.
The Ulster College of Art and Design is the regional college for Northern
Ireland.
Art has a place in the curriculum of every type of school, and the Society
for Education through Art, among other activities, encourages the purchase
by schools of original works of art by organising an annual Pictures for Schools
exhibition. Pictures may also be borrowed from an increasing number of
public libraries (see p. 222).
Official responsibility towards the nation’s architecture is concerned with
encouraging the best in new building and preserving the best that has been
inherited from the past.
Several government departments are concerned with architecture and help
to promote good design. The Ministry of Housing and Local Government,
the Scottish Development Department, and the Northern Ireland Ministry of
Development are responsible for approving the layout and design of local
authority housing schemes, and set standards for local authority housing. The
Ministry of Housing and Local Government is responsible for the work of
the National Building Agency (see p. 272) which carries out development and
research concerning new building techniques, d he Ministry of Public Building
and Works is also responsible for the design, building and maintenance work
of all government departments; it also has a research and development
group which co-ordinates similar groups throughout the government service.
The Architects and Building Branches at the Department of Education and
Science and the Scottish Education Department carry out research for school
building programmes. The Department of Health and Social Security is
implementing a very large building programme and the Regional Hospital
Boards, through their architectural departments, are responsible for the design
and construction of a large number of hospitals and ancillary buildings.
Government departments are assisted in an advisory capacity by the Royal
Fine Art Commissions for England and Wales and for Scotland, which also
advise planning authorities and other public bodies on questions of public
amenity or artistic importance, including new building developments.
A number of professional, advisory and other societies and institutions
exist to further the interests of architecture, and the Civic Trust (see p. 175)
220
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Education and
Professional
Associations
LITERATURE
AND LIBRARIES
seeks to promote high standards in architecture and civic planning and to
encourage a wider interest in the appearance and protection of towns and the
countryside.
The Minister of Public Building and Works and the Secretaries of State
for Scotland and Wales have responsibilities for the preservation of ancient
monuments and certain historic buildings and the Minister of Housing and
Local Government (together with the Secretaries of State) is responsible for
administering the grants available for the repair and maintenance of buildings
of outstanding historic or architectural interest; in Northern Ireland these
responsibilities are vested in the Ministry of Finance.
In Britain it is illegal for a person to practise under the title of ‘architect’
unless registered with the Architects’ Registration Council of the United
Kingdom. Most students train at a full-time school of architecture; there are
35 schools recognised for exemption from certain parts of the examinations of
the Royal Institute of British Architects (RIBA). In addition to these schools,
which may also have part-time courses, there are five schools of art and
technical colleges which have full-time courses leading to the external
examinations of the RIBA.
The Royal Institute of British Architects, the leading professional archi-
tural institution in Britain, has a membership of over 23,000 with more than
6,000 students. Allied to it are 80 architectural societies covering the whole
of the United Kingdom and countries overseas. The RIBA has one of
the largest and most important architectural libraries in the world. It is
concerned with a wide range of activities covering professional practice,
science, technology, statistics, architectural competitions, professional and
public relations; arranges lectures and discussions on a variety of subjects;
presents exhibitions; and, through its Board of Education, controls the
training and examination of architects. The Royal Gold Medal for Architec¬
ture is awarded annually by the Queen on the recommendation of the RIBA.
Among other associations are the Incorporated Association of Architects and
Surveyors, the Institute of Registered Architects and the Faculty of Architects
and Surveyors. Societies include the Architectural Association, the Architec¬
ture Club, and several which cover particular aspects of architecture, such as
the Modular Society.
The study of literature is included in the curricula of all schools, colleges
and universities. There are free public libraries throughout the country,
private libraries and a large number of private literary societies. Book reviews
are featured in the press and on radio and television and there are numerous
periodicals concerned in whole or in part with literature.
Government help is given through the Arts Council of Great Britain
which supports literature in a number of ways, including grants for writers,
a fund to aid literary projects, and subsidies to festivals of literature and poetry.
Similar provision is made, through the Arts Council of Northern Ireland, for
bursaries, poetry readings, and aid for publications.
Recognition of outstanding literary merit is given in the form of literary
prizes, a number of which are awarded annually, for instance, the Queen’s
Gold Medal for Poetry, the James Tait Black Memorial prizes for biography
and literature, the John Llewellyn Rhys Memorial prize for young writers of
promise, the Hawthornden prize for imaginative writing, the Winston
Spencer Churchill Literary Award for an outstanding work on the history
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS
221
Libraries
Libraries in
Education
of the English-speaking peoples, the Library Association Carnegie Medal
for an outstanding book for children, and the Somerset Maugham award for
young writers.
The British Museum Library in London (over 7 million volumes) is the largest
in Britain. The National Libraries of Scotland (in Edinburgh) and Wales (in
Aberystwyth) both have over 2 million volumes. Together with the Bodleian
Library of Oxford University (3^ million volumes) and the Cambridge
University Library (4 million volumes) these comprise the ‘copyright’ libraries
of the country and are entitled to receive a copy of each new book published in
Britain: the British Museum Library must receive a copy, the other libraries
may claim one.
Together with the British Museum Library and its associated department,
the National Reference Library of Science and Invention, the principal
national libraries are the National Central Library (see p. 222) and the
National Lending Library for Science and Technology (see p. 204). The
establishment of a National Libraries Authority to co-ordinate their services
and operations and those of the British National Bibliography was recom¬
mended in 1969 by the Dainton Committee, which had been appointed to
ensure their development in the most effective way. This recommendation
was accepted in principle by the Government in April ig?0.
The Victoria and Albert Museum and the British Museum (Natural
History) in South Kensington also have large libraries and many government
departments have old-established libraries of considerable size and importance,
for example, those of the Board of Trade, Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries
and Food and the Ministry of Defence. The Public Record Office contains the
records of the superior courts of law and of most government departments, as
well as such famous historical documents as Domesday Book. The National
Register of Archives (maintained by the Historical Manuscripts Commission)
contains particulars of local and private records.
Besides the few great private collections, such as those of the John Rylands
Library, Manchester, the Signet Library, Edinburgh, and the London
Library, there are the rich resources of the learned societies and institutions
(for scientific societies and institutions, see p. 193). Examples are the libraries
of the Royal Institute of International Affairs, the Royal Commonwealth
Society, the Commonwealth Institute, the Royal Geographical Society, the
Royal Institute of British Architects (see p. 220), the Royal College of
Physicians, the British Drama League (see p. 210), the Royal College of
Music, the Royal Academy of Music, the Central Music Library (administered
by Westminster City Council), the National Library for the Blind and the
National Book League.
The great expansion in education in recent years has increased the strain on
library resources at all levels of education. The ancient university libraries of
Oxford and Cambridge are not matched by any of the more recent foundations,
although the combined library resources of the colleges and institutions of the
university of London total over 4 million volumes and the university libraries
of Edinburgh, St. Andrews, Glasgow, Birmingham, Liverpool, Manchester
and Leeds each have over half a million volumes. The total stocks of British
University libraries in 1967 amounted to over 23! million volumes. Many
universities have succeeded in building up large and important research
collections in special subjects; for example, the Barnes Medical Library at
222
Public Libraries
Library
Co-operation
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Birmingham and the Brotherton Library of English Literature at Leeds. The
new universities, including the new technological universities, are also rapidly
building collections.
The importance of good libraries is recognised at all levels of the education
system. School libraries, most of which are maintained by local education
authorities, often receive co-operation from the public library service,
including loans of books. School children are regularly introduced to the
public library system, which they can use in addition to the school library.
Britain is served by a complete network of public libraries, administered by
474 public library authorities (county councils, county borough councils,
London borough councils, municipal borough councils and urban district
councils). The authorities in Great Britain, which provide more than 10,000
service points, have a total stock of over 100 million books. (The figures do not
include the libraries in the publicly maintained schools.) Qualified and
specialist staff are available for consultation in all but the smallest service
points. Nearly one-third of the total population are members of public libraries.
Under the Public Libraries and Museums Act 1964 the Secretary of State
for Education and Science is charged with the supervision of the public
library service in England and Wales, acting on the advice of two Library
Advisory Councils, one for England, the other for Wales. Under the Act,
public library authorities are designated and have a duty to provide an
efficient and (with some limitations) free lending and reference library service
for books and periodicals. Outlying areas may be served by mobile libraries,
of which over 500 are in service, and facilities exist for people who are unable
to visit a library.
In addition to lending books, about a third of the library authorities now
lend gramophone records of various kinds and a growing number are adding
loan collections of works of art, either originals or reproductions. Nearly all
library authorities provide children’s departments and reference sections and
art, music, commercial and technical departments meet the growing and more
specific demands in these fields. Most library authorities possess a significant
collection of books and documents on the history of their localities.
The public library is often a local cultural centre. Film shows, lectures,
adult education classes, book-week exhibitions, drama groups, gramophone
recitals and children’s story hours are among the many activities. An increasing
number of libraries provide special facilities for these extension activities.
The Public Libraries and Museums Act 1964 gave statutory recognition to
the voluntary system of library co-operation in England and Wales which had
grown up since the first quarter of this century. The nine regional library
bureaux in England and Wales (consisting mainly of public libraries in each
area) aim to be largely self-sufficient in the interlending of current British
books by means of a system of co-operative subject specialisation. They
organise co-operation among themselves and through the National Central
Library, which is responsible for interlending at national and international
level and has a bookstock of its own of over 500,000 volumes built up by
purchase, gift and the operation of the British National Book Centre exchange
scheme with foreign libraries. The combined resources of libraries available
to the National Central Library, which includes university, industrial and
other non-public libraries, amount to over 100 million books and many
thousand sets of periodicals.
There is a growing number of schemes for the exchange of specialist books
and periodicals as well as information. These are organised by associations of
Library
Associations
Books
Literary and
Philological
Societies
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS 223
industrial and commercial libraries which combine their resources, normally
through the local public or technical college library.
The Scottish Central Library carries out functions similar to those of the
regional bureaux and the National Central Library. Both Central Libraries
are financed in part by Exchequer grants. In Northern Ireland access to the
stocks of all co-operating libraries is available on application to the Belfast
public libraries, Queen’s University Library and the county libraries.
The principal professional organisation is the Library Association, which was
granted a Royal Charter in 1898 to unite all people engaged or interested in
library work, to promote the better administration of libraries and, among
other functions, to hold examinations in librarianship and to issue certificates
of efficiency. The Association in 1970 had a membership of over 17,300 of
whom more than 1,300 were from overseas countries. It maintains a Register
of Chartered Librarians, publishes books and pamphlets, a Yearbook, and an
official journal The Library Association Record. The Association and its
branches, groups and sections hold regular conferences. There are also
associations of libraries of which Aslib (the Association of Special Libraries
and Information Bureaux, see p. 204) and the Standing Conference of National
and University Libraries (SCONUL) are of major importance.
New books constitute the large majority of all books published in Britain. In
1969 British publishers issued over 32,000 separate titles, of which more than
23,000 were new books and the rest reprints or new editions. In recent years
there has been a great increase in the number of paperbacked books of all kinds.
The above figures include only a small selection of government publications
by Her Majesty’s Stationery Office, which is the largest publishing organisa¬
tion in Britain. The great majority of books, however, are produced by about
300 of the principal commercial publishers. These include the university
presses, notably the Oxford University Press (including the Clarendon Press)
and the Cambridge University Press.
Using the copies deposited under copyright law in the British Museum, the
British National Bibliography is published weekly, with three, six, nine and
twelve monthly cumulations, listing in a classified order, with indexes, all new
books and new editions, excluding reprints, of books published in Britain.
Leading organisations representing the interests of those concerned with
book production and distribution are the Publishers’ Association and the
Booksellers’ Association; the Book Development Council promotes British
books overseas. The Society of Authors is a professional association of writers.
The National Book League has a membership covering all who are interested
in books; authors, publishers, booksellers, librarians and readers. It en¬
courages an interest in books and arranges exhibitions in Britain and overseas.
Knowledge of British books and periodicals overseas is greatly assisted by the
British Council through the lending and reference libraries (over 200) which
it runs or supplies, and through the many touring book and periodicals
exhibitions. (For sales and exports of books in 1969, see p. 297.)
Societies for the promotion of literature include the English Association and
the Royal Society of Literature. The British Academy for the Promotion of
Historical, Philosophical and Philological Studies, generally known as the
British Academy, is the leading society of humanistic studies and receives a
grant from the Treasury.
A number of societies sponsor poetry readings and recitals; the Poetry
H*
224
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Society, the Apollo Society and the Barrow Poets are among the best known.
Poetry also plays an important part in various annual festivals, including the
National Eisteddfod—the bardic festival held in Wales—the Stratford-upon-
Avon Festival of Poetry, the Cheltenham Festival of Literature, and the
annual poetry festival organised by the Poetry Book Society in London.
Among the specialist societies are the Early English Text Society, the
Bibliographical Society, the Harleian Society, the Saltire Society, and several
societies devoted to particular authors of which the largest is the Dickens
Fellowship. There are a number of clubs and societies, such as the Book
Society and the Poetry Book Society, which exist to distribute selected new
books to their members.
10 THE NATIONAL
ECONOMY
BACKGROUND
Britain ranks about 75th in size among the countries of the world, with
about 0-18 per cent of the world’s land area. In population, approaching
2 per cent of the world’s inhabitants, it ranks tenth. In density of population
it is fourth: of the major countries, only Japan, Belgium and the Netherlands
are more crowded; and there are nine times as many people to the square
mile in the United Kingdom as in the United States. In terms of national
income per head it ranks appreciably below the United States and also below
Canada, Australia, New Zealand, Sweden and Switzerland, and slightly
below France and the Federal Republic of Germany. In world trade, it
ranks third, accounting for nearly one-tenth of the total. It takes about a fifth
of the world’s exports of primary products, and provides about eight per cent
of the world’s exports of manufactured goods.
Britain, from its own soil, provides only about half of the food it needs,
and—apart from coal, low-grade iron ore and natural gas—it has few natural
resources; thus it is one of the world’s largest importers of such products as
wheat, meat, butter, fodder grains, fruit, tea, tobacco, wool, and timber.
In return, it is one of the world’s largest exporters of aircraft, motor vehicles,
electrical equipment, chemicals, textiles and most types of machinery. No
other major country has such a small proportion of the working population
engaged in agriculture (about 3 per cent).
The United Kingdom is also the central banker of the sterling area, an
area with a quarter of the world’s population. Many countries outside the
sterling area use sterling in their international transactions, and it is the
currency in which about one-third of the world’s trade is conducted.
Earlier During the nineteenth century Britain secured a leading position as world
Development manufacturer, merchant, carrier, banker, and investor and supported a
of the Economy rapidly increasing population at a rising standard of living. Between 1890 and
1914, industrial competition from Europe and North America grew, but its
effects on Britain’s export industries, particularly cotton textiles and coal,
were offset by the rise in world trade, by the demand for British textiles from
India and other eastern countries and by the earnings of British shipping
and financial services and the returns on Britain’s large overseas investments.
During the period from 1870 to 1890 British industrial expansion had a
clear lead over that of other countries. Between 1890 and 1914 growing
industrial competition from Europe and North America began to make itself
felt, but its effects on Britain’s staple export industries, particularly cotton
textiles and coal, were offset by the general rise in world trade, by the con¬
tinued demand for British textiles from India and other eastern countries,
and by the continued high level of overseas investment.
After the first world war Britain’s older industries met increasing
competition, for example, coal and iron and steel from other European
countries and textiles from some eastern countries where labour was cheaper.
226
Effects of
the Second
World War
The Post-war
Period
BRITAIN I97i: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
At the same time Britain failed at first to gain a compensating share of world
trade in the newer types of engineering products. Some countries sought
deliberately to protect nascent and even established industries by tariffs and
(later) quotas and exchange restrictions. The result was heavy unemployment
in Britain’s older industries, the rate of which averaged 14 per cent in the
years 1921-39, and rose well above this in the years following the collapse of
the American stock market in 1929, reaching a peak of 22 per cent in 1932,
when the associated slump in world trade was at its worst. In some districts
relying mainly on the most heavily affected industries, the rate was much
higher. Income from invisible earnings (for example on overseas investments,
shipping and insurance) and relatively cheap imports, particularly food, how¬
ever, cushioned the effects of the fall in the volume of exports.
After 1932 levels of production and employment improved, stimulated by
an increase in home investment which was aided by the policy of cheap
money, by some revival in world trade and, after i935> ^>7 armament
programme. The decade saw a strong expansion in the vehicles, electrical,
chemicals and aircraft industries, while the construction of 3 million houses
brought about a large growth in the building and ancillary industries. By
1937 average real income per head was about 14 per cent higher than in 1929.
In spite of generous aid from the United States and Canada, the second
world war ran down British domestic capital by about £3,000 million,
through shipping losses, bomb damage, and arrears of industrial maintenance
and replacements. Some £1,000 million worth of overseas investments were
sold, nearly half in North America, and new external debts of £3,000 million
were accumulated. By 1944 exports had fallen to less than one-third of their
1938 volume.
After the second world war rationing and other war-time controls were
relaxed gradually as civil production expanded and trade recovered. The
abolition of quantitative restrictions on imports, other than from the dollar
area, was largely completed by 1955. Exchange controls on transactions
between the sterling area and the rest of the world were also progressively
lifted, and in 1958 convertibility of sterling on current account for all non¬
residents was introduced.
The period since 1945 has been one of rising production and living
standards and a relatively low level of unemployment. Economic growth has
been rather slower and more intermittent than in most other western Europe
countries and there have been certain persistent economic problems, especi¬
ally a continuous, if fairly slow, rise in prices and repeated crises in the balance
of payments particularly during periods of relatively rapid economic growth.
In spite of the contribution from invisibles, there were in a number of years
substantial deficits on current account transactions with the rest of the world
and a low level of reserves meant there was little room for manoeuvre.
Successive governments sought to deal with these difficulties in three main
ways: by monetary and fiscal measures aimed at restraining the growth of
home demand; by advice and exhortation—and for a time the use of certain
limited powers—to try to restrain rises in incomes and prices; and by measures
having a direct effect on the balance of payments (see, for example, p. 386).
In 1967 a serious deterioration in the balance of payments led to a loss of
overseas confidence in sterling. To meet the situation, the Government de¬
valued sterling in November 1967 from $2.80 to $2.40 = £1. They then pro¬
ceeded to take a number of fiscal, monetary and administrative measures to
restrain increases in expenditure, prices and incomes. A major reorientation
THE NATIONAL ECONOMY
227
OUTPUT AND
EMPLOYMENT
of the economy was in fact achieved. In the 2% years following devaluation
there was a massive switch of resources into the balance of payments. The
volume of exports of goods and services increased about four times as fast
as the gross domestic product. In consequence the balance of payments
improved rapidly during 1969 and by the beginning of 1970 the surplus on
current transactions was running at an annual rate of over £500 million.
THE FRAMEWORK OF THE ECONOMY
The following sections sketch briefly the salient features of Britain’s national
economy in recent years.
In 1969 Britain’s gross national product at factor cost (the measure of the
value of total goods and services produced at home and net income from
abroad) is estimated to have totalled £38,601 million. In real terms, that is,
after allowing for price changes, the increase over the 11 years since 1959 was
about 35 per cent (see diagram p. 228).
About a third of this output can be attributed to manufacturing industry
and this proportion has remained more or less constant for the past 12 years.
The relatively rapidly expanding sectors are gas, electricity and water (from
2-6 per cent in 1958 to 3-6 per cent in 1968), services (financial, health and
educational, professional and personal—from 17! per cent to 21 per cent).
Agriculture, forestry and fishing account for a small and very slowly declining
share (about 3 per cent), and mining for a small and rapidly declining share
(about 2 per cent compared with 3! per cent in 1958). The relative con¬
tributions of the distribution sector and the transport and communications
sector have changed little in the past 12 years and are now about 11 per cent
and 8 per cent respectively.
Within the large manufacturing sector, some industries specially those
producing new, technically advanced and rapidly developing products, have
been expanding (for example, office machinery, computers, instrumentation,
aircraft and aircraft engines, and glass), while others, including traditional
industries such as cotton textiles, have been in decline. In general the speed
up of technical progress in industry has in Britain as in other industrially
advanced countries brought with it a number of human problems. There are
problems of labour supply and unemployment. In London, the south-east
and the midlands, where expansion and change have been most rapid, there
are shortages of certain types of professional, technical and craft skills and the
general unemployment rate (the ratio of those unemployed and seeking
employment to those in or seeking employment) has stayed at a very low
level. These low unemployment rates in the greatest concentrations of
population helped to keep the general unemployment rate for Britain under
2 per cent in all years from 1948 to 1967; since when it has moved up to about
zi per cent. On the other hand, in areas which were formerly largely dependent
on a single traditional industry, such as coalmining or cotton textiles, or on
certain types of heavy engineering now less in demand, there have been
serious pockets of long-term unemployment, some of which have tended to
persist in spite of special measures to encourage additional employment in
the area. The general unemployment rates in Northern Ireland, Scotland,
Wales and the northern and certain other parts of England have thus been
considerably above the national average, with that of Northern Ireland
(nearly 7 per cent) giving particular cause for concern.
228
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Use of
Resources
TABLE 10
Distribution of
Total Supplies
of Goods and
Services
(at 1963 Prices)
Investment
Table 10, shows the distribution of total supplies of goods and services in
1958, 1964 and 1969 at 1963 market prices, divided between personal con¬
sumption, public expenditure on goods and services, investment and exports.
Percentages
1958
1964
1969
Consumers’ expenditure
Public authorities’ consumption
Gross domestic fixed capital formation
Investment in stocks
Export of goods and services
56-3
14-8
12-3
0-4
16-2
54-1
13- 7
14- 1
1-7
15- 6
52-3
14-9
14-6
0-6
17-7
Main trends shown in Table 10 are a fall in the proportion of total avail¬
able resources devoted to personal consumption, a rise in the proportion
devoted to exports since 1964 and a rise mainly between 1958 and 1964 in
the proportion devoted to capital formation.
CHANGES IN NATIONAL EXPENDITURE 1959 TO 1969 1963- 100
14CH
Consumers’ Public Gross Exports Gross national
expenditure authorities'. fixed capital product
current formation
expenditure
Besides its relation to total available supplies, two other measures of growth
of capital investment may conveniently be given. As a proportion of gross
national expenditure (equivalent to gross national product) fixed capital
formation is now over 20 per cent as compared with 15 per cent in 1951.
The total value of fixed assets in Britain, valued at constant replacement cost,
is estimated to have increased by 80 per cent between 1948 and 1968 when
their current replacement value, net of depreciation, wras estimated at
£93-3 thousand million, of which approximately two-thirds was accounted
for by buildings and one-third by vehicles, plant, and machinery.
Of total investment in 1969, 82 per cent was accounted for by domestic
fixed capital formation, 4 per cent by physical increase of stocks and work in
progress and 4 per cent by investment overseas. Of the domestic fixed capital
formation, 37 per cent was in plant and machinery, 34 per cent in buildings
(other than dwellings) and works, 19 per cent in dwellings and 10 per cent
in vehicles. By sector, about 55 per cent wras in the private sector and about
45 per cent in the public sector, including central Government, local govern¬
ment and nationalised industries. By industry group, about 22 per cent was
in manufacturing industry, and about 15 per cent in the public services.
Within the manufacturing sector, the largest investments were in the food,
Public
Authorities
THE NATIONAL ECONOMY 22Q
drink and tobacco industries, the engineering industries and the chemical
and allied industries. The most marked trends in recent years have been the
increases in local authorities’ house building and in plant and machinery
purchases by the textile industries (reflecting the growth of synthetics), the
electricity supply industry and the Post Office.
The rising levels of investment have been financed by saving in all the
main sectors of the economy, though, despite increases in local rates and in
grants from the central Government, the current surpluses of local authorities
have been sufficient to provide for only a quarter of their capital needs so
that the rest has had to be met by short- and long-term borrowing from the
Government or elsewhere. The central Government has increased its current
surplus sufficiently to finance its own capital expenditure, make capital
grants to industry, lend large sums (mainly to public corporations) and,
since 1969, repay a substantial amount of debt. It has increased its current
surplus (before providing for depreciation) from £492 million in 1964 to
£2,902 million in 1969. The public corporations, largely because of their big
investment programmes, have, despite payment of subsidies (particularly to
the transport corporations), been heavily dependent on borrowing from the
central Government. The companies’ sector, though the largest gross saver,
is also the largest investor and though in most years it has covered its invest¬
ment from its savings, this was not so in 1969. The personal sector has shown
a large if fluctuating excess of saving over acquisition of fixed assets (mainly
dwellings). Increasingly the main forms of financial assets acquired by the
personal sector are insurance policies, interests in pension funds, building
society shares and bank deposits, while the most important and rapidly
increasing financial liabilities of this sector are loans on house mortgages
from building societies.
PUBLIC AND PRIVATE FIXED INVESTMENT 1959 AND 1969
£ million at 1963 prices
Current expenditure on goods and services by the central Government
(including the national insurance funds) and the local authorities rose by
48 per cent at current prices over the period 1964 to 1969 and in the latter
year amounted to about 21 per cent of the gross national product. The main
cause of this increase was the continuing growth of the social services,
especially education. Defence has recently accounted for a declining share
of public expenditure on goods and services—28 per cent in 1969 compared
with 35 per cent in 1964 and a post-war peak of over 50 per cent in 1953.
230
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
In addition to their expenditure on goods and services, public authorities
transfer large sums to other sectors, mainly the personal sectors, by way of,
national insurance benefits, national assistance, investment and other grants,
and interest and subsidies. Central Government also make grants to local
authorities to finance about 40 per cent of their current expenditure, but this
is a transfer within the public sector and does not affect the position of the
public sector as a whole in relation to the rest of the economy.
TABLE 11
Saving and
Investment
£ million
Personal sector:
Saving0 ..
Capital transfers (net receipts)
less Gross domestic fixed capital formation*'
less Increase in value of stocks and work in
progress
Net acquisition of financial assets
Companies:
Saving0 . .
Capital transfers (net receipts)
less Gross domestic fixed capital formation6
less Increase in value of stocks and work in
progress
Net acquisition of financial assets
Public corporations:
Saving® ..
Capital transfers (net receipts)0
less Gross domestic fixed capital formation ..
less Increase in value of stocks and work in
progress
Net acquisition of financial assets
Central Government:
Saving0 ..
Capital transfers (net receipts)0
less Gross domestic fixed capital formation ..
less Increase in value of stocks and work in
progress
Net acquisition of financial assets
Local authorities:
Saving® ..
Capital transfers (net receipts)
less Gross domestic fixed capital formation ..
Net acquisition of financial assets
Overseas sector:
Net acquisition of assets'*
1964
1,924
-182
-879
-126
737
3,188
13
-2,398
-795
608
10
1,187
-12
581
495
106
-281
-17
303
331
53
1,112
-728
395
1967
2,197
-165
-1,046
-72
914
2,851
228
- 2,574
-221
284
683
16
1,659
-82
1,042
1,056
-170
-392
-27
467
386
91
1,568
1,091
312
1969
2,405
-387
-1,057
-150
811
3,150
532
3,182
-945
-445
875
1,327
1,482
28
748
2,915
1,591
-486
-42
796
449
119
1,720
-1,152
-416
0 Before providing for depreciation, stock appreciation and additions to reserves.
The figures for the personal sector exclude, and those for companies include,
expenditure by life assurance and superannuation funds.
Including financial transactions on writing-off debt in 1969.
Equals, apart from the change in sign, net investment abroad.
THE NATIONAL ECONOMY
23I
To meet the requirements of economic policy and to cover increased
government expenditure both on goods and services and on transfer payments
and provide for increased saving, taxation—the main source of government
revenue—has been increased sharply in recent years and in 1969, if national
insurance, health and redundancy funds contributions are included, amounted
to 38 per cent of the gross national product as compared with 28 per cent in
1964. Table 12 shows revenue and expenditure of public authorities, including
national insurance, health and redundancy fund contributions in 1964 and
1969. Further details about government revenue and expenditure are given
in the Finance chapter.
TABLE 12
Combined
Current
Accounts of
Public
Authorities in
1964 and 1969
Personal
Income and
Consumer
Expenditure
Sources of
Income
Distribution of
Income
Revenue
£
million
Taxes on income
Taxes on expendi¬
ture:
Central Govern¬
ment ..
Local authority
rates . .
National insurance,
health and other
contributions ..
Rent, dividends, in¬
terest, etc.
Gross trading income
1964
1969
£
million
3,528 6,336
3,362
1,096
1,444
1,008
91
Totals 11,916
6,194
1,674
2,243
1,768
94
Per
cent
35
34
9
12
10
18,329 100
1964
Expenditure
Goods and Services:
Military defence
Health services
Education
Other ..
Subsidies
National insurance
benefits and
other grants . .
Debt Interest
Total current
expenditure
Current surplus
Totals
£
million
1,928
1,076
945
1,563
409
2,520
1,266
9,703
2,213
11,916
1969
£
million
2,267
1,706
1,567
2,588
844
4,105
1,898
14,965
3,464
18,329
Per
cent
15
11
10
17
6
27
13
100
Note: This table excludes grants from the central Government to local authorities and
also debt interest paid by the latter to the former.
Personal incomes before tax at current prices rose rapidly and fairly steadily
for 22 years from £9,423 million in 1947 to £38,491 million in 1969—a
logarithmic rate of about 6 per cent a year. The increase in consumer expen¬
diture per head of population at constant prices has, however, been very much
lOWer about 2 per cent per annum. The difference is accounted for mainly
by rising prices and to a lesser extent by the growth of population, a higher
incidence of direct taxation and increased personal savings.
Income from employment in 1969 totalled £27,109 million and accounted
for 70 per cent of total personal income (against 60 per cent in 1938). The
three other main sources of personal income were self employment (8 per
cent), income from property (12 per cent), and grants from public authorities
(10 per cent). The general pattern of income distribution is thus dominated
by the pattern for income from employment. The effects of property income,
which tends to add to the income of the already affluent, are relatively slight
and to some extent counter-balanced by the effect of grants from public
authorities to those in need.
British direct taxation falls heavily on the rich and this is reflected in the
distribution of income after tax. Thus in 1967 there were 562,000 incomes
232
Indirect Taxes
and Subsidies
Consumer
Expenditure
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
PERSONAL INCOME AND EXPENDITURE, 1969
(In £ million at current prices)
National Insurance benefits
of £3,000 a year or more before tax but only 288,000 after tax out of a total
number of incomes of 27-8 million. About 22 per cent of incomes after tax
were in the £250 to £499 range and 5-4 million were in the next range of
£500 to £749. The number of incomes after tax of a thousand a year and
above rose from i*i million in 1955 to 9-3 million in 1967. Nearly 80 per cent
of the yield from income tax and surtax came from persons with annual
incomes after tax in this last category, although the total incomes before
tax of this group accounted for only 60 per cent of total incomes.
The combined effect of British indirect taxation and subsidies does not appear
to be regressive. The main subsidies are on food grown in Britain and on
housing provided by local authorities and these are especially helpful to those
on low incomes, while among the most important indirect taxes are those
on cars, petrol, consumer durables and alcoholic drinks.
The rise in the volume of consumer expenditure per head has been accom¬
panied, in Britain as in other advanced industrial countries, by changes in
the pattern of that expenditure. The proportion devoted to food has been
CONSUMERS’ EXPENDITURE IN 1958 AND 1968
£ million
6,000
Food Alcoholic Tobacco Housing Fuel Clothing Cars and Other Other Other
drink (rent, rates, and Motor cycles durable goods services
repairs, etc.) light (ex running goods
costs)
THE NATIONAL ECONOMY
233
falling slightly each year and now accounts for about 21 per cent of consumer
expenditure at current prices compared with 26 per cent in 1958. On the
other hand the proportions spent on housing and fuel and light together has
risen from 14 per cent to 18 per cent. Both food and housing prices have been
rising faster than other prices so that, if the calculations are made at constant
prices, the relative decline in food expenditure is greater and the relative rise
in housing expenditure less.
Short-term
Measures
Long-term
Policies
Prevention of
Monopolies and
Restrictive
Practices
ECONOMIC POLICY AND PLANNING
The central objective of the economic policies of successive British govern¬
ments has been secure, steady, economic growth with a high level of employ¬
ment together with a favourable balance of payments and thereby to ensure a
continuing improvement in output and living standards. This has not proved
easy to achieve (see page 226) and in the autumn of 1967 the Government,
faced with an adverse balance of payments and a run on sterling, decided to
give priority to restoring the external position, devalued sterling and pro¬
ceeded to take a number of measures which have achieved a major switch
of resources to exports and restrained the growth of imports.
The devaluation of the pound from $2.80 to $2.40 made exporting more
profitable, exports more competitive and to some extent discouraged the
growth of imports. Other measures taken to deal with the immediate situation
included the negotiations of loans from central bankers and of stand-by
facilities from the International Monetary Fund (see p. 396); a great increase
in taxation and a tightening of control over government expenditure (see
p. 360); the raising of the bank rate, the tightening of hire purchase regula¬
tions and the issue of recommendations to the banks to restrict credit; the
use of controls over overseas investment to restrict investment outside the
sterling area to cases which promised short-term benefits to the balance of
payments, while at the same time maintaining a voluntary programme for
reducing investment in the developed countries of the sterling area; a
temporary scheme of import deposits, under which importers are required
to deposit with Customs and Excise a sum proportionate to the value of the
shipment (see p. 386) for a period of 180 days interest free; and an attempt
for a time to enforce a more stringent prices and incomes policy.
At the same time policies directed to longer term improvements were main¬
tained and certain new measures were taken to improve planning and
encourage long-term economic growth. A central problem of British economic
and social policy has been to strike a balance between the needs of long¬
term planning, which call for some centralisation of control in the hands of
public authorities and large private undertakings, and the need for the
preservation of personal freedom, initiative and competition on political,
social and economic grounds.
Some of the Government’s powers and services are directed towards
combating forces that might militate against fair and competitive trading
conditions or put too much economic power in the hands of large under¬
takings which are not publicly accountable. For example, a Restrictive
Practices Court, first established in 1956 and since strengthened, may
consider a wide range of restrictive agreements between business under¬
takings and will permit their operation only if it finds them in the public
234
Aids to
Efficiency
The Machinery
of Planning
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
interest (see p. 239). A Monopolies Commission was first established in
1948 and was strengthened in 1965. On the basis of its reports the Govern¬
ment may prohibit mergers and break up undesirable monopolies. At the
same time the Government with the aid of the Industrial Reorganisation
Corporation, established in 1966, has been taking positive action to encourage
a reshaping of industry including certain mergers.
Successive governments have sought to stimulate business efficiency by
fiscal and other financial incentives and by providing a variety of services—
informational, advisory, promotional and financial.
Cash grants (in place of former tax allowances) were introduced in 1966
for capital expenditure on plant and machinery in manufacturing, extractive
or constructional industry and a separate similar scheme for hotel develop¬
ment was introduced in 1968 (see p. 251).
A measure of great long-term importance wtis the Industrial Training
Act 1964, under which Industrial Training Boards, covering wide sectors of
industry, have been appointed with powers to raise a levy on all employers
in their sector and to make grants in respect of training provided (see p. 417).
The Government also provides or supports a number of training services,
mainly for retraining, for the disabled and for supervisors (see p. 418).
Individual firms seeking to improve their efficiency, to innovate or to
introduce advanced technology into their operations, are served by a range of
government sponsored advisory services. In the technological field there are,
for example, the Industrial Liaison Service of the Ministry of Technology,
the Low-cost Automation Advisory Centres and the Production Engineering
Advisory Services (see also p. 251). Firms wishing to resolve problems of
management and industrial relations can call on the greatly expanded Man¬
power and Productivity Service of the Department of Employment and
Productivity (see p. 416).
Direct government assistance to exporters is limited to measures permis¬
sible within the terms of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
(GATT). Acting within these limits, the Government has increased the
Board of Trade’s allocation for participation in trade fairs, British Weeks
and other promotions overseas; and has taken steps to improve the facilities
offered by the Export Credits Guarantee Department and to develop the work
of the British National Export Council, set up in 1964, and its subordinate
bodies, in guiding and encouraging exports.
Public procurement policy is seeking to promote industrial efficiency,
especially where there is export potential; the co-operation of nationalised
industry and the local authorities is being sought to improve standardisation
and variety control.
To tackle the problems of long-term planning effectively and democratically,
a complex system has been developed, under which extensions of the services
of public authorities and of their powers to control and influence the private
sector are combined with an elaborate system of consultation to ensure that
they move as far as possible by consent.
Among the oldest of the important consultative bodies is the National
Joint Advisory Council, which was first set up in 1939 and advises the
Secretary of State for Employment and Productivity on matters of concern
to employers and employees (see p. 427).
The National Economic Development Council (NEDC), which was set
up in 1962, brings together representatives of government, management and
trade unions and provides a forum for the discussion of future policy and
THE NATIONAL ECONOMY
235
planning of the economy. It meets regularly under the chairmanship of the
Prime Minister. Other members are the ministers of the main economic
departments, representatives of management and trade unions and the
nationalised industries, independent members, the chairman of the National
Board for Prices and Incomes (NBPI) and the Director General of the
National Economic Development Office (NEDO), the independent but
publicly financed Secretariat serving the NEDC.
NEDC has set up a number of economic development committees (EDCs)
—one each for the major manufacturing industries and some of the service
industries and retail distribution as well as some covering certain general
aspects. There are 21 such EDCs. Each is under an independent chairman
and is composed of members from management, the trade unions, NEDO, the
Treasury, the Government department responsible for the particular industry
and up to three independent members. The EDCs study and promote the
application of measures to improve efficiency and competitive power in each
industry.
In 1964 the Department of Economic Affairs (DEA) was established to
take over the economic policy functions previously exercised by the Treasury
and was given the responsibility of framing and supervising a plan for econ¬
omic development. Its national plan, aiming at a 25 per cent increase in national
product between 1964 and 1970 was published in 1965. A second planning
document, The Task Ahead: Economic Assessment to igj2 was prepared by
the DEA and published in February 1969 at a time when economic thinking
was still dominated by short-term balance of payments problems. It adopted
a flexible approach, discussing the implications for government and industrial
policy of a range of different rates of economic growth. In October 1969,
the DEA was dissolved and in January 1970 the Treasury, which had resumed
responsibility for the DEA’s general economic policy functions, prepared a
revised assessment in the light of the improved external position, of con¬
sultations with industry and trade unions and reports by the EDCs. This
fresh assessment, with some modifications to take account of the budget
proposals of 14th April 1970 was published in May 1970 {Economic Prospects
to igj2—Revised Assessment). It assumed that the annual gross national
product until 1972 would be around 3 per cent in line with the trend of
production potential though the possibility of a higher rate of growth was
also considered. The best use of these increased resources, it suggested,
would be an increase in investment by private industry of 6 per cent a year,
the maintenance of the present export surplus, a growth of consumer expen¬
diture in line with the growth of the national product and a relatively slow
growth in public expenditure (see Table 13).
Long-term planning of public expenditure has been much developed and
a comprehensive survey has been made each year since 1961, one of the
objects of which is to relate public expenditure to the expected development
of the economy. New proposals on the presentation of public expenditure
over a five-year period were published in April 1969 and in December 1969
the first White Paper with such long-term forecasts was published (see
p. 361).
Prices and
Incomes Policy
The Prices and Incomes Acts of 1966 and 1967 gave powers to the Govern¬
ment to require advance notification of proposed increases in prices and
incomes, and if it referred such increases to the National Board for Prices
and Incomes (NBPI, see below), it would impose a standstill of up to six
months from the date of reference to the NBPI. A further Act of 1968 allowed
236 BRITAIN 197I: AN OFTICIAL HANDBOOK
the Government to enforce a standstill if the NBPI’s report was adverse.
Powers under the 1967 and 1968 Acts expired at the end of 1969.
The National Board for Prices and Incomes, an independent statutory body,
was set up in April 1965 and charged with investigating all questions relating
to prices and incomes referred to it by the Government. The Board has
published over 150 reports on such references. Legislation to combine the
NBPI and the Monopolies Commission into a single body, the Commission
for Industry and Manpower, was introduced in May 1970 but could not be
passed through Parliament before its prorogation for the General Election.
TABLE 13
Increase in
Resources from
1969 to 1972
Basic case
Average
annual
percentage
increase
£rn
1967
prices
Higher case
Average
annual
percentage
increase
1967
prices
Gross domestic product at
market prices
Balance of trade in goods
and services
Investment:
Private industries and
services ..
Nationalised industries . .
Other fixed investment . .
Stockbuilding
Public consumption
Personal consumption
3-0
6-0
0-5
3-0
a
2- 3
3- 0
3,900
670
20
240
100
500
2,370
3-75
7-2
0-5
3-0
a
2- 3
3- 8
4,800
820
20
240
150
500
3,070
“ Not appropriate.
Regional
Economic
Planning
The aim of regional economic planning is to secure a full and balanced
development of the country’s resources and to help achieve a faster and
steadier expansion in national output.
A system of regional economic planning councils and boards established in
Great Britain in 1965, provides the basic machinery for regional economic
planning. The regional economic planning councils consist of about 25 to 30
part-time members appointed for their wide knowledge and experience of
their regions. The councils are advisory bodies with no executive powers;
their main tasks are to study and advise on the needs and potentialities of their
regions, and to advise the central Government on long-term planning
strategy for their regions. The regional economic planning boards consist of
senior civil servants representing the main government departments con¬
cerned with aspects of regional planning in their respective areas. Their
functions are to co-ordinate the regional economic planning work of the
government departments and to co-operate with the economic planning
councils.
For purposes of regional planning England has been divided into eight
regions—Northern, Yorkshire and Humberside, East Midlands, East Anglia,
South-east, South-west, West Midlands, and North-west; Scotland has its
own economic planning council and board, and there is a Welsh Council
(supported by an economic planning board) concerned with both economic
and social affairs in Wales.
All the regional economic planning councils in England have published
Regional
Policies
Northern Ireland
Summary
THE NATIONAL ECONOMY ^
major reports on their regions; a development plan for Scotland up to 1970
was published by the Government in 1966 and one for Wales in 1967.
The present stage is one of formulating medium- and longer-term strategies,
with sub-regional studies of areas with particular problems. The strategies
take into account all the factors including the distribution of population,
industry and employment within the region and provides a framework for
local government planning.
One of the most important aims of regional planning is to use more fully the
economic resources of certain areas called development areas, which have
higher than average rates of unemployment, by attracting new industry and
encouraging the expansion of existing industry. The Local Employment
Acts i960 and 1963 were strengthened by the Industrial Development Act
1966. Inducements to industries to settle in these areas (for example, building
of advanced factories by the Board of Trade, capital grants, loans towards
working capital, retraining grants) are estimated to have provided some
400,000 jobs in each year. The investment grants are at a rate double that
for firms outside the development areas. A ‘regional employment premium’,
additional to the refund of Selective Employment Tax is paid to manu¬
facturing firms in the development areas (see pp. 252 and 365). Under the
Local Employment Act 1970, assistance to the value of about £20 million a
year can now be given to certain ‘grey’ or intermediate areas in northern
England, that is, to certain districts which were outside the development
areas but whose rates of economic growth give cause for concern (see p. 252).
On the negative side, controls over industrial location and expansion of
industry in south-east England and the midlands have been intensified,
while controls over new office buildings in the same regions were introduced
in 1965.
The Northern Ireland Government has set up an economic council, com¬
prising representatives of both sides of industry and other interests, to
examine means of furthering Northern Ireland’s economic development. As
Northern Ireland government departments have responsibilities for planning
in Northern Ireland, it was not necessary to set up a special planning board.
An economic report on Northern Ireland was published in 1965 containing
targets up to 1970.
V iewed as a whole the British economy has made considerable progress over
the past decade. Its rate of growth, if not so fast as that of some other industrial
countries, has been higher than in any earlier period over the past 50 years.
At the same time relatively full employment has been maintained and con¬
sumption and living standards have improved steadily. Moreover, modernisa¬
tion of productive industry and the distributive system have progressed
despite persistent balance of payments difficulties, accentuated by the role
sterling plays as a world reserve and trading currency, and a high level of
overseas commitments in the form of development aid and defence.
11 INDUSTRY
The Structure
of Industry
Manufacturing
ORGANISATION AND PRODUCTION
The United Kingdom was the first country in the world to become highly
industrialised, and today thirteen people work in mining, manufacturing and
building for every one engaged in agriculture. It is the world’s third largest
exporter of manufactured goods, and the range of its industrial manufactures
reflects its position as one of the most important workshops of the world.
The pattern of ownership and organisation in industry is varied. Personal,
corporate, co-operative and public enterprise all assume a number of different
forms, and all are important in the economy. Industrial enterprises vary from
the many small workshops to vast organisations such as the National Coal
Board, a public corporation with about 300,000 employees; Imperial Chemical
Industries Ltd., a limited liability company which, with its subsidiaries,
employs 145,000 persons in the United Kingdom; and the Co-operative
Wholesale Society Ltd., with about 36,000 employees.
Most manufacturing is in the hands of private enterprise. Exceptions include
fissile materials and radioactive isotopes made by the Atomic Energy
Authority, iron and steel from the plants of the British Steel Corporation,
locomotives and rolling-stock built in the workshops of British Railways, and
military equipment and supplies made in establishments of the defence
services. Staff of the Stationery Office do some printing and bookbinding.
Certain factories giving employment to the severely disabled are operated by
Remploy Ltd., a non-profit-making public company financed on the Vote of
the Department of Employment and Productivity, which appoints the
directors (see p. 415). The Government holds about 49 per cent of the
equity of a major oil company, British Petroleum Limited, and has a con¬
trolling interest in a few other companies.
The most recent survey of the size of all manufacturing establishments
employing more than ten persons, made by the Department of Employment
and Productivity, showed that in 1961 nearly a third of all employees in such
establishments were in those employing from 100 to 499 persons, while
slightly over a third were in those employing 1,000 or more. A high proportion
of the biggest establishments were in the heavy industries; the average size
of establishments in industries making consumer goods was smaller than in
manufacturing industries as a whole. Comparisons with results obtained in
earlier years suggested a slow but significant trend towards increased average
size of establishments.
The size of establishments is not in itself an indication of the size of manu¬
facturing enterprises, as a single enterprise may own several establishments,
not all of them necessarily engaged in the same or similar activities. The most
recent analysis of manufacturing enterprises by size (employment) relates to
the Report on the Census of Production for 1963. An enterprise, as defined in
the Census, normally consists of either a single firm or a parent company
together with its subsidiaries, just over 60 per cent of all employment in
British manufacturing industries in 1963 was accounted for by about 975
large private enterprises employing 1,000 or more people, the largest 100 or so
accounting roughly for a third. A further indication of company size is the
INDUSTRY
239
Building and
Civil Engineering
Mining and
Quarrying
Monopolies and
Restrictive
Practices
value of capital employed (net assets). For a few of the very largest including
the Imperial Chemical Industries group, the figure exceeds £1,500 million;
about 50 companies registered in Britain have over £100 million net assets.
In some industries a small number of big companies and their subsidiaries
are responsible for most of the total production. Examples are oil refining,
non-ferrous metal smelting, the manufacture of motor vehicles and com¬
ponents, aircraft and aero-engines, heavy electrical equipment, bicycles,
tobacco, cement, basic chemicals and computers. Shares in these companies
are usually distributed among a great number of holders and it is rare for a few
large holders to have a controlling interest. For example, five of the largest
public companies each have more than 100,000 shareholders. With intensified
competition in the economy and in many branches of industry the growing
dependence of profitable operation on concentration and an increasing scale
of production, the trend towards mergers and regroupings has gathered
momentum throughout the 1960s. Larger units of control have been estab¬
lished in almost all the leading industries, for example, motor vehicles, aircraft
frames and aero-engines, electrical engineering, electronics, machine tools,
brewing, textiles, and newspaper and magazine publishing.
A new departure was the setting up of the Industrial Reorganisation
Corporation by the Government in 1966 with resources of up to £15° million.
Its function is to participate in schemes for concentration, rationalisation and
modernisation of industry, in particular the merging and regrouping of firms
into larger units to meet the changing situation in the markets for many of the
most important products, and it has been instrumental in furthering large
mergers in motor vehicle manufacturing, the heavy electrical, computer and
a wide range of other industries. The Industrial Expansion Act 1968 extended
the Government’s powers to give financial support to industrial projects
calculated to improve efficiency; to create, expand or sustain production
capacity; to promote or support technological improvements.
An account of some of the principal manufacturing industries is given on
pp. 274-97.
In building and civil engineering, large-scale work is usually carried out by
private contractors, although the Ministry of Public Building and Works is
the largest single employer of building labour while some 45 per cent of the
industry’s output is for public authorities. Building firms may be divided into
those undertaking general building and civil engineering work and those
concerned with highly specialised work, many of which operate outside as
well as inside the building industry. Building is an industry of small firms;
almost three-quarters of the firms employ fewer than 20 employees. For
a fuller account of the building and civil engineering industries, see p. 271.
Much the most important of the British extractive industries is coalmining.
The coalmining industry of Great Britain (see p. 256) is operated as a single
co-ordinated enterprise under National Coal Board direction (see p. 256).
Nearly all other mining and quarrying (sand, gravel, chalk, limestone, salt,
tin, slate, oil shale and china clay) is undertaken by private enterprises, usually
owned and operated by limited liability companies; about 59,000 workers
are employed, excluding coalmining.
Legislation exists for scrutinising and, if desirable, for the investigation by an
independent administrative body of monopoly situations and for the judicial
examination of restrictive trading agreements.
The Restrictive Trade Practices Acts 1956 and 1968 govern the registration
and judicial examination of restrictive agreements. They require the entry in
240
BRITAIN I971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
a public register of the particulars of a wide range of restrictive agreements
(including those relating to common prices, approved lists of dealers and the
limitation of production) which affect the supply or processing of goods for
the United Kingdom market. Proposed agreements of national importance
which promote efficiency or provide for new productive capacity, can be
exempted from this requirement for a specified period by the Secretary of
State for Employment and Productivity. The Registrar of Restrictive Trading
Agreements is responsible for keeping the register and for bringing the agree¬
ments before the Restrictive Practices Court set up under the 1956 Act. The
Court, which includes laymen but is presided over by one of Her Majesty’s
judges, is, in effect, responsible for deciding whether an agreement is in
the public interest. If the parties to an agreement fail to satisfy the Court
that special circumstances set out in the legislation exist, and that the restric¬
tion is not unreasonable, having regard to the balance between the benefit it
confers and any public detriment likely to result from its operation, that
restriction must be found contrary to the public interest. Agreements are void
in respect of restrictions so found. The Court can make orders preventing the
parties from operating their agreement, or from making new arrangements
having the same effect. Agreements relating exclusively to exports are not
subject to this procedure but have to be notified to the Secretary of State for
Employment and Productivity.
Under the 1956 Act collective enforcement of resale price maintenance was
prohibited, but individual suppliers remained free to enforce resale prices in
the courts. The Resale Prices Act 1964 made minimum resale price mainten¬
ance unlawful, except in respect of classes of registered goods for which
temporary exemption has been sought under the provisions of the Act.
Where resale price maintenance is prohibited, it is also unlawful to notify to
dealers prices stated or calculated to be understood as the minimum price
which may be charged on the resale of goods in the United Kingdom, or to
seek to maintain such prices by withholding supplies. Suppliers may continue
to practise resale price maintenance on registered goods, pending a decision
by the Restrictive Practices Court as to whether a case for exemption has
been made out against the criteria in the Act. Periodically, the Registrar of
Restrictive Trading Agreements issues lists of classes of goods in respect of
which the Court has refused to make an Order exempting them from the
terms of the Act. Only one class of goods (books and maps) has so far gained
exemption under an order from the court; nearly 500 classes have been
refused exemption.
Monopolies and kindred arrangements (other than those within the scope
of the Restrictive Practices Court) may, in circumstances indicated in the
Monopolies and Mergers Act 1948 and 1965, be referred by the Board of
Trade to the Monopolies Commission for investigation and report. The
Department of Employment and Productivity, in co-operation with the pro¬
duction departments (see p. 247) concerned, take appropriate action on
reports but no Order can be made without parliamentary approval. The 1965
Act strengthened and extended the legislation on monopolies. It reorganised
and enlarged the Monopolies Commission; provided for the investigation,
at the reference of the DEP, of services as wTell as goods and of proposed or
recently completed mergers; made special provision for newspaper mergers;
and improved and extended the Government’s powers—subject to parlia¬
mentary control—for taking action on the basis of the Monopolies Com¬
mission reports including new powers to prohibit mergers and break up
undesirable monopolies and mergers.
INDUSTRY
Role of Public
Enterprise
241
Direct State participation in productive and commercial activities is effected
mainly through special statutory bodies set up to deal with a particular
activity. Such bodies, though not part of a government department, are under
a considerable but varying degree of public control (see below). The most
important of these statutory bodies are the public corporations which operate
major industries and services in the public interest. Altogether 10 per cent
of the labour force works for these bodies. Their managing boards and staffs
are chosen for their experience and competence in a particular field; they are
not civil servants, and, although accountable to Parliament for their actions
in a variety of ways, it is they and not the ministers of the sponsoring
departments who are responsible for the management of the corporations.
Certain of the corporations are self-supporting; others receive Exchequer
grants to help them carry out duties with which they have been charged.
These corporations are described in their relevant sections.
The extent to which the responsible minister has power over the working
of the boards which have been set up to run the nationalised industries varies
from industry to industry, but two features are common to almost all of them.
First, the minister appoints (and may dismiss) the chairman and members of
each board, and, secondly, he has power to give general directions as to how
the industry should be run, but does not interfere in day-to-day manage¬
ment. It is usually also laid down that the board shall give to the minister
any information, statistics and financial accounts which he may require. In
practice, as the responsible minister is kept fully informed and major policy
decisions are reached in consultation with him, there is very seldom occasion
for him to issue a formal directive.
The minister also has financial powers and responsibilities. The usual
statutory requirement is that the board is required to conduct its business so
that receipts at least balance outgoings taking one year with another. The
responsible minister is usually empowered (subject to Treasury approval) to
say what shall be done with any surplus revenues which may accrue. As
regards finance of capital expenditure, the present system is that such finance
as cannot be met from internal sources is mainly provided, in the form of
interest-earning loans, by the minister from the Exchequer, bank advances
being used only for normal requirements of short-term capital.
It is usual for the minister responsible for each nationalised industry to be
required by statute to take steps to see that the interests of the industry’s
customers are protected. This is generally done by the establishment of
representative consumers’ councils to consider complaints and suggestions
made to them, and to advise the board or the minister on the changes they
think desirable.
Financial targets have been agreed by the Government with the different
industries (or are under discussion) ranging from I2‘4 per cent gross return
on capital employed to ‘breaking even’ after interest and depreciation have
been allowed for. In addition the industries are expected to apply a test
discount rate for new investment of 10 per cent.
Government policy towards the nationalised industries is subject to the
approval of Parliament. Opportunities for parliamentary discussion are
afforded by debates, including debates on their annual reports and accounts,
and by answers to parliamentary questions, which, in principle, are admissible
only if concerned with policy rather than details of administration. A House of
Commons Select Committee on the Nationalised Industries, which examines
the reports and accounts of the nationalised industries and reports to Parlia¬
ment, has been in operation since 1957.
242
Industrial
Association
BRITAIN I971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
From the middle of the nineteenth century, private industrial undertakings
have increasingly entered into voluntary association for a number of different
purposes. Some of the more important of these are classified as: (1) the
provision of common services, the exchange of information, liaison with
the Government, and representation of their members’ point of view; (2) the
regulation of trading practices, sometimes including the regulation of prices
(see p. 240); (3) negotiation with trade unions on wages and conditions of
work. Associations for the first and third of these purposes cover, with
varying completeness, most of British industry, but there are wide sectors of
industry where there are no collective agreements to regulate trading practices.
Employers’ organisations which deal with labour matters usually consist of
firms engaged in the same type of operation or manufacturing process. Trade
associations mainly concerned with representations to the Government,
provision of common services or the regulation of trading practices are built
up round a product or an allied group of products. In an industrial sector
concerned wholly with an allied group of products, a single association may
undertake all the required functions.
There are about 75 national federations and probably altogether about
1,500 employers’ organisations (mostly regional or local, and members or
branches of the national federations) all concerned with negotiation of wages
and conditions of work. The number of manufacturers’ associations concerned
with providing common services is not known precisely, but according to a
survey carried out between 1953 and 1956 by Political and Economic Planning
(an independent research organisation) some 1,300 were in existence, varying
greatly in importance, structure and activities.
The central body representing British industry nationally is the Confedera¬
tion of British Industry (CBI). It is recognised by the Government as a
channel for consultation between government departments and representatives
of private employers as a whole. For its members it acts as an advisory and
consultative body providing them with information and statistics, ascertaining
their collective views and representing them nationally to the Government
and the public and also internationally, for example in the Council of European
Industrial Federations. CBI representatives sit on a number of government
advisory committees, on other statutory bodies and on voluntary bodies
concerned with matters affecting industry.
The CBI membership consists of some 11,500 companies and about 200
trade associations and employers’ federations. Nationalised industries have
joined as industrial associates. The CBI has a regional organisation in the
United Kingdom and is widely represented abroad.
In matters of common concern the CBI often acts jointly with the chambers
of commerce. These are open to all kinds of producers and traders and exist
to promote the interests of local industry and commerce. The Association of
British Chambers of Commerce, founded in i860, is the central organisation
to which 93 local chambers of commerce (together with 17 British Chambers of
Commerce operating abroad) are affiliated. In Scotland there is an additional
central organisation, the Scottish Chamber of Commerce, and in Northern
Ireland, the Northern Ireland Chamber of Commerce and Industry to which
local chambers are affiliated.
Location
The following is a summary of the geographical distribution of British industry
today, grouped by the areas covered by the regional economic planning
machinery (see p. 236).
INDUSTRY
243
Greater London
and the South-east
Region
South-west
England
East Anglia
West Midlands
London, lying at the head of ocean navigation on the Thames estuary, is
Britain’s capital and main communication centre, probably still the world’s
most important financial centre, and one of the world’s three largest cities
(with Tokyo and New York) and three largest ports (with New York and
Rotterdam). It is the main centre in Britain of printing, cinema film produc¬
tion and the manufacture of clothing, food and drink, furniture, materials for
the arts, precision instruments and many other specialised products. Small
firms predominate in many of these industries and the average size of manu¬
facturing firms (particularly in the central area) is well below the national
average. London is also, especially its outer ring, important for light engineer¬
ing, chemicals and consumer goods and has some heavy engineering plants
and a number of leading research establishments.
Towards the periphery of Greater London (population 7,763,820) and in
the new urban development outside it, industry, particularly the electronics
and a variety of consumer goods industries, has expanded greatly; some
of the largest aircraft plants are in these areas, for example at Weybridge
and Hatfield, as well as factories, at Dagenham, Luton and Dunstable, of two
of the four main motor vehicle manufacturers. There are other major motor
vehicle manufacturing plants at Cowley, Oxford (110,000), some 5° miles
north-west of London. Along the lower Thames and Medway estuaries there
are large oil refineries as well as some smaller shipyards, engineering works
and major concentrations of the paper and pulp and cement industries.
A great part of the Channel coast eastwards from Poole (population 99,000)
and Bournemouth (151,500) consists of built-up areas, which from Brighton
(165,000) eastwards are partly dormitories for people working in London.
Holiday resorts fringe the coast. Portsmouth (219,000) is a naval port with
some shipbuilding and general manufactures. Southampton (210,000) is
Britain’s largest port for ocean-going liners; its industries include ship
repairing, oil refining, cable-making, electronics and synthetic rubber. Dover,
Folkestone and Newhaven are packet ports.
Devon and Cornwall have a considerable tourist trade. Bristol (428,000) is a
leading port and commercial centre with aircraft, aero-engines, tobacco, food
processing, paper, printing and other industries and important non-ferrous
metals and basic chemicals plants at Avonmouth. Gloucester (90,500), origin¬
ally an inland port and commercial town, Cheltenham (76,000), originally a
resort town, and the area between and adjacent to them produce a variety of
manufactures, including machinery, instruments and accessories, and clotn.
Swindon (98,000), besides railway workshops, has important engineering
works. Bath (85,000), originally a resort town and centre of an agricultural
district, has become noted for engineering and other manufacturing.
Besides being one of the most productive agricultural regions, the eastern
counties possess some sizeable towns. Cambridge (100,500) is a leading centre
of research-based industry; Ipswich (122,000) and Peterborough (66,500) are
noted for diesel engines, agricultural machinery and engineering generally;
and Norwich (119,000) for footwear and food manufacture. Food canning and
freezing, based mainly on locally grown produce, have developed rapidly.
The fishing ports of Great Yarmouth (51,000) and Lowestoft (50,000) have
fish processing plants, and are also becoming important bases for companies
engaged in natural gas exploitation in the North Sea.
The West Midlands conurbation, which stretches from Birmingham
(1,074,000) to Wolverhampton (265,000) and includes parts of Staffordshire,
Worcestershire and Warwickshire, has an unusually wide variety of industry,
244
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
East Midlands
North-west
England
including the manufacture of metals, electrical and engineering products of all
kinds and also jewellery, rubber products, chemicals and domestic metalware.
The largest concentrations of motor vehicle manufacture (including com¬
ponents and accessories) in Britain are in Birmingham and Coventry (335,000).
The smaller conurbation of North Staffordshire, centred on Stoke-on-Trent
(273,000), is devoted chiefly to the manufacture of pottery and china and to
coalmining, although other industries are growing in importance, while
Stafford (53,000) has heavy electrical and other engineering works.
Other industrial centres are Rugby (57,000), electrical engineering;
Worcester (71,000), machinery; Burton-on-Trent (51,000), brewing and
rubber; and Kidderminster (46,000), carpets.
The thriving industrial cities and towns of the East Midlands include Leicester
(280,000), noted for hosiery and knitwear, boots and shoes and machinery for
making these products; Derby (221,000) for general engineering, aero-engines
and man-made fibres; Nottingham (305,000) for hosiery, cycles and a variety
of other engineering products, lace, pharmaceutical products and tobacco;
Northampton, (124,000) footwear and engineering; Chesterfield (70,000),
engineering. Corby (48,000), a new town in Northamptonshire, has a steel
industry. Part of Britain’s richest and most highly mechanised coalfield lies
under the north-east of the area. Some of the towns on the coalfield, such as
Mansfield (56,000), have important manufacturing industries, particularly
textiles.
Manchester (603,000) is the commercial hub of the cotton and man-made
fibre textile industries, a very important financial and commercial centre and
a major port. It is also one of the chief centres for electrical and heavy
engineering and the production of machine tools, petro-chemicals, dyestuffs,
and pharmaceutical goods, while it has a wide range of other manufactures.
In the traditional cotton-manufacturing towns man-made fibres are also
processed alone or blended with cotton; the largest of these are Bolton
(154,000), Oldham (109,000), Rochdale (86,000), Stockport (141,000), Burnley
(77,000), Blackburn (100,000), Preston (104,000) and Bury (66,000). In the
majority of these towns engineering industries, notably the manufacture of
printing, paper making, textile and electrical machinery and heavy commercial
vehicles (especially in the Chorley-Leyland area), have been expanding while
the cotton industry has been declining. The Lancashire coalfield also lies in
the Manchester-Wigan area.
The Manchester Ship Canal, which carries a substantial volume of overseas
trade, links Manchester and Merseyside. It passes through Warrington
(72,000) with its metal industries (such as wire-drawing), Widnes (54,000) and
Runcorn (31,000) with their chemicals, and Ellesmere Port (55,000) with its
oil refinery installations, before reaching the Mersey estuary. St. Helens
(102.500) , to the north of the canal, is famous for glass manufacture.
Liverpool (689,000) is the second port of Britain, a great commercial and
insurance centre and, after London, the greatest centre for processing imported
foodstuffs and raw materials, noted especially for flour milling, soap manu¬
facture, sugar refining and rubber products. Among its older industries is
ship repairing; shipbuilding is a major industry across the river at Birkenhead
(142.500) . Many new industries, including electrical engineering, manufacture
of heavy industrial equipment and, more recently, of motor vehicles, have been
established around Liverpool. Salt, extracted in Cheshire, is used by chemical
works on Merseyside.
Barrow (64,000), in the north-west of Lancashire, is well known for ship-
Yorkshire and
Humberside
Northern England
Wales
INDUSTRY 245
building and marine engineering. Blackpool (148,000) on the coast is Britain’s
most popular holiday resort.
About three-quarters of the United Kingdom’s worsted and woollen indus¬
tries are found in the West Riding of Yorkshire. Bradford (294,500) is the
commercial centre of the wool trade and important for worsted; Wakefield
(60,000) produces both worsted and woollens; Morley (44,000) and Leeds
(506,000) have specialised in cheaper cloths, and Batley (42,000), Dewsbury
(52,000) and Spenborough (39,000) in heavy cloth, but their production is
becoming more diversified. Huddersfield (131,000) has a reputation for fine
woollens and worsteds and Halifax (94,000) for carpets. In most of the larger
centres of the wool industry a variety of engineering products are manu¬
factured. Leeds, the commercial capital of the area, has a large ready-made
clothing industry and important engineering plants. Farther south is the heavy
engineering centre of Sheffield (532,000), famous for its high quality steels,
cutlery and tools. The area’s extensive coalfields provide nearly a quarter of
Britain’s coal; Doncaster (84,000), also with tractor and nylon manufacturing,
and Barnsley (75,000) are the largest towns on the coalfield.
York (110,500) is noted for chocolates and confectionery manufacture and
has important railway workshops, and Hull (295,000), one of the world’s
largest fishing ports and with many manufacturing industries, including
engineering, vegetable oil processing, paints and sawmilling, is the most
important industrial town in the East Riding of Yorkshire.
On the south (Lincolnshire) side of the Humber lie Scunthorpe (70,000),
another important steel-making centre, and the major fishing port of Grimsby
(97,000) which has a food processing industry and also growing chemicals and
textiles industries close by at Immingham.
The greater part of this region (Northumberland, Cumberland, Westmorland,
Durham and the North Riding of Yorkshire) is an area of mountains, lakes and
moors and is relatively thinly populated. Most of its population is concen¬
trated in the coastal strip from the coalfields north of the Tyne to the Tees.
Within this area the main centres are Tyneside, including Newcastle upon
Tyne (245,000), Gateshead (100,500), Tynemouth (73,000), South Shields
(107,000), Wallsend (47,000) and Jarrow (29,000); and Teesside (393,000) and
Hartlepool (99,000). Other large towns are Sunderland (220,000), Darlington
(84,000) and, in the west, Carlisle (71,000).
The whole region is more dependent than other parts of England on
traditional heavy industries, notably coalmining, iron and steel manufacture,
shipbuilding and repairing and chemicals (the complex of chemical plants on
both banks of the Tees is probably the most extensive in Europe), which
together employ nearly a third of the male workers. This proportion has been
falling steadily as the result of the region’s efforts, with government help, to
attract new types of enterprise. It is one of the most important areas for the
manufacture of electrical plant, and the many other industries include mining
machinery, rolling mill plant, earth-moving equipment, machine tools, ropes,
paint, glass, clothing and scientific instruments. An aluminium smelter is
under construction on the Northumberland coast. Atomic energy is important
in Cumberland, with two nuclear power stations and other installations.
Nearly two-thirds of the population of Wales and Monmouthshire live in the
two counties of Glamorgan and Monmouthshire. In this area are the coal
mines which, though long worked and operating at increasing depths, still
produce nearly all Britain’s anthracite and much of its steam and other
specialised coals, and employ more workers than any branch of manufacturing
246
Scotland
Northern Ireland
BRITAIN I971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
industry. Rhondda (95,500) and Merthyr Tydfil (57,000) are the largest
centres in the coalmining area. The steel industry, with some of the most
modern plants in Europe, supplies almost all Britain’s output of tin plate and
much of its sheet steel. In the past 35 years many new industries have been
established, often on government industrial estates; they include plastics,
synthetic fibres, clothing, electronics, motor vehicle components and light
engineering.
The main urban centres are also the three major ports—Cardiff (287,000),
Newport (112,000) and Swansea (171,000). Milford Haven (14,000), a magni¬
ficent deep-water harbour recently developed, has two major oil refineries.
In North Wales a number of light industries, notably man-made fibres, are
located in the seaside resorts and some other towns, particularly Wrexham
(37,000), and there is a large steelworks in Flintshire.
About three-quarters of Scotland’s population (5-2 million) is concentrated in
the central Lowlands between the Firth of Clyde and the Firth of Forth. The
principal cities in this area are Glasgow (945,000) and Edinburgh (465,000).
Clydeside, which includes Glasgow, is a major shipbuilding and marine
engineering centre; it also has a great variety of general engineering enter¬
prises and other industries. The steel industry, sited mainly in north Lanark¬
shire, produces a wide range of products. The widely dispersed electronics
equipment industry is represented by a growing number of firms in such
centres as Glasgow, north Lanarkshire, Dundee and central Fife, as well as in
Edinburgh, where this and other modern industries are expanding alongside
the long-established engineering, printing and brewing industries. Motor car
manufacture has been established in Renfrewshire and in West Lothian there
has been a major expansion of commercial vehicle building.
Outside the central Lowland belt there is considerable industrial concen¬
tration in and around Dundee (182,000) and Aberdeen (181,000) and a number
of towns outside these areas have attracted light industries in recent years.
Dundee’s traditional manufacture, jute, has been supplemented by office
machinery, clocks and watches, refrigerators and electronic products. In
north-east Scotland is the largest concentration of whisky distilleries, while
the paper and metal industries are also important.
Most of northern Scotland is mountainous and much of southern Scotland
is hilly and rugged. These regions are sparsely populated, but the Scottish
Highlands possess significant resources of hydro-electric power (see p. 263).
There are high-quality tweed and knitwear industries both in the valley
towns of the Borders and in the Highlands and Islands. Small engineering and
electronics industries have recently been established in towns in the Borders
and the south-west. Small-scale manufacturing has also been introduced in the
Highlands, and larger enterprises include the experimental atomic reactor
establishment at Dounreay and the aluminium smelter being built at
Invergorden.
Although the area of Northern Ireland is relatively small and it lacks minerals,
there is substantial and growing industrialisation, particularly in and around
Belfast, the capital city (391,000). Britain’s largest single shipyard incorporat¬
ing the world’s biggest shipbuilding berth is in Belfast; other long-established
activities include the manufacture of textile machinery and other engineering
products; ropes, twine, tobacco and clothing. Northern Ireland has also long
been an important centre for textiles—it is particularly well known for
linen. The textile industry is now extensively diversified; Northern Ireland
is one of the most important areas in Europe for man-made fibre produc-
INDUSTRY
Relations
between the
Government
and Industry
247
tion and provides about one-fifth of Britain’s output. There has also been
extensive development in vehicle components, oil-well equipment, elec¬
tronic instruments, telephone switchgear, toys, shoes, carpets and synthetic
rubber.
The Government can influence industrial activity in a number of ways—
through fiscal and monetary policy, through the level of public expenditure,
through the placing of government contracts, through the policies of publicly
owned enterprises, by physical controls, by inducements, by exhortation and
by the provision of services, information and advice. Apart from labour
legislation (see Chapter 16) and certain export and import controls over a
small range of products (see Chapter 15), there are few physical controls over
industry—the main ones are the use of the legislation concerning monopolies
and restrictive practices already described (see p. 239) and the operation of
powers to control new industrial and office building and changes in land use
(see p. 251).
There is a close association between industry and the Government through
such channels as the National Economic Development Council, the main
forum for consultation on economic affairs between the Government,
management and the trade unions, and Economic Development Committees
(EDCs), which cover particular sectors of industry and are under the aegis of
industry. A major reconstruction of Government machinery relating to
industrial policy was announced in October 1969. The Department of Econo¬
mic Affairs was abolished, with its responsibility for medium- and long-term
economic questions passing to the Treasury, and the co-ordination of regional
policies to a new Secretary of State for Local Government and Regional
Planning. The Ministry of Technology was expanded by absorbing the former
Ministry of Power, and by the transfer from the Board of Trade of responsi¬
bility for location of industry policy and investment grants. The Board of
Trade retained responsibility for printing and publishing, distribution and the
service trades; its role in relation to exports, commercial policy and consumer
protection was not affected by the changes. Policies for productivity, prices
and incomes, and manpower are the concern of the Department of Employ¬
ment and Productivity. Other departments concerned with particular subjects
of concern to industry generally are the Treasury (fiscal and monetary policy)
and the Department of Education and Science, which is responsible for the
promotion of education and for civil science, operating in the main through the
research councils.
For particular industries a system has grown up whereby a particular
government department acts as the main point of contact, the ‘production’ or
‘sponsor department’, for each major industry. Following the changes out¬
lined above the Ministry of Technology is the sponsor department for the
mechanical and electrical engineering industries and for those manufacturing
chemicals, non-ferrous metals, ships’ electronic equipment, computers,
machine tools, telecommunications equipment, shipping, aircraft and aero¬
engines. Others include the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, the
Board of Trade, the Ministry of Public Building and Works and the Depart¬
ment of Health and Social Security.
There are separate departments of the Northern Ireland Government for
matters within the competence of the Northern Ireland Parliament. The
Ministry of Commerce deals with industry, especially the encouragement of
industrial development.
1
248
Statistical
Services
Production and
Productivity
Production Trends
TABLE 14
Production and
Employment in
Industry, 1963-69
(1963 = 100)
BRITAIN I971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Central Statistical Office (CSO), which is attached to the Cabinet Office,
is the central body for government statistics. Although departments them¬
selves compile statistics relating to their responsibilities and may publish
them in their own standard publications, the comprehensive statistical
publications are prepared by the CSO, which acts as co-ordinator. The
Business Statistical Office, which is responsible to the CSO for policy but is
administratively part of the Board of Trade, will eventually take over the
responsibility for compiling a wide range of statistics relating to industry and
commerce. (For the principal regular series of statistics published, see Biblio¬
graphy, p. 481.)
Industrial production (mining and quarrying, manufacturing, construction,
and gas, electricity and water) was in the first half of 197° fractionally less
than a year previously, about one-third higher than in i960 and about double
the pre-war level. The course of production and employment from 1963 to
1969 is shown in Table 14.
Among manufacturing industries output rose fastest between 1963 and
1969 in the chemical and allied industries (49 per cent), in engineering and
electrical goods (37 per cent), and in paper, printing and publishing (23 per
cent); in the gas, electricity and water group there was an advance of 36 per
cent and in construction of 22 per cent.
Year
Industrial Production
All Industries
Manufacturing
Industries
Employment in
Industry
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
100
108
112
113
114
120
123
100
109
112
114
114
121
126
100
102
103
103
100
98
98
The size of the labour force has scarcely changed in the last five years and
the increases in production have been due mainly to a variety of factors
influencing productivity, including advances in products, machinery, pro¬
cesses and methods of work; the rate of fixed capital formation; more intensive
competition and sales promotion; and improved management.
Although gross fixed capital formation at home has, as a whole, been well
maintained since 1966, the proportion devoted to manufacturing has tended
to fall. The total in 1969 amounted to 21-8 per cent of the gross domestic
product and was estimated (at current prices) to be almost double the 1959
level. Part of this rising investment is linked with the introduction of new tech¬
niques and equipment and in particular of machines and instruments which
lessen the demand for human skill and supervision though they may require
more skill from fewer people. This process of automation is giving rise to far-
reaching changes in the pattern of industry and in the internal organisation
and labour requirements of business enterprises and has already been respon¬
sible for consequential increases in production and efficiency which, in the
long run, are likely to be very large. Much investment, however, still con¬
sists of replacements, additions and improvements of a more traditional kind.
INDUSTRY
249
INDEX OF INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION 1969 (1963 -100)
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
150
160
Chemicals and
allied industries
Engineering and
allied industries
Paper, printing and
publishing
Food, drink and
tobacco
Textiles, leather
and clothing
Metal manufacture
Total manufacturing
industries
Gas, electricity
and water
Construction
Mining and
quarrying
Both the long-term and the short-term growth of productivity thus depend
most directly on the decisions of individual undertakings. But though the
promotion of productivity is regarded as primarily a matter of industry,
government departments and educational and research establishments also
have an important contribution to make. Government budgeting and financial
policies also have a strong influence on the extent and direction of demand,
and government purchasing policies take account of national industrial
objectives.
Within industry employers’ organisations often provide technical assistance,
conduct market surveys, and support schemes of vocational education and
training, and many trade unions organise special training schemes and courses
to promote understanding of modern management techniques. Changes in
working methods to facilitate higher output feature in a number of produc¬
tivity agreements negotiated between management and workers. Private
consultants specialising in management and work study are available to advise
firms on measures to increase their productive efficiency, there are also many
specialist institutions, both public and private, concerned with various aspects
of productivity. The British Productivity Council (BPC) was established by
both sides of industry to stimulate interest in methods of raising productivity.
It is an independent body on which are represented the Confederation of
British Industry, the Trades Union Congress, the Association of British
Chambers of Commerce and the nationalised industries; its work is financed
by contributions from these bodies and by a government grant-in-aid. Most
of the BPC’s work is done through more than 143 local productivity com¬
mittees and associations throughout the country, but it is also responsible for
special countrywide campaigns. The local organisations arrange meetings,
inter-factory visits, courses, conferences, film shows and exhibitions.
The British Standards Institution (BSI) is a voluntary non-profit-making
body incorporated by Royal Charter. It prepares and promulgates standards
in respect of, inter alia, quality, performance, dimensions, testing methods and
codes of practice. Voluntary acceptance of such standards by manufacturers,
buyers and sellers reduces unnecessary variety and simplifies the specification
of requirements. The BSI is governed by a council consisting of representa¬
tives of the main organisations of employers and workers, professional
institutions and the larger government departments.
The Council of Industrial Design (CoID), set up in 1944 by the Government
to promote higher standards of design in British industry, is concerned with
250
Co-ordination
Management
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
all aspects of industrial design from durable consumer goods to capital goods.
The CoID, with its Scottish Committee, is a grant-aided body sponsored by
the Board of Trade; its members include industrialists, retailers, architects,
designers and educationists. At the Design Centre in the Haymarket,
London, a selective but changing display of modern British consumer goods
is maintained; exhibits are chosen from Design Index, the CoID’s illustrated
record of more than 11,000 well-designed products. Special exhibitions on
particular themes are also arranged regularly. An annual awards scheme,
Council of Industrial Design Awards, covering capital goods and engineer¬
ing equipment as well as consumer products, was introduced in 1967* The
Duke of Edinburgh also presents his annual Prize for Elegant Design. The
Scottish Committee runs the Scottish Design Centre in Glasgow, and there
are three independent regional design centres, each maintaining a duplicate
of the Index, at Liverpool, Manchester and Nottingham. The CoID organises
temporary exhibitions in regional centres and overseas; arranges regular
conferences and training courses; and undertakes industrial study tours in
Britain. It publishes a monthly magazine, Design, and maintains extensive
reference and photographic libraries.
Other bodies concerned with industrial design include the Royal Society of
Arts (see p. 194), the Society of Industrial Artists and Designers, which is the
representative professional body in Great Britain of designers engaged in
industry and commerce, and the Design and Industries Association (DIA), a
voluntary association of industrial companies, designers, and others interested
in the promotion of good design in industry. The Crafts Council of Great
Britain, the Crafts Centre of Great Britain and the Scottish Craft Centre are
all grant-aided by the Board of Trade. Their aims are to improve craft design
and to promote closer relations between craftsmen and industry.
The Ministry of Technology is responsible for co-ordinating government
policies in industrial policy. EDCs (see p. 247) are particularly concerned with
removing obstacles to efficiency; the ministry is represented on the EDCs by
its industrial advisers seconded to the department from industry. Government
grants to the BPC and the Council of Industrial Design are administered by
the Department of Employment and Productivity and the Board of Trade
respectively. The Ministry of Technology is charged with extending the intro¬
duction of automatic control systems and advanced techniques into industry,
sponsors the BSI, the British Calibration Service1 and the National Computing
Centre, supports the National Data Processing Service, and provides technical
advisory services. It is also concerned directly with research into such factors
as productivity measurement techniques, group technology, production
engineering and fatigue among operators. The Manpower and Productivity
Service of the Department of Employment and Productivity advises firms on
productivity, particularly aspects connected with manpower utilisation and
industrial relations. A number of other departments have responsibilities
which bear on productivity.
In Britain, as elsewhere, management is recognised as a subject requiring
special skills and knowledge. This is reflected both in a change in the general
educational qualifications of recruits and in the spread of systematic education
and training for management.
The British Institute of Management (BIM) is the central national manage-
t up in 1966 to provide reliable calibration facilities for industries producing
cinstruments and industrial test gear.
INDUSTRY
251
Encouragement
of Investment
in Industry
Government
Help for
Industry in
Development
Areas
ment body, independent, non-political and non-profit-making. Its purpose is
to study and promote scientific management, including management education
and training, throughout industry, commerce and public administration. The
BIM receives an annual government grant of about £100,000 to help it expand
services to industry. The Industrial Society works to promote better use of
human resources; it advises members and conducts conferences and courses.
Management studies and education for management are expanding rapidly
in Britain and have become a recognised feature of higher education (see
p. 162). There are graduate business schools in London and Manchester.
Training courses for higher management are held at several universities and
colleges, including the Administrative Staff College, Henley-on-Thames, and
Ashridge College of Management, Berkhamsted. The larger firms, especially
those with wide responsibilities, often provide general management courses
for senior executives, and systems of informal training within an organisation
are numerous. There are also bodies concerned with specialised branches of
management, for example, the Institute of Personnel Management, the
Institution of Works Managers, the Institute of Office Management and the
Institute of Marketing.
The growing number of professional personnel working as management
consultants—now over 3,500—and the use of the services of independent
management selection firms in the appointment of senior staff are further
indications of interest in the science of management in Britain. A government
scheme for helping smaller firms (25 to 500 employees) to pay for the services
of consultants was operated in the Bristol and Glasgow areas for several
months in 1968-69. The Government is considering whether a similar scheme
should be extended nationally.
Under the Industrial Development Act 1966 cash grants were introduced in
place of certain tax allowances for capital expenditure on plant or machinery
used in the manufacturing, extractive and construction industries. The grant
scheme, which is administered by the Ministry of Technology (see p. 56)
also covers capital expenditure on computers, ships, hovercraft and mining
works. The standard rate of grant is 20 per cent. In order to maintain a greater
incentive to investment in development areas (see below) the rate of grant is
40 per cent for plant or machinery for use in development areas. Over 40 per
cent of the total amount paid on plant and machinery, mining works and
computers goes to the development areas. A separate system of grants and
loans to encourage hotel development has been operating since 1968.
Some parts of Britain have long been less prosperous than others. Their rate of
economic expansion has been below average and their level of unemployment
above average as a result of the decline of some traditional industries or the
lack of job opportunities. For many years unemployment has remained a
persistent problem in Scotland, Wales and the north-east and some other
parts of England. This regional imbalance has been aggravated by the tendency
for new industries to concentrate in the Midlands and the south-east where, as
a result, the demand for labour is high and there are increasing problems of
congestion. An important aim of the Government’s regional policy is to
achieve a better distribution of industrial development between the different
parts of the country. The Government has in recent years taken important
measures aimed at securing balanced economic development.
Government aid to areas of high unemployment began in the 1930s and
has been developed in various ways since the end of the second world war.
252
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Since August 1966 large parts of Britain have been designated as ‘development
areas’ where industrial development is to be encouraged. They cover northern
England, Merseyside and nearly the whole of Scotland, Wales, Cornwall and
north Devon and contain a fifth of Britain’s working population. The Ministry
of Technology provides businessmen with detailed information on industrial
location within the development areas and offers a wide variety of inducements
to new or expanding businesses in these areas, the first priority being given to
smaller ‘special development areas’.
Besides the capital investment grants there is a wide range of financial and
other inducements available under the Local Employment Acts 1960-70 to
encourage industry to expand in the assisted areas. The Ministry of Tech¬
nology may build factories for leasing, in some cases with an initial rent-free
period, or sale on deferred terms; make building grants of 25 per cent (and 35
per cent in special cases) of the cost of building an industrialist’s own factory;
make grants towards the removal costs of firms moving into a development
area; and make loans for the general purposes of an undertaking (for example,
working capital, plant and machinery, etc.). In the special development areas,
operational grants may be paid to help new firms during the first three years
of their establishment.
Factory building and estate management are undertaken on the Ministry of
Technology’s behalf by the English, Scottish and Welsh Industrial Estates
Corporations; premises administered by the three Corporations total over
60 million square feet and give employment to over 250,000 people.
Assistance from other government departments includes 85 per cent capital
grants to local authorities for clearing derelict or neglected sites and for
improving basic services; and help from the DEP with the cost of training
additional labour in development areas and of transferring workers in
connection with establishing new enterprises.
Employers in the manufacturing industry in development areas are entitled
not only to refund of selective employment tax (see p. 365) but also receive
regional employment premiums of £1-50 a week for every full-time male
employee with lower rates for women, part-timers, boys and girls.
A committee set up in 1967 to investigate the needs of ‘Intermediate
Areas’—those areas with special economic problems but situated outside the
development areas—published its report in 1969. Under the Local Employ¬
ment Act 1970 certain such areas were given special assistance, similar to but
more limited than that available in the development areas under earlier Local
Employment Acts, including factory building grants, additional provisions
for industrial training and help in a clearance programme of derelict land.
Since 1948 control of new industrial building has been exercised through
the use of a system of Industrial Development Certificates. Any application
under the normal town and country planning machinery for planning
permission for industrial development involving more than 5,000 square feet
of floor space (or 3,000 square feet in the Midlands and south-east) must be
accompanied by a certificate from the Ministry of Technology certifying that
the development in question can be carried out consistently with the proper
distribution of industry. In considering applications the Ministry pays par¬
ticular regard to the need for providing appropriate employment in the
assisted areas. In practice this obligation has led to the refusal of certificates
for most projects outside the assisted areas unless it can be shown that the
project could not reasonably be undertaken in such an area or in Northern
Ireland. Subject to this priority, the control is also used to encourage dispersal
of industry to new or expanded towns taking population from the more
INDUSTRY
253
Northern Ireland
Councils to
Promote
Industry
congested areas. Under the Control of Office and Industrial Development Act
1965 the Board of Trade was given power—transferred to the Ministry of
Housing and Local Government in 1969—to control office developments of
over 10,000 square feet in most of the Midlands, and in the south-east other
than Greater London where the limit is 3,000 square feet.
Nearly 6^ per cent of workers employed in manufacturing industries in
1966 were in plants opened since 1945 by firms whose manufacturing base
was in some other region. A further 3 J per cent were in those opened by firms
whose base was in some other part of the region. The development areas (and
Northern Ireland) have made net gains of employment in the last two decades
by the movement of manufacturing industries.
Under its own legislation Northern Ireland provides for the payment of
investment grants at 40 per cent of the cost both of new plant and machinery
and of new buildings for the manufacturing, construction and extractive
industries in Northern Ireland. There is also provision for assisting firms by
means of loans to cany out major schemes of re-equipment, to move to
another area in particular need of industrial development or to undertake a
rehousing of their business in association with a major scheme of modernisa¬
tion and reorganisation. Help under the investment grants legislation is
largely made without regard to how much employment is created as a
result.
As an alternative means of assistance the Northern Ireland Government
continues to use its comprehensive and flexible powers authorised under the
Industries Development Acts for projects which offer a reasonable amount of
employment. In such cases capital assistance of 45 per cent would normally
be available instead of the 40 per cent referred to above. For those projects
which offer exceptionally attractive returns in employment or location within
Northern Ireland, the assistance offered could include tenancy of a govern¬
ment-built factory at a very low rent, grants towards operating costs in the
initial stages, and grants towards costs of removing existing machinery and
installing it in a factory in Northern Ireland. The regional employment
premium and selective employment premium apply also to Northern Ireland.
Since 1945 almost 280 new firms have been established in Northern Ireland
with government assistance, giving employment to some 80,000 people.
The Ministry of Commerce is the Northern Ireland government department
concerned with the administration of industrial development policies. The
Northern Ireland Economic Council was set up in 1965 to assist in furthering
economic growth. The chairman is the Minister of Commerce, and the
membership includes representatives of industry, commerce and the trade
unions.
Certain regions and areas in England have industrial development associations
concerned with promoting local industry. These are sponsored mainly by local
authorities, trade associations and individual firms.
Several voluntary associations are concerned with Welsh industry. The
Development Corporation for Wales, founded in 1959, is the most prominent.
In Scotland, the Highlands and Islands Development Board, set up by
statute in 1965, works to stimulate the economic and social development of
the seven ‘crofting’ counties (see p. 313). It provides grants and loans to
industrial, commercial and other enterprises; it may also acquire land,
provide management and other advisory services and set up and carry on
businesses. The Scottish Council (Development and Industry), a voluntary
association, promotes the general economic development of Scotland.
254
Rural Industries
TABLE 15
Inland Fuel
and Power
Consumption
(in Terms of
Primary Sources)
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Encouragement is given to the development of rural industries. Much of this
work is done under the aegis of the Development Commission1 with finance
from the Development Fund, notably advice and guidance to small businesses
in rural areas and country towns and loans for assistance to tourism in the
rural parts of development areas. In England and Wales this service is
provided by the Council for Small Industries in Rural Areas acting in consulta¬
tion with the Rural Community Councils through their Small Industries
Committees in the counties; by the Small Industries Council for Rural Areas
of Scotland; and in Northern Ireland by the Rural Industries Development
Committee of the Northern Ireland Council of Social Services. Another
service provided by the Commission is the financing of small factories to
stimulate rural industries and to combat rural depopulation.
Under the Finance Act 1968 hotels in certain rural parts of the develop¬
ment areas qualify for a refund of selective employment tax (see p. 365).
FUEL AND POWER
The main primary sources of energy currently used in Britain are coal,
petroleum and, to a lesser extent, nuclear energy, natural gas and water power;
secondary sources produced from these are electricity, town gas and coke.
Coal, mined within the country, still represents slightly more than half
primary energy consumption, although the amount of coal used and its share
of the total energy market has been falling. Oil, on the other hand, virtually
all imported, has expanded rapidly, its share of total energy consumption
having risen from one-fifth in 1958 to over one-quarter in 1961, and to over
two-fifths in 1969. With the advent of nuclear power and North Sea natural
gas Britain has moved over from two fuels to four. A programme for nuclear
power stations has been in progress for 15 years and nuclear power now pro¬
vides a significant and increasing share of electricity supplies although it still
Million tons coal equivalent
1950
1955
1960
1969
Coal (net)
Oil . .
Nuclear energy
Natural gas . .
Hydro-power
Total ..
201*1
22*2
0*9
224*2
213*5
34*5
1*0
249*0
195*5
65*5
0*9
0*1
1*7
263*7
161*9
135*7
10*5
8*4
2*0
318*5
Source: Ministry of Technology
represents under 4 per cent of total energy requirements. The share of natural
gas, until recently only imported in liquefied form, is even smaller, but it is
expanding more rapidly from supplies from the North Sea discoveries.
Water-power resources are very small and cannot be developed much further.
Trends in primary energy consumption are shown in Table 15 and in the
diagram on p. 255.
1 The Development Commission recommends, and the Treasury approves and
administers, advances by grants or loans from the Development Fund, established by
the Development and Road Improvement Funds Acts 1909 and 1910. At the present
time the Fund may be used to help and expand the rural economy (including accom¬
modation of tourists) and also to promote the development and improvement of
fisheries.
INDUSTRY
255
The fuel and power industries, with the exception of petroleum, are under
public ownership. General responsibility for the effective and co-ordinated
development of fuel and power resources lies with the Minister of Technology.
Research is undertaken by the fuel and fuel-using industries. The Minister of
Technology also has an Advisory Council on Research and Development.
The fuel and power industries in Britain employ in total about 770,000
people, or 3 per cent of the working population; their capital investment in
1970-71 will be in the region of £700 million, about one-sixth of total invest¬
ment; their annual turnover is about £4,000 million; and the value of their
net output is about 5 per cent of the national product. The nationalised
industry boards’ investment is financed through internal resources and
borrowing from the Government (long term), the clearing banks (short term),
and, in the case of gas and electricity, from overseas (long term) sources.
256
COAL
The National
Coal Board
Pattern and
Trends in
Supply and
Demand
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The responsible ministers—the Minister of Technology in England and
Wales and for Scottish electricity the Secretary of State for Scotland—are
required by statute to set up consultative councils for each of the nationalised
fuel industries to protect the interests of consumers. National Industrial and
Domestic Coal Consumers’ Councils were set up in 1947 and Area Electricity
and Gas Consultative Councils (supported by district committees) were set up
in 1948 and 1949 respectively. Each consists of a chairman and from 20 to 30
unpaid members appointed from nominations put forward by interested
bodies, mainly local authorities.
Coal has been worked in Britain for over 700 years and an organised coal¬
mining industry has been in existence for over 300 years, some 200 years
longer than in any other country. British coal exports dominated the world
market until about 1910. By 1913—the peak production year—the industry
was producing 287 million tons of coal, exporting 94 million tons and
employing over a million workers.
In 1947 the coal mines passed into public ownership by means of the Coal
Industry Nationalisation Act 1946, which set up the National Coal Board as
a statutory corporation to manage the industry.
The National Coal Board (NCB) consists of a chairman and between eight
and eleven members appointed by the Minister of Technology. The NCB has
an almost complete monopoly to extract coal in Great Britain, and is also
empowered to license private operators to work small pits and open-cast sites.
It has no monopoly in distribution, and retail sales remain largely in private
hands, but it has, however, some retail depots and makes bulk sales to large
industrial consumers.
The NCB is responsible for the day-to-day running and the commercial
management of the industry, but is answerable to the minister (and through
him, to Parliament) for its efficiency. The minister has power to issue direc¬
tives on matters affecting the public interest, and to authorise borrowings to
finance capital investment.
At the end of March 1970 there were 299 collieries in operation. Of these,
296 were grouped into 17 areas, each controlled by a director who is respon¬
sible to the NCB. The remaining three collieries (in Kent) are controlled by a
general manager who is also responsible to the NCB.
A typical area produces nearly 10 million tons of coal a year, employs
up to 20,000 men and has a turnover of about £55 million.
Coal consumption in Britain increased by an average annual rate of nearly
4 million tons between 1947 and 1956; sales fell sharply, however, between
1956 and 1959 and large stocks of coal accumulated at pit heads. Growing
competition from oil, increasing efficiency in the use of coal and reduced
requirements of the gas, steel, railway transport, and other industries con¬
tributed to the fall in demand which is still continuing (see Table 16). Un¬
distributed stocks have recently been run down considerably and at the end
of 1969 were 18*5 million tons.
Nearly half of total output is consumed by the electricity authorities and
over one-quarter by domestic and industrial users together. Coke ovens are
other large users and the gas industry still consumed nearly 7 million tons
in 1969 despite the switch to natural gas. Consumption by the electricity
industry has increased by 38 per cent since 1961 to 76 million tons in 1969
whereas the requirements of all the other main classes of consumer have
INDUSTRY
257
Production and
Manpower
TABLE 16
Coal
Statistics
1950-69
declined. In the case of domestic users this fall has been slightly offset by
increased purchases of solid smokeless fuels.
Coal exports have declined for somewhat similar reasons and now average
about 3 million tons a year. The peak post-war figure was 19 million tons in
1949. The principal markets are in Western Europe and the Republic of
Ireland.
The fact that the British industry was developed so early has meant that many
of the best seams of coal are now worked out. There are abundant reserves of
coal with which production can be maintained well into the next century;
there is also scope for opening new collieries should these be required.
The main coal-bearing areas are: (1) the Yorkshire, Derbyshire and
Nottinghamshire field, which produces about 48 per cent of the total output,
(2) the Durham and Northumberland field, (3) the South Wales field, and
(4) the Scottish field. Other important coal-bearing areas are those of
Lancashire and the west Midlands (Staffordshire and Warwickshire).
Table 16 shows the main trends in the industry since 1950.
Total output
of which, open-cast
Total consumption
of which, export
Total labour force®
All underground workers®
Output per manshift®:
at coal face
overall
Output mechanically
loaded® . .
Unit
million
tons
’000
tons
per cent
1950-54
(average)
222-1
11-4
223-0
15-2
688-4
546-1
3-3
1-2
5b
1955-59
(average)
217-8
12-4
215-7
8-2
690-2
550-6
3-5
1-3
22b
1960-64
(average)
194-2
7-4
198-1
5-9
549-0
437-2
4-5
1-5
56b
1969
150-6
6-3
164-7
3-5
311-1
245-1
6-8
2-2
92b
Source : National Coal Board
“ NCB mines only.
6 Estimate.
Coal consumption has fallen steadily over the past 20 years as shown in
Table 16, and fell by 2-4 million tons in 1969. The fall in demand has been
accompanied by increases in productivity and has resulted in a rundown of
the labour force from some 700,000 to about 300,000. There were 35,000 fewer
workers in September 1969 than in September 1968. Overall productivity has
risen by half since 1961 to 2-2 tons per manshift in 1969. Coal face output has
doubled over the last 20 years to 6-8 tons per manshift in 1969. The increases
have been obtained largely by concentration on the more productive mines
and faces, by increasing mechanisation at the face, and by the use of multi¬
shift working. At mechanised faces, output now averages 7-7 tons per man¬
shift compared with 4-1 tons at non-mechanised faces. Other important
measures which have contributed to increased productivity include new tech¬
niques for obtaining information about the reserves before they are worked,
intensive training of management and men to obtain the maximum utilisation
of equipment on highly mechanised faces, the increasing use of powered sup¬
ports, the use of higher horse-power machines and improvements in the
mechanised handling of coal below ground and on the surface.
258 BRITAIN I971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The former Ministry of Power forecast that the fall in consumption is likely
to continue but the Government is taking measures to support consumption
with the aim of holding demand at around 120 million tons by 1975. The
NCB plans to continue to improve the competitive position of coal and increase
productivity by restricting production to the most productive pits and the most
efficient faces. The labour force will, therefore, continue to decline in the near
future.
The NCB raises capital, including working capital, by borrowing from the
Minister of Technology. At present there is a statutory limit of £900 million
on such borrowing. Within certain limits the Board may also, with the per¬
mission of the Minister of Technology, borrow temporarily (by way of over¬
draft or otherwise). The greater proportion of investment, however, is financed
from internal resources.
Capital expenditure by the industry totalled £462 million from 1947 to
1955 and about ^790 million in the nine years 1956 to end-March 1964. At
the end of the 1964-65 financial year the total capital debt to the Exchequer
amounted to about £960 million. In 1965 legislation was enacted to effect a
capital reconstruction involving the writing off of ^4X5 °f the existing
debt. As a result, the total debt to the Minister at the end of March 1970
amounted to £668 million.
Under the nationalisation statute, the NCB has been required to break even
on its current account (taking one year with another) after meeting all proper
charges including provision for reserves. It has made surpluses in some years
and deficits in others. In certain areas, such as Scotland, Lancashire and Wales,
deficits have been persistent, and profits from the areas of high productivity,
for instance, the Midlands, have been inadequate to cover the losses sustained. |
By March 1966 the accumulated deficit on the current account had reached
£115-6 million; this was included in the £415 million written off. Interest
payments and depreciation provisions have been reduced as a result. In the
year ending March 1970 the NCB made an operating profit of £8-8 million,
and after payment of interest there was a deficit of £26-3 million.
To assist the redeployment of manpower and the elimination of uneconomic
colliery capacity, the Coal Industry Acts 1965 and 1967 authorise the Ministry
of Technology to make grants limited to two-thirds of relevant expenditure in
any one year up to a maximum aggregate amount of £45 million over the four
years to 1971.
Research The NCB has two research organisations: a Coal Research Establishment,
at Stoke Orchard, near Cheltenham, Gloucestershire, providing facilities for
fundamental research; and a Mining Research and Development Establish¬
ment, near Bretby, Derbyshire, for the investigation of underground problems,
developing new machines and testing equipment. The NCB is financially
responsible for the British Coal Utilisation Research Association’s (BCURA)
industrial laboratories at Leatherhead, Surrey, whose work is closely inte¬
grated with that of the NCB’s own research establishments. BCURA also
undertakes contract work for Government departments and other interests.
Research associations receiving grants from the NCB and the Ministry of
Technology include the British Coke Research Association and the Coal Tar
Research Association. Much of the work of other bodies, such as the Safety in
Mines Research Establishment (SMRE), is closely related to the Board’s
problems; the SMRE carries out research on explosions and fires, pneumo¬
coniosis, engineering and metallurgy.
Capital
Investment and
Financial
Structure
INDUSTRY
259
PETROLEUM
Indigenous
Production
International
Trade
Consumption
The petroleum industry in Britain dates back to 1850, when Dr. James Young,
a Glasgow chemist, succeeded in obtaining lamp oil and lubricants from
natural mineral oil occurring in the Derbyshire coal measures. The Scottish
shale deposits, yielding similar products, were first worked in 1858 and ceased
production in 1962.
Sources of crude oil within Britain meet only 1 ton in every 1,200 of total
United Kingdom requirements, the remainder being imported from overseas.
Annual production of crude oil from indigenous oilfields now totals about
80,000 tons. Prospecting for crude petroleum has so far led to the establish¬
ment of several small oilfields, notably in Nottinghamshire (Egmanton and
Bothamsell), in Leicestershire (Plungar), in Lincolnshire (Gainsborough) and
in Dorset (Kimmeridge). A substantial field of natural gas was also located in
1966 in north Yorkshire, near Scarborough.
Seismic prospecting in the North Sea has been going on since 1962 and full-
scale exploration activities since 1964, following the enactment of the Con¬
tinental Shelf Act 1964, and the subsequent award of a first round of licences.
Further licences were awarded in 1965) bringing the total area under licence
to 41,272 square miles (108,000 square kilometres) out of a total area on which
Britain has rights of 142,000 square miles (370,000 square kilometres). In 1970
£ further round of licences was allocated for areas in the North and Irish
seas.
Drilling, which started in 1964, has proved the existence of five major fields
of natural gas capable of commercial production, and large quantities of gas
are coming ashore from three of these (West Sole, Hewett and Leman Bank).
British and British-Dutch oil companies have been responsible for developing
the oil resources of many countries to mutual advantage, especially in the
Middle East, Far East, Africa and Caribbean areas.
Today these companies produce more than one-third of all oil entering into
international trade, with a tanker fleet (partly owned by them and partly on
charter) amounting to nearly a quarter of the world’s tanker tonnage. (United
Kingdom registered tanker tonnage is about 14 per cent of the world’s total.)
In 1969 the United Kingdom imported 93-1 million tons of crude oil valued
at £671 million, the largest single item among imported products.
Kuwait (25*5 per cent) regained from Libya its position as the largest
supplier. Other major suppliers were Saudi Arabia, Iran, Venezuela and
Nigeria.
Deliveries of petroleum products for inland consumption in 1969 totalled
about 89 million tons, having doubled since i960. Fuel oil consumption
in 1969 constituted 37-5 per cent of the total. Demand for gas and diesel oils
(excluding those used in road vehicles) rose by a further 1 million tons to
10-3 million tons in 1969. Sales of motor spirit have expanded by an annual
average of 6-4 per cent since i960 and totalled some 13 million tons in
I9^9-
The most important uses of gas and diesel oils in 1969 were for non¬
industrial central heating, agricultural tractors and the railways. Electricity
generation accounted for about 24 per cent of total fuel oil consumption,
excluding that used in oil refineries; the steel industry accounted for 14 per
cent; and non-industrial central heating for a further 12 per cent. Of the
remainder, the largest users were the cement, paper-making, general chemical,
glass, engineering, brickmaking and textile industries.
z6o
Refineries
Oil Pipelines
Research
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Before 1939 three-quarters of the United Kingdom’s supply of petroleum
products was refined overseas, as it was considered more economical to refine
at the source of production. Since the second world war the industry has
favoured the siting of refineries in the consuming areas.
At the end of 1969 rated refinery capacity in Britain amounted to 106 million
tons a year. Of the 22 refineries in operation, seven have a capacity of under
0-5 million tons. The ten largest are situated at Fawley, near Southampton
(16-5 million tons); Stanlow, in Cheshire (1075 million tons); Isle of Grain
and Shellhaven (both 10 million tons), and Coryton (7 million tons), all three
on the Thames Estuary; Teesport, Yorkshire (6 million tons); two at Milford
Haven in Pembrokeshire (6-3 million tons and 5-9 million tons); Llandarcy
near Swansea (8 million tons); and Killingholme near Grimsby (7 million
tons). Other important refineries are located at Belfast, Grangemouth,
Billingham, Heysham (Lancs.) and a third at Milford Haven. The completion
of a 4-5 million tons plant on Humberside brings the number of important
refining areas to seven. Stanlow is to be expanded by 7! million tons to become
the largest refinery in Britain.
Output of refined products (excluding refineries’ own consumption) has
risen steadily; from 4 million tons in 1948 to 25! million tons in 1954,
40 million tons in i960 and the peak total of 84 million tons in 1969. There is a
substantial external trade in refined products which tends to follow trading
and seasonal requirements and the commercial arrangements of the major oil
companies. Exports from Britain, mainly in the form of heavier products
to European countries, were valued at j£i47 milfi°n in I9^9"> imports of
refined products (including liquefied gases) amounted to £237 million.
Three main crude oil pipelines are in operation in Britain between harbours
capable of berthing very large tankers and refineries: in west Scotland, from
Finnart to Grangemouth; in South Wales, from Angle Bay, Milford Haven,
to Llandarcy; and in north-west England, from Tranmere to Heysham.
Pipelines carry refined products from refineries to major marketing areas; for
example, from Stanlow to the Manchester area, from Fawley to Staines and
Heathrow Airport, and from the Isle of Grain to Walton-on-Thames and
Heathrow Airport. A 245-mile (394 kilometres) pipeline, opened in 1969, feeds
refined products to north London and the Midlands from refineries and
installations on the Thames and Mersey; a similar line is planned from Milford
Haven to the Midlands and Manchester. Pipelines carrying petrochemical
feedstocks run from Stanlow to Carrington, near Manchester, from Fawley to
Severnside, near Bristol, and from Teesside to Fleetwood and Runcorn. The
Pipelines Act 1962 is designed to secure the orderly development of privately
owned industrial pipelines.
Research into problems of petroleum technology is carried out mainly by the
leading oil companies, which have also endowed research at the universities
on a substantial scale. Research centres are situated at Sunbury-on-Thames
(the British Petroleum Company), Thornton, in Cheshire, and Woodstock,
in Kent (Shell), and Abingdon, in Berkshire (Esso). The first of these covers
the full range of petroleum research and development, from geology and
production to product utilisation and petroleum chemicals. In general, the
remainder are concerned with the evolution of new and improved fuels and
lubricants and the development of new uses for petroleum products and of
new products based on petroleum, especially chemicals.
INDUSTRY
ELECTRICITY
SUPPLY
Present
Structure
England and
Wales
Scotland
261
A public supply of electricity was first provided in Britain in 1881, at
Godaiming, Surrey. From its earliest days a measure of public control has
been a feature of the industry. In 1919 the Electricity Commissioners were
created as a supervisory body and to promote reorganisation on a national
scale through voluntary agreement. In 1926 the Central Electricity Board
was set up to construct and operate a national grid inter-connecting individual
power stations, thus co-ordinating generation and transmission. In 1943 the
North of Scotland Hydro-Electric Board (NSHEB) was established as a
public corporation to develop the water-power resources of the Highlands.
In 1948 all municipal and private undertakings (other than those in Northern
Ireland) were acquired under the Electricity Act 1947 an^ vested in the
British Electricity Authority and 14 regional boards, except in the north of
Scotland where they became the responsibility of the NSHEB. Two subse¬
quent Acts (1954 and 1957) effected a measure of decentralisation and gave
the industry its present structure. Electricity supply employs about 223,000
people, including 5,700 in Northern Ireland.
In England and Wales, electricity is generated and transmitted by the Central
Electricity Generating Board (CEGB) and distributed by 12 separate Area
Electricity Boards; co-ordination is effected by the Electricity Council. In
Scotland, two boards—the NSHEB and the South of Scotland Electricity
Board (SSEB)—both generate and distribute electricity. In Northern Ireland,
the Belfast Corporation and the Electricity Board for Northern Ireland
generate and distribute electricity, and the Londonderry Corporation
distributes only.
The Electricity Council is the central body of the supply industry with a
general responsibility for promoting electricity supply and for advising the
Minister of Technology; it is also responsible for a number of common
services, principally capital financing, research and industrial relations. The
Council consists of a chairman and two deputy chairmen, the chairman and
two designated members of the CEGB, the chairman of the 12 Area Electricity
Boards and not more than three other members. The CEGB controls the
operation and maintenance of power stations and the main transmission system
(the national grid) and supplies electricity in bulk to the 12 Area Boards. The
CEGB consists of a chairman, a deputy chairman and between six and eight
members. Each of the 12 Area Electricity Boards acquires bulk supplies of
electricity from the CEGB and is responsible for distribution networks and
sales of electricity to its area consumers.
Area Consultative Councils were set up under the Electricity Act 1947 in
the area of each Board to represent the interests of consumers; their chairmen
are ex officio members of their respective Area Boards. The Minister of
Technology appoints the chairmen, deputy chairmen and members of the
Electricity Council, the CEGB, the Area Boards and the Consultative
Councils; approves each Board’s capital development programmes and the
industry’s research programme; and approves, in consultation with the
Treasury, the industry’s borrowing requirements.
The boundary separating the areas covered by the two Scottish Boards runs
roughly from Dumbarton on the Firth of Clyde to Newburgh on the Firth of
Tay. Members of both Boards and of the respective consumer consultative
councils are appointed by the Secretary of State for Scotland; each Board
comprises a chairman and between four and eight members, one of whom is the
262
Northern Ireland
Generation
Conventional
Thermal
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
chairman of the other Board. The Secretary of State’s responsibilities in
relation to the Boards are similar to those of the Minister of Technology.
In Northern Ireland electricity is generated at power stations in Belfast and
at Ballylumford and Coolkeeragh. Those in Belfast are operated by the city
corporation and the remainder by the Electricity Board for Northern Ireland.
Generation is co-ordinated by the Northern Ireland Joint Electricity
Authority, set up by statute in 1967. The output of the stations has, since
1948, been purchased in bulk and re-sold to distributors—the Belfast
Corporation for Belfast and district, the Londonderry Corporation for the
City of Londonderry, and the Electricity Board for the rest of Northern
Ireland.
As Britain has abundant supplies of coal, together with good rail and water
transport for moving it, most of its electricity is produced by coal-fired steam
generating stations. In some areas oil or natural gas would provide cheaper
fuel but the rate of conversion from coal- to oil-fired stations is being held down
to cushion its effects both on the balance of payments and on employment of
coalminers. Hydro-electric development on any scale is comparatively recent,
water-power resources being relatively small and in remote areas. Since 1965,
nuclear energy has become increasingly important.
The output capacity of the generating stations of the electricity boards in
Great Britain at the end of 1969 totalled 51,651 megawatts (MW), an increase
of over 40 per cent since 1963.
In the years 1963 to 1969 an annual average of over 2,700 MW of generating
capacity was installed, including 4,000 MW in 1968 and 1,600 MW in 1969.
About 10,500 MW of capacity will come into operation in England and Wales
in the period 1970-72. The SSEB’s plans provide for its total capacity of
4,134 MW at the end of 1969 to be increased to 5,600 MW by 1970.
Sales of electricity in Northern Ireland (where, of the total installed
generating capacity of 1,139 MW, 600 MW is in oil-fired and the remainder in
coal-fired thermal stations) amounted to 3,370 million kilowatt-hours in 1969.
Generation by the public supply in Great Britain exceeded 214,000 million
kilowatt-hours (kWh) in 1969; conventional steam power stations provided
86 per cent of the total and hydro-electric and nuclear stations about 2 per
cent and 12 per cent respectively. The high rate of expansion of output,
which has been a feature of the industry since its earliest years, has not been
maintained during the past five years, although the total of electricity
generated in 1969 was still nearly 32 per cent higher than in 1964.
Generation of electricity outside the public supply system is relatively
small—under 20,000 million kWh in 1969. The major sources outside the
fuel industries themselves are the chemical, iron and steel and paper industries
and the nuclear power plants of the Atomic Energy Authority (AEA).
An analysis of electricity generation in Great Britain is given in Table 17.
The electricity authorities take about half the British consumption of coal and
about ten per cent of the consumption of oil. The authorities’ demand for
these fuels continues to expand. However, the growth of demand for these
fuels has been slower than was at one time expected, because of some tem¬
porary slowing down of the growth of demand for electricity and because of
the increasing thermal efficiency of the generating stations. This has led to
some rephasing of the capital programme.
Oil-fired stations of 2,000 MW are under construction at Fawley, on
Southampton Water, at Pembroke, South Wales, and at Inverkip, Renfrew-
SCIENTIFIC INSTRUMENTS
Examining an acoustic hologram
in a programme designed to get
more quantitative information
from ultrasonic flaw testing.
Electron micro-probe analyser for
elemental analysis of surfaces at
the National Centre for Tribology.
Million volt electron microscope,
Harwell.
INDUSTRY
New Range Rover
station wagon with
permanent four-wheel
drive.
Airtug made in Britain
to handle large
aircraft.
A 520 in. dryer fabric
loom weaves special
technical felts for the
paper industry.
Automatic tube butt welding
machine.
Electronically con¬
trolled two-stage tyre
building machine.
660 megawatt turbine¬
lines for power
stations.
FUEL AND POWER
INDUSTRY
TABLE 17
Electricity
Generation for
Public Supply in
Great Britain,
1969
Hydro-electric
263
shire. A dual-fired station of the same size to burn either coal or oil is being
built at Kingsnorth, Kent, and the 336 MW Hams Hall ‘C’ station near
Birmingham is being converted to dual coal/natural gas firing. An oil-fired
station of 3,300 MW is to be built at the Isle of Grain. Average thermal
efficiency (that is, the ratio of the electrical energy output to the heat energy
input of the fuel consumed) of conventional steam stations in England and
Wales rose from 20-75 per cent in 1947 to 28-38 per cent in 1969 as new plant
was brought into use. The 20 most efficient stations, containing much of the
newest plant, had an average thermal efficiency of 33-25 per cent in 1969.
Central Electricity Generating Board
South of Scotland Electricity Board
North of Scotland Hydro-Electric Board
Steam and oil engines
Hydro plant
Pumped storage
Nuclear plant . .
Total
Output capacity
(end year)
MW
46,034
3,819
1,797
46,164
1,288
760
3,438
51,650
51,650
Electricity
sent out
million kWh
179,307
15,274
3,687
172,727
1,960
1,121
22,460
198,268
198,268
Source : Ministry of Technology
Striking advances have been made in the design of steam-generating plant.
A cross-compound generating unit with an output capacity of 550 MW came
into operation in 1963 at Thorpe Marsh, near Doncaster. Forty-seven single¬
shaft units of 500 MW are being installed in 13 stations. The first came into
operation at the Ferrybridge ‘C’ station, Yorks, in 1966. In 1968 Ferrybridge
‘C’ became the first of the 2,000 MW stations to supply electricity from all four
of its generating sets. By the end of 1969 22 sets had been installed, of which
18 had been commissioned at six stations. Station capacities are also increasing.
By 1971, ten stations, each with capacities of 2,000 MW, with four 500 MW
single-shaft generating units, will be in service. Six larger generating units, of
660 MW, will be installed at Drax (Yorks). (For locations see map, inside
back cover.) In Scotland, a 1,200 MW station at Cockenzie was commissioned
in 1968 and one of 2,400 MW (four generating units of 600 MW) at Longannet
in 1970. A 1,980 MW station at Inverkip (three units of 660 MW) is expected
to be commissioned in 1975.
Large gas turbine units of 55 MW and 70 MW, based on aero jet engines,
have been introduced since 1965 for peak load operation. The CEGB and
SSEB have installed 919 MW of such units. Smaller gas turbines have been
introduced at new stations to safeguard the auxiliary supplies to the large new
steam units, and also to provide capacity for peak operation. Auxiliary units
of this kind in service at the end of 1969 totalled 867 MW, and by 1973 will
exceed 1,300 MW.
Hydro-electric generation is confined to Scotland and Wales, and most of the
water-power so utilised is drawn from high-level reservoirs with their own
natural catchment areas. The setting up of the NSHEB in 1943 marked the
beginning of an era of intensive water-power development in the Highlands.
264
Nuclear Power
Stations
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
In 1969-70, 2,580 million units were sent out by the NSHEB from water¬
power, compared with 322 million in 1949. At the end of March 1970 there
were 54 main hydro-electric conventional stations in operation in the north
of Scotland with a total installed capacity of 1,051 MW and the largest—the
Loch Sloy station—has a capacity of 130 MW. The Cruachan pumped
storage section of the Awe scheme, with an installed capacity of 400 MW from
four reversible-pump-turbines, came into full operation at the end of 1967.
Construction of a 300 MW pumped-storage project at Foyers, Loch Ness,
began in November 1969. It will have two 150 MW reversible-pump-turbines
and is planned for completion in 1974. In addition, there are stations generat¬
ing electricity by water-power in the south of Scotland (122 MW) and in
Wales (469 MW). The latter includes the 360 MW pumped-storage station
at Ffestiniog, which was completed in 1963. (In pumped-storage schemes
electricity generated in off-peak periods is used to pump water to higher levels
from which it descends at peak periods to operate turbo-generators.)
Some 12 per cent of Britain’s public supply generation was in nuclear power
stations in 1969 and the proportion is expected to rise to about 25 per cent by
the mid-1970s. Britain accounts for some 30 per cent of world nuclear
generation.
The AEA itself has five main stations which produce electricity for the
national grid: Calder Hall, in Cumberland (198 MW electrical output);
Chapelcross, Dumfriesshire (191 MW); the Advanced Gas-Cooled Reactor
(AGR) at Windscale, Cumberland (34 MW); the experimental fast breeder
station at Dounreay, Caithness (14 MW); and the Steam Generating Heavy
Water Moderated Reactor (SGHWR) at Winfrith, Dorset (100 MW).
Others are owned and operated by the electricity authorities. Under the
first commercial programme, originally announced in 1955 but since twice
modified, eight stations with a total installed capacity of over 3,600 MW were
in operation in 1969: Berkeley, in Gloucestershire (276 MW output capacity),
and Brad-well, in Essex (300 MW), were both commissioned in 1962; Hunter-
ston ‘A’, in Scotland (300 MW), in 1964; and in the following year Hinkley
Point ‘A’, in Somerset, Trawsfyndd, in Wales (both 500 MW), and Dungeness
‘A’, in Kent (550 MW); Sizewell, in Suffolk (580 MW), was commissioned in
1966; and Oldbury, in Gloucestershire (600 MW), in 1968. A ninth station,
Wylfa, in Anglesey (1,180 MW), is due to be operating in 1970. These stations,
like Calder Hall and Chapelcross, are all magnox stations—graphite¬
moderated, carbon-dioxide cooled, using natural uranium metal fuel elements
canned in magnesium.
Under a second programme announced in 1964 and extended in 1965, a
further 8,000 MW of nuclear capacity is planned by about 1976. The first
station in this programme, Dungeness ‘B’, due to begin operating in 1972, is
based on the AGR at Windscale, which uses slightly enriched uranium
dioxide fuel canned in stainless steel, a logical development of the magnox
system. When in full operation with a net electrical output of 1,200 MW, it
will be the most powerful in the world. Three further AGR stations, Hinkley
Point ‘B’, Hunterston ‘B’ and Hartlepool are under construction, and will
come into service in 1972, 1973 and 1974 respectively. They will be the first
in Britain to produce electricity more cheaply on base load than the best
contemporary coal stations. Consent has been given for further nuclear
stations at Heysham (1,320 MW) and Sizewell (2,640 MW).
A large prototype fast reactor (PER) of 250 MW capacity is being built
at Dounreay where in October 1962 the experimental fast reactor became the
Transmission
and
Distribution
Capital
Investment
INDUSTRY
first of such type to produce electricity for public use and to operate at a high
power level. It is due for completion in 1972.
The Atomic Energy Authority undertakes the manufacture and reprocessing
of nuclear fuels for nuclear reactors in Britain and overseas at Springfield in
Lancashire, Capenhurst in Cheshire and Windscale in Cumberland. In
1968-69 completed export orders amounted to ^1-9 million, outstanding
orders to £19 million and new contracts to £11-4 million. Income from fuel
services in Britain amounted to ^24-6 million.
Main electricity transmission lines—the national grid—supply most of the
country. By 31st March 1969 those of the CEGB totalled 18,697 circuit miles
(30,000 kilometres), of which 5,512 miles (8,875 kilometres) were 400,000 volt,
2,174 miles (3,500 kilometres) 275,000 volt, 10,599 miles (i7>00° kilometres)
132,000 volt and the remainder were 66,000 volt and below. In Scotland there
were some 4,500 circuit miles (7,200 kilometres) of main transmission lines at
the end of March 1969, of which 1,350 circuit miles (2,170 kilometres)
operated at 275,000 volts and the remainder at 132,000 volts. Energy move¬
ments on the grid in England and Wales are controlled through the seven
operational areas, set up for that purpose and distinct from the regions in
which the generating side of the industry is organised; each area has a separate
control, and the operations are co-ordinated by a National Control in London.
The grid in Scotland is operated from the control centres at Pitlochry
(NSHEB) and at Kirkintilloch (SSEB).
To reduce the number of new transmission lines needed to meet the
country’s increasing power demands, most of the new ‘supergrid’ of main
transmission lines now operating at 275,000 volts are, since 1965, being
uprated to operate at 400,000 volts. The development of the grid system has
made the British system the largest integrated power network in the world.
Twin cross-Channel cables laid between Dungeness and Boulogne, capable
of transmitting up to 160 MW at 200,000 volts (direct current), have been
in operation since 1961; by this means advantage is taken of the differences
between France and Britain in the timing of peak loads.
A direct current transmission link to reinforce supplies in the London area
is being installed; due for completion in 1971, the scheme—the first of its
kind in the world—will have a capacity of 640 MW.
In England and Wales the Area Electricity Boards distribute to consumers
electricity acquired mainly from the CEGB, supplemented from other sources,
such as industrial plants and the nuclear power stations of the AEA. There
are over 18-1 million consumers. Industrial concerns are the biggest users of
electricity. The principal domestic uses of electricity are for lighting, cooking
and for space and water heating, but the demand for numerous other domestic
purposes is rising steadily.
The NSHEB has about 464,000 consumers, many in remote areas. The
SSEB supplies about 1-5 million consumers.
About 7 per cent of the annual gross fixed capital formation of the United
Kingdom in 1969 was attributable to the electricity supply industry. The
industry’s plans for new capital investment are based on a growth in demand
estimated at an annual average rate of 6 per cent up to 1975-76.
Capital expenditure of the electricity supply industry has been expanding
very rapidly: from £249 million in 1956 it rose to £720 million in 1966 but has
since fallen to £452 million in 1969-70. In recent years nearly half of the
industry’s capital requirements have been financed from internal resources.
266
Research
GAS SUPPLY
Organisation
under Public
Ownership
BRITAIN I97i: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The statutory limit to borrowings by the industry in Great Britain is £5,200
million. The Gas and Electricity Act 1968 empowered the industry to borrow
(long term) from overseas sources.
The Electricity Council, in consultation with the Minister of Technology, is
responsible for drawing up a general programme of research, comprising:
direct research carried out by the Electricity Boards themselves, supported
by co-operative research with selected industrial research associations and by
research contracts placed with universities and other organisations. The
Council itself is empowered to conduct research. It is advised by the Electricity
Supply Research Council. Collaboration on research between the supply
industry and the plant manufacturers is co-ordinated by the Power Engineering
Research Steering Committee set up in 1966.
The main research establishments of the industry are run by the CEGB and
comprise the Central Electricity Research Laboratories at Leatherhead,
Surrey, the Berkeley Laboratories in Gloucestershire, concerned with nuclear
problems, and the Engineering Laboratories at Marchwood, on Southampton
Water. In 1965 the Electricity Council established a research centre at
Capenhurst, Cheshire, at which intensive research is being undertaken on
distribution problems and on appliances and methods of electricity utilisation.
Both Scottish electricity boards carry out research and experimental work
either on their own or in co-operation with other electricity authorities. The
NSHEB undertakes a wide range of research and development work, both
independently and in conjunction with the universities and manufacturers.
The SSEB has recently extended its own research activities and, with the
NSHEB, is associated with those of the Electricity Council and CEGB.
Public supply of gas in Britain dates from 1807, when Pall Mall, London,
was first lighted with gas. In 1812 the London and Westminster Gas Light
and Coke Company received a Royal Charter to supply gaslight in London.
In the early years of the industry gas was used almost exclusively for lighting,
provided by a growing number of company and municipal undertakings.
The gas industry in its present form developed in the main during the
period between the two world wars when increasing competition from
electricity had to be met, and by 1939 the industry had become mainly a
supplier of heating rather than lighting.
The Gas Act of 1948 brought the industry in Great Britain, in which about
120,000 persons are at present employed, under public ownership and control
on 1st May 1949. The assets of 991 undertakings, of which 269 belonged to
local authorities, were vested in 12 Area Gas Boards. The central body is
the Gas Council, appointed by the Minister of Technology. It is both a co¬
ordinating council and, since the enactment of the Gas Act 1965, a trading
body. It consists of a full-time chairman and deputy chairman, the 12 chair¬
men of the area boards and up to five other members. Its general duties are to
advise the Minister on questions affecting the industry and promote the
efficient performance of their duties by the area boards. It also has specific
duties relating to finance, labour relations and research.
The Area Gas Boards, which have a large measure of financial and opera¬
tional responsibility and are similar in most respects to the central bodies
of the other publicly owned corporations, are responsible for the local
manufacture of gas and its distribution to consumers. Each of the Area Gas
Boards, appointed by the Minister of Technology, consists of a full-time
INDUSTRY
Production
Consumption
Domestic Use
Industrial and
Commercial Use
Coke and
By-products
Capital
Investment
Lines of
Development
267
chairman and deputy chairman, in some cases one or more full-time members,
and usually five or six part-time members, including the chairman of the Area
Consultative Council. There is no common pattern of organisation; each
board is fully independent and has devised its own subordinate structure.
Each is required to pay its way, taking one year with another. The operations
of the area boards have resulted, in the 21 years up to 31st March 1970, in an
aggregate disposable surplus of approximately ^93 million before taxation.
In Northern Ireland the gas supply industry remains in the hands of a
number of municipal undertakings and statutory and non-statutory companies.
The main single source of gas in Britain in 197° was natural gas which
accounted for some 50 per cent of all gas available, compared with 36 per cent
in 1969. Gas manufactured from oil accounted for 37 per cent of total gas
available in 1969 and gas from coal 9 per cent.
In 1969 the quantity of gas produced in Northern Ireland was about
21 million therms, most of it for household use.
Three-fifths of all gas sold by gas boards is for household use and the remainder
for industrial and commercial purposes. Total consumption has been rising
steadily since 1961, after a period when growth was almost negligible. For
the last three years consumption has risen by about 10 per cent each year.
Sales reached a level of nearly 5,000 million therms1 in 1969. There are about
13 million consumers, an increase of about half a million in the past seven
years.
About 40 per cent of the domestic load is used for central heating, with gas
fires and cookers each accounting for about 25 per cent.
Gas has traditionally been used extensively in industries which require the
control of temperatures to a fine degree of accuracy, for example, in the pottery
industry and in certain processes in the manufacture of iron and steel products.
Natural gas is being used as a chemical feedstock and in bulk fuel markets.
In 1969 sales of gas to industry totalled 1,070 million therms.
Production of coke at gas works in 1969 was 3 million tons (a fall of two-
thirds in four years) and at coke ovens 16-6 million tons, reflecting the use of
oil and the increasing use of natural gas.
Under the Gas Act 1948, borrowing by the Gas Council and the Area Gas
Boards was limited to £250 million. In 1954 the industry’s borrowing powers
were increased to £450 million, in i960 to £525 million, in 1963 to £650
million, in 1965 to £1,200 million and in 1968 to an interim limit of £1,600
million with provision for a further increase to £2,400 million. The Gas and
Electricity Act 1968 empowered the industry to borrow from overseas (long
term) sources.
The industry had been spending about £50 million a year on capital
investment in the period 1955 to 1961 but since 1961-62 expenditure has
increased sharply; in 1969-70 it reached £235 million and £245 million is
planned for 1970-71. Between vesting day (1st May 1949) and the end of
March 1970 about £1,500 million had been invested in fixed assets.
Much of the gas industry’s current research and development effort is
concentrated on transforming the industry from one based on manufactured
1 1 therm = 100,000 British thermal units = 25,200 kilocalories.
268
Natural Gas
Research
FUEL
EFFICIENCY
BRITAIN I97i: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
gas to one based on indigenous natural gas. In 1970 the Gas Council estimated
that the switch over to natural gas in Great Britain would be completed in
seven to eight years.
A phased programme of converting the 30 million gas appliances is in
progress. Investigations are being made into projects involving various
methods of storage of natural gas to meet peak load conditions. Further
storage facilities for natural gas are under construction near Coatbridge,
Scotland. A further facility is planned at Urmston, Cheshire.
Since 1964 deliveries of natural gas from the Sahara have been made in liquid
form to Britain. A pipeline system distributed the gas from a terminal on
Canvey Island to 8 of the 12 Area Gas Boards. This pipeline has been
expanded to form a national high pressure pipeline system. By March
1970, some 1,500 miles (2,400 kilometres) of the required 2,500 miles (4,000
kilometres) had been constructed. The central distribution system is fed
from the two shore terminals by four feeder mains. A third terminal is under
construction.
The first productive well in the North Sea was discovered in 1965. Five
major gasfields have now been located as well as a number of smaller struc¬
tures. The Ministry of Technology has estimated that production could exceed
3,000 million cubic feet (85 million cubic metres) per day by 1975. In 1969-70
the abstraction rate was estimated at 960 million cubic feet (27 million cubic
metres) per day.
The first pipeline to pump natural gas to the shore, at Easington in
Yorkshire, was put on flow early in 1967. The second pipeline, which comes
ashore at Bacton in Norfolk, came on flow in August 1968, and the third, also
to Bacton, in July 1969. Supplies of gas from an on-shore field at Lockton,
Yorkshire, are expected to rise to an average 75 million cubic feet (2-1 million
cubic metres) a day.
The Gas Council expects gas consumption to increase by some 20 per
cent a year up to 1975 and therefore substantial expansion is required. The
need to provide additional storage capacity, and the strengthening of the
distribution system will also give rise to substantial investment.
The Gas Council has a research committee which advises on research policy
at the four research centres. The engineering research station at Killingworth,
Northumberland, has concentrated on distribution problems. Research is
also carried out on behalf of the Gas Council at a number of universities and
colleges.
Efficiency in the use of fuel, among both industrial and domestic users, has
been assisted by various bodies representing producers and consumers and
by the technical advisory services of the fuel and power industries.
The Coal Utilisation Council consists of representatives of the National
Coal Board, solid fuel distributors and appliance manufacturers and distri¬
butors. Originally formed in 1932, it informs and advises domestic users
on the best use of solid fuel, including the choice of installation and the
operation of solid fuel appliances.
A non-profit-making company, the National Industrial Fuel Efficiency
Service, was formed in 1954 and sponsored by the fuel and power industries
to promote fuel saving in industry. In addition to consultancy work, it provides
advice and services to all non-domestic fuel users in a variety of forms, from
‘spot’ inspection to full-scale surveys and regular visits on a contract basis.
INDUSTRY
England and
Wales
Organisation
269
Sponsoring by the fuel and power industries ceased on 1st April 1969 but the
Government is providing a measure of financial support until April I972>
when it is hoped that the service will have become fully self-supporting.
WATER SUPPLY
Britain’s water resources are, with progressive development, sufficient for
domestic and industrial requirements. The sources of water are often distant
from the areas where supplies are needed, however, and water undertakings
are therefore mainly concerned with abstraction, storage, treatment and
distribution. Supplies are obtained partly from surface sources such as
mountain lakes, streams impounded in upland gathering grounds and river
intakes, and partly from underground sources by means of wells, adits and
boreholes. Unlike other public services in Great Britain, such as electricity and
gas, water supply remains in the hands of a large number of undertakings.
Ministerial responsibility in England and Wales is shared by the Minister of
Housing and Local Government and the Secretary of State for Wales; in
Scotland it lies with the Secretary of State for Scotland; and in Northern
Ireland with the Minister of Development.
It was not until the nineteenth century that the provision of water supplies
became a general public service, largely due to the efforts of Edwin Chadwick
and his colleagues who demonstrated the dangers arising from inadequate
water supply and sanitation. The Public Health Act 1848 laid the basis for
a long series of statutes dealing with public health. From the middle of the
nineteenth century onwards a number of water undertakings were set up
to provide water to the expanding urban population, and the water supply
system developed rapidly, although in piecemeal fashion and with some
overlapping and waste.
Local authorities have a duty as sanitary authorities to ensure that water
supplies are adequate for the needs of their areas, and they may do this
either by operating water undertakings themselves or by ensuring that other
bodies are providing adequate supplies. Over one-fifth of the water consumed
is supplied by statutory water companies. The householder receives his
domestic water supply at a comparatively small charge, varying in different
areas, which he usually pays by way of a water rate levied, like other rates,
on the value of his house. Industrial users are charged in most cases according
to actual metered consumption.
The Minister of Housing and Local Government and the Secretary of
State for Wales have a duty to promote the conservation and proper use of
water supplies in England and Wales and are advised by the Central Advisory
Water Committee on general questions relating to water and organisation of
supplies. Since the passing of the Water Act 1945, over 800 smaller water
authorities in England and Wales have been absorbed by larger authorities or
by the creation of joint boards in order to improve the efficiency of the water
supply industry. There are now some 218 statutory water undertakings of
which about two-fifths are local authorities. A number of private proprietors
without statutory powers also provide small supplies.
The largest undertaking in Britain is the Metropolitan Water Board, which
supplies over 368 million gallons daily to 6J million people in the London
area. It consists of 39 part-time members who are the elected representatives
of the various local authorities within the Board’s area of operations, together
with one representative each from the Thames and Lee Conservancies.
270
Present Supplies
Scotland
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Public water supplies in England and Wales—reaching over 99 per cent of
the total population—now total some 2,777 million gallons a day, out of a total
estimated abstraction of 5,000 million gallons a day (excluding water used for
cooling in connection with electricity generation). Capital expenditure by
water undertakings, which averaged about £58 million a year in the period
1961-65, has risen to over £80 million a year. Interest and running costs are
largely met from annual income.
The provision of piped supplies for rural districts has been assisted by
grants under the Rural Water Supplies and Sewerage Acts 1944 to 1965. By
March 1970 schemes costing over ^112 million had been completed or were
in progress with the aid of grants under these Acts.
The Water Resources Acts 1963 (which came into full operation in April
1965) and 1968 created a new administrative structure consisting of 27 river
authorities and a central Water Resources Board to meet the growing domestic,
industrial and farm irrigation needs. The river authorities, the Thames
Conservancy and the Lee Conservancy Catchment Board have a majority of
members appointed by the county and county borough councils in their areas.
The remainder are appointed by ministers mainly for their knowledge of land
drainage, fisheries, the public water supply and water in use in industry and
in agriculture. The authorities manage the water resources of river basins
and carry out other functions in respect of land drainage, flood control,
administration of fisheries and prevention of pollution. They are responsible
for assessing water resources and requirements, controlling and developing
resources and securing regulation by a system of licensing. Special arrange¬
ments exist for the Greater London area, where the full range of river authority
control is not necessary. The work of the river authorities is co-ordinated by
the Water Resources Board, an expert advisory body which reports to the
Ministry of Housing and Local Government. Its duties include the review of
national water resources and requirements, the encouragement of the transfer
of water between areas according to need, the co-ordination of proposals of
river authorities for capital investment and the initiation of research. Since
April 1969 water conservation has been financed from charges levied by river
authorities on the licensed abstractors and users of water.
The administrative arrangements for water supply and distribution in
Scotland were reorganised by the Water (Scotland) Act 1967 under which
the functions of 200 local water authorities were transferred to 13 regional
water boards in May 1968. The Act also established the Central Scotland
Water Development Board which supplies water in bulk to its seven con¬
stituent regional water boards; it does not supply direct to individual con¬
sumers. All the members of these boards are members of town or county
councils.
The water problem in Scotland is broadly similar to that in England and
Wales except that there is not the same need to allocate water between
competing interests and less reliance needs to be placed on underground
sources. The Secretary of State for Scotland is responsible for general
oversight and co-ordination and has a general duty to promote the conserva¬
tion of water resources in Scotland; and to require regional water boards to
provide supplies of wholesome water everywhere in their districts, where
this can be done at reasonable cost; at present, they supply about 97 per cent
of the total population. The Scottish Water Advisory Committee advises the
Secretary of State on general questions relating to resources and supplies.
The Rural Water Supplies and Sewerage Act 1944, as amended, makes avail-
INDUSTRY
271
Northern
Ireland
Measurement
of Resources
Barrages
Pollution
able to Scottish local authorities grant assistance up to a maximum of £60
million towards the cost of water supplies and sewerage schemes in rural areas.
Northern Ireland has abundant supplies of water for both domestic and
industrial consumption. Distribution is mainly the responsibility of local
authorities, some of which have combined to form joint boards. About 90 per
cent of the population has a piped supply and over 100 million gallons are
supplied daily. Under the Water Supplies and Sewerage Act (Northern
Ireland) 1945 the Ministry of Development may pay grants towards the cost
of water schemes. Since 1945 over ^45 million have been invested, of which
almost £22 million were government grants. New measures for the manage¬
ment of water resources in Northern Ireland are under consideration.
Information on the yield, behaviour and quantity of the nation’s surface
water resources is provided in the Surface Water Year Book of Great Britain,
published annually by Her Majesty’s Stationery Office. This publication
contains particulars of the run-off and related rainfall from a large number of
rivers, streams and reservoired areas. The Water Resources Board is respon¬
sible for the collation and publication of hydrological information: the field¬
work of surface water measurement is done by river authorities, water
undertakings and other bodies. Detailed studies of the resources and use of
water in specified areas have been published in the series of hydrological
surveys which cover approximately half of England and Wales. General
information on rainfall, published annually in British Rainfall, is the re¬
sponsibility of the Meteorological Office, while advice on ground water is the
responsibility of the Water Resources Board. The Hydraulics Research Station
of the Ministry of Technology at Wallingford and the Water Research
Association’s station at Medmenham carry out research into problems of the
design and calibration of gauging weirs and flumes for the measurement of
surface water, and into other hydraulic problems.
Full-scale feasibility studies are being made of barrages across Morecambe
Bay and the Dee estuary. A preliminary ‘desk study’ has also been carried out
at Solway Firth, and one is in progress for the Wash. Barrage projects involve
dams across or within tidal estuaries to form a lake of fresh water.
Each river authority is responsible for the control of pollution of rivers
and certain tidal waters in its area and its approval must be sought before
polluting effluents are discharged. Control of pollution in the tidal Thames
is exercised by the Port of London Authority. In Scotland nine river purifica¬
tion boards have been set up. The Secretary of State for Scotland is advised
by the Scottish River Purification Advisory Committee on questions affecting
the cleanliness of Scottish rivers. In several ports the petroleum companies
co-operate in the prevention of oil pollution from tankers and refineries.
The Water Pollution Research Laboratory at Stevenage investigates
problems connected with the treatment of polluted water, the treatment and
disposal of sewage and industrial waste water, and the effects and prevention
of pollution of surface water and underground water.
CONSTRUCTION
The construction industry includes firms engaged on the construction,
alteration, repair and maintenance of buildings, highways, airfields, drainage
and sewerage systems, waterworks, docks, harbours and canals, sea defence
272
Structure
Output
Housing
BRITAIN I971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
works, electrical wiring, heating and other installation work, open-cast coal
prospecting and mining, and structural work connected with thermal and
hydro-electric power stations and telecommunications. About 1-5 million
people are engaged on construction in both the public and private sectors.
They represent about 7 per cent of the total labour force and their net output
provides about 7 per cent of the gross national product.
The construction industry is gradually adopting metric in place of Imperial
weights and measures; the change is due to be completed in 1972. Designers
have used metric terms for new projects since January 1969; contractors
started working in metric terms on some projects in January 1970.
Constructional work is carried out both by private contractors and by public
authorities which employ their own labour. Over five-sixths of the work is
done by private firms. Although there are over 75,000 firms in the industry,
about a quarter of them are one-man businesses. At the other end of the scale
are about 220 firms each with more than 600 employees.
Public authorities as a whole employ about 350,000 operatives but a very
large proportion of these are engaged on repair and maintenance work which
local authorities, for example, carry out with their own labour.
Over 40 per cent of operatives are occupied on building maintenance, valued
at over £1,100 million annually. The total labour force includes about 800,000
skilled craftsmen, who have been trained for four or five years under the
industry’s apprenticeship schemes. A further 100,000 are employed as
apprentices.
Some firms are vertically integrated, owning quarries and workshops,
mechanised plant and standard builders’ equipment; some undertake respon¬
sibility for projects from initial design to finished building. All but the
smallest projects are generally carried out under professional direction, either
by architects or, in the case of the more complicated civil engineering projects,
by consulting engineers. The functions of the latter, acting on behalf of a
client, embrace advice on the feasibility of projects, the drawing up of plans
and the supervision of the constructional work by the contractor.
The Ministry of Public Building and Works (see p. 56) is responsible for
the construction programmes undertaken directly by the Government (except
for roads and health and education projects), including work for the armed
services, both at home and overseas. It is also responsible for co-ordinating
research and development throughout the government service and seeks to
influence methods and techniques in the building industry as a whole.
The output of the industry has been rising steadily over many years. The
value of work done in 1969 amounted to £4,697 million, of which £704
million represented work carried out by the labour employed directly by
public authorities. Private contractors carried out the remaining £3,993
million (£3,167 million on new work and £826 million on repair work).
About 344,000 houses were started in 1969 and some 367,000 were completed,
of which 186,000 were for private owners. Of the £1,179 million of new
housing carried out by private contractors, £552 million, or less than half, was
for private owners and the remainder for public authorities. Industrialised
building methods employing prefabricated components are used in much of
the work.
The National Building Agency is an independent advisory body, managed
by a board of directors appointed by the Minister of Housing and Local
INDUSTRY
273
Government and the Secretaries of State for Scotland and Wales, and
financed by a government grant and the fees which it earns. Its main function
is to encourage the adoption of advanced methods of housebuilding, especially
industrialised building methods, as well as to provide technical advice and
services, in particular to local authorities.
Civ;i Britain was the first country to develop civil engineering as a large-scale
Engineering modern industry and the first to provide techniques, finance and equipment
Projects to carry out major civil engineering projects throughout the world. Prominent
figures in the early development of civil engineering included John McAdam,
pioneer in road construction; Thomas Telford, builder of roads, bridges,
canals, docks and railways; George and Robert Stephenson and Isambard
Kingdom Brunei, pioneers of railway building.
Among important construction projects in hand in the United Kingdom in
1970 were several major conventional power stations and nuclear power
stations (see p. 264), dams and reservoirs, including a £3-5 million dam on the
River Towy in Wales, hospitals, large-scale housing developments, such as
the Thamesmead (London) project to house 60,000 people, and the new town
being built at Craigavon, Northern Ireland. Projects for road construction,
bridges and tunnels included about 380 miles (608 kilometres) of motorways
under construction (see p. 339), a £6 million high-level bridge over the Clyde,
and the £28 million second Mersey Tunnel. An extension to the Victoria
underground railway line in London is under construction (see p. 346).
British constructional firms have been as active overseas as in the United
Kingdom. British consulting engineers, in particular, have built up a tradition
of knowledge and integrity which has caused their standards to become
international practice and their services to be in world-wide demand.
A British firm acts as consultant to the World Bank on the Indus Basin
irrigation scheme, the largest in the world, and several firms were involved in
the design of the Mangla Dam, Pakistan, which forms part of it. Other design
projects included a new port at Dammam, to cost between ^10 million and
£12 million, for the Saudi Arabian Government, and a £75 million new town
in Abu Dhabi.
Among important construction projects by British contractors in hand in
overseas countries during 1970 were: a £10 million sugar mill in the Philip¬
pines; a £24 million deep-water harbour and a £4 million air terminal at
Dubai in the Persian Gulf; an ^8-5 million road bridge at Rio de Janeiro; a
new capital for British Honduras; and a ^15 million tunnel under the harbour
at Hong Kong.
It has been estimated that the total value of work carried out during the
year ending in March 1970 by over too British contractors, operating in 103
countries, was £220 million, compared with £204 million in the previous year,
and that the value of new contracts obtained was £341 million, compared
with £234 million in the previous year. Members of the Association of
Consulting Engineers had projects worth about £1,726 million in hand on
1 st January 1970.
Research The Directorate-General of Research and Development in the Ministry of
Public Building and Works is responsible for co-ordinating research and
information services to increase efficiency in the building industry. The
Building Research Station which forms part of the Ministry was originally set
up in 1921, thus making Britain the pioneer of organised building research,
Overseas
Constructional
Work
274 BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
and is concerned with research into all aspects of building. It provides a
technical advisory service for construction firms. An Agreement Board, set up
by the Ministry, tests and certifies new products and methods.
The Construction Industry Research Association carries on research affect¬
ing all sections of the industry.
The Heating and Ventilating Research Association, an industrial research
organisation, deals with problems of heating and ventilation of large buildings.
The major construction firms have research departments working on plant,
materials and methods. Other bodies concerned with research include the
universities and colleges of technology. Most of the producers of primary
building materials have trade associations which maintain research institutions
chiefly devoted to seeking new and more efficient use for their materials.
MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES
Britain’s manufacturing industries supply a wide range of products, many of
which are of major importance in world trade. Output has increased by almost
one-half since 1958, and in 1969 was 3-3 per cent higher than the previous
year; output per head showed an advance of 2-3 per cent in 1969 bringing the
risesincei963t0 25*3 per cent. In 1969 this sector spent ^1,428 million on fixed
capital equipment (at 1963 prices), 70 per cent of which was spent on plant and
machinery. The number of employees in manufacturing industry (including
the unemployed and those absent from work through sickness and other
causes, but excluding employers and the self-employed) was 8-6 million in
June 1969, 37 per cent of the total number of employees.
The employment and production figures listed in Table 18 give an indica¬
tion of the relative importance of broad sectors of manufacturing industry.
Expansion has been particularly rapid in those industries utilising advanced
technologies such as electronics, the newer branches of mechanical engineer¬
ing, most branches of the chemical industry and man-made fibres. The
diagram on page 249 shows the changes in production between 1963 and 1969
in the major groups of industry.
In the subsequent sections, statistics of employees refer to numbers at
June 1969 and export statistics are taken mainly from the Overseas Trade
Accounts of the United Kingdom.
METAL The metal manufacturing industries employ 588,000 persons. Of these,
MANUFACTURE 280,000 are in the iron and steel industry, 110,000 in the manufacture of iron
castings, 60,000 in the manufacture of light metals, and 85,500 in the copper,
brass and other base metal industries. Exports of iron and steel products and
non-ferrous metals in 1969 had an aggregate value of £597 million.
Iron and Steel Britain pioneered the application of coal to the smelting of iron ore from the
seventeenth century onwards and British inventors were responsible for the
discovery of the processes which led to the great expansion of steelmaking in
the second half of the nineteenth century. Today Britain is the world’s fifth
largest steel producing nation. Output of crude steel in 1969 totalled 26-4
million ingot tons, 2*2 per cent more than in 1968. Capacity utilisation in 1969
averaged about 80 per cent, compared with 82 per cent in 1968. Pig iron
production in 1969 amounted to 16-4 million tons.
Net deliveries of finished steel amounted to 21-7 million tons in 1969. The
4-1 million tons of iron and steel products which were exported had a value
INDUSTRY
275
of £285 million; the United States (-£48-8 million), Spain (£17-3 million) and
Sweden (£16-i million) were the main overseas buyers.
The main producing districts are: Wales (29 per cent of total crude steel
output); Yorkshire and Humberside (26 per cent); Northern (18 per cent);
and Scotland (12 per cent). Wales concentrates mainly on the manufacture
of flat products, especially sheet steel and tinplate; the output of the north-east
coast and Scotland is predominantly of heavy steel products (plates, sections
and rails), but a wide strip mill for sheet production is also in operation in
Scotland. Production of special alloy steels is centred on Sheffield.
TABLE 18
Industry Groups :
Sales of Goods
Produced and
Work Done,
Production,
Employment
and Capital
Expenditure
Industry Group
Food, drink and tobacco
Coal and petroleum
products
Chemicals and allied
industries ..
Metal manufacture
Engineering and elec¬
trical goods..
Shipbuilding and mar
ine engineering
Vehicles
Metal goods (not else¬
where specified)
Textiles, leather and
clothing
Paper, printing and
publishing . .
Other manufacturing
industries . .
Total : all manufac¬
turing industries . .
Goods Produced and
Work done in 1968°
£
million
6,754-3
1,143-0
2,913-3
3,434-3
6,686-4
465-1
3,768-8
2,141-8
3,900-6
2,352-6
3,332-7
36,892-9
Percentage
of total
18-3
3-1
7-9
9-3
18-1
1-3
10-3
5- 9
10-6
6- 4
9-0
100-0
Index of
Industrial
Produc¬
tion
1969
Number
of
Employees
(thou¬
sands)
1963
= 100
119
139
149
114
127
85
118
119
116
123
n.a.
125-5
June
1969
811-7
501-6
588-2
2,291-9
185-7
823-6
569-0
1,239-4
634-3
1,001-7
8,647-1
Fixed
Capital
Expendi¬
ture in
1969 at
1963 prices
£
million
204-2
69-7
215-8
122-4
302-0
b
125-5
145-7
83-8
158-7
1,427-8
a Census of Production 1968, the most recent year for which figures are available.
b Included in engineering and electrical goods,
n.a. =not available.
During the period 1955-67 over £i,JS° million was spent on major
development schemes. Capital expenditure reached a peak in 1961 of over
£230 million, due mainly to the strip mill expansion programme, and totalled
about £90 million in 1969, although it is expected to rise sharply in the next
few years. Between i960 and i969> steel production by the converter processes
increased from 8 per cent of output to nearly 30 per cent, by electric furnaces
from 7 per cent to 18 per cent; while the share from older open hearth
processes fell from 84 per cent to 52 per cent. The emphasis in recent years
has been on improving efficiency rather than raising total capacity and Britain
has some of the most modern plant in Europe.
Output per blast furnace has risen markedly in recent years, due both to an
increase in average size and to improvements in efficiency, such as improved
276 BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
preparation of raw materials, the injection of fuel and oxygen, and the use of
higher blast temperatures. Industry-wide scientific and technological research
is carried out by the Inter-Group Laboratories of the British Steel Corpora¬
tion. Total annual expenditure by the industry is about £10 million.
Outstanding development projects completed in the last few years include
wide strip mills at new integrated works at Newport (Monmouthshire) and
at an existing works in Scotland; a new plant at Stoke-on-Trent, which is
based entirely on continuous casting for supplies of semi-finished steel; an
advanced unit for the mass production of alloy and special carbon steels at
Sheffield; the world’s largest electric melting shop and a steelworks in which
a linked three-computer system controls production planning throughout,
both at Rotherham; and a new large-scale steel-making plant at Port Talbot
with two oxygen converters, linked with a deep-water harbour.
The iron and steel industry has been subject to some form of public
supervision since 1932. The Iron and Steel Act 1967 brought into public
ownership 13 major steel companies together producing well over 90 per cent
of Britain’s crude steel and employing some 70 per cent of the manpower in
the industry. Their shares and securities were vested in July 1967 in the
British Steel Corporation. The Corporation’s specific duties include pro¬
moting the efficient and economic supply of iron and steel products, exports
and research and development; it is statutorily responsible for the finances of
the nationalised industry. The Corporation’s Third Report on Organisation,
published in December 1969, recommended the formation of six product
divisions, four covering iron and steelmaking and two covering construc¬
tional engineering and chemicals, and this structure came into effect in
March 1970. The remaining private sector includes some 200 companies
accounting for about one-third of the value of the industry’s sales.
Iron Castings Output of iron castings totalled 376 million tons in 1969, 5-6 per cent higher
than in 1968. The main users of iron castings are the general engineering
industry, accounting for nearly one-third of the total tonnage sold and about
one-half of the industry’s turnover, the motor vehicle industry, the manufac¬
turers of pressure pipes and fittings, the building and associated industries
and the steel industry. There are about 900 firms in the iron founding
industry with some 110,000 employees. Exports are included in the total of
steel exports in the previous section.
Non-ferrous The non-ferrous metals industry is the largest in Europe and as a consumer
Metals of aluminium, copper and lead Britain is second only to the United States
among western countries. Output in 1969 included: aluminium, 33,000 long
tons of virgin metal and 223,500 long tons of unwrought alloys; refined copper,
49,000 tons of virgin copper and 147,000 tons of secondary metal; lead, 139,000
tons of secondary metal refined from scrap and 117,000 tons of virgin lead
refined from imported lead bullion; zinc, 149,000 tons of slab metal; and tin,
26,000 tons. Mining in Britain is confined to the small-scale working of tin,
although detailed investigation is taking place into the possibilities of a
considerable expansion in this field.
In 1969 exports of non-ferrous base metals were valued at £312 million.
The main products exported, including semi-finished products, were copper
and copper alloys (^1097 million), nickel and its alloys (£37-9 million),
aluminium and its alloys (£23-9 million) and tin and its alloys (£22-8 million).
The Federal Republic of Germany (£52-4 million), the United States (£34-6
INDUSTRY
277
MECHANICAL
ENGINEERING
Agricultural
Machinery
and Tractors
Tractors
Metal-working
Machine Tools
million), and China (£28 million) were the largest purchasing countries.
Indirect exports are also substantial.
Nearly half of the industry is situated in the Midlands; other centres
include South Wales, London, Tyneside and Avonmouth, where one of the
world’s largest zinc smelters (capacity 120,000 tons a year) was formally
opened in May 1968. Firms are engaged in smelting, casting and fabrication
by rolling, extrusion and drawing and the techniques of powder metallurgy
and pressure diecasting are also employed. Two major aluminium smelters
(combined annual capacity 200,000 tons) are being built with government
loans at Invergorden (Scotland) and Anglesey (Wales). Together with a third,
being built at Lynemouth (Northumberland), they will provide over half of
domestic requirements by 1974.
Britain is also a major producer of the newer specialised metals including
uranium, zirconium and beryllium for the nuclear energy industry; niobium
for aircraft production; and selenium, silicon, germanium and tantalum for
electronic apparatus. Scientific and technological research for the industry as a
whole is conducted by the British Non-Ferrous Metals Research Association.
Mechanical engineering comprises a wide range of industries, including all
types of machinery, machine tools, engineers’ small tools, mechanical handling
equipment, construction equipment, industrial plant, ordnance and small
arms, watches and clocks, and scientific instruments. Vehicle engines are
included in the section on vehicles (p. 283). The number of employees is
i-2 million and the volume of production from these industries rose by 31 per
cent between 1963 and 1969. The aggregate value of the main products of all
sections other than small arms was about £4,000 million in 1969. Exports of
non-electric machinery were valued at £1,418 million in 1969, 12 per cent
more than in 1968.
There are some 300 firms, employing 34,600 people, in the agricultural
machinery industry, including three large firms employing well over 1,000
workers. In 1969 deliveries, excluding tractors, were valued at £76 million
and exports were worth £29 million; the main overseas markets were the
Republic of Ireland, France, the United States and South Africa.
The number of self-propelled combine harvesters, forage harvesters, pick¬
up balers and grain driers in use has increased in Britain in recent years.
Deliveries in 1969 included 3,500 combine harvesters, 5,000 milking machines,
13,500 pick-up balers and 1,000 grain and grass driers.
The bulk of British tractor output and exports consists of agricultural tractors.
Some 180,000 agricultural and industrial wheeled tractors were delivered in
1969, 132,000 (73 per cent) for export. In addition, 26,500 small market garden
tractors were delivered. Exports of new agricultural and track-laying tractors
were valued at £110 million in 1969; South Africa (£8-5 million), Australia
(£8 million) and Finland (£6 million) were the main buyers. Production is
dominated by two large organisations. Britain has one of the heaviest tractor
densities in the world (see p. 308).
Britain was the birthplace of the modern machine tool industry. The industry’s
output today ranges from watchmakers’ lathes weighing a few pounds to
machines weighing hundreds of tons, and to electronically controlled machine
tools giving accuracies of one-ten-thousandth part of an inch. Over 2,400
numerically controlled machine tools have been installed in Britain. The
Government, through the Ministry of Technology, is assisting the industry in
278 BRITAIN I971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
various ways, including prc-production purchase schemes, numerical control
advisory services and the placing of research and development contracts.
Deliveries of machine tools were valued at £169 million in 1969, compared
with £153 million in 1968. Exports in 1969 had a value of £71-3 million,
20 per cent up on 1968, and of the orders on hand at the end of Decem¬
ber 1969 (£148 million), 44 per cent were for export; the Soviet Union (£11-5
million),the United States(£io-8 million), Australia(^5-5 million) and France
(£4-4 million) were the main overseas markets in 1969. Seven major groups
account for over two-thirds of the industry’s output although the high degree
of specialisation makes it possible for smaller firms to flourish. The industry
is centred mainly in the Midlands, Yorkshire and Lancashire, and to a lesser
extent near London and Glasgow. There are 70,000 persons employed.
The Machine Tool Trades Association of Great Britain is the representative
body of most manufacturers and importers, and is responsible for the
International Machine Tool Exhibitions held in Britain every four years, the
next being due in 1972. The industry is served by its own research body,
the Machine Tool Industry Research Association, and its customers by the
Production Engineering Research Association.
Industrial Britain manufactures a wide range of industrial engines. Deliveries of engines
Engines (including parts) had a value of ^135 million in 1969 and exports (including
marine engines) were worth £3^’^ million; in addition, parts exported were
valued at £28-8 million. The total brake horse-power of the 330,000 internal
combustion engines delivered was 12*1 million, ranging in size from under
3 b.h.p. to over 4,000 b.h.p. Production is concentrated among the large firms
in the industry, and a total of 35,000 people are employed.
Textile The textile machinery industry, one of the oldest of Britain’s mechanical
Machinery and engineering industries, produces machines and accessories for the manufacture
Accessories and processing of yarns and fabrics from all types of natural and man-made
fibres. In 1969, the industry’s exports (£1057 million) accounted for roughly
two-thirds of total deliveries. Principal markets were Pakistan (£97 million),
the Federal Republic of Germany (£9-6 million) and the United States
(£9-3 million). Comprising about 400 predominantly small scale firms, the
industry has some 48,000 employees and is situated mainly in Lancashire,
Yorkshire, Northern Ireland, Dundee, Leicester and Nottingham.
Mechanical
Handling
Equipment
Contractors’
Plant
Almost every industry makes use of mechanical handling equipment, the
products of the industry range from individual units and accessories to
complete operating systems. The value of deliveries in 1969 was £200
million, the main products being cranes and bridge transporters, lifts,
escalators, conveyors, elevators and hoists. In addition, British firms produced
28,000 powered industrial trucks, including 1,600 fork-lift trucks. Exports
of mechanical handling equipment (including industrial and works trucks) in
1969 were valued at £69-5 million, 47 per cent more than in 1968. There are
many small firms in the industry; in all, 60,000 people are employed.
Almost the whole range of plant required by the construction industry is
produced, including crawler tractors, motor graders, scrapers, trenchers,
dozer equipment, dumpers, excavators and loading shovels, and crushing,
pulverising and screening plant. The labour force numbers 41,000.
The value of deliveries from the industry was £232 million in 1969, of
which £123 million was for export; earth-moving machinery accounted for
Office
Machinery
Engineers’
Small Tools
and Gauges
Industrial Plant
and Steelwork
Boilers and
Boilerhouse Plant
bon, Steel and
Non-ferrous Metal
Works Plant
Chemical Plant
and Mineral Oil
' Refining
f Equipment
INDUSTRY 279
83 per cent of total deliveries. France, Australia, the Federal Republic of
Germany and the Irish Republic are important markets.
The office machinery industry has been expanding rapidly. In 1969 the value
of deliveries was £103 million including million for export. Deliveries
in 1969 included 308,000 standard typewriters and 110,000 portable type¬
writers. The value of deliveries of accounting and similar machinery was
^58-6 million, of which £31'8 million was for export, and of other office
machinery ^3i-3 million, of which £15‘9 million was for export. Exports of
all office machinery (including electronic computers and data processing
equipment) were valued at £109*7 million. The most important overseas
purchasers were the Federal Republic of Germany (£13*4 million), the
United States (£12*9 million), France (£12*6 million) and Italy (£6*5 million).
British subsidiaries or associates of United States firms are prominent in the
industry. There are 57,000 persons employed.
The manufacture of engineers’ small tools and gauges is an expanding
industry; deliveries increased in value from £55 million in 1959 to £110
million in 1969; the main products were hard metal-tipped tools (£14 million),
other metal cutting tools (£47 million), jigs and fixtures (£20 million) and
press tools, moulds, etc. (£21 million). Export deliveries in 1969 totalled
£20 million. The industry has a labour force of 74,000 persons.
British industry manufactures almost every type of industrial plant and
steelwork, and 182,000 are employed in this branch. Of particular importance
are steam-raising boilers, lime and cement kilns, gas and coke oven plant,
sintering plant, metallurgical furnaces and plant, chemical and mineral oil
refining plant, nuclear reactors, water and sewage treatment plant, and steel¬
work for bridges, buildings, etc. The industry has many large-scale enterprises.
In 1969 the aggregate value of deliveries totalled £611*5 million.
British companies delivered water tube boilers to the value of £85*8 million
in 1969; shell boilers and other boilerhouse plant accounted for a further
£56*4 million. Water tube boilers of advanced design and of large steam¬
raising capacity are produced for power stations, whereas shell boilers are used
for steam-raising and heating in factories and buildings. Exports of vapour
generating boilers in 1969 amounted to £13 million.
The steelworks plant industry provides, in association with firms producing
rolling mills, almost all Britain’s requirements as well as plant for export.
The value of deliveries in 1969 was £17*9 million; rolling mills and ancillary
equipment accounted for a further £19*9 million. This industry consists of a
small number of firms, most of which are business associates or members of a
consortium. India, Pakistan, Finland and South Africa are a few of the
countries in which British firms have undertaken major plant projects.
The manufacture of specialised equipment for the chemical and oil refining
industries has expanded rapidly in recent years. Deliveries of chemical plant
were valued at £129 million in 1968, the last year for which figures were
collected. Britain ranks second to the United States as a supplier of equip¬
ment for the petroleum industry. The range of chemical plant produced
includes distillation columns, heat exchangers, high-vacuum drying equip¬
ment, and plant for the manufacture of chemicals from all feedstocks including
petroleum.
K
28o
Nuclear Power
Station
Construction
Miscellaneous
N on-electrical
Machinery
Refrigeration,
Space Heating and
Ventilation
Equipment
Pumps,
Compressors and
Industrial Valves
Other Machinery
Scientific and
Industrial
Instruments
and Apparatus
BRITAIN I97I* AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Two major consortia, consisting of leading firms in the heavy electrical
engineering, civil engineering, boiler, instrument, and associated industries,
were formed in 1968 to build nuclear power stations for the United Kingdom
electricity authorities (see p. 264). These replaced the three groups formed
in 1959. The Atomic Energy Authority grants them non-exclusive manu¬
facturing licences and is working in close collaboration with them in research
and development.
In addition to the mechanical engineering firms described in preceding
sections, there are about 1,800 enterprises whose principal product is a type
of machinery not so far mentioned. The main products include: mining
machinery, printing and book-binding machinery, refrigeration appliances,
space heating, ventilation and air-conditioning equipment, pumps and pump¬
ing machinery, industrial valves and cocks, compressors, scales and weighing
machinery, portable power tools, food preparing machinery and many other
types of equipment. The total value of deliveries in 1969 was some £635
million. There are 366,000 workers employed in these industries.
This industry makes a wide range of equipment and appliances, extending
from domestic and commercial refrigerators of varying sizes to industrial
refrigeration equipment for cold stores, manufacture of chemicals and other
products, ice-making plant and refrigeration plant for ships. Total deliveries
of refrigerating machinery had a value of ^74 million in 1969; 880,000
domestic refrigerators were for the home market and 207,000 were exported.
The value of deliveries of space heating, ventilating and air-conditioning
equipment has been rising and in 1969 reached £937 million. Exports were
valued at j£i6'i million.
Industrial valves controlling the movement of liquids and gases are a vital I
component in many industrial processes, particularly in the chemicals, oil and
electric power industries. The value of deliveries of pumps and valves in 1969
was £165-8 million and that of air and gas compressors and exhausters £38-2
million. Exports of pumps and centrifuges totalled £67-3 million and exports
of industrial valves £37’3 million.
The value of deliveries of other major products in 1969 was: mining mach¬
inery, £78-6 million; food and drink machinery, £55-5 million; and pack-
aging machinery, £34 million. Important export products in 1969 included,
printing and bookbinding machinery (£30’1 million); paper-making mach¬
inery (£22-7 million); food and drink processing machinery (£20-3 million);
and cigarette making machinery (£15-2 million). Production of industrial :
process machinery and control instruments essential for the automation
of industry—is expanding rapidly, with deliveries totalling £67-6 million in
1969 (£41‘3 million in i960).
The industry manufactures scientific, surgical and industrial instruments;
it has a labour force of 132,000 persons. The value of deliveries of other
broad categories was: optical instruments, £12-2 million; electric, electronic,
and nucleonic instruments, £27 million; and nautical and aeronautical instru¬
ments, £25 million. The total deliveries for 1969 amounted to £199
million.
Export deliveries of scientific instruments have risen from £27-9 million in
i960 to £72-2 million in 1969. The Scientific Instrument Research Association
conducts research on behalf of the industry.
INDUSTRY
Radioisotopes
Photographic
Equipment
Clocks and
Watches
General
Mechanical
Engineering
ELECTRICAL
ENGINEERING
Electrical
Machinery
281
Radioisotopes are processed and marketed by the Radiochemical Centre at
Amersham, now part of the AEA (see p. 200). In the year ended March 1970
sales of radioisotopes totalled £3-8 million, of which 59 per cent was exported.
Deliveries of photographic equipment in 1969 totalled about £120 million,
including £57 million for export. The main products in 1969 were: film (other
than cinematograph film), £50 million; sensitised paper and cloth, £25 million;
and cinematograph film, £20 million. Deliveries of photographic cameras were
valued at £4 million.
The present industry is largely a post-war development. It employs 15,000
people, the great majority skilled craftsmen, and many of its factories are
located on new industrial estates in the older industrial areas, particularly in
Scotland. Output in 1969 included clocks (£7-8 million), watches (^57
million) and time switches (£10-5 million); export sales were valued at
£5-4 million.
Behind the firms manufacturing the major products outlined in this section
are about 3,800 enterprises, employing 252,000 people, whose main functions
are to supply parts and components, to conduct research and development
work, and to undertake general sub-contracting and repair work. (Some enter¬
prises are included because the mixed character of their work precludes their
classification under any single industry.) They include several large under¬
takings with more than 5,000 employees. Ball and roller bearings, and chains,
are important products; exports of the former were valued at ^18-2 million in
1969 and exports of chains at £6-6 million.
The electrical engineering industry, with a labour force of 905,000, is engaged
in the manufacture and installation of a wide variety of electrical equipment,
including all types of generating, transmission and distribution equipment;
motors; telecommunications apparatus; domestic appliances; and specialised
laboratory and electronic equipment. The volume of output rose by 44 per
cent between 1963 and 1969, and the total value of production in 1969
was estimated at over £2,100 million.
Exports of electrical machinery, apparatus and appliances in 1969 were
valued at £466 million, 14 per cent more than in 1968. Products are exported
to all parts of the world; in 1969 the United States (£34-8 million), South
Africa (£30-9 million), the Federal Republic of Germany (£27-3 million),
Australia (^27-2 million) and Canada (£23-4 million) were the main markets.
The industry’s leading representative organisation is the British Electrical
and Allied Manufacturers’ Association; scientific and technological research
on behalf of the industry as a whole is carried out by the Electrical Research
Association.
British scientists and engineers have been responsible for many of the basic
advances in the generation and transmission of electric power. The experi¬
ments of Michael Faraday pointed the way to the production of electricity
as a source of cheap and abundant power. Sir Charles Parsons produced and
patented the first turbo-dynamo, the forerunner of the giant turbo-generating
sets of today.
In 1969 deliveries of electrical machinery were valued at £460 million,
comprising £64 million worth of generating equipment, £y6 million worth of
turbines for generation, £56 million worth of transformers, £i6y million
202 BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
worth of switchgear and control gear and £97 million worth of other electrical
machinery, including electric motors.
Exports of generators, motors, converters, transformers and rectifiers
amounted to £64 million in 1969, the main purchasers being Canada (£7-8
million) and Australia (£7-3 million). Switchgear, starting and control gear
exports were valued at ^44'1 million.
About 600 firms manufacture electrical machinery, but recent mergers,
prompted and assisted by the Industrial Reorganisation Corporation (see
p. 239), have led to the creation of one of the leading electrical engineering
groups in Europe while smaller firms have been reorganised into larger units.
The total labour force numbers 199,000. Manufacture takes place in many
areas, including Manchester, Rugby, Tyneside, Stafford and Larne (Northern
Ireland).
Electrical Production of electronic equipment is one of the most rapidly expanding of
and Radio British industries. United Kingdom scientists and inventors have made many
Equipment basic contributions to electronics—the thermionic valve, the development of
radar, the first public transmission television service, and the ‘printed circuit’,
which has led to far-reaching changes in methods of production in the radio
industry. The industry employs 344,000 people.
Capital Equipment Total deliveries of electronic equipment (excluding telephone apparatus)
were valued in 1969 ^4^9 niillion, including ^19° million for export.
(Indirect exports incorporated in ships, aircraft and machinery are consider¬
able.) Computers are the most important product of the capital equipment
sector, which accounts for 30 per cent of total output. Britain has the largest
indigenous computer industry outside the United States and has supplied
over one-half of Britain’s computer installations. The merger in 1968 of the ,
two major British computer concerns created a single group, responsible for
almost all domestic output. Total deliveries, which have more than doubled
in the last three years, were valued at £151’2 million in 1969 and exports at
^62-1 million.
Deliveries of radar and navigational aids were valued at £93 million in 1969,
over six times the i960 level, and over one-third of total output was exported, j
Three-quarters of the world’s radar-fitted merchant ships use British equip¬
ment, as do most of the world’s civil airports outside the American continent.
All-weather landing systems and inertial (automatic) navigation systems are
amongst recent developments. Other important items of capital equipment
include electronic control equipment (£65 million), radio communications
equipment (£57 million) and electronic measuring and testing equipment
(£42 million).
Consumer Goods The consumer goods sector of the industry manufactures radio and television
sets and radiograms. The industry is dominated by several large firms. Output
of television sets in 1969 rose to i'9 million (including i43>00° colour tele¬
vision sets); the total sales value of ^90-6 million was almost all in the home
market. Production of radios and radiograms numbered 1-42 million in 1969
and total sales were worth £18-9 million.
Insulated Wires The industry produces cables and wires for the distribution of electric power,
and Cables for telegraph and telephone networks and for many other purposes; its
products include submarine cables and cables insulated by a great variety of
materials. It is supplying the high voltage cable to carry the expanding output
of electric power in Britain (see p. 262). The value of deliveries in 1969 was
Telegraph
and Telephone
Apparatus
Electrical Goods
and Domestic
Electrical
Appliances
VEHICLES,
AIRCRAFT
AND SHIPS
Motor Vehicles
Cars
INDUSTRY 283
£267 million. Exports of electric cables, wires, etc., were worth ^39'3 million;
the main purchasers were the United States and Hong Kong.
The industry has a labour force of 53,000 persons most of whom are
employed in four major groups.
Britain is one of the largest exporters of telegraph and telephone equipment.
Shipments overseas had a value of million in 1969. Research and
development work is done by firms in the industry in co-operation with the
Post Office. The industry employs 86,000 persons, and three firms are respon¬
sible for almost all output.
Deliveries of other electrical goods in 1969 included domestic electrical
appliances, £202 million; electrical equipment for motor vehicles and air¬
craft, 5^111 million; batteries and accumulators, £75 million; electric lamps,
-£43 million; and other electrical goods, million. In terms of volume,
deliveries included: 1-5 million electric blankets, i‘9 million vacuum cleaners,
8-8 million domestic washing machines and 2,i million electric irons. In 1969
exports of domestic electrical equipment were valued at ,£43’5 million, in¬
cluding washing machines and parts (£12-3 million), refrigerators (£6-6
million) and vacuum cleaners (£5’2 million); the main markets were the
United States (£4-3 million), the Federal Republic of Germany and Canada.
Exports of batteries and accumulators in 1969 were valued at £i9,2 million.
The industry has a labour force of 212,000.
The industries which manufacture vehicles and aircraft provide a significant
contribution to exports; exports of transport equipment in 1969 had a value of
£1,071 million, accounting for almost 14 per cent of total exports. The labour
force numbers 1,015,000 and includes: 507,000 in motor vehicle manufacture,
238,000 in aircraft construction and repairing, 188,000 in shipbuilding and
marine engineering, 55,000 in the manufacture of locomotives and railway
wagons and carriages, 22,000 in cycle and motor cycle manufacturing, and
5,000 in the making of perambulators and hand trucks.
In both size and value the largest section of the vehicle industry comprises the
manufacture of cars and commercial vehicles.
At one time located mainly in the Midlands and London areas, the industry,
during the last decade, has built manufacturing and assembly plants on
Merseyside, in Wales and in Scotland.
Car and commercial vehicle output is dominated by the four largest firms—
British Leyland Motor Corporation, Ford, Chrysler United Kingdom
(Rootes) and Vauxhall—which account for over 95 per cent of complete
vehicle production; the balance is in the hands of smaller, specialist producers
of heavy commercial vehicles, omnibuses, coaches, limousines and sports cars.
The principal trade association is the Society of Motor Manufacturers and
Traders (SMMT), which holds a motor show annually in London and a
Commercial Motor Exhibition every two years. The Motor Industry Research
Association carries out collective research on vehicles and components.
Car output in 1969 totalled 1*72 million units, compared with i’82 million
units in 1968. Exports in 1969 amounted to 772,000 cars with a record value
of £341 million, 22 per cent higher than in 1968. The United States (£69-8
million) was again the largest single purchaser, followed by Canada (£27
million), Switzerland and Belgium. About one-fifth (by value) of all exports
went to EFTA member countries and one-seventh to the EEC.
284
Commercial
Vehicles
Accessories,
Parts, etc.
Cycles and
Motor Cycles
Cycles
Motor Cycles
Railway
Vehicles
Aircraft and
Aero-Engines
Aircraft
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Production of commercial vehicles, including chassis, increased from 146,000
in 1946 to 466,000 in 1969, 14 per cent up on 1968. Exports in 1969 of new
commercial vehicles numbered 181,000 with a record total value of £168-5
million. Australia (£16 million), South Africa (£18-8 million) and EFTA
countries (£20-1 million) were the main markets for commercial vehicles.
Since 1961 Britain has been one of the world’s largest exporters of commercial
vehicles. The prototype of a gas-turbine powered commercial vehicle was
demonstrated in 1968.
Exports of parts and accessories for cars and commercial vehicles in 1969 had
a value of £202 million; engines and parts for motor vehicles were valued at a
further £68-6 million. Caravan and trailer exports totalled £13-9 million.
Deliveries of bicycles have declined in recent years, but in 1969 amounted to
i-6 million, slightly more than in 1968. Most of British manufacturing
capacity is in the hands of a single group of companies, and output is con¬
centrated in the Nottingham area. About one million cycles worth £io-8
million were sent overseas in 1969; the United States (£3-3 million) was the
largest single market. A small-wheel bicycle, developed in Britain, is the first
major technical change in the bicycle for 60 years.
Deliveries of all types of motor cycle amounted to 83,300 in 1969. The total
included 4,900 mopeds and 12,100 three-wheeled vehicles. Manufacture is
dominated by one large group. Exports of motor cycles and parts totalled
£18-3 million in 1969, with the United States much the biggest market.
The British Railways Board has its own workshops which supply British
Railways and certain other users in Britain; private firms build locomotives,
carriages and wagons for British Railways, for industrial users and for export.
Deliveries in 1969 included 3,172 electric locomotives, all of which were
for export, 4,054 other diesel locomotives, 509 coaching vehicles and 2,576
wagons. The total value of exports of railway vehicles and parts in 1969 was
£13-5 million; Pakistan (£2-1 million), Portugal, Sudan and South Africa
were the largest purchasers.
Almost all the aircraft produced by the British industry today are based on
civil and military applications of the gas-turbine aero-engine, first developed
by Sir Frank Whittle. The most notable turbo-prop aircraft in current
production and operation is the Hawker Siddeley 748, of which over 260 have
been sold or are on order. A second generation of jet airliners, the medium-
haul Trident, the longer-haul Vickers VC 10, and the BAG One-Eleven, the
world’s first jet transport designed to operate economically on short-haul
routes, have been in service for over six years. Other civil aircraft in produc¬
tion include the HS125 executive jet, the Sky van and the Islander, an
economical feeder-line aircraft. Flight trials of the Concorde, the world’s first
supersonic airliner, developed jointly by Britain and France, are in progress.
The industry produces a wide range of military aircraft, including the
Jaguar, in collaboration with France, and the Harrier vertical take-off strike
aircraft, the first overseas order for which was placed by the United States
Government in 1969. Britain, the Federal Republic of Germany and Italy are
jointly to develop a supersonic multi-rate combat aircraft (MRCA) to meet
the needs of their air forces during the late 1970s and 1980s. It is also engaged
on work on rockets, earth satellites and other aerospace requirements, includ¬
ing the Blue Streak and Black Arrow satellite launchers.
INDUSTRY
Aero-engines
Shipbuilding
and Marine
Engineering
Merchant
Shipbuilding
285
Hovercraft, a new type of transport vehicle invented in Britain, are being
increasingly used throughout the world. Almost 200 have been built in
Britain up to 1969 and a number of types, including a 170-ton version, the
SRN 4, are in production or under development.
In 1969 exports of the aerospace industry totalled a record £305 million,
4 per cent up on 1968. Exports of new aircraft and parts in 1969 (excluding
electrical equipment) had a value of j£i74'9 million, compared with £135’1
million in 1968. Leading buyers included the United States (£26 million) and
the Federal Republic of Germany (^12-7 million). In addition, exports of
instruments were worth ^4’9 million, and tyres ^i-i million.
The construction of aircraft is dominated by two large airframe manufac¬
turers and one helicopter concern; outside these groups are a few important
smaller companies. Besides extensive research work by the industry, research
on a substantial scale on problems of aircraft and their engines is carried out
by the Government, chiefly at the Royal Aircraft Establishment and the
National Gas Turbine Establishment, both at Farnborough, and the Royal
Aircraft Establishment at Bedford. The British aerospace industry has over
50 collaboration and licence agreements with overseas governments and
companies.
Exports of aero-engines and parts have provided over ^1,000 million in over¬
seas earnings since 1946, and in 1969 were valued at ^117 million: major
customers were the United States (£43'7 million), France (-^17 million) and the
Netherlands (^6-5 million). Twelve different types of British jet engines power
over 30 types of aircraft currently in production overseas. Famous engines in
production include the economical Dart turbo-prop, the Spey turbo-jet and
the revolutionary Pegasus lift-thrust engine for vertical take-off and landing
(VTOL) aircraft. Advanced technology turbofan engines, currently under
development, have secured large overseas orders as power plants for air¬
buses. The power plant for the Concorde is a further development of the
Olympus.
One company is responsible for almost all aero-engine production.
The building of large ocean-going vessels is concentrated in four main areas:
the river Clyde in Scotland, the north-east and north-west coasts of England
and Belfast in Northern Ireland. Numerous yards around the coast build
smaller vessels such as fishing vessels, yachts and harbour craft.
Co-operative research into shipbuilding and marine engineering is under¬
taken by the British Ship Research Association with its headquarters and a
research station on the river Tyne.
A gradual fall in tonnage launched from the 1955 peak of 1*5 million tons was
halted in 1964, and launchings in 1969 totalled I-04 million gross tons, 150,000
tons above the 1968 level. British launchings were the fourth largest in the
world in 1969 accounting for 5-4 per cent of the world total, compared with
5-3 per cent in 1968. Seventeen oil tankers, totalling 260,000 gross tons, were
launched in 1969. Launchings also included 22 bulk carriers totalling 451,500
gross tons and 24 cargo ships between 8,000 and 10,000 gross tons. At the
end of 1969 orders on hand for merchant vessels of 100 gross tons and over
were 285 (283 in 1968) totalling 4-8 million gross tons with a record value of
^588 million, 46 per cent higher than in 1968. Of these vessels, 68 (1-3 million
gross tons) were for export.
Since the publication in 1966 of the report of the Shipbuilding Enquiry
Committee, many British shipyards have embarked on programmes of
286
Ship Repairing
Marine
Engineering
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
modernisation and reorganisation. In many cases this has been facilitated by
assistance from the Shipbuilding Industry Board, set up in 1967. In recent
years, modernisation in British shipyards has been paralleled by major struc¬
tural changes resulting from the proposals of the Shipbuilding Industry
Board. A series of mergers has led to the creation of two groups on Clyde¬
side, one in north-east England, one in eastern Scotland and one in southern
England. Together with one group in Belfast—where the world’s largest
building dock was recently completed—they accounted in 1969 for almost
nine-tenths of the industry’s new orders.
There are many specialist ship-repairing establishments and most of the
larger shipbuilding firms also carry out repair work; about one-quarter of
ship-repairing activity is concentrated on the north-east coast of England.
Repair yards and dry docks are situated in all the large ports.
Many of the larger shipbuilding yards maintain or have closely associated
engine building works, constructing various types of marine slow-speed diesel
engines, usually under licence. One firm designs large low-speed diesel engines
and there are two independent builders of these engines. Steam turbines of
the highest powers are also built.
Miscellaneous
Textile
Manufactures
The group of industries manufacturing metal products not already described
consists of a large number of companies with a total labour force of 575,000
in 1969; the main groups were bolts, nuts and screws (47,000 persons), wire
and wire manufacturers (44,000), cans and metal boxes (35,000), jewellery,
plate, and refining of precious metals (25,000), tools and implements (22,000),
cutlery (13,000), and other metal industries (388,000). The total value of
exports in 1969 was about £215 million.
Cutlery and The production of cutlery and flatware is centred mainly in the city of
Flatware Sheffield and the industry’s reputation has been built up on the skill of its
craftsmen. Mass-production methods are, however, extensively used except
in the case of some of the highest quality wares, although firms remain mainly
small. The value of sales of cutlery and flatware in 1969 was £15-5 million,
including export sales of ^4*7 million.
Domestic This industry, located mainly in the Midlands, Lancashire, Yorkshire, South
Hollow-ware Wales and London, produces a wide range of domestic utensils, such as
saucepans, buckets and dustbins, mainly from aluminium and wrought steel.
The value of sales in 1969 was £26 million, of which ^3*7 million were sales
for export.
Tools and The manufacture of hand tools is one of the oldest British industries, covering
Implements the manufacture of such tools as files, saws, hammers, axes and spades;
Sheffield, Birmingham and other Midland towns are the most important
centres. The value of sales of implements and tools, other than machine tools
and portable power tools, was j£43'5 million in 1969, of which ^13-8 million
worth were exported; the totals included sales of hand tools, at home and for
export, valued at £25 *9 million and ^13-9 million respectively.
Jewellery, Gold The making of jewellery, gold and silver ware and the refining of precious
and Silver Ware metals is an industry in which British craftsmen are heirs to a long tradition.
Most of the firms in the industry are small. The law requires that gold and
.silver plate shall not be sold until it has been hall-marked at one of the Assay
INDUSTRY
CHEMICALS
Inorganic and
Organic
Chemicals and
Dyestuffs
Plastics
287
Offices situated in London, Birmingham, Sheffield and Edinburgh. The
Birmingham office, located in the main centre of the jewellery industry, is by
far the most important. The total value of sales of jewellery, goldsmiths’ and
silversmiths’ wares and electro-plated nickel silver wares in 1969 was £28
million, of which ^5*9 million was for export.
The chemicals industry, with a labour force of 480,000, comprises the manu¬
facture of: general chemicals (147,000 employees), pharmaceutical chemicals
and preparations (70,000 employees), toilet preparations (26,000 employees),
paint (36,000 employees), soap and detergents (25,000 employees), synthetic
resins, plastics materials and synthetic rubber (59,000 employees), dyestuffs
and pigments (25,000 employees), fertilisers (14,000 employees) and other
chemical industries (78,000 employees). The industry is capital intensive; its
fixed capital expenditure, excluding mineral oil refining, amounting to over
£1,188 million during the six years 1962-67, and totalling £264 million in
1969. In January 1970, a leading British company announced plans to double
its chemicals production over the next five years with a £225 million invest¬
ment programme—the largest ever undertaken in the British chemical
industry. The value of exports in 1969 was £745 million, or 10-3 per cent of
total British exports. Production in the general chemicals industries rose by
no per cent between 1958 and 1969.
Over half the output of the inorganic chemicals industry consists of a limited
number of relatively simple chemicals, such as sulphuric acid, caustic soda,
chlorine and ammonia, produced in very large quantities and serving as basic
materials for industry. Sulphuric acid has the largest production of any
chemical and 3*3 million tons were produced in 1969. The remaining output of
this sector consists of a very wide range of chemicals of varying complexity.
Substantial quantities of inorganic chemicals are used in the manufacture
of such products as fertilisers, detergents, paint, glass and metals. About
one-sixth of output is estimated to be exported directly.
Production of organic chemicals (which include coal-tar chemicals) rose
by 20-5 per cent between 1958 and 1969. To an increasing extent petroleum is
the raw material used and it is estimated that in 1969 petroleum-based
chemicals accounted for four-fifths of the total output of organic chemicals;
deliveries of feedstock for the petroleum chemical plants totalled 5-5 million
tons in 1969 compared with i-i million tons in 1959. The most important
products (by weight) in 1969 were ethylene (875,000 tons) and propylene
(478,000 tons). The main outlets for organic chemicals are plastics materials,
solvents, synthetic rubber, man-made fibres and detergents. Consumption of
dyestuffs is geared to demand by the textile industry; about 35,000 tons of
synthetic dyestuffs were produced in 1969.
Exports of chemical elements and compounds amounted to £166-5 miffion
in 1969. Major purchasers in 1969 were, the Netherlands (£22-5 million), the
United States (£10 million), France (£8-8 million) and Sweden (£7-9 million).
Tho first plastic, Parkesine (later called Celluloid), was produced and patented
in Britain in 1865 by Alexander Parkes; other British discoveries include
polyethylene. Plastics manufacture is one of the fastest growing sections of the
economy. Output of synthetic resins has increased by 234 per cent since 1958
and total production in 1969 was 1-3 million tons (an increase of 6 per cent
over 1968), of which 0-9 million tons consisted of thermoplastic resins.
Expansion in recent years has mainly been in thermoplastic materials, of
K*
288
Synthetic
Rubber
Fertilisers
Paints
Pharma¬
ceuticals
BRITAIN I97i: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
which the most important are polyethylene (used in coverings and packaging—
notably for foodstuffs), polyvinyl chloride (known as PVC and used for a
wide range of industrial purposes and consumer goods) and polystyrene
(a cheap non-inflammable material used for toys, light mouldings and many
consumer goods). One of the newer thermoplastic materials is polypropylene,
which can be fabricated as mouldings, films and fibres. A new family of plastic
materials reinforced with carbon fibres is now in commercial production in
Britain; they are up to three times the strength but only half the weight of
steel. Rapid expansion of capacity for all the main types of plastics materials
is planned. Exports in 1969 amounted to 480,000 tons, valued at £128-4
million. The main purchasers were Australia (£12-5 million), South Africa
(£11 million), Sweden (£8-6 million) and the United States (£7-5 million).
The first general purpose synthetic rubber to be manufactured on a com¬
mercial scale in the United Kingdom was marketed in 1958. High styrene
rubbers for shoe soles and flooring, and nitrile rubbers for use where oil
resistance is required, are in large-scale production, and neoprene rubber is
manufactured in Northern Ireland. Production in 1969 amounted to 258,700
tons, most of which came from the styrene-butadiene plant at Hythe, near
Southampton. Exports of synthetic rubber and latex totalled 98,000 tons.
The development of artificial fertilisers owes much to the pioneer work of
the British scientists Sir John Lawes and Sir Joseph Gilbert. Production is
dominated by two firms and there are a number of firms marketing compound
fertilisers from the principal constituents—nitrogen, phosphorus and
potassium. To encourage use, home sales are assisted by government subsidies
to farmers (see p. 311). Output of nitrogenous fertilisers (in terms of nitrogen
content) has been increasing and in 1968-69 totalled 896,000 tons, while
437,000 tons (in terms of phosphate content) of phosphatic fertilisers were
produced; production of compound fertilisers amounted to 2-8 million tons
in 1968-69. The use of ammonium nitrate (35 per cent nitrogen), ammonium
phosphate, and, to a limited extent, urea (mostly 45 per cent nitrogen) is
resulting in more concentrated fertilisers. The value of exports of manufactured
fertilisers, mainly nitrogenous, was £5-4 million in 1969.
Manufacturers’ sales of paint and varnish during 1969 amounted to over
100-5 million gallons (including 15 million gallons of emulsion paint) valued at
£147 million. Britain is one of the largest exporters of paints in the world;
exports of pigments, paints, varnishes and related materials in 1969 amounted
to £44 million. Indirect exports in the form of surface coatings for finished
goods are considerable.
In recent years many improved techniques have been introduced, including
new ranges of synthetic resins and pigments, quick-drying paints and paints
needing only one application.
The whole range of drugs is produced in the United Kingdom, including
antibiotics, sulphonamides, anti-malarial drugs, anti-histamine products,
anaesthetics, vaccines, sera and naturally occurring drugs. Research expendi¬
ture totalled £20 million in 1969.
Notable British contributions to the development of new products include:
the discovery of penicillin by Sir Alexander Fleming and its evaluation by Sir
Howard Florey and E. B. Chain; the evaluation of sulphapyridine (M & B 693)
by Sir Lionel Whitby; the discovery of griseofulvin; and, more recently, the
INDUSTRY
289
isolation of the penicillin nucleus and the development of several semi¬
synthetic penicillins and the cephalosporin antibiotics. Several of the laiger
pharmaceutical companies in Britain are subsidiaries of overseas firms.
In 1969 exports of medicinal and pharmaceutical products and goods rose
by 21 per cent to the record level of j£ii7'7 °f which ^33'9
worth were antibiotics. The largest purchasers were the Republic of Ireland
(£6-3 million), Japan (£6-1 million), France (£6 million) and Belgium (£5-6
million).
Notable discoveries by the British crop protection industry include the
insecticidal activity of BHC (benzene hexachloride), the first selective weed¬
killer, MCPA, and more recently Gramoxone, a non-residual general herbicide
based on paraquat. Sales of pesticides and allied products were valued at
-£36-6 million in 1969, 10 per cent higher than in 1968; herbicides (^24*5
million) were the largest single category. Exports of insecticides, fungicides
and weedkillers in 1969 totalled £23-9 million, one-third more than in 1968.
Sales of toilet preparations were valued at £122 million in 1969, including
export sales of £18 million; home market sales of hair preparations totalled
about £30 million. Petroleum is the source of the principal raw materials
used in the manufacture of organic surface-active agents in detergents; the
other main constituent, polyphosphates, is derived from inorganic sources.
Sales of synthetic detergents amounted to 484,000 tons in 1969, including
73,000 tons for export. Deliveries of soap totalled some 277>000 tons. Sales
of polishes in 1969 were valued at ^i7’9 million, including floor and furniture
polishes worth £8*5 million. Exports of perfumery and toilet preparations,
soap and associated products were valued at £(>0‘y million.
The textile industries in June 1969 had a labour force of 756,000 persons, half
of whom are women; 53>oo° employees are engaged in the production of man¬
made fibres, 75,000 in the spinning and doubling of cotton, flax and man-made
fibres, 66,800 in the weaving of cotton, linen and man-made fibres, 159,000
in the woollen and worsted trades, 140,000 in hosiery and knitted goods,
66,000 in textile finishing and 45,000 in carpets. I he total value of textile
exports in 1969 at ^347 million was 16 per cent more than in 1968. Production
of textiles rose by 3-5 per cent in 1969 and was 16 per cent higher than in i95^-
Considerable vertical integration is taking place connected with the increasing
use of man-made fibres. Four multi-fibre, multi-process groups, founded
under the leadership of man-made fibres manufacturers, control the bulk of
Britain’s spinning and warp knitting activities.
The Textile Council for the Man-made Fibres, Cotton and Silk Industries,
financed by a levy on the industry, acts as a statutory co-ordinating body,
while scientific and technical research for the industry is carried out principally
by the Cotton, Silk and Man-made Fibres Research Association.
Cotton was Britain’s chief consumer goods industry and cotton piece-goods
its largest export during the nineteenth century. Increasing low-cost competi¬
tion has cut progressively into British markets and a global limit was placed
on imports of cotton goods from most countries during 1966-70.
Output in 1969 consisted of: 292 million lb. of single cotton yarn, 154
million lb. of spun man-made fibre and mixture single yarn, 237 million lb. of
doubled yarn, 151 million lb. of textured yarn, 723 million linear yards of
woven cotton cloth, and 589 million linear yards of man-made fibre and
290
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Wool
Man-made
Fibres
mixture cloth. In 1969 exports of cotton yarn (excluding man-made fibres)
were worth j£ii-4 million, exports of woven cotton fabrics were valued at £27
million, with Congo (Kinshasa) and the Irish Republic the most important
markets.
Most of the industry is located in Lancashire, the north-east of the county
being mainly concerned with weaving and the south-east with spinning.
Manchester is the commercial centre and Liverpool is the chief port of entry
for raw cotton. Under legislation to assist the reorganisation of the industry,
Exchequer funds have paid for two-thirds of the cost of removing surplus
capacity, and have also provided grants of about one-quarter towards the
cost of approved re-equipment and modernisation schemes.
The wool textile industry, one of the largest in the world, is the most ancient of
Britain’s staple industries and has been important since medieval times. There
are two main branches—woollen and worsted. The small or medium-sized
business predominates, with only a few large firms. While the West Riding of
Yorkshire is by far the most important producing area, Scotland and the West
of England remain famous as specialised producers of high-quality woollen
cloth. In recent years an increasing amount of man-made fibre has been
blended with wool.
In 1969 output included 203 million lb. of wool and hair tops and 314
million lb. of woollen yarn. Deliveries of worsted and semi-worsted yarn
amounted to 222 million lb. and of woven fabrics to 286 million square
yards. In addition, large quantities of raw wool are scoured and cleaned in
Britain. Consumption of raw wool in 1969 was 385 million lb., compared with
509 million lb. in 1959. Exports in 1969 included wool yarns (£23-3 million),
woollen fabrics (£43*4 million) and wool worsted fabrics (£24-8 million). The
main buyers of woollen fabrics were the United States (^47 million), Japan
and Canada. Raw wool (cleaned or scoured in Britain) and other animal hair
and tops exported had a value of ^50 million. Research is carried on mainly
by the Wool Industries Research Association.
Much of the early development of viscose rayon and acetate took place in
Britain. Production is spread throughout the country with Northern Ireland
of growing importance. Large firms predominate in the industry. There has
been a rapid expansion of output in recent years, the 1969 record total
of 1,221 million lb. being 48 per cent more than in 1964. Output consisted of
664 million lb. of staple fibre and 557 million lb. of filament yarn in 1969. Of
the staple fibre, 299 million lb., and of the continuous filament, 344 million lb.,
were of fully synthetic materials.
Two main types of man-made fibres are manufactured: those made from
cellulose (such as rayon) and those produced by fully synthetic processes from
chemical substances (such as nylon). Viscose rayon is still the most widely
used of all man-made fibres and output in 1969 totalled 465 million lb. The
world’s largest rayon staple factory is at Greenfield (North Wales), with an
annual output of over 200 million lb., while other large rayon plants are at
Grimsby, Preston and Wolverhampton. Almost all the rayon produced in
Britain is made by a single company and its subsidiaries.
Production of nylon, the first fully synthetic fibre, in the form of nylon 66,
started in Britain in 1941; another type of nylon (nylon 6) has been manu¬
factured since 1963. Total productive capacity for nylon has increased from
160 million lb. a year in 1964, to almost 300 million lb. at the end of 1969.
Terylene, a polyester fibre, was invented in Britain during the second world
INDUSTRY
29I
war. It is resistant to fading and is particularly suited to blending with wool.
Annual manufacturing capacity totals about 120 million lb. A group of fibres
of growing importance are the acrylic fibres: Courtelle (a British discovery)
and Acrilan are examples. Synthetic elastomerics or spandex fibres, which are
man-made textile fibres having inherent properties of stretch and recovery,
are now produced commercially.
Exports of man-made fibre yarns had a value of £607 million in 1969, and
woven fabrics £25-8 million. The Soviet Union, the Federal Republic of
Germany and the Republic of Ireland were the most important purchasers
of yarns.
Hosiery and The hosiery and knitwear industry is predominantly one of small-scale
Knitwear enterprises. The industry is widely distributed, wdth Scotland and the east
Midlands as the two most important centres. Sales of knitted goods were
valued at £437-4 million in 1969 including £151-2 million worth of outerwear
and £101 *2 million worth of socks and stockings. Exports of knitted clothing
and accessories were valued at £35-1 million in 1969; the largest buyers were
the United States, Switzerland and Canada. Exports of knitted fabrics
amounted to £21-2 million. The British Hosiery and Knitwear Export Group
co-ordinates the export activities of the industry and organises overseas
missions. The Hosiery and Allied Trades Research Association, with
laboratories at Nottingham, undertakes collective research.
Other Textiles The linen industry is concentrated in Northern Ireland (the greatest linen¬
manufacturing region in the world), with most of the remainder in Scotland.
Unen Broadly speaking, the Northern Ireland industry concentrates on yarns and
the lighter types of fabrics, while in Scotland production is largely of coarse
linens and canvas, although household types are also produced. Northern
Ireland manufacturers produced 35 million linear yards of cloth in 1969,
while weavers in Great Britain delivered 227 million square yards, including
14 million square yards of sailcloth and canvas. Exports in 1969 included
£7-9 million worth of linen fabrics and £3-6 million worth of flax yarns and
linen thread.
Jute Jute is manufactured on a large scale in the Dundee area—the centre of the
world’s oldest jute industry—and 13,400 people are employed in all. Jute is
used in the manufacture of carpets, cordage, ropes and woven into fabrics for
a wide range of uses in the packaging, carpet, upholstery, building and motor
car industries. New uses for jute, as a plastic reinforcement for example, have
been developed. In 1969, 86,400 tons of raw jute were used, and exports of
jute fabric and yarn totalled £2-4 million.
Lace Sales of finished lace goods amounted to £17 million in 1969. The most
important lace product is from the warp knitting machines, with sales valued
at £9 million. Exports were worth £5-2 million in 1969.
MISCELLANEOUS In addition to the products mentioned above, British textile firms manufacture
METAL a wide range of other goods, including many special yarns and fabrics, net,
ODUCTS household textiles such as blankets, tablecloths and curtains, and floor
coverings other than carpets. Sales of narrow fabrics (including elastic
machinery belting and ribbon) totalled £51-7 million in 1969, including export
sales of £7-5 million. Sales of floor coverings of linoleum, vinyl and other
synthetic materials were valued at £32-8 million in 1969; just under one-sixth
were for export. The cordage industry is the largest in Europe. Exports of
ropes, cordage, nets and netting in 1969 were valued at £4-1 million.
292
Carpets
CLOTHING,
LEATHER AND
FOOTWEAR
Clothing
Leather
Footwear
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
In 1969 total sales of all types of carpets and rugs amounted to 146 million
square yards, valued at £200 million. Exports in 1969 had a value of £30
million; Australia (/5-6 million) was the largest single market.
There are over 120 enterprises engaged in the manufacture of carpets,
including several large firms. In addition to the manufacture of woven carpets
such as Axminster and Wilton, about one-half of total sales by quantity in
1969 were of tufted carpets, a form of carpeting in which the pile, usually
containing a high proportion of artificial fibres, is inserted into a pre-woven
backing. Axminster-type carpets account for about 35 per cent of the value of
exports. The principal manufacturing centres include Kidderminster (in
Worcestershire), Halifax and Dewsbury (in the West Riding of Yorkshire),
Glasgow and Kilmarnock (in Scotland) and several towns in Northern
Ireland. About a third of the carpets produced (by quantity) are made pre¬
dominantly of wool and a growing proportion of traditional woven carpets
contain some man-made fibre.
There are 555,000 employees in the clothing, leather and footwear industries.
Some 391,000 are in the clothing industry, 105,000 in the footwear trade and
59,000 in leather, leather goods and fur manufacture. The aggregate value of
their exports in 1969 was ^172 million.
The British clothing industry is the largest in Europe and total deliveries
of made-up clothing have increased by 7 per cent since 1963. Exports in 1969,
excluding knitted goods, were valued at ^61 *6 million; Switzerland (^6’8
million) was the main purchaser. Substantial quantities of clothing are also
sent by parcel post.
Although there are some large firms employing mass-production methods
on an increasing scale, the typical firm is small. The principal manufacturing
centres are London, Leeds and Manchester, but several firms are also situated
on industrial trading estates throughout the country. Fashion is important in
the production of haute couture models and throughout the ready-to-wear
industry. The Clothing Export Council, representing over 200 companies,
organises promotions for various sectors of the industry.
Leather tanning is one of Britain’s oldest industries. In 1969 some 11,400 tons
of sole and other heavy leather and about 437 million square feet of upper,
lining and other light leathers were produced. Britain is one of the world’s
leading exporters with exports in 1969 valued at £31-2 million. The United
States is the largest single market (£57 million in 1969), followed by Canada
(£4 million) and the Federal Republic of Germany.
Tanneries are situated in most parts of Britain, but there are important
concentrations in Lancashire, Cheshire, Yorkshire, the north Midlands and
the London area. Many different types of leather are produced, ranging from
the heavy types for industrial uses, such as machinery belting, to high quality
leather for footwear, leather goods, gloves and clothing. The British Leather
Manufacturers’ Research Association is the foremost of its type in the world.
The British footwear industry is the third largest in the world. In 1969
manufacturers’ sales of footwear totalled 194 million pairs. Exports of all
types had a value of £33-5 million; the United States (£9-2 million), the
Soviet Union and Canada were the largest markets.
Factories are located throughout Britain. Some areas concentrate on
production of particular types; for example, the Rossendale Valley region
INDUSTRY
293
FOOD, DRINK
AND TOBACCO
Bread and Flour
Confectionery
and Biscuits
Cocoa,
Chocolate and
Sugar
Confectionery
Fruit and
V egetable
Products
of Lancashire on slippers, and Leicester and Norwich on women’s and girls’
shoes. The Shoe and Allied Trades Research Association enjoys a world-wide
reputation in all matters connected with shoemaking.
The food, drink and tobacco industries employ 853,000 persons in the
production of a great variety of goods. The value of their combined exports
in 1969 was £387 million. Exports of alcoholic and other beverages accounted
for £190 million; sugar, sugar preparations and honey for £28 million; cereal
and cereal preparations for £26 million; fruit and vegetables for £18 million;
and coffee, cocoa, tea and spices for £21 million.
Many of the industry’s leading firms have been involved in mergers in
recent years.
The household consumption of bread, which has been falling, averaged about
2 lb. 6 oz. (1-08 kilos) per head per week in 1969. The trend is heavily towards
concentrating production in large mechanical bakeries; well over two-thirds
of the bread is made in these bakeries, which specialise in sliced and wrapped
loaves; four groups have a dominant position. In the smaller bakeries produc¬
tion of cake and other flour confectionery is usually allied to bread production.
There are 160,000 employees in the bread and flour confectionery industry; a
further 40,000 are employed in grain-milling.
There are 53,000 employees producing biscuits, and annual output has been
over 550,000 tons in recent years. Weekly consumption of cakes and biscuits
per head in Britain was 117 oz. (0-32 kilos) in 1969. British biscuits have
gained a world-wide reputation, and, despite the problem of import restric¬
tions in several overseas markets, exports in 1969 were valued at £13 million.
The cocoa, chocolate and sugar confectionery industry, which has 89,000
employees, is composed of a small number of very large manufacturers and
many medium-sized and small firms. The main ingredients used by the
industry are sugar, cocoa beans, glucose, milk, nuts and fats. Production of
chocolate and sugar confectionery was 681,000 tons in 1969. Consumption of
chocolate and sugar confectionery in the United Kingdom is far higher than
in any other country, being equivalent to 7’6 oz. (o-2i kilos) per head per week.
The value of exports in 1969 of cocoa preparations (including chocolate)
was £18 million and of sugar confectionery, ^17 million. The United States
and Canada were the main markets for cocoa preparations. About 30 per cent
of total world exports of chocolate and sugar confectionery come from
Britain, the world’s largest exporter of these products.
Among the fruit and vegetable products manufactured are jam, marmalade,
sauces and vinegar. The labour force numbers 74,000. Output of jams and
marmalade, which fell from 329,000 tons in 1949 about 215,000 tons in
1956, has since remained little changed, totalling 191,000 tons in 1969. Straw¬
berry, raspberry, apricot and blackcurrant jams are the most popular. Exports
of jams and marmalade in 1969 were valued at £2 million.
In 1969, 788,000 tons of canned vegetables were produced. The British
Navy was using canned foods in 1813, but rapid development in the industry
did not take place until after 1935. Beans in tomato sauce (250,000 tons) and
processed and fresh peas (277,000 tons) are the vegetables most in demand
as canned products. In addition, output in 1969 included 103,000 tons of
canned and bottled fruit, and 286,000 tons of canned soup. Strawberries,
plums and rhubarb are the most important fruits used for canning, followed
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
by fruit salad, prunes and gooseberries. Sales of prepared fruit pie fillings are
increasing.
Sales of frozen foods are rising in Britain, and nearly 189,000 tons of
vegetables and 1,500 tons of fruit were preserved by this method in 1969; peas
accounted for 47 per cent of all home-produced quick-frozen vegetables. Sales
of dehydrated products, including accelerated freeze dried foods, are also
increasing.
Bacon Curing, The industry comprises the curing of bacon and ham, the canning and
Meat and Fish preserving of meat and fish, the manufacture of sausages and pies and the
Products preparation of extracts and pastes. The labour force numbers 94,000. Output
of canned meat and canned meat products in 1969 rose to 130,000 tons, and
the quantity of bacon and ham cured increased to 234,000 tons. There has
been a rapid expansion of quick-frozen fish output, and some 96,000 tons were
produced in 1969; small quantities (8,000 tons in 1969) are also canned.
Exports of fish and fish preparations had a value of £14 million in 1969 and
those of meat and meat products were worth £16 million.
Beverages
Whisky
Gin
Brezving and
Malting
Soft Drinks
The industries producing beer, spirits, wines, cider and soft drinks have a
labour force of 155,000. Exports were valued at ^190 million in 1969.
Exports of whisky (almost all of it Scotch whisky) totalled 52 million proof
gallons with a value of £168 million in 1969; almost half went to the United
States (£81 million or 27 million proof gallons). Scotch whisky was first
distilled in the fifteenth century. It is blended from 20 or more different types,
some from malted barley and some from other grains. Whisky requires several
years to mature, and the 126 million proof gallons of Scotch whisky produced
in the 1969 distilling year will not be on sale for some years. Stocks of whisky
amount to more than 700 million proof gallons, representing 10 years’ con¬
sumption. About four-fifths of annual sales are to overseas buyers.
Production of gin in Britain has risen steadily since the early 1950s. The main
distillers are in London and one company accounts for a large proportion of
total output. Although the larger manufacturers also own distilleries abroad,
exports had a value of £10 million in 1969.
There are 92,000 employees in the brewing and malting industry. Recent
mergers have led to the creation of a few major brewery groups, marketing
their products throughout the country. In 1969, 33 million bulk barrels of
beer were produced, the highest since 1945, and consumers’ expenditure on
beer amounted to £1,058 million. Exports in 1969 of malt beer were 377,000
bulk barrels, worth £4 million. Firms are experimenting with new methods,
including continuous brewing processes, and automated batch production
plants are well established.
The main raw materials used in brewing are malt, hops and some sugar.
Malt is made almost entirely from home-grown barley. Some brewers make all
or part of their own malt, others purchase it from independent maltsters who
also supply distillers, vinegar brewers and malt extract manufacturers. British
malt is used by brewers throughout the world, and exports in 1969 amounted
to 68,000 tons, worth £3 million.
The soft drinks industry has expanded markedly in the last decade although
sales are liable to be affected by the weather. Output in 1969 included
66 million gallons of concentrated liquid, and 262 million gallons of uncon¬
centrated drinks. Though there has been some amalgamation in recent years,
there are still several hundred firms supplying regional markets. There are two
INDUSTRY
295
Tobacco
BRICKS,
POTTERY, GLASS
AND CEMENT
Brickmaking
and Refractory
Goods
Pottery
very large firms among about 20 producing widely advertised brands which
are marketed on a national scale. There is also some degree of specialisation by
firms in the production of various types, such as carbonated drinks, cola-based
drinks, squashes and cordials, tonic waters and ‘mixers’, and comminuted
drinks (in which the whole fruit is used).
The tobacco industry manufactures almost all the cigarettes and other tobacco
goods sold in Britain. In 1969 consumers’expenditure on these goods amounted
to £1,690 million (of which about three-quarters was tax revenue) and, in
addition, exports worth £34-9 million (of which cigarettes accounted for
88 per cent) were shipped to a large number of overseas markets; Hong Kong,
Kuwait, and the Federal Republic of Germany were the most important. The
main centres of production are in and around Bristol, Liverpool, London,
Manchester, Newcastle, Nottingham, Glasgow and Belfast. The two biggest
manufacturing groups account for over 90 per cent of total output. The
industry has 39,000 employees.
The tobacco industry used 306-1 million lb. (138-8 million kilos) of un¬
manufactured tobacco in 1969, all of which was imported. In 1969 the main
sources were the United States, Canada and India. Total consumption of
tobacco in Britain in 1969 amounted to 249-3 million lb. (ii3-i million kilos),
including 216-5 million lb. (98-2 million kilos) consumed in cigarettes, 28-2
million lb. (12-8 million kilos) in pipe and hand rolling tobacco and 3-6 million
lb. (i-6 million kilos) in cigars. In 1969 125,000 million cigarettes were
consumed, 3,100 million more than in the previous year; 75-5 per cent of the
total were tipped compared with 16 per cent in i960.
This group comprises the manufacture of bricks, fireclay, refractory goods,
pottery, glass, cement, abrasives, asbestos and other building materials. The
industries have a combined labour force of 346,000, which includes 60,000 in
the bricks, fireclay and refractory goods trades, 83,000 in the glass industry
and 61,500 in the pottery industry.
Firms in the industry manufacture such items as bricks, roofing tiles, chimney
pots, fireclay ware and heat-resisting products including furnace and kiln
linings. Brickmaking, one of Britain’s oldest industries, was introduced by
the Romans, and manufacturing methods vary from traditional hand fabrica¬
tion to highly mechanised systems. In 1969 about 6,734 million building
bricks were produced in Great Britain, 43 per cent of which were of the
Fletton type, made mainly in the Bedford and Peterborough areas. Refractory
goods (firebricks, silica bricks, magnesite bricks and chrome-magnesite bricks)
are manufactured mainly for home use. Exports of refractory construction
materials in 1969 were worth £8-9 million.
The pottery industry, supplying almost all home needs for domestic and
industrial pottery, is a long-established and complex industry, largely located
in the Stoke-on-Trent area of Staffordshire. Much of its raw material
is indigenous, such as china clay, ball clay and china stone from Devon and
Cornwall.
Domestic pottery, including china, earthenware, stoneware, jet and
Rockingham, accounts for about half of the industry’s output; the other main
divisions are glazed tiles, sanitary ware and electrical ware, and such specialised
industrial products as acid-proof stoneware, porous ceramics and laboratory
porcelain are also manufactured. Among famous makes of British pottery are
296
Glass
Cement
PAPER, PRINTING
AND PUBLISHING
Paper and
Board
BRITAIN I971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Wedgwood, Spode, Royal Worcester, Royal Doulton, Minton, Coalport and
Royal Crown Derby. Total sales of domestic pottery were ^58-1 million in
1969 including export sales of ^25-9 million, the highest ever; the United
States and Canada are important markets.
There has been considerable re-equipment; gas or electrically fired kilns
have replaced almost all the coal-fired kilns, and new decorating techniques
and automatic and semi-automatic machinery have been introduced.
Britain’s glass industry is the third largest in the world. The section of the
industry devoted to the manufacture of plate and sheet glass in their various
forms is organised for quantity production, much of it in the form of the
‘float’ glass process, which was developed in Britain and has been licensed
to glass makers throughout the world. Its use for internal decoration and as
a finish for internal and external walls has greatly increased in recent years.
Large quantities of safety glass are produced for the motor industry. Other
products include glass bricks, tubular glass (produced on a large scale),
mirrors, lamp and bulb glass, scientific and medical glassware, glass fibres,
and all types of glass containers (often made by fully automatic machinery).
A traditional product is hand-made lead crystal glassware of very high quality.
Direct exports of glass and glassware reached the record value of £39-4
million in 1969. Those of glass were worth £23-4 million, the most important
markets being the United States, South Africa, Australia and Canada. The
figures included X7'5 million of float glass.
Collective research is undertaken by the British Glass Industry Research
Association, and much research work is also carried out by the Department
of Glass Technology of Sheffield University.
The cement industry of the United Kingdom is chiefly concerned with the
manufacture of Portland cement. Invented by Joseph Aspdin and patented
in 1824, this material and the methods of its production have been the subject
of continuous technical improvement and intensive research. The capacity
of the industry, which has 17,000 employees, has expanded substantially.
The Dartford-Gravesend district of Kent is an important producing area.
Annual output totalled 17-1 million tons in 1969.
The paper, printing and publishing industries have 634,000 employees,
including 92,000 in the manufacture of paper and board, 64,000 in the pro¬
duction of cardboard boxes and packing cases, 143,000 in the publishing of
newspapers and periodicals, and 261,500 in other types of printing and
publishing.
The manufacture of paper in Great Britain was not firmly established until
1678, but records show that some paper was produced as far back as 1492.
The British paper and board industry is the largest in Europe. Total produc¬
tion in 1969 of all types of paper and board amounted to 4-9 million tons. Of
this, newsprint accounted for 777,000 tons, board for 1*4 million tons and
other paper for the remainder. Exports of paper, board and manufactured
paper items were valued at £78-6 million in 1969. The main purchasers were
the Republic of Ireland, South Africa and Australia.
Wood pulp is the main raw material, but large and increasing quantities of
waste paper are also used. A £20 million integrated pulp and paper mill, the
first in Britain, was opened at Fort William, in the Scottish Highlands, in
1966. Two-thirds of the timber it uses is home-grown.
INDUSTRY
297
Printing and
Publishing
OTHER
MANUFACTURING
INDUSTRIES
Rubber
There are a few very large groups in the industry and many medium-sized
and small firms. The large groups hold considerable interests abroad, includ¬
ing pulp and paper producing mills in the United States, Canada and other
parts of the Commonwealth and Europe. Sales of household paper products,
including facial tissues, have continued to rise sharply. Sales of cardboard
boxes and cartons were valued at ^129 million in 1969 while those of fibre
board packing cases totalled £126 million. Sales of manufactured stationery
totalled ^112-3 million in 1969. Wallpaper manufacturing is dominated by
one firm; a recent development has been the introduction of plastic and
plastic-coated wall coverings. Research is undertaken by the Research Associa¬
tion for the Paper and Board, Printing and Packaging Industries.
The printing industry produces an immense range of goods, from national
newspapers and periodicals to books, catalogues and greetings cards. The
industry includes many very small enterprises. Mergers in recent years have
led to the formation of large groups in the newspaper, magazine and book
publishing sections. Three large firms each employ more than 19,000 persons.
General printing, publishing, engraving and bookbinding remains essentially
an industry of small firms.
Publishers’ turnover in 1969 is estimated at £138 million, of which export
sales accounted for a record total of .£66 million. Consumers’ expenditure on
books, newspapers and magazines totalled almost £4°° million in 1968. Book
titles published in 1969 totalled nearly 32,400, over 23,200 of them new ones.
Popularity of paper-backed books has increased rapidly in recent years.
According to the overseas trade returns, exports of printed matter, manu¬
scripts and typescripts were valued at £81 million in 1969? including books
(£42-6 million), and newspapers and periodicals (£13-9 million), but these
figures do not include parcel post shipments, which are possibly as large again
as the recorded totals. The United States and Australia are the most important
overseas markets. The Book Development Council was formed in 1965 to
promote the supply and use of British books overseas. Firms have introduced
the latest developments in high-speed printing equipment, including elec¬
tronic engraving machines and advanced processes of photographic repro¬
duction, and several newspapers are now set by computer.
Other manufacturing industries include the timber and furniture group, with
301,000 employees, rubber manufacture, with 129,000 employees, and a group
of miscellaneous manufactures which embrace some 225,000 employees,
including 107,000 employed in plastics moulding and fabricating.
Britain’s rubber manufacturing industry is the oldest in the world, dating
from 1819. Macintosh invented waterproof garments, and Dunlop in 1888
devised the pneumatic tyre. Tyres and tubes represent more than half the
output of the industry but firms also make a variety of goods, the most
important being rubber footwear, conveyor belting, cables, hose, latex foam
products and other vehicle components and accessories.
In 1969 the industry’s consumption of rubber totalled 438,600 tons, com¬
prising 178,400 tons of natural rubber, 235,800 tons of synthetic rubber and
24,400 tons of reclaimed rubber; the proportion of synthetic rubber used is
increasing. In 1969, 249,000 tons of rubber were used in the production of
tyres and tyre products. Tyre manufacturers include several subsidiaries of
United States and other overseas companies. The Government has approved
in principle the proposed merger of Britain’s biggest tyre company and its
298
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Furniture,
Brushes and
Timber
Toys, Games
and Sports
Equipment
Italian equivalent, which would create the largest tyre group in Europe.
Direct export of all rubber manufactures in 1969 were worth ^72-4 million,
with Sweden, Australia and Denmark as the main markets. This figure
included tyres and tubes valued at ^38-8 million, but excluded large indirect
exports on vehicles. In addition, the industry exported about £4-8 million
worth of rubber footwear and £2-2 million of rubber gloves and other
miscellaneous products.
London is the largest centre for furniture manufacturing, but High Wycombe,
in Buckinghamshire, is important for domestic furniture.
Deliveries of domestic furniture rose by 27 per cent in volume between 1958
and 1969, and in the latter year their value was £177 million. Exports of all
furniture were worth ^23-2 million in 1969. Numerous enterprises manu¬
facture furniture in Britain (including domestic, upholstered, office, school
and other furniture) with a labour force of 90,000. The bedding industry
employs 18,000 people; sales of new bedding in 1969 were valued at £35-5
million. Many firms are small but in recent years there has been a tendency
towards concentration.
Scientific research and technical information services are provided by the
Furniture Development Council and the Furniture Industry Research
Association. The Council is concerned with the management problems of the
industry and produces an annual statistical and economic review.
The brush industry is located throughout Britain, and embraces highly
mechanised establishments as well as small craft units. The value of sales in
1969 was £22-4 million, of which £2 million was for export.
The timber industry employs 110,500 people. Britain is mainly dependent
on imported supplies of timber (valued at £218 million in 1969) but sawmill
output of home-grown timber together with the output of home-grown
pitwood totalled about 65 million cubic feet in 1969. Other products include
plywood and chipboard.
The number of people engaged in manufacturing toys and sports equipment
in Britain is 39,000. Sales of toys in 1969 were worth ^81 million and exports
had a value of £28 million. The United States and the Federal Republic of
Germany were the main overseas markets. Current trends are towards
increased production of small-scale precision models of vehicles and toys
linked to television characters.
The value of manufacturers’ sales of games was £$-6 million and that of
sports equipment £21-7 million, of which £g-6 million was for export.
12 AGRICULTURE,
FISHERIES AND
FORESTRY
AGRICULTURE
Although Britain is a densely populated, industrialised country relying on
imports for nearly half its food supply, agriculture remains one of its largest
and most important industries. It occupies 706,000 people or nearly 3 per cent
of the total working population, provides about 3 per cent of the gross
national product, and uses 48 million of the 60 million acres (19-5 million of
the 24 million hectares) of land.
In Northern Ireland 2-7 million of the 3-3 million acres (i-i million of the
1-3 million hectares) of land are in agricultural use, and the corresponding
proportions for employment and gross product are 10 per cent and 9 per cent.
THE LAND AND The soils of the country are extremely varied. Many of those in the west and
ITS USES north, overlying hard rocks, are poor and thin. The lowlands and river
valleys are usually fertile, varying in texture from clay through silt to sandy
loam. There is also some peat. Clay soils often require under-drainage. Land
used for farming is conventionally divided into improved land suitable for
cultivation (crops and grass) and rough grazing. In hill country the area of
improved land is often small, but is usually supplemented by grazing on a
comparatively large area of hill land.
In the United Kingdom as a whole there are 30 million acres (i2'2 million
hectares) under crops and grass. Improved land and rough grazing together
represent 80 per cent of the land area. The rest is mountain and forest, or put
to urban and kindred uses. The area available for farming is gradually de¬
creasing to meet the needs of housing and industry; however, the loss is more
than outweighed by the increase in output from what remains. Rough grazing,
nearly all of which is hill or mountain land with a native herbage of coarse
grasses, rushes, bracken, heather or scrub trees, has a low potential output—
usually assessed at about one-sixth of that of agricultural land—but is valuable
for sheep. In England and Wales only one-sixth of farming land is classified as
rough grazing. In Northern Ireland the proportion is about one-quarter, but
in Scotland it is about three-quarters.
For many centuries the bulk of land in Britain lay in estates ranging in size
from a few hundred acres upwards, comprising farms of varying sizes let to
tenants. Social changes of the past half-century have completely changed the
pattern of rural life in England and Scotland. Estate duties have been a
principal factor in the breaking up of estates. Most surviving estates are still
owned by private individuals or family trusts, but the Crown, local authorities,
and other corporate bodies hold considerable areas. Of the farms sold, many
have been bought by the tenants already in occupation. About half the farms
in Great Britain today are owner-occupied.
There are about 340,000 significant farming units in Britain. Just under
half are very small units, mostly farmed part-time by occupiers who have
Size and
Ownership
of Farms
300
Types of
Farming
Tillage and
Grassland
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
another source of livelihood besides farming, and accounting for less than a
tenth of the industry’s total output. About half of the total output comes from
the 10 per cent of holdings classified as large farm business, capable of
employing four or more full-time men. There are estimated to be some
190,000 full-time farm businesses in Britain including about 56,000 medium¬
sized (two-four men) and 100,000 small businesses. The number is falling
by about 4,000 or 2 per cent a year.
The average size of full-time holdings in England and Wales is 160 acres
(65 hectares) of crops and grass. In Scotland the crops and grass area of the
22,300 full-time farms averages 170 acres (70 hectares) although the average
for the 32,900 part-time and other holdings is only 16 acres (6-5 hectares).
In Northern Ireland the land is divided into about 64,000 holdings, almost
all of which are owner-occupied. About 40 per cent of these holdings are
either very small or let in conacre (seasonal lettings for crops or grazing), so
that the number of effective farm businesses is about 37,000 of which half
provides a full-time occupation for the owner. The typical farm size is between
40 and 70 acres (16 and 28 hectares) of crops and grass.
Most British farms produce a variety of products; the pattern varies from
farm to farm. Dairy farming is widespread throughout Britain. In England
the farms devoted primarily to arable crops are in the eastern part of the
country—in East Anglia, Kent, Lincolnshire and the East Riding of Yorkshire.
Potato and vegetable growing on a substantial scale marks the farming of the
Fens (south Lincolnshire and Cambridgeshire), the alluvial areas around the
rivers Thames and Humber and the peaty lands in south Lancashire. Else¬
where, horticultural crops are widely dispersed amongst agricultural crops.
In Scotland the rich lowlands of the east coast are also primarily arable.
Interspersed between these arable areas, and also in the Midlands, the
south-east of England and the north-east of Scotland, there are large tracts
where much of the land is under grass and the rearing and fattening of
cattle is an important enterprise. In the south-west of Scotland dairying is
extensively practised, but most of the north-west is devoted to rearing sheep
on rough hill land. The parts of England bordering the Pennine hills and most
of Wales are also sheep-rearing areas, though a good deal of dairying, based
on purchased feedingstuffs, is also done there. In Northern Ireland mixed
farming is practised, the most important products being milk, fat and store
cattle, pigs and eggs, with sheep and stock raising in the hill areas. Oats and
barley are widely grown, mainly for livestock feeding, and the only important
cash crop is potatoes, both ware and seed.
There are three main categories of grassland in the United Kingdom-
temporary grass, permanent grass and rough grazing. Temporary grass may
be part of an arable rotation, providing a break of from one to seven years
between tillage crops, or it may be part of an all-grass system where its
advantages over permanent grass are that it can provide early and late season
grazing and often heavier crops.
Since the end of the second world war there has been an increase approach¬
ing half a million acres (202,000 hectares) in the area of temporary grass and
the total arable area is over 5 million acres (2 million hectares) more than it was
pre-war. In England and Wales nearly one-half of the 24 million acres (97
million hectares) of crops and grass (excluding over 3 million acres (1-2
million hectares) of rough grazing) is under permanent grass, one-third under
cereals and one-sixth under temporary grass. About three-quarters of all
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
301
AGRICULTURAL
PRODUCTION:
CROPS AND
LIVESTOCK
Production
Food Supplies
agricultural land in Scotland is in rough grazing and of the 4-3 million acres
(1-7 million hectares) of crops and grass about one-quarter is in permanent
and two-fifths in temporary grass. Excluding about 640,000 acres (259,000
hectares) of rough grazing the crops and grass area of Northern Ireland is
about 2 million acres (o-8 million hectares) of which over half is under per¬
manent and slightly less than one-quarter under temporary grass.
Farmers everywhere are exposed to the vagaries of the weather, of pests and
diseases, and of the market; but over the past 30 years much has been done
in Britain to mitigate these risks. This has been partly due to the advance of
science, partly to self-help by farmers’ organisations, but largely to govern¬
ment action. The role of the Government as guarantor and provider of
technical and advisory services, is described on pp. 308-18.
The steady expansion in production and in yield per acre of arable land which
has taken place over the last 30 years is summarised in Table 19. Apart from
a slight decline between 1961 and 1964 and another in 1968 total cattle stocks
have risen steadily each year since 1953. The milk-producing herd reached its
peak level in 1962, thereafter suffering a two-year decline. Since 1964 the
herd has again increased each year despite heavy losses in the foot-and-mouth
epidemic of 1967-68. Numbers of sheep and lambs reached their highest level
in 1966 but have since declined slightly. Numbers of pigs and poultry have
expanded considerably over the past decade, though pig numbers showed a
temporary reduction in 1966-67. Production of wheat at nearly 3! million
tons in 1969-70 has increased by over two-thirds since the end of the second
world war, while barley production at over 8£ million tons in 1969-70 is now
more than four times the 1946 figure. There has been a marked fall in the
production of oats. Potato production is very susceptible to weather conditions
but on average adequate supplies are being maintained from a steadily
declining area. Between i960 and 1969 output of pigmeat increased by about
one-third and eggs by under one-fifth and these, together with the increase
in beef and milk output, resulted in higher consumption of feedingstuffs,
mostly from home resources. Imports of concentrated feeds fell slightly from
6 million tons in 1960-61 to 5^ million tons in 1966-67, but then rose to
6 million tons in 1969-70.
The index of agricultural net output (all holdings) at constant prices has
risen steadily. By 1953-54 it was about 56 per cent above the immediate
pre-war average. Based on the average of 1954-55 to 1956-57=100, it was
135 in 1966-67. On a rebased index, 1964-65 to 1966-67 =100, 106 is forecast
for 1969-70.
Since 1939 the population of the United Kingdom has increased by over
7^ million, or 16 per cent. In spite of this growth Britain now produces just
over half of its total food requirements or two-thirds of all that can be grown
in temperate climates; this latter figure comparing with about one-half before
the second world war. Home production of the principal foods is shown as a
percentage by weight of total supplies in Table 20.
Table 21 shows how the level of the main food supplies passing into
consumption has changed since before the second world war and within the
last decade. The main trends reflected in the table are that consumption of
bulky foods (carbohydrates), such as flour, has tended to decline, while that of
lugh-protein foods, such as meat and eggs, continues to increase with greater
availability and rising living standards.
302
Crops
Cereals
Fodder Crops
Sugar Beet
Potatoes
Dairy Fanning
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Wheat growing is mainly confined to the East Anglia area of England.
There was a sharp fall in the area under wheat in 1969 following bad weather
during the previous winter and spring. Harvesting conditions were reasonably
good, however, and about 3-3 million tons were harvested in 1969, with
average yields estimated at 32-3 cwt. per acre (660 kg. per hectare). Just under
a half of the wheat crop is used for flour milling, the remainder going mainly
for animal feed.
Since i960 the area under barley has increased by nearly 80 per cent and
production has more than doubled due to improved yields. The important
malting and distilling market currently absorbs about one-sixth of the crop,
most of the remainder being used for animal feeding purposes.
The widespread use of combine harvesters has necessitated the installation
of drying and storage facilities on many farms. Such equipment is also widely
used on a co-operative basis.
In England and Wales the total area of fodder crops has fallen because in
many cases farmers can provide winter feed more economically by increased
grass production and improved methods of conservation. In Scotland the area
of fodder crops is declining but the area of turnips and swedes is greater than
in England.
Beet is grown mainly in East Anglia and Lincolnshire where most of the beet
sugar factories are situated. The crop is grown under contract to the British
Sugar Corporation, which takes the entire output at guaranteed prices and also
provides technical advice and assistance. Precision drilling is the usual method
of sowing and more than three-quarters of the crop is mechanically harvested.
Potatoes are grown in most parts of Britain. Early potatoes are cultivated
mainly in the south and on the west coast for immediate summer marketing.
The production of main crop potatoes (which may be stored until the
following spring) is centred on the eastern side of the country and in Northern
Ireland, which sends about one-sixth of its crop to Great Britain. Scotland
and Northern Ireland produce more than half of the requirements of seed
potatoes. Both areas also export seed potatoes. The long-term trend is for the
area planted with potatoes to diminish and for yields to increase but Britain
remains self-sufficient in main crop potatoes except in years of unusually low
yield. The area declined from 829,000 acres (335,000 hectares) in i960 to
an estimated 691,000 acres (280,000 hectares) in 1968. Wet cultivating and
sowing conditions in the 1968-69 winter and spring were the main causes of
a further fall in 1969 to 614,000 acres (248,000 hectares). The yield in 1969
was 10 tons per acre (25 tonnes per hectare), the record being io-i tons per
acre (25-3 tonnes per hectare) in 1965. Although the planting, cultivation,
harvesting and grading of the potato crop are becoming increasingly mechan¬
ised, much hand labour is still needed.
Milk is much more valuable when sold on the liquid milk market than when
converted into cheese, butter or other milk products. In Great Britain milk
is produced primarily for liquid consumption, but in Northern Ireland the
greater part of the milk is used for manufactured products. Average
consumption per head is nearly five pints per week.
Average yields per dairy cow have increased during the last decade by more
than 11 per cent and now average well over 800 gallons (3,64° litres) a year.
Freedom from tuberculosis has reduced herd wastage, and through the
artificial insemination (AI) centres, operated by the Milk Marketing Boards
and other organisations, the influence of a relatively small number of high-
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
3°3
Years commencing 1st June
TABLE 19
Land Use,
Produce and
Livestock
in Britain
Item and Unit
Land Use (’000 acres)
Arable for food crops
Temporary grass, fodder
Permanent grass
Rough grazings
Total
Main Crops
Cereals: area (’000 acres) . .
harvest (’000 tons)
of which—
Wheat: area (’000 acres) . .
harvest (’000 tons)
yield (cwt. per acre)
Barley: area (’000 acres) . .
harvest (’000 tons)
yield (cwt. per acre)
Oats: area (’000 acres) . .
harvest (’000 tons)
yield (cwt. per acre)
Potatoes: area (’000 acres) . .
harvest (’000 tons)
yield (tons per acre)
Sugar area (’000 acres) . .
beet: harvest0 (’000 tons)
yield (cvjt. per acre)
Livestock (’000 head)
Total cattle and calves
of which—dairy cows
beef cows
heifers in
calf
Sheep and lambs
Pigs 
Poultry
Livestock Products
Milk (million gallons)
Eggs (million dozen)
Beef and veal (’000 tons) . .
Mutton and lamb (’000 tons)
Pigmeat (’000 tons)
Poultry meat (’000 tons)
Averages
1936-38 1956-65
7,476
5,611
18,750
16,476
48,313
5,301
4,442
1,856
1,651
17-8
929
765
16-5
2,403
1,940
16-1
724
4,873
6-7
335
415
24-8
8,675
3,281
554
25,786
4,466
76,236
1,556
545
578
195
435
89
10,128
7,835
12,849
17,721
48,533
7,851
10,222
2,140
3,134
29-2
3,708
5,000
26-4
1,778
1,856
21-4
792
6,676
8-5
434
801
36-9
11,489
3,223ft
9806
804
27,736
6,462
106,863
2,407
1,071
855
240
761
295
1968
1969
(Prov.)
11,545
6,697
12,195
17,537
47,974
9,418
12,920
2,417
3,414
28-2
5,933
8,140
27-4
945
1,205
25-6
691
6,763
9-8
465
930
40-0
12,151
3,226
1,152
826
28,004
7,387
127,459
2,649
1,237
904
243
860
528
11,407
6,536
12,348
17,568
47,859
9,131
13,506
2,059
3,320
32-2
5,962
8,661
29-0
945
1,298
27-5
614
6,117
10-0
457
890
39-0
12,374
3,275
1,211
822
26,604
7,783
127,220
2,742
1,253
922
227
912
554
1969
metric
equiva¬
lents
4,630c
2,640c
5,000c
7,120e
19,390
3,700c
813°
4-15d
2,420°
3-64d
383c
3- 44d
248c
25-0d
185c
4- 85d
12,480*
Source: Agricultural Departments. Annual Abstract of Statistics
“ Raw equivalent basis. e ’000 hectares. e million litres.
6 Five-year average 1961-65. d tonnes per hectare.
3°4
BRITAIN I971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
TABLE 20
Home
Production as a
Percentage of
Total Supplies
Food product
Pre-war
average
1959
1969
(Prov.)
Carcase meat and offal
Bacon and ham (excluding canned). .
Shell eggs
Milk for human consumption (as liquid)
Cheese. .
Butter . .
Oils and fats (crude oil equivalent). .
Sugar (as refined)
Wheat and flour (as wheat equivalent)
Potatoes for human consumption . .
51
32
71
100
24
9
16
18
23
96
64
41
99
100
39
5
15
26
37
92
69
38
99
100
43
12
11
31
41
95
Source: Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food.
TABLE 21
Food
Consumption
Per Head Per
Annum
Pre-war
average
lb.
1959
lb.
1969 (prov.)
lb.
kg.
Carcase meat and offal . .
Bacon and ham . .
Poultry meat
Fish: fresh, frozen and cured
Eggs in shell
Liquid milk
Cheese
Butter
Margarine
Oils and fats
Sugar®
Flour
Potatoes
Fresh vegetables (including
tomatoes)
Fresh and dried fruit
Canned and bottled fruit
Tea
Coffee
99-8
26-4
5-1
21-8
25-9
217-1
8-8
24-7
8- 7
19-3
100-6
194-5
190-0
115-3
86-5
10-3
9- 3
0-7
96-9
24-2
11-1
17- 5
29-8
318-7
9-3
18- 5
14-8
21-6
111-3
168-3
214-8
108-1
80-5
17-4
9-7
1-9
101-2
25-0
21-9
16-1
32-0
317-4
11-3
19-6
11-8
25-4
107-2
145-7
217-7
113-8
78-5
19-0
8-5
3-6
45-8
11-4
9.9
7- 3
14-5
143-2
5-1
8- 9
5-4
11-5
48-6
66-0
98-7
51-7
35-6
8-6
3-9
1-7
Source: Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food.
a Including sugar in all home-produced and imported manufactured goods, and in
brewing.
potential bulls is widely disseminated. It is estimated that about two-thirds
of Britain’s total cattle are bred by AI. The Friesian breed is dominant in the
dairy herds of England, Wales and Northern Ireland, but in Scotland the
Ayrshire breed is the most numerous. Milk production has also been stimu¬
lated by advances in grassland management, intensive grazing techniques and
new methods of making high quality hay; new methods of conversion into
silage are being exploited. Most dairy farmers practise some degree of in¬
tensive grass management, but hay of the traditional type remains the basic
winter feed; it is supplemented with purchased concentrates.
Clean dairy farming methods and hygienic standards for equipment and
buildings used in milk production are prescribed by regulations made and
enforced by the appropriate ministers.
Livestock
Beef Cattle
Sheep
Pigs
Poultry
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY 305
A great number of specialised breeds of livestock have been developed over
the centuries in Britain. It has been found that they meet the needs of breeders
in most countries and substantial export sales are made to buyers seeking to
replenish and improve their herds with British animals.
In the hill regions hardy herds of beef cattle are kept, especially of the
Galloway and Welsh Black breeds and their crosses; in marginal land and
lower areas the sires used are predominantly of the Aberdeen Angus and
Hereford breeds. About two-thirds of home-fed beef production derives from
the dairy herds, some females being mated to beef sires, the majority by AI.
There is a large and complex trade in store cattle (increased by animals
imported from the Irish Republic), a typical movement being from the upland
west to grazing areas in the Midlands.
Britain has outstandingly good pastures for sheep. Moreover, veterinary
research has provided vaccine and sera protection against nearly all the
epidemic diseases to which sheep are subject. More than 30 breeds and
innumerable crosses are to be found in Britain, each breed having originated
within a circumscribed area.
In the hills, and especially in the Highlands, winter conditions are usually
severe. Draft ewes and lambs are brought from the hill areas every autumn
to swell the lowland flocks, usually in two stages: first, to farms at inter¬
mediate altitudes, where they are mated with rams of a larger and more
rapidly maturing breed; then, the cross-bred progeny pass on in due course
to the more genial lowland conditions and especially to the Midlands and the
south and east of England, where they become crossed again with Down
rams for fat lamb production. The hill breeds bring in hardiness and the
lowland sires fecundity and early maturity.
Although wool is of considerable importance to the sheep farmer the main
object is the production of fat lambs; this reflects the change in the preference
of consumers away from mature sheep.
Pig production is carried on in most parts of Britain but is particularly
important in the eastern and southern counties of England. In the past pigs
were found on the majority of farms but there is now an increasing concentra¬
tion into specialist units and larger herds. The most frequently used breeds are
the Large White and the Landrace though considerable cross-breeding takes
place. Pig improvements are fostered by the Meat and Livestock Commission
and by leading commercial firms through schemes for progeny and perform¬
ance testing, litter recording and other development work. Attention is focused
on utility qualities, such as size and weight of litters, and on food consumed
per pound of liveweight gain. AI is available as a nationwide service.
Carcases are used for curing as bacon, for sale as fresh pork and for manu¬
facturing into sausages and other processed forms. In terms of pig meat, about
30 per cent is used for bacon and 70 per cent for pork and manufacturing.
Specialist techniques and intensive husbandry have been introduced over a
large part of the poultry industry and considerable concentration has occurred.
There are now several flocks of over 100,000 birds and only a small pro¬
portion of total production is in the hands of the smallest producers. About
80 per cent of the laying birds on farms are in flocks of 1,000 or more. With the
rise in the poultry population and in the yield of eggs per bird (now averaging
well over 200 eggs a year), the estimated production of eggs has more than
doubled the 1938 level and for several years nearly all eggs consumed in
Britain have been home-produced. About 285 million broilers and other
special table chickens were produced in 1969.
3°6
Horticultural
Crops
BRITAIN I97i: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Horticultural crops occupy only a small fraction of the cultivated land of
the country—about 2% per cent of the area under crops and grass—but their
value in terms of output per acre is very high. The total value of horticultural
crops sold in 1969-70 is estimated at about £226 million, out of an estimated
total value of £2,115 million for all output from agricultural holdings in
Britain. The June 1969 Census of open-grown crops showed that there were
about 470,000 acres (195,000 hectares) of vegetables (excluding potatoes),
about 207,000 acres (84,000 hectares) of fruit, and 36,000 acres (14,600
hectares) of flowers and nursery stock.
Market gardening has grown up around all the large centres of population,
notably in the Lee Valley, near London, and in more rural areas with favour¬
able soil or climatic conditions—in Bedfordshire, Cambridgeshire, Lincoln¬
shire, Hampshire and Kent, and in a concentration of smallholdings in the
Vale of Evesham. Districts with mild climates, such as the Penzance region of
Cornwall, have been favoured for the production of selected early crops. More
recently, selected vegetable crops, particularly peas, have been grown in
rapidly increasing quantities for quick-freezing.
Specialised horticultural holdings range from a few acres up to about
300 acres (120 hectares), and many have glasshouses, frames or forcing houses.
Use of fertilisers, particularly of an organic nature, is very heavy, and much
of the field work is mechanised. The larger holdings normally have specialised
packing sheds, with washing and grading machinery, and irrigation plants.
Growers, however, often join together in co-operatives for marketing their
produce and many of these provide grading and packing facilities.
Britain has over 4,500 acres (1,820 hectares) of glasshouses, about half of the
area being used primarily for the cultivation of tomatoes, the main centres of
which are the Lee Valley in Essex and Hertfordshire, Lancashire, the East
Riding of Yorkshire, the rest of Essex and Sussex. In the Lea Valley, on a
narrow belt of gravel and brick earth, about 450 acres (182 hectares) are
covered with glass. Production of tomatoes is estimated at about 85,000 tons
annually and the value of all glasshouse crops (including flowers) is nearly
£45 million per year.
Hard fruits are grown in many parts of England and Wales, the chief risk
associated with their culture being late frosts. The main centres are in the
south, south-west and east of England, and Kent in particular. The area of
Cox’s Orange Pippin has increased in recent years but that of other dessert
varieties and of cooking apples has declined. About 23,000 acres (9,300
hectares) of varieties of cider apple are grown mainly in Devon, Herefordshire
and Somerset for the cider-making industry. In Northern Ireland there are
between 6,500 and 7,000 acres (2,630 and 2,830 hectares) of cooking apples—
Bramley’s Seedling—mostly concentrated in County Armagh. Plums and
soft fruits are grown in many counties; concentrations of plums and cherries
are found in Kent and Worcestershire, of blackcurrants in Norfolk, Kent,
Herefordshire and Worcestershire; and of strawberries in the Wisbech area
and in Kent. Raspberries are exceptional in that of some 9,000 acres (3,640
hectares) grown in Britain over four-fifths are in Scotland, mainly in the
Blairgowrie district of Perthshire and in Angus.
Hop-growing for the brewing industry is confined to two main areas, in Kent
and Sussex and in Herefordshire and Worcestershire. Capital outlay and
cultivation costs are very high, but crops per acre average about 12 cwt.,
worth some ^470. The total annual value of the crop is nearly £7 million.
Hops
FARM
EXPENDITURE
AND EARNINGS
TABLE 22
Estimated
Farm Expenses
and Sales in
Britain
1969-70
Capital
Requirements
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY 3°7
Estimates of farm expenses and sales and the aggregate net income of agri¬
cultural producers are prepared annually by the agricultural departments
(see Table 22). They show that Britain’s farming is based on livestock; two-
thirds of farmers’ income is derived from the sale of animals or their products.
The aggregate net income of farmers rose from £393 million in 1960-61 to
£535^ million in 1969—70* The annual cost of direct support to agriculture
from public funds has averaged £255 million during the past five years.
Of farm expenses, machinery and equipment amount to about one-sixth,
feedingstuffs about one-third and wages about one-fifth. Since i960 male
agricultural earnings have risen by nearly 70 per cent, offsetting the manpower
economies made possible by mechanisation and increasing farm size.
Until 1958 rents tended to lag behind other costs. This was due partly to
the reluctance of landlords to put up the rents of satisfactory tenants, and
partly to the terms of reference given to arbitrators. These terms were
modified in the Agriculture Act 1958 and since i960 rents in England and
Wales have gone up by about 90 per cent.
Expenses
Labour . .
Rent and Interest
Machinery
Feedingstuffs . .
Fertilisers
Other
Total
Net Income
Total
£
million
333i
198
284
5244
150J
285
1,775^
535i
2,311
As a Per¬
centage
of total
18-8
11*2
16-0
29-5
8-5
16-0
100
Sales
Milk and Milk
Products
Fatstock . .
Eggs and Poultry
Farm Crops
Horticultural
Products
Other
Total
Production grants,
sundry receipts
and other credits
Increase in value of
farm stocks and
work in hand . .
Total
£
million
458
657
322
403
226
484
2,114J
113i
83
2,311
As a Per¬
centage
of total
21-7
31-1
15-2
19-0
10-7
2-3
100
Source: Annual Review 1970 (Cmnd. 4321).
The capital required for land and buildings may be provided by the farmei,
if he is an owner-occupier, or by the landlord, if the farm is let to a tenant.
In 1969 ‘fixed capital’ totalling nearly £100 million was added to the value of
land and buildings and £186 million was invested in new plant, machinery,
vehicles and stock. The bulk of the capital required to stock and run the farms
is provided by the occupiers. Bank advances are an important source of
outside capital, both fixed and working; about two-thirds of the total bank
advances to agriculture are believed to be for short-term purposes. Agricultural
merchants are also an important source or short-term credit. Mortgage loans
form the chief source of long-term credit and are provided by specialised
financial institutions (see p. 312) and private sources.
3°8
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Mechanisation
Net Incomes
THE ROLE
OF THE
GOVERNMENT
Government
Policy
Accounts of some 2,000 farms in England and Wales, collected by university
agricultural economists in 1968-69, show average valuations of occupiers’
capital ranging from over £10 to more than £60 per acre (^4 to £24 per
hectare), or well over £100 (^40-50) for intensive holdings. In Scotland a
similar sample of 800 accounts shows a wide range in valuations per acre,
from about £3 (£1-20 per hectare) on hill sheep farms with extensive rough
grazings to between £50 and £60 per acre (£20 and £24 per hectare) on low¬
land farms. In Northern Ireland average valuations of occupiers’ capital range
from over £100 on the smaller, more intensive farms to ^50 per acre (^40 to
£20 per hectare) on the larger farms. On all types of farms investment in
machinery is a heavy item: on dairy and arable farms it averages nearly £20
per acre (^8 per hectare); on stock-rearing farms it may amount to £7 per
acre (£3 per hectare).
Britain has one of the heaviest tractor densities in the world, with over half a
million tractors in 1969, or one to every 31 acres (12-6 hectares) of arable land.
Power-take-off implements now characterise arable farming; and some
69,000 combine harvesters were in use in 1969. A wide variety of machines for
harvesting and preservation of grass are employed. Milking machines are
installed on all except the smallest farms, many with mechanical means of
handling milk.
Over 90 per cent of the farms in Great Britain have an electricity supply
and accompanying equipment. There are about 1,100 farmers’ machinery
syndicates through which farmers have the use of expensive equipment
without tying up their own capital.
Research, development and testing of farm machinery are carried out by
the National Institute of Agricultural Engineering.
The range of net incomes between individual farms is very wide, varying
with the type and size of farm, quality of land, and managerial ability of the
occupier. The average net income for farms of different types is mostly within
the range of £5 to £16 per acre (£2 to £6-50 per hectare) with the exception
of pig and poultry farms and horticultural holdings, which are more in¬
tensive in their use of land. Net income per acre on dairy and arable farms
has nearly always been higher than on stock-rearing farms, which are generally
larger than the other types and are situated on poorer land.
By the beginning of the 1930s the need for some form of State assistance to
agriculture had become pressing: it was during this time that the Govern¬
ment initiated the various forms of protection and financial assistance for agri¬
culture.
During the second world war and the immediate post-war years, agri¬
cultural production was closely controlled by the State, with County War
Agricultural Executive Committees, composed of landowners, farmers and
farm workers, acting as the Government’s local agents.
Government policy today is founded on the Agriculture Act 1947 and 1957,
the Agriculture and Horticulture Act 1964 and the Agriculture Acts 1967 and
1970. The main objective, as set out in Section 1 of the 1947 Act, continues to
be ‘a stable and efficient agricultural industry capable of producing such part
of the nation’s food and other agricultural produce as in the national interest it
is desirable to produce in the United Kingdom, and of producing it at mini-
Machinery of
Government
CURRENT
SUPPORT POLICY
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY 309
mum prices consistent with proper remuneration and living conditions for
farmers and workers in agriculture and an adequate return on capital invested
in the industry’. To this end, the Government is empowered to provide, for
the main agricultural products, guaranteed prices determined in the light of
annual reviews (see p. 310).
The Agriculture Act of 1957 assured farmers that the prices guaran¬
teed under the 1947 Act would not be steeply reduced, and at the same
time provided grants towards the cost of bringing fixed equipment up to
date.
The Agriculture and Horticulture Act 1964 gave the Government powers to
introduce minimum import prices for agricultural and horticultural products.
These powers have been used in the case of cereals and, in 1970, for eggs
and certain egg products. An understanding with overseas suppliers on the
sharing of the bacon market became effective in 1964 and was renewed in
1969.
In 1968 the selective expansion programme, announced in 1965, was
extended to 1973 provided expansion was based on increasing productivity.
The agricultural industry is expected both to release manpower and to
increase production to meet the major part of the growth in demand for
temperate foodstuffs.
The functions of government in relation to agriculture are mostly exercised
by the agricultural ministers, that is to say, for England and Wales the
Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food and the Secretary of State for
Wales, for Scotland the Secretary of State for Scotland, and for Northern
Ireland the Home Secretary, who is the minister responsible for United
Kingdom aspects of Northern Ireland agriculture, local aspects being the
responsibility of the Northern Ireland Minister of Agriculture. The agri¬
cultural ministers are assisted by advisory committees composed of general
agriculturists, scientists and other specialists.
The headquarters of the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food is
divided functionally, each division being responsible for a particular sub¬
ject or service. Its relations with individual farmers are conducted mainly
through its local offices, grouped in England in regions, each administered by a
regional controller working in close collaboration with the regional heads of
the technical services. Local offices in Wales are grouped under a Welsh Sec¬
retary with similar functions and with special responsibility for Welsh affairs.
In Scotland most of the agricultural functions of the Secretary of State are
discharged through the Department of Agriculture and Fisheries. The
Secretary of State for Scotland also appoints the members of the Crofters
Commission (see p. 313) and the Red Deer Commission, which deals with the
conservation and control of red deer.
The Northern Ireland Ministry of Agriculture is responsible for imple¬
menting agricultural policy inaugurated by the Northern Ireland Government.
It is organised on similar lines to the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and
Food, for which it acts as agent in the administration in Northern Ireland of
United Kingdom agricultural schemes.
In November 1966 an Economic Development Committee (see p. 235) for
agriculture was established, comprising representatives of farmers, workers
and landowners, as well as official members.
In February each year, in accordance with the 1947 Act, the agricultural
ministers review the economic condition and prospects of the industry.
310
Annual Review
Price
Guarantees
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Between annual reviews, a special review may be held in the event of a change
in circumstances. In holding reviews, the ministers are required to consult
with representatives of agricultural producers—in practice, the three farmers’
unions in the United Kingdom. The ministers consider such factors as pro¬
duction trends and market requirements, world market prospects, the cost of
subsidies, the trend of income in the industry as a whole, the increasing
efficiency of the industry and changes in production costs. In the light of their
conclusions from the Review, Ministers determine guaranteed prices for fat
cattle, fat sheep, fat pigs, eggs, wool, milk, cereals, potatoes and sugar beet.
These guarantees apply to livestock and livestock products for the ensuing
12 months, and to crops to be harvested in the current year. Consideration is
also given to the relevant production grants (see p. 311) which are those con¬
nected with tenant-type activities (for example, fertilisers subsidy), as opposed
to grants which are the responsibility of the landlord (for example, Farm
Improvement Scheme), and they are taken into account in calculating the total
value of the guarantees. The Government’s conclusions and its decisions on
changes in guaranteed prices and relevant production grants are published as
a White Paper.
The cost of government support to the industry in 1969-70 was about
£280 million; the estimate for 1970-71, made before the 1970 review de¬
cisions, forecast an increase to about £299 million.
The general policy of the Government is to allow free import of food into
Britain. The support system acts by means of deficiency payments to stabilise
prices to farmers at appropriate levels. These payments make up the deficit
between the open market price of a commodity and the price guaranteed by
the Government.
The deficiency payments scheme for cereals is administered directly by the
agricultural departments, and storage incentives are paid to growers who sell
their wheat and barley after the harvest period. ‘Standard quantity’1 arrange¬
ments for wheat and barley were introduced for the 1964 crop but were
abolished in 1968 and 1969 respectively. Deficiency payments for fatstock
are made weekly to producers on certified sales on a liveweight or deadweight
basis. For cattle and sheep there may also be a balancing payment at the end of
the year if the average return to producers falls short of the annual guaranteed
price.
For most of the remaining commodities and for fat pigs in Northern
Ireland, the Government operates the guarantee through the appropriate
marketing board, which takes account of any payments from or to the Govern¬
ment in deciding what to pay producers for their produce. In the case of milk
there are five boards, and the full guaranteed price is paid only on a ‘standard
quantity’ relating to the volume of liquid milk sales plus a reasonable reserve.
Milk produced in excess of the standard quantity is sold for manufacturing
considerably below the full guaranteed price. The retail price of liquid milk is
determined by the Government so as to cover the full cost of the guarantee
and, taking one year with another, there is no Exchequer subsidy. For eggs, a
1 The Agriculture Act 1947 postulates that the guarantees should be related to the
volume of agricultural produce which, in the national interest, it is desirable to produce
domestically (see p. 308). This is effected by including ‘standard quantities’ in the
guarantee arrangements for milk, eggs, pigs, potatoes and sugar beet. ‘Standard
quantity’ arrangements vary in form but, in general, the basic guaranteed price
determined in the Annual Review is related to a specific quantity of produce marketed
annually on a national basis; if this quantity is exceeded, the producers’ average
unit return falls.
Production
Grants
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY 31I
subsidy is paid to the British Egg Marketing Board on all first-quality eggs
sold to the Board through packing stations but new arrangements will be
necessary after the end of March 1971 when the Board will cease to exist (see
p. 315). The government intends to phase out the subsidy and remove eggs
from the guarantee by the end of March 1974. A deficiency payment is made
for potatoes in years in which the growers’ average price for potatoes for
human consumption (excluding new potatoes) is less than the guaranteed
price; payment for the benefit of growers is made to the Potato Marketing
Board in Great Britain and to the Ministry of Agriculture, Northern Ireland.
Surpluses are purchased by these authorities for stockfeed.
For wool a fixed price is guaranteed to the British Wool Marketing Board
for every pound of fleece wool it buys from producers. This enables it to fix in
advance a schedule of producers’ prices, based on types and quality, after
making allowance for the Board’s marketing costs.
Under the Sugar Act 1956 and the Agriculture Act 1957 the British Sugar
Corporation contracts to buy the whole of the sugar beet crop produced from
a specified acreage—at present 443,000 acres (179,000 hectares) at a scale
of fixed prices, determined as a result of the annual review and related to
sugar content. Refined sugar produced by the Corporation is sold, under
market-sharing agreements with the refiners, at a price based on the world
price.
The Sugar Board buys Commonwealth sugar under the Commonwealth
Sugar Agreement and sells it commercially. The deficits or surpluses which
result from the transactions of both the Corporation and the Board are
ultimately reflected in the Board’s accounts. When these accounts show a
deficit a surcharge is made on all sugar, imported or home-produced, entering
the British market, including the sugar content of composite sugar imports,
and when there is a surplus a distribution payment is made correspondingly,
so that taking one year with another the Board balances its accounts.
The price supports outlined above relate only to current production. To
increase productivity, however, the Government offers to farmers a wide
range of inducements, known as production grants, for improvements to land,
crops, livestock and equipment. In 1969-70 the Exchequer’s contribution in
the form of production grants was ^136 million. The form taken by these
schemes varies considerably but they fall into three main categories. Firstly,
improvements to land fertility, which include a subsidy on fertilisers and
lime and grants for field drainage, farm water supply and for ploughing certain
kinds of land; the Exchequer cost of these improvements currently runs at
nearly £45 million a year. The second type of inducement is aimed at main¬
taining breeding herds of cattle and flocks of sheep (particularly in upland
areas) and includes a calf subsidy on animals suitable for beef production;
the total cost is over £55 million a year. The third type consists of a contribu¬
tion towards farm improvements generally but with particular reference to
farm buildings, silos, roads, fences and other equipment. From March 1970
the rates of grant have been 40 per cent on items approved under the Farm
Improvement Scheme, 60 per cent on items under the Hill Land Improve¬
ment Scheme and for field drainage schemes, plus a 10 per cent supplement
for field drainage benefiting hill land. A grant is also available to farmers and
growers to encourage the keeping of farm business records as an aid to sound
management decisions.
The Agriculture Act 1970 introduced a new unified farm capital grant
scheme to replace various existing schemes.
L
312
Amalgamatio n s
of Small Farms
Horticulture
Investment
Grants
OTHER
GOVERNMENT
ASSISTANCE
AND ACTION
Agricultural
Credit
BRITAIN 1971; AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Under the Agriculture Act 1967 the Government is empowered to make
grants to meet 60 per cent of the approved costs of voluntary amalgamations
of small farms with other land to form commercial units; and to pay lump
sums or annuities to farmers who give up such holdings for amalgamation.
Where an owner wishes to dispose of an uncommercial holding the Govern¬
ment may buy it outright for this purpose.
Horticultural produce, because it is perishable and liable to seasonal variation
in quantity and quality, does not lend itself to a system of guaranteed prices.
Hitherto the principal means of support has been tariffs on imports, but
greater emphasis has now been placed on the need to strengthen the com¬
petitive efficiency of the industry so as to reduce its dependence upon tariffs.
To this end grants of one-third are available to meet the capital cost of a wide
range of buildings, plant and equipment used in the production, storage, pre¬
paration for market and transport of horticultural produce. Additionally,
small-scale horticulturists who are prepared to undertake a three-year pro¬
gramme for improving the efficiency of their businesses may qualify for a grant
of up to £500. The cost to the Exchequer of these schemes is over £4 million
a year.
Special arrangements for the agricultural and horticultural industries have
been made under the investment incentives procedure which replaced invest¬
ment allowances in 1966. Broadly speaking, the Minister of Agriculture in
England, Wales and Northern Ireland and the Secretary of State in Scotland
are empowered to p2y grants on approved expenditure on fixed equipment,
plant and machinery, agricultural tractors and self-propelled harvesters. From
March 1970 the rates of grant have been 30 pei cent for fixed equipment, plant
and machinery and 10 per cent on agricultural tractors and self-propelled
harvesters.
A number of facilities for specific purposes enjoy government encouragement
and support.
In England and Wales finance for the purchase or improvement of agri¬
cultural land and buildings is available from the Agricultural Mortgage Cor¬
poration Ltd. The Corporation’s funds are derived mainly from public
issues of stock, but it receives a measure of government support. Similarly
in Scotland, loans for agricultural purposes secured on agricultuial land in
Scotland are granted by the Scottish Agricultural Securities Corporation
Improvement loans for carrying out improvements to agricultural land and
buildings are also available to landowners from the Lands Impro\ement
Company, whose funds are provided privately.
In Northern Ireland loans are available to farmers from the Agricultural
Loans Fund, administered by the Ministry of Agriculture and financed out
of public funds. Half of the loans issued are short-term for agricultural
machinery and the remainder are medium- or long-term loans for such
purposes as the purchase of livestock, the erection and improvement of farm
buildings and farm dwellings, and the purchase of land for amalgamation and
subsequent restructuring. _
Under the Agriculture Act 1967 the Government can make loans in Great
Britain to help finance the purchase of land acquired for approved amalgama¬
tions of small farms (see above), and approved remodelling expenditure.
Smallholdings
Crofting
Rural
development
Boards
Arterial
drainage and
Sea Defence
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY 313
These loans may be granted up to 90 per cent (100 per cent for certain small
amalgamations) of the valuation of the combined unit determined by the
Agricultural Mortgage Corporation Ltd. in England and Wales and the
Scottish Agricultural Securities Corporation Ltd. in Scotland, which act as
the Government’s agents.
Since 1892 county councils and county borough councils in England and
Wales have had powers to provide land for smallholdings. For financial
assistance in improving smallholdings, authorities can obtain the amalgama¬
tions and capital grants available to farmers generally and these are supple¬
mented for certain smallholdings. In England and Wales, about 12,750
smallholdings are provided by local authorities and about 900 by the Ministry.
The Minister and local authorities may make loans for working capital
to their smallholding tenants. In this way the tenants can be helped to
obtain livestock, machinery, implements and other necessary items; tenants
must, however, have available at least 25 per cent of the capital required.
Land settlement in Scotland has always been carried out by the central
Government, which now owns and maintains about 420,000 acres (170,000
hectares) of land settlement estates, comprising some 3,450 crofts and
holdings.
In the seven Scottish crofting counties—Argyll, Caithness, Inverness,
Orkney, Ross and Cromarty, Sutherland and Shetland—much of the land is
farmed by crofters, tenant farmers whose holdings are generally either rented
at a cost of not more than £50 a year or have an area not exceeding 75 acres
(30 hectares).
In these counties there are about 19,000 crofts, which produce about
one-quarter of the total agricultural output of the area. The special problems
of the crofting counties, which had for some time been suffering from a
declining population, led to the setting up, in 1955, of a Crofters Commission
whose functions are to reorganise, develop and regulate crofting in the
crofting counties, to promote the interests of crofters and to keep under review
matters relating to crofting. The Commission’s statutory powers include
supervising the letting of crofts and (if the crofters agree) the reallocation
of land to form viable and self-contained communities; it also acts as
the Secretary of State’s agent in administering development grants and
loans.
Under the 1967 Agriculture Act a Northern Pennines Rural Development
Board has been set up to advise on the special problems of the upland
areas.
Land drainage (including flood protection) in England and Wales is the
responsibility of 27 river authorities (see p. 270), two catchment boards
(which exercise the functions of river authorities) and about 370 internal
drainage boards. Local authorities also have general land drainage powers.
There are no comparable authorities in Scotland, where arterial drainage of
agricultural land is the owners’ responsibility. River authorities have powers
to maintain and improve watercourses designated as main rivers. Their work
is concerned with the improvement of land drainage by increasing the capacity
and efficiency of rivers and erecting pumping stations, the prevention of
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
inland flooding and the construction and maintenance of defences to protect
low-lying areas from tidal flooding. River authorities also have powers relating
to water resources generally, freshwater fisheries and river pollution.
Internal drainage boards are concerned with very much smaller areas and
their work is chiefly in low-lying agricultural districts. Their main function is
to keep the land drained in their area by improving the main drains and,
where necessary, by pumping from low-lying land.
River authorities and catchment boards obtain most of the funds needed for
drainage purposes from local authorities. The Government pays grants to¬
wards the cost of improvement schemes carried out by these authorities. The
grants vary from 10 per cent to 80 per cent according to the financial position
of the authority, with an additional premium for sea defence works. Internal
drainage boards levy drainage rates on owners and occupiers and also receive
Government grants at a flat rate of 50 per cent. Local authorities receive grants
ranging from 20 per cent to 50 per cent. In Scotland 50 per cent grants are
available to owners or occupiers of agricultural land.
In Northern Ireland the Ministry of Agriculture is the drainage authority
in respect of watercourses designated by the Drainage Council as main or
minor watercourses.
In Great Britain more than half, and in Northern Ireland almost all, farms are
owner-occupied. The traditional form of tenancy in England and Wales runs
from year to year; in Scotland longer leases for terms of 10 to 14 years are
more common, although most tenants farm on a year-to-year basis. The
tenancy agreement may be either written or verbal (in Scotland it must be
written if the period of the lease exceeds one year) and may (but need not)
include provisions about such matters as rights of cropping, liability for repaii
and maintenance, and compensation for tenant’s improvements.
In order to protect the respective interests of landlords and tenants and to
eliminate uncertainty as to their rights and liabilities, a code of landlord and
tenant relationships has been written into legislation. The Agriculture Acts
1947 (England and Wales) and 1948 (Scotland) lay down the basic rules of
good estate management and good husbandry for owners and occupiers
respectively. The Agricultural Holdings Acts 1948 (England and Wales) and
1949 (Scotland) as amended by the Agriculture Act 1958 and the Agriculture
(Miscellaneous Provisions) Acts of 1963 and 1968 contain more detailed
provisions concerning the rights and obligations of landlords and tenants.
The Acts provide for any tenancy of agricultural land, with the exception
of certain short-term lettings to which exemption can be given by the Minister
or Secretary of State, to continue in force from year to year until terminated
by a valid notice to quit. With certain exceptions the tenant can contest it by
serving a counter-notice; the notice to quit then becomes inoperative unless
the landlord can satisfy an independent body (in England and Wales the
Agricultural Land Tribunal and in Scotland the Scottish Land Court) that
his claim for possession is in the interests of sound estate management or good
husbandry or that the land is required for certain purposes specified in the
Acts.
The Acts lay down a code of compensation to which the tenant is entitled
on termination of the tenancy. Rent is a matter for negotiation between
landlord and tenant and may be varied by agreement at any time or, failing
agreement, by arbitration at intervals of not less than three years in England
and Wales and five years in Scotland.
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY 3T5
MARKETING Agricultural products are marketed mainly through private trade channels
such as corn merchants, livestock auctions and markets, and bacon factories,
or through producers’ co-operative organisations. For certain commodities,
however, marketing arrangements are influenced by boards operating under
the Agricultural Marketing Act 1958 (which consolidated earlier legislation).
These marketing boards are producers’ organisations with statutory powers
to regulate the marketing of particular products. The schemes under which
they are constituted and operate must be approved by Parliament and
confirmed by a poll of the producers. Most of the members of the boards are
elected by the producers but a minority are appointed by the minister or
ministers concerned. Further safeguards serve to protect consumers and other
interests affected by schemes and the public interest generally.
Marketing boards fall into two broad categories: first, those which are sole
buyers of the regulated product from all producers not specially exempted
or, alternatively, those exercising a comparable influence by controlling all
contracts between producers and first buyers; and, secondly, boards which
maintain only a broad control over marketing conditions, leaving producers
free otherwise to deal individually with buyers. The boards for eggs, hops,
milk and wool fall into the first category and the potato board into the second.
The egg board will be replaced by a more broadly based Eggs Authority from
April 1971 which will be restricted to support buying and more general market
matters. Northern Ireland has its own marketing boards, based on local
legislation, for milk, pigs and seed potatoes.
The Home-Grown Cereals Authority, established under the Cereals
Marketing Act 1965 to improve the marketing of home-grown cereals,
operates a scheme of bonuses and provides market intelligence. It has reserve
trading powers.
The Meat and Livestock Commission, established under the Agriculture
Act 1967, is charged with improving the production, marketing and distribu¬
tion of livestock and meat in Great Britain. It has a range of executive
functions extending from breeding to retail distribution, one of the most
important of which is to evolve a general scheme of carcase classification. It is
not empowered to trade in either livestock or meat.
Grants of up to one-third are available for the modernisation of major
wholesale horticultural markets; Covent Garden market is being moved to a
new site at Nine Elms in south London, which should be in use in the early
I97os-
National statutory grades are being introduced to improve the competitive
position of home-grown horticultural produce as against imported supplies
and to speed its transit through distributive channels. Grades have so far been
introduced for apples, pears, tomatoes, cucumbers and cauliflowers.
The Apple and Pear Development Council publicises home-grown apples
and pears to increase sales.
Market In 1962 the Government earmarked £1$ million to assist the financing of
Development research and development in the marketing of agricultural and horticultural
Scheme produce. By March 1970 grants totalling about £1-31 million had been
approved. The grant ceiling has been raised to £2 million and the scheme
extended to March 1971 to assist marketing developments other than those of
a co-operative nature.
Co-operation The Central Council for Agricultural and Horticultural Co-operation was
established under the provisions of the Agriculture Act 1967 to promote and
L
CONTROL OF
DISEASES AND
PESTS
Animals
Plants
BRITAIN I971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
develop co-operation in agriculture and horticulture and to administer a
scheme of grants. The Agricultural and Horticultural Co-operation Scheme
1967 incorporates and extends grants for co-operative production and
marketing of agricultural and horticultural produce.
The day-to-day work of treating animal disease is the responsibility of the
veterinary profession in private practice. The State veterinary service,
inaugurated in 1865 and covering Great Britain, deals with situations beyond
the control of the individual veterinary surgeon. Centred on London and
Edinburgh, it is able to deal promptly with outbreaks of notifiable diseases.
For many years Britain has been free from many serious animal diseases,
including rinderpest, sheep scab, glanders and rabies. Two cases of rabies in
imported dogs occurred in 1969--70 after an absence of cases for nearly 50
years. A prohibition on imports of dogs, cats and certain exotic species of
animal was imposed but was lifted for dogs and cats in September 1970. The
campaign to eradicate swine fever has been successful. A major epidemic of
foot-and-mouth disease was experienced towards the end of 1967 but was
eradicated successfully by a stringent slaughter policy supported by other
vigorous control measures; the last case of the disease occurred in June 1968.
In i960 the whole of the United Kingdom became a bovine tuberculosis at¬
tested area. The incidence of bovine tuberculosis is now very low; all cattle are
tuberculin tested at regular intervals and reactors to the test are slaughtered,
compensation being paid to the owners. The voluntary Brucellosis (Accredited
Herds) Scheme, introduced in 1967 as a first stage towards eradication of the
disease, was replaced in 1970 by an incentives scheme which offers payments
for healthy herds rather than compensation for reacting animals. Limited
eradication projects will start in specially selected areas in 1971.
The work of the service is backed by the extensive facilities of the Central
Veterinary Laboratory at Weybridge, Surrey, and those of its subsidiary
laboratory at Lasswade, near Edinburgh. In addition, there are 21 investiga¬
tion centres with well-equipped laboratories in England and Wales. These
centres perform work requiring specialist knowledge and give advice on
disease problems to private practitioners. In Scotland a similar service is
provided by the investigation centres of the three Scottish agricultural colleges.
In Northern Ireland the veterinary services are organised similarly to those
in Great Britain but are administered separately by the Northern Ireland
Government. Animal Health Control policies and the geographical situation
have kept the country free from nearly all the major epizootic diseases. A
scheme for the eradication of brucellosis was almost complete by mid 1970.
The full-time veterinary service is supplemented by the central veterinary
laboratory at Stormont, Belfast.
The plant health services, operated by the Agricultural Departments, are
responsible for statutory controls designed to limit the spread of plant pests
and diseases present in Britain and prevent the introduction of new ones from
abroad. They also issue the health certificates required by other countries to
accompany plant material imported from Britain. Voluntary certification
schemes are operated to encourage the development of healthy vigorous and
true-to-type planting stocks, particularly of crops subject to degenerative
diseases. The Plant Pathology Laboratory at Harpenden, Hertfordshire,
provides scientific and technical advice on which statutory controls and
certification schemes are based.
Infestation
Control
Agricultural
Chemicals
AGRICULTURAL
ADVISORY
SERVICES
The National
Agricultural
Advisory
Service
The
Agricultural
Land Service
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY 31?
The problems of controlling mammalian pests and birds are studied at the
Ministry of Agriculture’s Pest Infestation Control Laboratory at Tolworth,
Surrey and its Land Pests Department at Worplesdon, Surrey; a branch
at Slough, Buckinghamshire, studies insect infestation of stored food pro¬
ducts. The laboratories provide information to and liaise closely with Regional
Pest Officers who in turn advise local authorities, farmers and others con¬
cerned with these problems.
Safeguards against the dangers which could arise from uncontrolled use of
pesticides have been devised and are operating successfully. Regulations made
under the Agriculture (Poisonous Substances) Act 1952 provide protection
for workers using the more toxic chemicals. The voluntary I esticides Safety
Precautions Scheme, operated by the Government with the support of
industry, ensures that new pesticides intended for use in agriculture, forestry
and food storage, or new methods of using existing pesticides, are not intro¬
duced until enough experimental work has been done on their possible hazards
(including contamination of food and harm to wild life) to allow the Govern¬
ment to make recommendations for their safe use. Fheie is also a voluntary
Veterinary Products Safety Precautions Scheme on similar lines although this
will be replaced and amplified by licensing and control provisions made under
the Medicines Act 1968. The purpose of the schemes is to enable users and
advisers to choose efficient proprietary brands of agricultural chemicals fur the
control of pests and diseases, the destruction of weeds, for growth regulation
and for the control of insects and mite pests of stored grain. Products approved
for safety may then be submitted through the Agricultural Chemicals
Approval Scheme for efficiency approval.
A key role in the administration of the safety schemes is played by the
Government’s Advisory Committee on Pesticides and Other Toxic Chemicals.
Reports of this Committee, published in 1964, concluded that there was no
evidence that the use of certain persistent organochlorine pesticides presented
an immediate hazard to human beings and animals, apart from certain species
of predatory birds. In 1967 the Committee recommended that the voluntary
Safety Precautions Schemes should be replaced by compulsory licensing
arrangements. In 1969 R further report recommended the withdrawal of
certain of these chemicals including DDT, aldrin and dieldrin, and the
Government is arranging the implementation of these recommendations in
co-operation with users and manufacturers.
In England and Wales free technical advice on all agricultural and horticultural
matters, other than veterinary, is available through the Ministry’s National
Agricultural Advisory Service (NAAS), which is organised on a regional basis.
Counties, or groups of counties, have a county agricultural adviser and are
divided into districts, in each of which there is a district agricultural adviser
who can call on an extensive team of specialist advisers. In Northern Ireland
advisory work is organised by the Ministry of Agriculture, with a county
organisation similar to the NAAS. In Scotland the advisory services, also
similar in scope to the NAAS, are based on the three agricultural colleges.
The Agricultural Land* Service (ALS), through its qualified land agents,
surveyors and architects, provides a service without charge to owners and
occupiers of both agricultural and horticultural land needing advice on
problems arising from the ownership of land, and investment connected with
it. The services include general advice on the design, layout and construction
318 BRITAIN I971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
or improvement of all types of farm and horticultural buildings as well as
roads, fences, shelter belts and effluent disposal. The ALS also provides
professional advice and services to the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and
Food.
A unified service to be known as the Agricultural Development and
Advisory Service will operate from March 1971 and will comprise the NAAS,
the ALS and an integrated veterinary service.
Basic agricultural research in Britain is described on p. 199. The NAAS
operates 22 farms and horticultural stations whose functions are to investigate
local and national problems, to test research findings and integrate them into
improved production systems and to communicate them to advisers and the
industry. In England and Wales, research and advice on agricultural economics
is undertaken by 12 university Departments of Agricultural Economics. Ten
of these conduct work on farm incomes and the economics of particular
products for the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (see p. 308). In
Scotland, agricultural economists are on the staff of the three agricultural
colleges. The agricultural departments in England and Wales and Scotland
have economics and statistics units.
The Northern Ireland Ministry of Agriculture also has an Economics and
Statistics Division and nine other Research Divisions dealing with different
aspects of agricultural research and development and responsible for university
teaching of agriculture.
Agricultural There are four types of institution which provide full-time education
Education in agricultural subjects: universities; non-maintained agricultural colleges;
in England and Wales, county agricultural colleges and institutes; and in
Scotland, farm schools. Ten universities in Britain provide degree and post¬
graduate training in agriculture. A National College of Agricultural Engineer¬
ing was established in i960 at Silsoe, Bedfordshire, and it offers degree and
postgraduate courses in agricultural engineering. In Northern Ireland there
are three agricultural colleges and two more are planned.
A new pattern of three-year sandwich courses leading to Ordinary and
Higher National Diplomas has been introduced at the four non-maintained
agricultural colleges and at 14 of the county agricultural colleges and institutes
in England and Wales. Similar courses are provided at two of the colleges in
Northern Ireland. The older two-year courses will be phased out in a year or
two as the new pattern becomes established. The 31 county colleges and
institutes in England and the five in Wales also provide one-year residential
courses in general agriculture or horticulture with supplementary courses
covering the various specialisms in greater depth and two of them offer a new
pattern of two-year sandwich courses leading to the award of the National
Stockmans Certificate in Poultry Practice. Local education authorities also
provide short courses, block-release, day-release and other part-time classes
for farmers, farm workers and horticulturists, as well as an advisory service for
domestic producers.
An agricultural, Horticultural and Forestry Industry Training Board was
set up in 1966 under the Industrial Training Act 1964 (see p. 417). Grants are
available to employees on recognised courses in agriculture, horticulture or
forestry. Where possible the Board arranges courses through industrial or
local authority facilities but otherwise runs its own courses. Training boards
are usually financed by a levy on employers but owing to special circumstances
RESEARCH AND
EDUCATION
Economic
and Market
Research
Fishing Ports
Methods of
Sea Fishing
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY 319
in agriculture, proposals are before Parliament to provide for a different
system of financing agricultural training.
There are eight farm schools in Scotland, run by local education authorities,
providing courses—mainly residential—of from one to three years’ duration
for boys and girls of from 12 to 16 years. There is one residential agricultural
school in Northern Ireland, which provides short courses for boys over 15
years of age.
Courses in land management are available at the Universities of Cambridge
and London and at the Royal Agricultural College, Cirencester.
FISHERIES
The sea fishing industry is of especial importance to the economy of Scotland.
In the rest of the United Kingdom it is an important source of employment in
the major fishing ports. The industry falls into three main divisions, concerned
respectively with white fish, herring and shellfish. The major element of the
catch (about 82 per cent by weight) is white fish: the catches of herring and
shellfish, although important, are relatively small. White fish are demersal fish
(such as cod, haddock, plaice, turbot and sole) which live on or near the sea
bed, and also pelagic fish (such as pilchard, mackerel and sprats) which live
mainly in intermediate waters or near the surface. Herring is a pelagic species
and constitutes a separate fishery. Shellfish include Crustacea (such as
lobsters, nephrops and crabs) and molluscs (such as escallops, mussels, cockles
and oysters).
The white fish section of the industry is made up of three main groups:
the distant water, the near and middle water, and the inshore fisheries. The
distant waters are those round Iceland and in the west Atlantic, Greenland,
Bear Island and the north coast of Norway, and the Barents Sea; the middle
water grounds lie around the Faroe Islands; and the near water grounds are
those in the North Sea, the Irish Sea and in the coastal areas around Britain.
The herring fishing grounds are almost entirely in Scottish waters. The in¬
shore waters also yield considerable quantities of shellfish.
The principal fishing ports in England and Wales are Hull, Grimsby, Fleet-
wood, North Shields, Lowestoft and Milford Haven. In Scotland the chief
centres for white fish are Aberdeen, Granton, Fraserburgh, the Moray Firth,
the west coast and Shetland Islands; herring landings are made mainly at the
east coast port of Fraserburgh, the west coast ports of Ullapool, Mallaig,
Oban and Ayr and in the Shetland Islands. In Northern Ireland the main
fishing ports are Ardglass, Portavogie and Kilkeel.
The chief methods of catching fish are by trawling, seining, lining and ring
netting. Trawling is carried out throughout the year in the distant and near
waters for all species of demersal fish. Seining is also used for catching
demersal fish all the year round, mainly in the North Sea, the Minches, the
Firth of Clyde and the Irish Sea. There are about 550 Scottish and Northern
Ireland seiners, and about 170 operating from English ports.
The pelagic fisheries are seasonal. There is summer fishing for herring
based on the Shetlands, the east coast ports of Scotland and the north-east
coast ports of England. Other seasonal fisheries take place off the west coast
of Scotland, in the Isle of Man area and off southern Ireland.
The inshore fisheries comprise a great diversity of types of vessels and
methods of capture; in addition, there are extensive fisheries for crabs,
L*
3 20
The Fishing
Fleet
Supplies
Sea Fish
Processing
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
lobsters, shrimps, mussels, escallops, cockles and oysters, and, off Scotland,
north-east England and in the Irish Sea there are valuable catches of nephrops
(‘Norway lobsters’ or Dublin Bay prawns).
Distant water vessels, which operate mainly from Hull, Grimsby and Fleet-
wood, numbered 161 at the end of 1969. They are over 140 feet (42-5 metres)
in length and most of them make voyages of 17 to 23 days to fishing grounds
in the Arctic Circle. Partly due to the introduction of freezer trawlers and
factory vessels, there has also been fishing in the waters bordering Newfound¬
land, Labrador and Greenland. These vessels spend from one to three months
at sea and freeze, in some cases as fillets, much or all of their catch immediately
it is taken. At the same date, near and middle water vessels numbered 374; they
are between 80 and 140 feet (24-5 and 42-5 metres) long and most of them work
nearer home, making voyages of from a few days up to more than two weeks,
although some of the larger vessels fish regularly off the Faroes and seasonally
as far afield as Iceland. Included in the near water group are vessels engaged
in fishing for herring which normally make daily landings. The inshore group
consists of vessels of under 80 feet (24-5 metres) which, except for seiners, are
seldom at sea for longer than two or three days and more usually make daily
landings, often fishing within sight of land.
In the British fishing industry in 1969 there were about 18,000 fishermen
in regular employment and some 4,000 occasionally employed; about two-
fifths of the former and one-third of the latter were from Scottish ports. In
Northern Ireland there are about 500 regular fishermen.
In 1969 landings of all types of fish by British fishing vessels totalled 939,000
tons (716,000 tons of demersal fish, 173,000 tons of pelagic and 50,000 tons
of shellfish), valued at about £66 million. Imports totalled about 113,000 tons
of fresh and frozen fish (including 54,000 tons brought direct from the fishing
grounds), valued at about £22 million. Cod accounted for 46 per cent of the
total value of demersal and pelagic fish landed by British vessels; haddock
(19 per cent) and plaice (9 per cent) were the other most important sources of
earnings to the industry.
Imports of all types of fish (fresh, frozen, salted, canned or otherwise
preserved) in 1969 amounted to about 195,000 tons valued at £70 million,
including 30,000 tons of canned salmon to the value of £25 million and other
canned fish worth £13 million.
Weekly disposals of fresh, frozen and cured fish (excluding shellfish and
imported canned fish) in Britain averaged about 16,000 tons landed weight
in 1969. Consumption has been declining slightly, on an edible (fillet) weight
basis; it was ib'i lb. (7*3 kg.) per head in 1969 (see Table 21) in comparison
with a peak total of 28-7 lb. (13 kg.) in 1948.
Processing and packaging of fish—curing, kippering, canning and quick-
freezing for consumer packs—are the subject of continuing research and
development. The growth of quick-frozen fish production has altered radically
the structure of the industry. With the increase in quick-freezing (which now
processes about a quarter of all white fish landings), new export outlets have
opened up for white fish, which in 1969 accounted for about half the total
exports of fish and fish preparations, valued at £14-1 million. Exports of most
forms of fish increased in 1969.
A valuable by-product of the industry is the manufacture of fish meal for
Freshwater
Fisheries
Distribution
System
Promotion and
Regulation of
the Industry
The Herring
Industry Board
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY 321
animal food and, to a much lesser extent, for fertilisers. Home production of
white fish meal and herring meal in 1969 was 85,000 tons.
The most valuable freshwater fish are salmon and sea-trout, being worth far
more when caught by rod and line than similar fish netted at sea. Drift netting
for salmon is prohibited off the coast of Scotland and is strictly controlled
around England, Wales and Northern Ireland to protect the valuable sport
fisheries in the game rivers. A limited amount of estuary and river netting
for salmon is permitted under licence by river authorities. In England and
Wales the landed value of the salmon catch is approximately £275,000 a year,
in Scotland it amounts to over £1-5 million, and in Northern Ireland to some
£200,000. In Northern Ireland, eels worth about £300,000 a year are captured
by long lines and by eel nets placed in river weirs.
The principal inland wholesale distributing centre for fish is Billingsgate
Market in London, which handles about 300 tons a day, but other large cities
also have central fish markets. The principal method of distribution is through
wholesalers, located at the ports, who buy at the auctions and sell to inland
wholesalers; the port wholesalers prepare the fish for onward shipment. Fish
lorries, including insulated and refrigerated vehicles, transport the catch daily
from the ports to inland centres, although rail transport is still used from some
ports. Retail sales are handled by some 18,000 to 22,000 fishmongers and fish
friers; the latter use about a third of the landings of white fish.
Trawler-owning companies have entered into the marketing and distribu¬
tive system. This process has been encouraged by the growing popularity of
quick-frozen consumer packs, which are sold by other retail outlets, such as
grocers, as well as by fishmongers.
The government departments mainly responsible for the administration of
legislation concerning the fishing industry are the Ministry of Agriculture,
Fisheries and Food, the Department of Agriculture and Fisheries for Scotland
and the Ministry of Agriculture for Northern Ireland. The safety and welfare
of crews of fishing vessels are provided for under the Merchant Shipping Acts
administered by the Board of Trade, under whose aegis a committee of
enquiry into deep-sea trawler safety reported in 1969. This led to amendment
of the Acts and other legislative provision for additional safety measures.
The Herring Industry Board was set up under the Herring Industry Act
1935 now consolidated in the Sea Fish Industry Act 1970 to reorganise,
develop and regulate the herring industry. The Board consists of a chairman
and three other members, all part-time and independent of the industry, who
are appointed jointly by the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, the
Secretaries of State for Scotland and Wales, and the Home Secretary. The
Board, whose activities are financed partly by levies and licence fees and
partly by government grants and loans, is advised by the Herring Industry
Advisory Council, consisting of 32 members representing all sections of the
industry and consumers.
The functions of the Board include the promotion of sales of herring, both
at home and abroad, and the application of the benefits of technical progress
to the industry, including the adoption of new methods of catching, processing
and distributing herring. The Board administers the government grant and
loan schemes which provide for assistance towards the purchase of new fishing
vessels, and the improvement of existing vessels. Fishermen may also obtain
322
The White Fish
Authority
Operating
Subsidies
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
loans from the Board towards the purchase of second-hand vessels under
80 feet in length and towards the cost of new nets and gear. Up to 31st March
1970 £2,167,443 in loans and £1,861,421 in grants had been advanced.
The White Fish Authority and the Committee for Scotland and Northern
Ireland of the Authority were set up in 1951 under legislation now con¬
solidated in the Sea Fish Industry Act 1970. The function of the Authority is
to reorganise, develop and regulate the white fish industry, and that of the
Committee to advise the Authority about the exercise and performance of its
functions in Scotland and Northern Ireland. The Authority is composed of a
chairman and six members, and the Scottish Committee of five members and
a chairman who is a member of the Authority. They are appointed jointly by
the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, the Secretary of State for
Scotland, the Home Secretary and (in the case of the Authority) the Secretary
of State for Wales. The White Fish Industry Advisory Council was also set up
under the 1951 Act to advise the Authority about the exercise and performance
of its functions. It normally consists of 53 members representing the various
interests of the fishing industry.
The White Fish Authority administers government grant and loan schemes
for the purchase of new fishing vessels and engines and the improvement of
existing vessels. It also administers loans for the purchase of nets and gear and
processing plants. Up to 31st March i97°> j£35 ntiHi011 in l°ans and £27
million in grants were approved for these purposes by the Authority. Its
other activities are financed by levies on first-hand sales of most white fish, and
a government grant towards research and development.
Subsidies are paid to the inshore fishing industry under the provisions of the
Sea Fish Industry Act 1970 at the rate of so much per day at sea according
to the length of the vessel or at so much per stone (6-35 kg.) of fish landed,
which varies according to the kind of fish, from certain vessels under 60 feet
(18-5 metres) in length. No subsidy is paid for shellfish. Subsidies for white
fish cost £1*2 million in 1969-70 and those for herring £240,000.
The White Fish Subsidy (Deep Sea Vessels) (United Kingdom) Scheme
1969 came into operation on 1st April 1968 for a period of three years.
Subsidies payable up to 31st July 1971 are set at a basic £2 million a year and
will be adjusted by reference to the level of profitability of the industry, subject
to a maximum total of £4 million. Payment will be related to the operating
efficiency of vessels and not to their classification. T he new arrangements
replace the previous policy of progressively decreasing operating subsidies to
deep-sea vessels.
Subsidies cost £1-67 million for the six months ending 31st January 1969
and £1-94 million for 1969-70.
FORESTRY
The estimated total area of productive woodland in Great Britain is 3'2^
million acres (1*33 million hectares), or about 6 per cent of the total land area.
If account is taken of areas of scrub and old felled areas, including those cut
down in the second world war, the total rises to 4-35 million acres (176 million
hectares), or 775 per cent of the land area; about half of the area is in England,
two-fifths in Scotland, the remainder in Wales. The high proportion of un¬
productive woodland is largely a legacy of two wars and, while rehabilitation
of these areas continues to proceed, it is unlikely that all areas (for instance,
323
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
because of remoteness and poor site conditions) will be replanted. A measure
of the extent of rehabilitation is provided by the fact that the area of un¬
productive woodland has been reduced by 300,000 acres (121,000 hectares)
since 1945.
The area of productive forest managed by the Forestry Commission, at
i-8 million acres (073 million hectares) represents something over 50 per cent
of the total. The annual rate of productive forest expansion is currently about
55,000 acres (22,000 hectares) by the Commission mainly in Scotland, and
about 35,000 acres (14,200 hectares) by private woodland owners. The Com¬
mission’s programme includes considerable planting in upland areas, and
consists mainly of conifers because of the difficult site conditions encountered
and because over 90 per cent of industrial demand is for softwoods. The major
species used are Sitka spruce, Lodgepole pine, Scots pine and Norway spruce.
In the older woodlands and taking the country as a whole, the most common
coniferous trees are Scots pine, Sitka spruce, Norway spruce and the larches,
while, among the broadleaved, beech and oak occur widely.
Except for the period of the two world wars, when much over-felling took
place, home woodlands have until recent years made only a limited contribu¬
tion to the nation’s total requirements of wood and wood products. Some
25 per cent of the Commissioner’s woodlands are now in production. Britain
imports 90 per cent of its needs by volume and a higher proportion still by
value, the total import cost of wood and wood products including pulp and
paper being over £650 million in 1969, of which ^217 million was accounted
for by timber imports.
The Forestry Acts 1919 to 1945 established the Forestry Commission as the
national forestry authority charged with promoting the interests of forestry,
the development of afforestation and the production and supply of timber in
Great Britain (the Forestry Acts 1919 to 1963 were consolidated in the
Forestry Act 1967). As more and more of its coniferous woods reach the
production stage the Commission has assumed an increasingly important role
as a timber seller and has encouraged the setting up of some 20 new timber¬
using industries in the past 12 years. The Commission consists of a part-time
chairman, a full-time director general, three full-time executive commis¬
sioners and five part-time commissioners. The Commissioners comply with
directions given by the forestry ministers, who are the Minister of Agriculture,
Fisheries and Food and the Secretaries of State for Scotland and Wales.
Northern Ireland has its own separate organisation (see p. 325).
The Commission’s total estate covers some 2-9 million acres (1-2 million
hectares) and includes 2-n million acres (0-85 million hectares) of forest land,
of which about i-8 million (073 million hectares) are under trees in 380
forests distributed throughout England, Scotland and Wales. All these forests
are covered by management plans, which provide for such work as planting,
road construction, thinning, fire protection and timber production, facilities
for public recreation, wild life conservation and the landscaping of plantations.
As already stated, a substantial amount of the Forestry Commission’s new
planting is carried out in Scotland, much of it in the Highland counties. The
poorer types of land are being used, such as sour, peaty soil which is unsuitable
for agricultural purposes, but has become suitable for forestry as a result of
advances in the technique of deep ploughing.
Production of coniferous timber from Commission woodlands, mainly by
way of thinnings, is expected to rise from about 1*3 million tons in 1969 to
about 2*2 million tons by 1980 and to 4 million tons by 1990. Some of this kind
324
Finance
Private
Forestry
Advisory
Bodies
Consultative
Machinery
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
of produce is meeting traditional requirements of the coal mines but much is
taken by the paper pulp industry and by factories established to make chip¬
board, fibreboard and wood wool.
The Forestry Fund was constituted under the 1919 Forestry Act; from it is
paid all the expenditure of the Forestry Commissioners and into it are paid
amounts voted annually by Parliament, together with the Commission’s
receipts from sales of produce, rentals and other sources. In the period 1st
October 1967-31st March 1969 (future statistics will be published each fiscal
year) drawings from funds voted by Parliament amounted to ^227 million,
and receipts were £9 million.
Privately owned woods comprise nearly two-thirds of the total forest area in
Great Britain and contain most of the mature and semi-mature timber. The
size of woodlands in individual ownership ranges from a few acres to several
thousand acres, and a high proportion of the private woodland area is in small
ownership—that is, owners of up to about 250 acres (100 hectares).
Impetus was given to the effective management of private woodlands by
the introduction of the Dedication of Woodlands Scheme, initiated in 1947.
Under this scheme, owners are invited to put their land permanently to
timber production and to manage their woods in accordance with a plan
agreed with the Forestry Commission, in return for the provision of planting
and management grants and technical advice. By March 1969 the total area
dedicated was 955,000 acres (386,000 hectares). In addition, there are wood¬
lands covered by the Approved Woodlands Scheme and the Small Woods
Scheme under which a planting grant, but no management grant, is paid.
More than 1 million acres (400,000 hectares) are managed under the first two
schemes. Woodland owners are represented, in their relations with the
Forestry Commission, by the Forestry Committee of Great Britain, which
co-ordinates the work of two associations of woodland owners: the Timber
Growers’ Organisation (for owners in England and Wales) and the Scottish
Woodland Owners’ Association.
There are a number of forestry co-operative societies providing for land-
owners and farmers the services of skilled staff, centralised purchasing facilities,
and a central agency for the disposal of forest produce. The Forestry Com¬
mission also co-operates with the principal forestry societies, such as the
Royal Forestry Society of England and Wales and the Royal Scottish Forestry
Society, in disseminating technical knowledge.
In 1959 the Home Grown Timber Marketing Corporation was established
by timber merchants to promote the use of home grown timber.
Under the Forestry Act 1967 the Commissioners maintain national com¬
mittees for England, Scotland and Wales, composed partly of Forestry
Commissioners and partly of persons outside the Commission. These
committees act in an advisory capacity, particularly as to the social, recreational
and amenity aspects of the Commissioners’ activities and relationships with
other land users. The Commissioners also maintain a regional advisory
committee for each Conservancy.
Other bodies have been set up to provide for consultation on the marketing
and utilisation of home grown timber. The Home Grown Timber Advisory
Committee (HGTAC) is a statutory body and includes representatives of
associations of landowners, timber merchants and processors and the trade
Forestry
Education and
Research
Forestry in
Northern
Ireland
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY 325
unions under an independent chairman. In 1949 the Forestry Commissioners
set up the Advisory Committee on Utilisation of Home Grown Timber (now
a sub-committee of the HGTAC) to advise on measures designed to promote
utilisation of produce from British woodlands.
A voluntary scheme was agreed upon in 1961 for consultation on proposals
for afforestation of land within National Parks (see p. 175). The Timber
Growers’ Organisation and the Country Landowners Association undei took
to advise their members to notify the park planning authorities about their
planting proposals.
The Forestry Commission maintains two forester training schools: in
England, at Parkend in the Forest of Dean, Gloucestershire; and in Scotland
at Faskally, near Pitlochry in Perthshire. Both will be closed by 1972 as the
responsibility for forester training is being assumed by the Department of
Education and Science. Northerwood House in the New Forest, Hampshire, is
the Commission’s educational centre, and is used for practical courses for
Commission staff and for university students, landowners and agents, planning
officers, school teachers and others.
An Agricultural, Horticultural and Forestry Industry Training Board and a
Furniture and Timber Industry Training Board have been set up to provide
for training in forestry for employees of private woodland owners and in the
home-grown timber trade.
Higher education in forestry is provided at several universities; a propor¬
tion of graduates is recruited by the Commission as forest officers.
The Commission’s Forest Research Station at Alice Holt Lodge, near
Farnham, Surrey, was opened in 1946. Expenditure on research work at this
station, at the Northern Research Station and in experimental areas in many
forests in Great Britain amounted to ^x-2 million in 1967-69. This sum
included grants for special forestry research work to various institutions and
to university departments including the Commonwealth Forestry Institute at
Oxford, which is also financed by the university, the Foreign and Common¬
wealth Office and overseas governments. A Northern Research Station was
opened at the Bush Estate near Edinburgh in May 1970. Research into tne
qualities of home-grown timber is carried out by the Forest Products Research
Laboratory at Princes Risborough, Bucks, and also by grant-aided research
associations.
When the Government of Northern Ireland was formed in 1922, the new
Ministry of Agriculture became the forest authority working with similar
powers and duties to those conferred on the Forestry Commission by the
Forestry Act 1919. At that time the Ministry took over some 4,000 acres
(1,625 hectares) for afforestation, of which 700 acres (285 hectares) had been
^ Forest policy is carried out under the authority of the Forestry Act
(Northern Ireland) 1953, which replaced earlier legislation. This Act provides
the Ministry with powers to acquire and manage land, and to give financial
and technical assistance for private planting. It introduced measures for the
protection of all woodlands, whether owned by the State or privately owned,
against destruction by over-cutting, fire or depredation by animals.
The State forest area has grown steadily and at a greatly accelerated pace
since the end of the second world war. By 1970 over 150,000 acres (60,750
hectares) had been acquired, of which about 99,000 acres (40,100 hectares)
had been planted. The present afforestation programme provides for the
326
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
creation, as soon as possible, of an area of 150,000 acres (61,000 hectares) of
productive forest.
Financial provision is made by sums voted annually by Parliament and
from receipts from forest produce and other sources. About 1,000 people are
employed in field labour and ancillary work. The area of exploitable private
woodlands is at present about 35,000 acres (14,200 hectares), and private
planting, which is gaining impetus, is assisted by schemes for the supply of
young trees from the Ministry’s nurseries at a low cost, by grants towards the
cost of the establishment of new plantations, and by free technical advice.
Pomeroy Forestry School at Pomeroy House, Co. Tyrone, provides training
and refresher courses for forestry workers, school teachers and others inter¬
ested in trees and forestry.
The public may visit almost all the forests, five of which have been
designated Forest Parks, and use the amenities provided.
13 TRANSPORT AND
COMMUNICATIONS
Technical
Trends
Inland and overseas transport and communications employed 6-8 per cent
of the total labour force in Great Britain in June 1969. Of the 1-5 million
persons so occupied, 32 per cent were engaged in road passenger transport
and road haulage contracting, 17 per cent in railways and 29 per cent in
postal services and telecommunications; sea and air transport absorbed
respectively 5 per cent and 4 per cent; port and inland water transport and
miscellaneous transport services and storage absorbed 13 per cent. Transport
and communications contribute about 9 per cent of the gross national
product and are responsible for a rather higher proportion of the nation’s
gross fixed capital formation.
SHIPPING
Of the world’s active sea-going tonnage of 100 gross tons1 and over nearly
12 per cent is registered in Britain, making the British merchant fleet one of
the largest in active employment. The British shipping industry is, however,
exposed to severe international competition. The position has been made
more difficult by the prevalence among competitors of such practices as flag
discrimination and the use of ‘flags of convenience’. While from 1959 to 1969
Britain’s merchant fleet increased by 15 per cent from 20*8 million to 23-8
million gross tons, the total tonnage of all other countries, excluding the
US Reserve Fleet, increased by over 100 per cent, from 90 million to 181
million gross tons. After being positive until about 1959 the balance of pay¬
ments for shipping services remained adverse until 1965, but showed an
estimated surplus of £31 million in 1969.
In a variety of ways technological change has been proceeding more rapidly
under current conditions. Vessels are becoming obsolete over a shorter period
and as they do so are being replaced by larger ships, with generally lower
building costs per ton; labour-saving devices, greater speeds and faster turn-
round facilities are reducing operating costs. The tendency to greater average
size has been the most marked in tankers and dry bulk cargo ships. Vessels are
specially built to carry ore, cement, wine and various kinds of chemicals.
Many ships have been designed to carry fully loaded road vehicles, pallets
and containers. In particular the use of containers on long door-to-door
journeys can result in speedier, safer and cheaper carriage of a wide range of
goods. Two consortia of British shipping companies are operating specially
designed deep-sea cellular container ships on services to Australia, and
another company is operating a similar service to Canada.
1 One gross ton (g.t.) = 100 cubic feet. One deadweight ton (d.w.t.) = x long ton
(2,240 lb.). Gross tonnage indicates the total capacity of the enclosed spaces on a ship.
Deadweight tonnage denotes the maximum load which a vessel can carry before
submerging the load-line.
328
THE MERCHANT
FLEET
Employment
of Shipping
SHIPOWNERS
SHIPPING
ORGANISATIONS
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Of the 23-8 million gross tons of merchant shipping of 100 gross tons and
over registered, but not all owned, in the United Kingdom on 30th June 1969
tankers accounted for 10-2 million gross tons and 13 per cent of the world’s
sea-going tonnage.
Britain’s merchant fleet has been increasing rapidly in response to new
methods of handling goods. Gross tonnage of ships delivered to British
owners in 1969 is estimated at 2-4 million, about a quarter of which was
built in British yards. Over half of the fleet is diesel driven.
The Queen Elizabeth 2 (66,000 g.t.), the most advanced and one of the
largest passenger liners ever built, designed for the transatlantic route and for
cruising, went into service in 1969.
In June 1969, 19-4 million gross tons of trading vessels of 100 gross tons and
over (of an average age of 8-7 years) were both owned and registered in
Britain.1 The usual employment of this fleet has been analysed by the United
Kingdom Chamber of Shipping as follows: 6-5 million gross tons were
employed as foreign-going passenger and cargo liners; 3*9 million gross tons
as foreign-going tramps; 8-2 million gross tons as foreign-going tankers;
and o-8 million gross tons in coasting and trade with ports between the Elbe
and Brest (home trades).
About one-third of British-owned shipping registered in the United Kingdom
consists of foreign-going passenger-cargo and cargo liners, mostly the latter.
Practically all these ships are owned by large liner companies. Many operate
wide networks of scheduled cargo and passenger services which, between
them, cover every ocean. The 3-9 million gross tons of foreign-going tramp
ships are operated by a large number of private owners, some having only a
small number of ships and some only one ship.
Examples of major British liner shipping companies operating scheduled
services from the United Kingdom are: the Cunard, to North America; the
Royal Mail, to South America; the Blue Funnel, to Australia and the Far
East; the Peninsular and Oriental (P. & O.) and the British India lines, to
India, Australia and the Far East; the Union Castle, to South and East Africa;
Elder Dempster, to West Africa; Furness Withy, to North America and the
West Indies; the New Zealand line, to Australia and New Zealand; and Shaw
Savill and Albion, to Australia and New Zealand. These and the other major
liner companies have for the most part amalgamated to form a small number
of major groups, of which the largest and best known are the P. & O., the
Furness Withy, the Ocean S.S., and the British and Commonwealth groups.
Over two-thirds of the total tanker fleet belong to the oil companies,
although there are a few important independent United Kingdom tanker¬
owning companies.
A government guaranteed loan scheme to benefit British shipowners
ordering from British shipyards was introduced in 1967.
The main organisations concerned with the activities, interests and common
problems of the industry are as follows:
1 The remaining tonnage included fishing vessels, tugs, river and estuary craft,
Admiralty vessels (mostly tankers) not usually engaged in the commercial carriage of
cargo, and shipping registered in Britain but owned in other Commonwealth countries
(including over 1 million gross tons of tankers).
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
329
Lloyd’s Register
of Shipping
Shipowners’
and Shippers’
Organisations
Employers’
Organisations
The National
Maritime Board
Conferences
The Baltic
Exchange
Lloyd’s Register is an organisation (distinct from the Society of Lloyd’s, see
p. 378) which surveys and classifies ships with particular regard to their
safety and operational efficiency. It will accept responsibility for surveying
and giving technical advice on vessels of all flags from the initial stages of
building, at regular intervals during their service, and after casualties. A
satisfactory Lloyd’s classification is a guarantee to an underwriter that he
may accept the risk of a vessel, and this forms a strong link between the
Register and the Society of Lloyd’s.
The representative body speaking for shipowners generally (excluding, for
the most part, owners of fishing vessels) is the Chamber of Shipping. There
are a number of local associations of shipowners centred around the main port
areas. Other organisations represent companies specialising in a particular
trade or type of cargo.
The British Shippers’ Council, formed in 1955, represents the shipping
interests of exporters and importers in matters of both national and inter¬
national concern.
The British Shipping Federation Limited is the employers’ organisation
concerned with labour relations and the regulation of employment throughout
the Merchant Navy. It is responsible for the administration of the Merchant
Navy Established Service Scheme, under which shipowners engaging crews
for ships of 200 gross tons and above engage them through the Merchant Navy
Establishment Administration unless they are prepared to offer two-year
company service contracts.
The National Maritime Board is composed of equal numbers of representa¬
tives of the shipowners and seafarers’ unions and is responsible for all negotia¬
tions of wages and conditions of service in the Merchant Navy.
British shipping companies operating liners have associated with each other
and with the companies of other countries operating on the same routes in a
series of ‘conferences’ designed to secure standardisation and stability of rates,
and to maintain frequency and regularity of services. The essential principle
of a conference is the establishment of a common tariff of freight rates or
passenger fares from each port of departure. Each conference meets from
time to time to review and revise existing rates, or to compile new ones. Some
of the conferences are connected by rate agreements, or have joined together
to form wider groupings. There are over 60 conferences dealing with trade to
and from the United Kingdom.
The Baltic Mercantile and Shipping Exchange, which originated in one of
London’s seventeenth-century coffee houses, is the world’s largest market
for the chartering of ships of all nationalities. Shipbrokers and merchants’
representatives meet here to arrange the chartering of dry-cargo tramp ships
for the carriage of goods to and from all parts of the world.
RELATIONS
WITH THE
GOVERNMENT
The Board of Trade is the government department responsible for most
matters connected with merchant shipping. Under the Merchant Shipping
Acts, it administers many regulations for marine safety and welfare, for
instance: certifying the load-line (or Plimsoll line) that shows that a ship is
not overloaded; ensuring that standards of safety are observed in ship con¬
struction; ensuring the provision of adequate life-saving, fire-fighting and
radio equipment; and dealing with the discipline, professional standards,
33°
Pollution of
the Sea
Traffic
Control
BRITAIN I97U AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
health and accommodation of seamen. Most of the work which these re¬
sponsibilities entail is carried out by the officers of the Marine Survey and
Mercantile Marine at the ports. There is also a Registrar-General of Shipping
and Seamen, in whose office at Cardiff a complete record of all British ships
and seamen is kept. Abroad, certain parts of the Merchant Shipping Acts
are administered by H.M. Consuls and by officers of Commonwealth
Governments.
Much of the law relating to shipping has recently been revised under the
Merchant Shipping Act 1970; in particular some disciplinary provisions have
been relaxed and arrangements for welfare and safety improved.
A committee of enquiry reported in May 1970 in favour of the establish¬
ment of a Ship Research and Development Institute, an Industrial Training
Board for Shipping, and a Statutory Marine Authority for safety control,
a code of practice for shipping conferences, and an international treaty on
shipping practices.
The discharge of oil into British territorial waters was first restricted in 1922.
Britain is a party to the 1954 International Convention for the Prevention of
the Pollution of the Sea by Oil which came into force in 1958. The nations
ratifying this convention (now numbering over 40) agree to prohibit their
national fleets from discharging persistent oil within a certain distance of
any coast—originally 50 miles (80 kilometres) but under amendments in
1962 extended in many areas to 100 miles (160 kilometres) or more—and also
in extensive areas of the north-east Atlantic Ocean, the Mediterranean, the
whole of the North Sea, and around Australia. The provisions were given
legal effect for British ships under the Oil in Navigable Waters Act 1955
which also prohibits the discharge of any kind of oil from British and foreign
vessels into British territorial waters. Amendments to the 1954 Convention
were agreed in 1962 and came into force on 18th May 1967; the Oil in Navi¬
gable Waters Act 1963, applying the amendments to British ships, became
effective on the same date. The Convention as amended prohibits ships of
20,000 gross tons and over, built after 18th May 1967, from discharging
persistent oil anywhere at sea. Amendments accepted in 1969 will extend
the prohibition; a new Oil in Navigable Waters Bill is before Parliament. In
1969 Britain signed the International Convention Relating to Intervention
on the High Seas in Cases of Oil Pollution Casualties, enabling a state to
take action on the high seas to prevent pollution of its coastline by oil from
a damaged tanker, and the International Convention on Civil Liability for
Oil Pollution Damage, facilitating the obtaining of compensation for damage
by oil pollution.
Over 300,000 vessels pass through the Dover Strait every year. Recommended
one-way routes were marked in 1967 by navigational aids provided by the
French and British lighthouse authorities—a scheme worked out by the joint
Institutes of Navigation of France, the Federal Republic of Germany and
Britain and agreed by the Inter-Governmental Maritime Consultative
Organisation, a United Nations agency with headquarters in London.
Additional traffic-separation schemes in areas around British and other coasts
have since been adopted, and others are under consideration.
Lighthouses, The Board of Trade administers the Coastguard Service. This is primarily a
Pilotage and life-saving organisation which keeps watch at danger points around the coast
Rescue for vessels in distress and renders assistance either by coastguard rescue
THE MERCHANT
NAVY
Qualifications
Conditions of
Employment
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS 331
equipment or by informing other authorities who may be able to give help.
There are some 550 regular coastguards and about 7,000 part-time auxiliary
coastguards. During the year ended 31st March 1970 life-saving action was
taken on 2,592 occasions. There is close liaison between the Coastguard
Service and the Royal National Life-boat Institution. I he latter maintains
lifeboats and fast inshore rescue boats around the coast of the United King¬
dom; it is supported entirely by voluntary contributions, and depends
largely for its operation on voluntary workers. From its foundation in 1824
to the end of 1969 the Royal National Life-boat Institution saved 91,733
lives. Lifeboats and inshore rescue boats were launched 2,373 times in 1969
and rescued 1,035 people.
The general lighthouse authority for England and Wales, the Channel
Islands and Gibraltar is the Corporation of Trinity House, which received
its first Royal Charter in the sixteenth century and is administered by a
Board of ten Elder Brethren, elected from the Royal Navy and the Merchant
Navy. Lighthouses in Scotland and Ireland are the responsibility respectively
of the Commissioners of Northern Lighthouses and the Commissioners of
Irish Lights. These authorities control over 190 lighthouses, many minor
lights and buoys, and a number of lightships, some of which are being replaced
by unattended sea marks or by light towers.
Trinity House is the chief pilotage authority, licensing some 700 pilots in
41 districts in England and Wales, including London, Southampton and
Milford Haven. In some cases the harbour authority or local council is the
pilotage authority. In Britain there are 48 pilotage authorities for the 92
pilotage districts and over 1,600 licensed pilots. The Board of Trade also has
certain responsibilities in connection with lighthouses and pilotage.
About 85,000 United Kingdom personnel and a considerably smaller number
of others are employed by the merchant fleet.
The Board of Trade holds examinations for, and issues certificates of com¬
petency to, ships’ officers as master, first mate and second mate of foreign-
going ships, or master and mate of home trade ships and as first-class engineer
and second-class engineer. Officers may not normally serve on board ships in
these grades unless they hold the appropriate, or a higher, certificate.
Radio officers are required to hold certificates of competency in radio¬
telegraphy issued by the Minister of Posts and Telecommunications on the
results of an open examination.
A seaman may not be rated as A.B. (Able Seaman) in United Kingdom
registered ships unless he bolds a certificate of competency as A.B. granted
by the Board of Trade, or an equivalent certificate. To obtain this certificate
a seaman must, among other qualifications, have served three years at sea on
deck, have obtained a certificate of efficiency as lifeboatman and have passed
a qualifying examination.
Seamen qualify by seniority for promotion to the rating of petty officer.
Service as a deck rating qualifies for the purpose of admission to the examina¬
tion for a second mate’s certificate.
The Merchant Navy Training Board promotes the instruction and studies
of apprentices, cadets and ratings who are preparing for their examinations
for the various certificates of competency.
Wages and conditions of employment are negotiated by the National Maritime
Board. Minimum wages and holidays with pay are guaranteed for both
332
PORTS
Principal
Ports
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
officers and ratings. Moreover, the Merchant Navy Established Service
Scheme, introduced by the Board in 1947, has removed a great deal of the
uncertainty formerly associated with a seafaring life. Officers and men can
now take two-year contracts, not only with individual shipping companies but
with the industry as a whole, and get special benefits between voyages in
addition to the normal unemployment insurance benefit.
There are over 300 sea ports in Britain. In 1969, 183 million tons of imports,
including 112 million tons of petroleum and petroleum products, passed
through the ports and 43 million tons of exports and re-exports, including
5 million tons of coal. Coastal traffic amounted to 107 million tons, princi¬
pally petroleum and coal.
As a result both of the anticipated increase in the country’s trade and of
technological changes affecting sea-going traffic (such as the shift to larger
tankers and bulk carriers implying a need for more deep-water berths,
demand for the development of mechanical handling methods, packaging of
general cargo in standard sizes and container and ‘roll-on, roll-off’ services)
large-scale modernisation of the ports system became necessary. Conse¬
quently capital investment in ports has risen from about £18 million a year
in the early 1960s to some £50 million in 1970.
The Port of London, with 92 miles (147 kilometres) of waterway and about
4,800 acres (1,920 hectares) of dock estate, including 29 miles (47 kilometres)
of quayage, is the largest port in the Commonwealth and, with New York
and Rotterdam, is one of the three largest ports in the world. The Port of
London Authority operates three main groups of docks. Two groups of
older up-river docks were closed in 1968 and 1970 respectively, and facilities
down-river, notably at Tilbury, are being extensively developed. About
58 million tons of cargo were handled in 1969. Among the chief commodities
handled are petroleum, coal, timber and grain. Other imports include textile
fibres, scrap, sugar and meat. Vehicles, machinery and foodstuffs pre¬
dominate among exports.
Liverpool is one of Britain’s largest ports. It handles a large proportion of
Britain’s exports to the Far East. There are extensive facilities for dealing
with imports of grain, sugar, wool and other specialist cargoes. In 1969 over
26 million tons of cargo passed through the port.
Southampton, Britain’s major ocean passenger port, has a growing cargo
trade; in 1969 it handled over 28 million tons, including petroleum, fruit and
vegetables, cereals, timber and manufactured goods.
Other major ports are Hull and Immingham on the Plumber, the port of
Clyde (or Clydeport) which includes the docks at Glasgow and at Greenock
(now an expanding container port), Manchester (an inland port reached
from the Mersey via the Manchester Ship Canal), Bristol on the Bristol
Channel, and Swansea and Newport in South Wales. Other estuaries impor¬
tant for shipping are the Firth of Forth on the east coast of Scotland (Grange¬
mouth and Leith), the Tyne (Newcastle), the Tees (Middlesbrough and the
flartlepools), and the Stour and Orwell on the East Anglian coast (Harwich,
Felixstowe and Ipswich). Among the smaller ports which are growing rapidly
are Grangemouth, and Shoreham on the south coast. The major oil import¬
ing centres are I^ondon, the Medway, Milford Haven, Southampton, Liver¬
pool, Manchester, and Finnart on the Clyde; Port Talbot and Newport in
South Wales, the Tees, the port of Clyde and Liverpool are the main ore
handling ports; London, Liverpool, Bristol and Hull are among the chief
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
333
Development
Ownership
Labour
grain importers; and London, Hull, Liverpool and Garston are the main
timber ports. Dover is Britain’s most important port for short-sea voyage
passengers, and Southampton for travellers by ocean liner; Grimsby, Hull
and Aberdeen are the largest fishing ports.
A development scheme costing over ^30 million has been carried out at
Tilbury, London. In addition to a grain terminal, freightliner terminal, and
a riverside impounding station, a dock extension project, finished in 1969,
has provided 13 new deep-water berths, six of them for container traffic and
is already handling 100,000 containers a year. Another major scheme, costing
over £33 million and including deep-sea container berths, is under construc¬
tion at Seaforth, Liverpool. A ^3-5 million grain terminal is also to be built
at Liverpool. Southampton’s container facilities are being extended at a cost
of some £11 million (400,000 containers should be handled in a year by the
end of 1973)* Container facilities have also been provided at Harwich,
Greenock (port of Clyde), Felixstowe, Manchester, Newport and Grange¬
mouth. A new deep-sea coal terminal at Immingham is in use and is to form
part of an jT 11-5 million development catering also for iron ore imports. A
£20 million deep-water harbour completed at Port Talbot serves as an ore
terminal for the British Steel Corporation.
The Minister of Transport makes grants of 20 per cent of approved capital
expenditure to statutory and other harbour authorities and persons carrying
out harbour operations.
Central control by the Government over the ports’ capital expenditure
was imposed for the first time under the Harbours Act 1964, which also
provided for the establishment of a National Ports Council to advise the
Minister of Transport on development.
From 1948, ports handling about a fifth of the national sea-borne trade have
been government owned; the British Transport Docks Board (see p. 335)
owns the majority of such ports, which include Southampton, Hull, Imming¬
ham, Newport, Cardiff and Swansea. In 1969 shipping arrivals and de¬
partures at BTDB docks totalled over 108 million net registered tons
(including fishing vessels), and the total cargo handled was about 79 million
tons.
Certain ports and docks used largely in conjunction with railway services
are administered by the British Railways Board: examples are Folkestone,
Heysham, Stranraer and Parkeston Quay (at Harwich). Other ports are
controlled by public trusts on which are represented users of the port, by
local authorities and other interested bodies or by companies. Several new
estuarial authorities have been set up by means of harbour reorganisation
schemes under the 1964 Harbours Act.
About 105,000 people are employed in the operation of ports in the United
Kingdom. At the end of 1969 there were 49,000 dock workers registered with
the National Dock Labour Board, concerned primarily with loading and
unloading cargo. The remainder included administrative, clerical and
technical staff, and pilots, lightermen and customs officials.
Because arrivals and departures of ships are liable to occur at irregular
intervals without conforming to set schedules a system of largely casual
labour existed at the docks in the past. However, a start was made on ‘de-
casualisation’ in 1941 when war-time controls were imposed. In 1947 the
National Dock Labour Board was established, with members appointed by
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
the Minister of Labour and representing both employers and workpeople, to
administer a scheme under which registered workers received a guaranteed
minimum wage for attendance even when no work was available.
In September 1967 each registered dockworker was placed in employment
with a licensed employer on a permanent basis in accordance with the
recommendations of the 1965 Devlin report (see Bibliography, p. 484). Work
is proceeding on rationalisation of the industry’s pay structure and the elimina¬
tion of all remaining restrictive practices.
Most of the oil tankers coming to the United Kingdom to discharge crude oil
are berthed at special tanker terminals which are near the oil refineries and are
owned and operated by the oil companies. The maximum deadweight
tonnage of fully laden tankers that some of the most important terminals can
accommodate at present is: Finnart (Clyde) 300,000; Isle of Grain (Thames
estuary) 105,000; Coryton (London) 85,000; Tilbury Reach (London)
47,000; Thames Haven (London) 130,000; Tranmere (Liverpool) 100,000;
Milford Haven (Pembroke) 250,000; and Fawley (Southampton) 110,000.
Long pipelines connect Finnart with the refinery at Grangemouth on the
Firth of Forth, Angle Bay (Milford Haven) with the refinery at Llandarcy
(near Swansea) and Stanlow (Merseyside) with the refinery at Fleysham
(Lancashire). Facilities are being extended to accommodate larger vessels;
Coryton will be able to accept tankers of 200,000 tons (partly laden).
A deep-water oil terminal, costing over ^5 million, and serving two new
oil refineries, became operational at Immingham (Humberside) in 1969.
The hovercraft, a vehicle which rides on a cushion of air over both land and
water surfaces, has been in regular public passenger service around the coasts
of Britain since 1965. Large-capacity passenger and car ferry craft (165 tons)
were introduced in 1968 as an extension to the present cross-channel services
to France, making an all-year-round service possible. A hovercraft terminal
at Pegwell Bay, near Ramsgate, came into use in 1969.
INLAND TRANSPORT
The dense passenger and freight traffic of Great Britain1 is carried mainly
by road and rail, although coastal shipping and, to a lesser extent, inland
waterways and pipelines are important in carrying certain types of freight,
particularly bulk cargoes. A small but increasing proportion goes by air.
Part of the inland transport system of Great Britain is nationalised; namely,
the railways, passenger transport in the London area, a large proportion of
road passenger and some road haulage services, most of the inland waterways
and some of the vessels on them. Road haulage is largely, and coastal shipping
almost entirely, in the hands of private enterprise.
In the third quarter of 1969 there were 14-67 million vehicles licensed for
use on the roads. Of these 11-23 million were motor cars and i-i million
motor cycles; 2 per cent of the i-6 million road goods vehicles and 67 per cent
of the public road passenger vehicles (excluding taxis) were publicly owned.
In 1969 58 per cent of freight, in terms of ton-mileage,2 travelled by road,
20 per cent by rail, 20 per cent by coastal shipping, and 2 per cent by pipeline
and inland waterway.
1 For an account of inland transport in Northern Ireland, see p. 346.
2 Ton-mileage is calculated by multiplying the tonnage carried by the actual distance
it was transported.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
335
Since 1945 the rapid growth of private and commercial motor traffic, causing
congestion problems of increasing severity, especially in cities and towns, and
the changing pattern of demand for transport services have led successive
Governments to undertake or commission fundamental studies of probable
trends in transport and problems which may arise therefrom. Over the
period 1966-75 an increase of over 50 per cent has been forecast for total
passenger mileage, with demand for public transport diminishing and travel
by private transport still rising fast. Total freight ton-mileage is expected to
increase substantially, although fuel traffic will fall as a result of structural
and technological change.
The Buchanan report, published in November 1963, was the result of a
study group set up to examine the problems of traffic in urban areas. It
estimated that Britain would have 40 million vehicles on its roads by a.d. 2010
and proposed radical measures to rebuild and adapt cities and roads to handle
the growth of traffic. It is now expected that the number of vehicles on the
roads will double by 1990.
The railway network has been reduced by nearly a third in recent years,
but it was decided in 1967 to fix a basic network of some 11,000 route-miles
(17,600 route-kilometres) for modernisation and development.
The present role and structure of the nationalised transport undertakings are
the result of a series of legislative measures, starting with the 1947 Transport
Act under which they were taken into public ownership. In accordance with
this Act the British Transport Commission (BTC) was established on
1 st January 1948 and assumed control of Britain’s railways, all railway-
owned steamships, docks, hotels and road transport interests, most of the
country’s canals (including all those owned by the railways), certain rivers
(as navigation authority) and the whole of the London passenger transport
system. It was also to arrange for the gradual acquisition of privately owned
long-distance road haulage firms.
Changes of policy following the coming into power of a Conservative
Government in 1951 were put into effect under the Transport Act 1953 which
modified the functions of the BTC. The Transport (Disposal of Road Haulage
Property) Act 1956 provided for the completion of the denationalisation of
road haulage, a process begun under the 1953 Act.
Over the next few years it became widely held that the BTC’s activities
were so large and diverse that they could not be run effectively as a single
undertaking. The Transport Act 1962 therefore dissolved the BTC and set
up four boards, for British Railways, London Transport, British Transport
Docks and British Waterways. Each of these was responsible to the Minister
of Transport, who appointed the members.
The shipping services operated by British Railways and certain ports and
docks used for them passed to the British Railways Board.
The hotel property of the BTC was transferred to British Transport Hotels
Ltd., a wholly owned subsidiary, first of the BTC and later of the British
Railways Board.
Road passenger, haulage and other undertakings, such as British Road
Services, the Tilling Bus Group, the Scottish Omnibuses Group, Thomas
Cook and Son, were operated as companies incorporated under the Companies
Act, with their own boards; they were grouped under a Transport Holding
Company, responsible to the Minister of Transport.
Integration and modernisation of the national transport system are being
put into effect under the provisions of the 1968 Transport Act which has
33^
RAILWAYS
Organisation
under Public
Ownership
Operations
BRITAIN I971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
considerably altered the transport pattern laid down by the 1962 Act. The
Act provided for a capital reconstruction and reorganisation of British
Railways; the setting up of Passenger Transport Authorities to control and
co-ordinate local transport arrangements; three new nationalised bodies—
a National Bus Company, a Scottish Transport Group and a National Freight
Corporation; a new licensing system and safety provisions for road haulage
operators; and new grants for public transport. Most of the functions of the
Transport Holding Company have been distributed among the new bodies.
Britain was the pioneer of railways. The opening of the Stockton to Darlington
Railway in 1825, and of the Liverpool and Manchester line in 1830, when
George Stephenson’s famous ‘Rocket’ locomotive was used, began a century
of widespread railway development. The great period of railway building
was from 1840 to 1875.
The railways first came under centralised government direction during the
first world war, and afterwards some 130 private companies were amalgamated
into four large regional groups under the Railways Act 1921. Thereafter they
suffered from the prolonged industrial depression and growing competition
from road transport, and following the second world war the Transport Act
1947 brought the railways under public ownership as a single enterprise,
British Railways, operated under the overall management of a Railway
Executive established as the agent of the BTC. Under the Transport Act 1962
the British Railways Board was set up and came into existence on 1st January
1963 with sole responsibility for managing railway affairs.
In spite of technical and operational advances the Board’s financial position
remained unsatisfactory and, following a detailed review of railway policy,
the 1968 Transport Act made far-reaching changes. Capital debt was written
down from £1,627 million (of which £705 million had already been suspended
under the 1962 Act) to £365 million. Grants for rail passenger services which
are unremunerative but which are regarded as socially necessary were intro¬
duced; £61 million was so paid in 1969. Grants not exceeding a total of £50
million may be paid to the Railways Board on a gradually diminishing scale
during the years 1969 to 1973 towards the cost of maintaining surplus track
and signalling equipment pending their elimination; £15 million was paid in
1970. Deficit financing, which had been in operation since 1963, ceased in
1968 and the Board is now expected to pay its way. Other provisions of the
Act removed certain restrictions on the Board’s powers to manufacture and
to run hotels, and reduced the size of the Board.
The process of rationalisation arising from changing public transport require¬
ments is reflected in the reduction of over 5,778 miles (9,245 kilometres) of
standard-gauge route since 1961. A total of 805 million passenger journeys
was made and 200 million tons of freight traffic conveyed on British Railways
in 1969; total receipts amounted to £533 million. The Board made a profit
of £15 million following interest payments of £41 million. At the end of
1969 it employed 225,469 people.
In 1969 a subsidiary, British Transport Hotels Ltd., owned 34 hotels of
which it managed 33. It also managed the catering facilities on trains (includ¬
ing Pullman trains) in addition to station refreshment rooms.
British Railways’ subsidiary, British Rail Hovercraft Ltd., set up in 1966,
runs regular hovercraft services across the Solent to the Isle of Wight, and
across the Channel between Dover and Boulogne. Two 165-ton Mountbatten
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
337
Development
(SRN-4) hovercraft, the largest in the world, are used for cross-channel
journeys.
The Railways Board and the shipping subsidiaries of the National Freight
Corporation have between them a fleet of about 100 vessels, providing
passenger and freight services on most of the important routes between
Great Britain and the Continent and the Republic of Ireland, as well as on
many domestic routes. Ownership of domestic services in Scotland was
transferred to the Scottish Transport Group under the Transport Act 1968.
In 1955 the BTC produced a modernisation plan designed to transform
virtually all the services offered by tne railways. Fhe plan has since been
modified in the light of ensuing economic and technical developments, but
capital expenditure has been substantial over the past few years and in 1969
amounted to £60 million.
The most important developments have been the replacement of steam by
diesel and electric traction completed in 1968; the improvement of inter-city
passenger services with the emphasis on speed, reliability and comfort;
the introduction of express freight services (‘freightliners’) enabling freight to
be handled throughout transit in standard containers (now the responsibility
of Freightliners Ltd., see p. 338); and increased mechanisation in the carrying
of coal.
On main lines in 1955 there were about 18,000 steam, 7 mainline diesel
and 71 electric locomotives. At the end of 1969 there were 4,183 diesel
and 328 electric locomotives. In addition there were 3,649 diesel passenger¬
carrying multiple units and 7,332 electric multiple units.
The Board’s current programme includes the replacement of old passenger
coaches by new stock with improved amenities, and the construction of
new electric multiple unit stock to replace old vehicles. On certain sections
of the London-Bristol-South Wales line and of the London-Edinburgh line
passenger trains are permitted to run up to 100 mph (160 kmph). Similar
speeds are also in operation on the London Midland Region’s services on the
electrified line between London, Birmingham, Manchester and Liverpool.
This electrification scheme, costing some £160 million and completed in 1967,
was the largest individual capital investment project ever undertaken by
British Railways and included station reconstruction, bridgeworks, a new
colour-light signalling system and new rolling stock. A 70 per cent increase
in numbers of passengers has resulted. Electrification is to be extended by
235 route-miles (376 route-kilometres) to Glasgow at a cost of ^25 million;
a £30-4 million route rationalisation and resignalling scheme is to be as¬
sociated with it.
Motorail services (carrying both passengers and cars) increased their
traffic by 20 per cent in 1969 and have a current capacity of 107,000 cars on
22 services.
The efficiency of freight services is being improved as new vehicles come
into service and as facilities for concentrating traffic at fewer and better
equipped and sited marshalling yards and terminals are completed. The
freightliner services, now the responsibility of Freightliners Ltd. (see p. 338),
are to be developed further to bring the number of main terminals in operation
to 21. Services are operated throughout the country and to the Continent.
The first freightliner ran in November 1965.
The London International Freight Terminal, opened in 1967, links the
British Railways container port of Harwich with the main freightliner net¬
work. The first fully cellular container ships built in a British yard are being
338
National Freight
Corporation
Freight
Integration
Council
Channel Tunnel
ROADS
BRITAIN I97i: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
used in British Railways container services between Harwich and Zeebrugge,
opened in 1968.
Bulk products traffic is increasing. Oil is being moved from refineries
under long-term contracts, while coal is being fed direct from collieries to
power stations in ‘merry-go-round’ trains, on which coal is loaded and dis¬
charged automatically from a new type of high-capacity wagon. Long-term
contracts are in operation for the carriage of cars, china clay, milk, grain and
newspapers. ‘Steel liner’ trains have been running from South Wales since
i967-
British Railways Board’s subsidiary, British Engineering Ltd., has 14 mam
workshops, employing some 37,000 people, mostly on repairs and construc¬
tion of rolling stock, locomotives and containers.
The Railway Technical Centre at Derby covers 20 acres (8 hectares) and
employs about 2,000 people. Work is proceeding on a large number of projects,
a major one being the development of a 150 mph (240 kph) gas turbine
‘advanced passenger train’ to run over existing tracks. With the associated
train control system it is being given government financial help.
The National Freight Corporation was set up under the 1968 Transport
Act to provide and promote the provision of integrated road and rail freight
services, making the maximum economic use of rail. The Corporation took
over all the road haulage and most of the shipping interests of the Transport
Holding Company, and from the Railways Board the depots, vehicles, ware¬
houses, containers and other equipment, though not the actual trains used,
in the freightliners and sundries services, and also the Board’s road haulage
vehicles.
Freightliners Ltd., a company jointly owned by the Freight Corporation
and the Railways Board (with 51 per cent and 49 per cent of the shares
respectively), is responsible for the marketing and management of freight-
liner services. The Railways Board makes a charge for providing and hauling
the trains, and profits are divided between the Board and the Corporation in
proportion to their holdings.
A Freight Integration Council was set up under the 1968 Act to advise
the Minister of Transport and the Secretary of State for Scotland on the
provision of integrated freight services by publicly owned bodies. It consists
of several independent members with an independent chairman, the chair¬
men of the Freight Corporation and the Railways Board, and members
representing union interests.
The British and French Governments have agreed to the construction of a
rail Channel Tunnel (either a bored tunnel or an immersed tube) provided
that finance can be raised on acceptable terms in the private sector. Proposals
made by an international group are being considered. The construction cost
is estimated at about £200 million.
The advent of the motor vehicle made it necessary for the Government to
set up a central road authority; accordingly, the Road Board was established
by the Development and Road Improvement Funds Act 1909. In 1919 the
Board’s responsibilities were taken over by the newly established Ministry of
Transport.
Roads are classified according to their traffic value. Trunk roads provide
a national network of routes for through traffic; other roads are divided for
grant purposes into principal and non-principal roads.
In June 1970 Great Britain had nearly 200,000 miles (320,000 kilometres)
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
339
Development
Motorways
Bridges and
Tunnels
of public highway. There were 9,000 miles (14,4°° kilometres) of trunk
roads, of which over 675 miles (1,080 kilometres) were motorways; 20,000
miles (32,000 kilometres) of principal roads of which some 10 miles (16 kilo¬
metres) were motorways, and 170,000 miles (272,000 kilometres) of other
roads.
The Minister of Transport is the highway authority for trunk roads in
England and on these roads he administers expenditure, which is provided
wholly from central government sources, although for many purposes he
employs local authorities as his agents. T he Secretary of State for Scotland
has corresponding responsibilities for roads in Scotland and the Secretary of
State for Wales for roads in Wales. Work on major trunk road schemes in
England, including motorways, is controlled by regional road construction
units, manned jointly by Ministry of Transport and county council staff.
The highway authority for principal roads is, in general, the council of the
county or county borough in whose area the roads lie. The Minister makes
specific grants towards approved expenditure on construction and major
improvement of these roads and contributions from public funds towards
maintenance and other expenditure is made through grants to local authorities.
Roads other than trunk and principal roads are entirely the responsibility
of the local authority in whose area they lie.
A large and steadily expanding road-building programme has been in progress
since 1955- Public expenditure on new and improved roads in Great Britain
is estimated at over ^42° niillion in 1970—71- The current programme
includes a considerable mileage of motorways constructed for the use of
limited classes of traffic under powers granted by the Special Roads Act 1949
(consolidated in the Highways Act 1959).
The motorways form part of a programme designed to provide a national
network of modern through routes. At the same time, work done under this
programme is eliminating some of the worst bottlenecks in uiban areas and
thus helping to give free outlets from the big cities and from other main
sources of traffic to the trunk routes.
Plans to spend over ,£4,000 million on roads in the next 15 to 20 years were
announced by the Government in May 1970.
At the end of June 1970 in England 604 miles (966 kilometres) of motorways
had been opened for traffic and construction had started or tenders had been
invited for a further 345 miles (552 kilometres). The lines of an additional
106 miles (170 kilometres) had been fixed and draft schemes published for
108 miles (173 kilometres). In Wales 23 miles (37 kilometres) are in use. In
Scotland 120 miles (192 kilometres) of motorway are planned, of which over
52 miles (83 kilometres) are in use. (See map on inside of back cover.)
A comprehensive programme of trunk road improvements is also well
advanced. Over 1,000 miles (1,600 kilometres) of all-purpose trunk roads in
Great Britain now have dual carriageways, in addition to 580 miles (928 kilo¬
metres) of principal roads.
A large programme of bridge and tunnel building has been undertaken in
recent years. The bridges include the Medway Bridge on the M2, the sus¬
pension bridge across the Firth of Forth, the Severn Bridge incorporating
major advances in suspension bridge design, and the 7,000-ft (2,100 metres)
bridge across the Firth of Tay. Tinsley Viaduct, near Sheffield, a two-level
viaduct over 3,000 ft (9,000 metres) long, was opened in two stages in 1968.
A high-level bridge over the Clyde at Erskine is under construction, a
340 BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
ten-lane bridge at Glasgow was opened in 1970, and the new £4 million
London Bridge is to be completed in 1972.
The second Blackwall Tunnel (under the Thames) costing £8 million
and the £13 million Tyne Tunnel between Wallsend (Northumberland) and
Jarrow (Durham) were opened in 1967. The j£n million Dartford-Purfleet
Tunnel (under the Thames) has been open to traffic since the end of 1963.
Work on the ^20 million Mersey crossing began in 1967; the first of the twin
tunnels is due for completion in 1971 and the second in 1974. A tunnel to
carry a London motorway under the Thames is to be built at the new town
of Thamesmead.
Research Research on roads is carried out at the Road Research Laboratory (see p. 192).
Its aims are to find more economical ways of designing, constructing and
maintaining roads and of facilitating the flow of traffic on them and to reduce
road accidents. The layout of roads, their traffic, the safety features of road
vehicles and the behaviour of road users are investigated, and new methods,
materials and processes are developed for building roads and providing them
with a smooth, safe and durable surface. The Laboratory has a Tropical
Section, which undertakes research and advises on road problems overseas.
In 1969 there were about 14*67 million motor vehicles licensed to use Great
Britain’s roads. Of these, i*6 million were goods vehicles and 100,000 were
public road passenger vehicles (that is, buses and taxicabs).
The first world war stimulated the development of motor vehicles, which
became serious competitors of the railways. Government regulation of public
road transport began with the passing of the London Traffic Act 1924,
which gave the Minister of Transport power to control the number of buses
and their journeys in London; this was followed in 1933 by the setting up of
the London Passenger Transport Board (see p. 345).
Licensing The Road Traffic Act 1930 ended the licensing of public service vehicles
(that is, buses and coaches) by local authorities and set up instead traffic areas
each under the control of three traffic commissioners (except for the London
metropolitan area, v/hich has one1) appointed by the Minister. The com¬
missioners regulate, by means of a licensing system, public road passenger
transport services, and they sanction routes and time-tables in order to secure
proper co-ordination of services and eliminate unnecessary competition; they
may control fares.
The Road and Rail Traffic Act 1933 established a system of licensing for
road haulage vehicles designed to restrict vehicle operations to proved needs.
Under the Act the licensing authority (that is, the chairman of the appropriate
body of traffic commissioners) could grant licences to public haulage vehicles,
where their services appeared to be needed and grant automatically, on
application, licences for the carriage of the licensee’s own goods.
Under the 1968 Transport Act a new licensing system, with the aims of
improving safety and promoting a fuller use of rail transport where this does
not impose higher costs on industry, is replacing the system described above.
Over 900,000 goods vehicles not exceeding 3^ tons gross loaded weight
(30 cwt. unladen) have already been exempted from licensing. Operators of
goods vehicles of over 3^ tons were issued during 1970 with operators’
ROAD
TRANSPORT
1 Under the Transport (London) Act 1969, three commissioners will eventually operate
in the metropolitan traffic area (excluding the London Transport area).
Organisation of
Road Haulage
State-owned
Services
Size of the
Industry
Public
Passenger
Transport
by Road
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS 341
licences certifying that they provide adequate maintenance facilities, control
loading and the hours worked by their drivers; and that they have adequate
financial resources to enable them to maintain vehicles properly.
In due course they or an employee will be required to hold a ‘transport
manager’s licence’ entitling them to manage the vehicles of a transport under¬
taking. The Act also provides for the eventual introduction of a new form of
‘quantitative’ control to apply to all goods vehicles of over 16 tons gross
weight engaged in hauls of over 100 miles (160 kilometres) or carrying certain
bulk materials, such as coal, in loads of over n tons over any distance.
Meanwhile these larger vehicles must continue to obtain licences under the
old system in addition to the new.
The first stage of the reduction in hours worked by drivers of goods and
public service passenger vehicles laid down by the 1968 Transport Act came
into force in March 1970, together with a new system of written records to be
kept by goods vehicle drivers and their employees. Regulations concerning
the fitness and loading of vehicles have been made more stringent under
recent legislation.
From September 1956 to January 1963 the nationalised road haulage services
were controlled by British Road Services (BRS), a division of the British
Transport Commission, and operated through five companies, which together
owned about 16,000 vehicles. Under the Transport Act 1962, these organisa¬
tions operated companies incorporated under the Companies Act, with their
own boards, and were grouped together under the Transport Holding
Company, responsible to the Minister of Transport. i he road haulage
interests of the Holding Company have been transferred to the National
Freight Corporation (see p. 338).
The number of licensed vehicles in the road goods transport industry has
shown a relatively slow growth, from 1-4 million in i960 to i-6 million in
1969. In 1969, 600,000 vehicles held carrier licences, of which 400,000 were
used solely for the owner’s own goods. Of the remaining 200,000 about
29,000 were operated by the National Freight Corporation.
The 1968 Transport Act enables Passenger Transport Authorities (PTAs)
to be set up to control and co-ordinate the different forms of transport in
any particular area. The first PTAs were set up in April 1969 south-east
Lancashire—north-east Cheshire, Merseyside, the West Midlands and
Tyneside. The constituent local authorities appoint most of the members,
but up to one-seventh may be appointed by the Minister of Transport (or
by the Secretaries of State for Scotland and Wales). Each appoints its own
chairman, with the Minister’s approval. The PTAs control policy and finance,
and appoint professional executives—Passenger Transport Executives—to
be responsible to them for day-to-day operations. The Executives may operate
services themselves and enter into agreements with other bodies, such as
British Railways or the National Bus Company, to operate others; they have
taken over all the former municipal bus undertakings in their areas.
The National Bus Company was formed to take over the former bus
operating and manufacturing subsidiaries of the Transport Holding Company
in England and Wales, and operates through locally based subsidiaries.
A separate Scottish Transport Group has been set up to control bus and
some shipping services in Scotland, and has taken over the relevant interests
of the Transport Holding Company, operating through subsidiaries.
342
Road Safety
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The National Bus Company and the Scottish Transport Group operate
about 21,100 and 4,700 vehicles respectively. The PTAs control 6,300
vehicles formerly operated by 20 municipal undertakings. The remainder of
the industry, excluding London Transport, comprises 4,800 operators
owning 34,000 vehicles; 79 of these operators are local authorities outside
PTA areas operating 10,000 vehicles, and 3,500 are small concerns operating
not more than five vehicles.
Capital grants are made by the Government towards the cost of investment
in public transport, at rates of up to 75 per cent of approved cost. Eligible
schemes include improvements or extensions of railway lines, new fixed track
rail and bus systems, interchanges, stations, and car parks. Grants at the rate
of 25 per cent are available towards the cost of new buses complying with
specifications approved by the Ministry of Transport. Grants may also be
paid through a new rural bus grants scheme, and for 7 years to PTA Executives
towards the cost of rail services covered by agreement with the Railways
Board.
Britain has one of the highest densities of road traffic in the world. Road ac¬
cident statistics are compiled and published by the Ministry of Transport, the
Scottish Development Department and the Welsh Office from reports made
by the police. In 1969, 7,383 people were killed on the roads and about
90,700 seriously injured. The fatal accident rate per vehicle is lower than that
in most other European countries.
Modern roads, designed for present-day traffic and segregating pedestrians
from vehicles, are safer than the roads they replace and surveys have shown
they result in a marked fall in casualties. The more important measures
directed primarily towards road safety include speed limits of 30 and 40 mph
(48 and 64 kmph) in built-up areas and 50 mph (80 kmph) on certain trunk
and important classified roads in rural areas; a 70 mph (112 kmph) speed limit
on all motorways and on ordinary main roads where no lower limit applies;
the provision of pedestrian crossings—usually illuminated by flashing beacons
and marked with conspicuous white stripes (‘zebra’ crossings); and the system
of road markings and traffic signs which are being replaced by greatly
improved signs in accordance with general European practice. The Road
Safety Act, 1967 made it an offence to drive with more than a prescribed
level of alcohol in the blood, at present 80 milligrammes of alcohol per 100
millilitres of blood.
The design of vehicles, their use on the roads, and the maintenance of their
mechanical condition are controlled by regulations. Private cars and light
vans which are three or more years old must be tested annually at private
garages authorised as test stations. Heavy goods vehicles are tested annually
at government test stations. Public service vehicles must be specially
approved before being licensed to carry passengers, and are tested at regular
intervals. Any vehicle may be stopped on the road at any time by the police
and examined. Fitting of seat belts in cars registered in or after 1965 is com¬
pulsory, and a high standard of tyre safety is enforced.
All drivers of motor vehicles, unless they have either held a full British
licence or passed the driving test in the last ten years, are required to pass the
test before being granted a full licence to drive. Until they pass the test they
must obtain a ‘provisional’ licence which necessitates their displaying ‘L’
(Learner) plates on their vehicle, and in all cases, except solo motor-cycles
and motor-cycle combinations, where vehicles are constructed to carry
passengers, learner drivers must be accompanied by a qualified driver.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
343
Control of Traffic
INLAND
WATERWAYS
(Newly arrived residents to Britain may drive under their overseas driving
licences for three months before becoming subject to these rules.) A learner
driver of a solo motor-cycle is restricted, until he passes the driving test, to a
machine not exceeding 250 cc. Professional driving instructors must be
approved by the Ministry of Transport. A scheme for special licensing and
testing of drivers of heavy goods vehicles, which lapsed in 1939, was re¬
introduced in February 1970.
The Road Traffic Acts, which embody the law relating to road users, are
enforced by the police and the courts. A person convicted of any of the 26
most serious offences is liable to be disqualified from driving for a period. The
standard of conduct for all road users and a summary of the requirements of
the law is set out in easily understandable form in the Highway Code, which
was revised in 1969. A failure to observe the code does not of itself render a
person liable to criminal proceedings but may be taken into account in any
such proceedings.
National campaigns to persuade people to take greater care on the roads
are conducted by the Ministry of Transport and the Royal Society for the
Prevention of Accidents, acting as the Government’s agent and with the
participation of the local authorities. The police and education authorities
also help by arranging courses of instruction, especially courses for children.
The Road Traffic Regulation Act 1967 empowers traffic authorities to make
orders regulating traffic and imposing parking control. With the exception of
trunk roads, which are the concern of the central Government, traffic is the
responsibility of local authorities. Extensive schemes are being undertaken
for the improvement of road safety and the relief of traffic congestion. These
include: ‘fly-overs’ at road junctions; new outlet roads from cities; and traffic
management measures, including comprehensive control of street parking,
‘one-way’ systems, peak hour ‘clearways’ prohibiting waiting on busy roads,
and ‘tidal flow’ arrangements. A Traffic Advisory Unit set up in 1965 in the
Ministry of Transport advises local authorities. In most town centres street
parking is permitted for limited periods only, and in London and some other
towns on payment at parking meters usually under the supervision of traffic
wardens. Disc schemes providing free but limited parking facilities are in
operation at Devizes, Harrogate and Ripon. Off-street facilities are being in¬
creased, including multi-storey car parks. A computer-controlled system to
regulate traffic was installed in west London in 1968. Similar systems are
operating in Glasgow and Liverpool.
In 1761 James Brindley completed the Bridgewater Canal to take coal from
the collieries owned by the Duke of Bridgewater at Worsley to Manchester.
This marked the beginning of canal building in modern Britain, with which
the names of Brindley, Telford, Rennie, Jessop and other great engineers are
associated. Canals played an important part in promoting industrial and
commercial expansion in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries.
The whole canal system was practically complete by 1830. As a result of
developing competition from the railways, however, about one-third of the
canal mileage had passed to the control of the railway companies by the middle
of the nineteenth century. During the two world wars government control
of railways included railway-owned canals. Under the Transport Act 1947,
most of the country’s canals passed to the British Transport Commission in
January 1948. Under the Transport Act of 1962, control has been vested
in the British Waterways Board since January 1963. Under the Transport
M
344
The System
Development
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Act 1968 a grant-in-aid is being paid primarily to enable the Board to main¬
tain an extensive network of amenity waterways; in 1969-70 £1-5 million
was paid and a further ^0-5 million for the costs of improving bridges.
There are about 2,500 miles (4,000 kilometres) of navigable inland waterways
in Great Britain,1 some 2,000 miles (3,200 kilometres) of which belong to the
British Waterways Board; the remainder are mainly still in the hands of
local authorities or private companies. Many of the Board’s canals are narrow
waterways which can generally be used only by boats not exceeding 7 ft
(2-13 metres) in width, capable of carrying a load varying from 25 to 30 tons;
the remainder are broad waterways and canalised rivers, some of which can
be used by craft of up to about 750 tons capacity. The Caledonian and Crinan
Canals in Scotland are broad waterways. Of the 2,000 miles (3,200 kilometres)
of inland waterways under the control of the British Waterways Board some
340 miles (544 kilometres) are commercial waterways. A substantial additional
mileage (1,100 miles—1,760 kilometres—known as cruising waterways) is to
be maintained for recreational purposes; a statutory Inland Waterways
Amenity Advisory Council has been set up to advise the Minister of Transport
and the Board.
Engineering, commercial and estate work is directed from the Board s
headquarters in London and Watford, and through regional offices at Leeds
and Gloucester. In Scotland the canals (other than the Caledonian, which is
run by a manager) are, for engineering purposes, under the control of the
engineer-in-charge at Glasgow; estates work is supervised centrally from
London.
In 1969 traffic on the Board’s waterways amounted to just over 6-7 million
tons, of which 2-6 million tons were coal, 1-4 million tons liquids in bulk and
27 million tons general cargo. Some 97 per cent of the traffic is carried on
about 300 miles (480 kilometres) of broad waterways, which are mainly
canalised river navigations.
Although the British Waterways Board is the largest single carrying
operator, most of the traffic is handled by independent carriers or by traders
in their own craft. The Board at the end of 1969 owned 575 freight carrying
craft (including tugs) with a carrying capacity of 26,674 tons. It operates
2 docks and 26 warehouses.
The Board continues to improve facilities on its commercial waterways, most
of which link important industrial districts with ports. These waterways are
the main navigations and broad canals in the Yorkshire-Humberside area,
together with the Trent and Weaver Navigations, and the Weston Canal in
Cheshire, the Lee Navigation, part of the river Severn, including the Glouces¬
ter and Sharpness Canal, and the Caledonian and Crinan Canals. The Board
is also improving recreation facilities on its cruising waterways.
The total turnover of the British Waterways Board in 1969 amounted to
£4-8 million, of which £0-4 million arose from the Board’s own freight¬
carrying activities, £1 million from warehousing and terminal services, and
£o-S million from the docks. The sale of water for industrial and agricultural
purposes brought in ^o-8 million. British Waterways encourages pleasure
boating and receipts rose to £155,000.
1 In Northern Ireland, the only inland waterway which is still used for commercial
transport purposes is the Lower Bann Navigation.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
345
LONDON
TRANSPORT
Reorganisation
The London
Transport
System
London is, with Tokyo and New York, one of the world’s three largest cities.
The area known as Greater London, within a radius of about 15 miles (24 kilo¬
metres) from Charing Cross, contains about 77 million people.
London’s passenger transport system, in its modern sense, began in 1829
when the first omnibus, horse-drawm, appeared on the London streets. The
first regular tram service, also horse-drawn, began in 1870. In 1863 the first
underground steam railway, the Metropolitan, was opened. It was built by
digging a great trench for the line and roofing it over. In 1870 the world’s
first tube railway, the Tower Subway, under the river Thames opened; it
was cable-operated and ran for only a few months. The first electric tube
railway in the world, the City and South London Railway, was opened in
1890, and this was followed in 1900 by the opening of the Central London
Railway. Shortly afterwards the original steam-operated underground lines
were electrified. Meanwhile horse-drawn trams were being replaced by
electric trams, and later horse-drawn buses by motor buses.
Until 1933 there were many separate undertakings providing passenger
transport facilities in London, but in that year they were all vested in a single
public corporation, the London Passenger Transport Board. In 1948, with
the establishment of the British Transport Commission, the London Trans¬
port Executive took over control as an agency of the Commission.
Under the Transport Act 1962 the London Transport Executive was
replaced by a financially independent board, the London Transport Board.
Exchequer loans financed the Board’s external capital needs. From 1965 to
1969 the Board ran a deficit, due mainly to competition from the private car
and to increasing traffic congestion. The deficit was met by Government grants.
Under the Transport (London) Act 1969, which came into effect on 1st
January 1970, the Greater London Council (GLC) replaced the Ministry
of Transport as overall planning authority for London’s internal transport
and also took over control of the central bus and underground railway services,
formerly the responsibility of the London Transport Board (LTB). Manage¬
ment of the transport facilities is performed by the new London Transport
Executive, appointed by and responsible to the GLC. The LTB’s country
bus and Green Line coach services were transferred to London Country Bus
Service Ltd., a subsidiary of the National Bus Company (see p. 336). Under
a financial reorganisation the Government has written off the entire capital
debt of the former LTB, some £250 million.
The London Transport undertaking operates all road and rail passenger
transport services in the London area with the exception of the London lines
of British Railways and the taxicabs. Some 7,600 taxicabs that ply for hire
in the streets are privately operated by companies or owner-drivers and are
licensed annually by the Metropolitan Police. There are about 12,200 licensed
cab drivers.
London Transport’s railway network stretches over 20 miles (32 kilometres)
from north to south and 35 miles (56 kilometres) from east to west. In March
1970 the total length of the railway over which London Transport trains
operated was 254 miles (406 kilometres), of which 100 miles (160 kilometres)
were underground. London Transport trains serve 276 stations and its buses
and coaches travel over 1,699 miles kilometres) of roads. To carry
traffic over all this area London Transport owns 4,311 railway cars and
6,570 buses and coaches. The total staff employed is nearly 60,000.
Improvements being carried out by London Transport have included
34^
PUBLIC
TRANSPORT
IN NORTHERN
IRELAND
Roads
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
extension and modernisation of parts of tne Underground system, and the
introduction of automatic fare collection and automatic trains. One-man
operation of buses is being steadily extended over a period of years.
Work on a new 14-mile (22 kilometre) underground railway, has been in
progress since 1962. The main 10^-mile (17 kilometre) section from Waltham¬
stow in north-east London to Victoria Station is now in use, and an extension
to Brixton in south London should be in operation by the end of I971* There
are plans to extend the underground system still farther.
London Transport set up an International Advisory service for city
transport in 1969.
Reorganisation of public transport in Northern Ireland was completed in
1968. Under the Transport Act (Northern Ireland) 1967 the Ulster Transport
Authority was wound up and its assets and liabilities transferred to a new
company, the Northern Ireland Transport Holding Company. Responsibility
for operating services on the 200 miles (320 kilometres) of railway track was
given to the Northern Ireland Railways Company Ltd., a subsidiary of the
Holding Compaq. The Act also provides for a licensing system for road
passenger operators.
Ulsterbus Ltd., another subsidiary of the Holding Company, has taken
over the road passenger operations of the Authority, which formerly provided
all public road passenger services, apart from those of the City of Belfast. A
number of privately owned bus companies now operate in addition.
In 1966 the Authority’s monopoly of road carriage of freight was replaced
by a licensing system. About 1,900 operators and 4>I5° vehicles have been
licensed, the biggest single operator being Northern Ireland Carriers Ltd.,
owned jointly by the Northern Ireland Transport Holding Company and
the British National Freight Corporation.
On 31st March 1970 there were 14,109 miles (22,574 kilometres) of public
roads in Northern Ireland, comprising 379 miles (606 kilometres) of trunk
roads, 1,012 miles (1,619 kilometres) of Class I roads, 1,733 m^es (2>773
kilometres) of Class II roads, 2,876 miles (4,602 kilometres) of Class III roads
and 8,109 miles (12,974 kilometres) of unclassified roads.
The Ministry of Development is directly responsible for the trunk road
system and bears the entire cost of maintenance and construction work on
these roads. In addition to major construction schemes on trunk roads, an
extensive system of motorways is planned including an urban motorway
system in Belfast. About 48 miles (77 kilometres) of motorway were in use by
the middle of 1970.
The Ministry of Development administers the Road Fund (the proceeds of
motor vehicle taxation, driving licence fees, etc.), from which grants are paid
to the local authorities (county, county borough, borough and urban district
councils) which are responsible for the other roads. The rates of grant range
from 90 per cent for major improvement works on Class I roads to 25 per cent
for maintenance work on the unclassified roads.
Gross capital expenditure on all roads in the financial year to 31st March
1969 was ^12 million, and expenditure on maintenance and minor improve¬
ments was about £7 million. Gross capital expenditure in the five-year
period 1970-74 is expected to be about £80 million, compared with about
£62 million in the five-year period to 31st March 1969. Expenditure on
maintenance and minor improvements in the five-year period to 31st March
1969 was ^31-4 million.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
CIVIL AVIATION
347
Commercial
Organisation
The Role of the
Government
Air Services
Licensing
The Air Transport
Licensing Board
{ATLB)
British airmen were among the first to carry mails (at the time of the Corona¬
tion of King George V in 1911) and among the first to operate regular mail
and passenger services, which were inaugurated on 25th August 1919, when
a daily passenger service was opened between London (Hounslow) and Paris
(Le Bourget).
In April 1924 four small British companies merged to form Imperial Airways
Limited and this company pioneered the commercial development of inter¬
continental air routes. By 1929 there was a through service from England to
India. The first passenger service to Australia started in 1935.
The British Overseas Airways Corporation, a public corporation, took over
the undertakings of Imperial Airways Limited and British Airways Limited in
1940. British European Airways was established under the Civil Aviation
Act 1946 as a separate public corporation to cover the United Kingdom and
Europe. In addition to the two nationalised corporations, 46 independent
air transport operators hold Air Operators’ Certificates.
General responsibility for the development of United Kingdom civil aviation
rests with the Board of Trade, which has certain statutory powers and duties
in respect of the air corporations, including the power, very seldom used, to
give directions of a general character as to the exercise and performance of
their functions in relation to matters affecting the national interest. The
Board of Trade appoints the Boards of the corporations and, with the
approval of the Treasury, has power to make loans within the limits laid down
by Parliament to finance capital investment. It is responsible for approving
the lines of the corporations’ capital expenditure, and also sets, after con¬
sultation with the corporations, their financial targets and, in BOAC’s case,
approves the amount payable annually as dividend. There is close consultation
on overseas traffic rights and air safety. Day-to-day matters concerning the
corporations’ activities are the responsibility of the commercial management
of BOAC and BEA.
The Board plays an important part in the activities of the International
Civil Aviation Organisation and other international aviation bodies.
Under the post-war nationalisation legislation the air corporations had a
statutory monopoly of British scheduled services, and independent operators
were confined, broadly, to charter work. From 1949, and increasingly from
1952, the independants were allowed to develop new scheduled services,
provided they secured ministerial approval and operated, technically, as
associates of the corporations. The Civil Aviation (Licensing) Act i960
abolished the corporations’ monopoly and provided for a licensing system,
administered by an Air Transport Licensing Board, to which the nationalised
and independent operators could apply on an equal footing for licences for
scheduled or charter services, or for revocation or variation of existing licences.
The ATLB is an independent body of six to ten members appointed by the
Board of Trade. Its main function is to consider and decide on applications for
licences (or their revocation or variation). The ATLB must have regard to an
applicant’s financial resources, staffing, organisation, the need for the pro¬
posed services, the adequacy of, and possible effect on, existing services, and
any objections or representations made by interested parties. It also has the
general duty of furthering the development of British aviation. There is
348
The
Corporations:
Constitutions
and Functions
Finance
Growth of
Air Services
British
Overseas
Airways
Corporation
(BOAC)
Operations
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
provision for appeals on ATLB decisions to the Board of Trade, which
appoints independent commissioners to hear appeals publicly and report with
recommendations upon them.
A committee set up to enquire into the affairs of the civil air transport
industry reported in May 1969. Its recommendations formed the basis of
proposals put forward by the Government in November 1969} including the
establishment of a Civil Aviation Authority to take over general control of
the industry, of an Airways Board to control the state-owned airlines, of a
privately owned ‘second force’ airline formed from among the independent
operators, and of a group of regional airlines; subsidies would be available
for certain regional services. Legislation along the lines of the committee s
recommendations is under consideration. A statement in favour of the estab¬
lishment of a ‘second force’ air line was issued by the new Government in
August 1970.
The constitution and functions of BOAC and BE A are laid down in the Air
Corporations Act 1967, which consolidates, with certain exceptions, the
provisions of the Air Corporations Acts 1949 an<^ 1966, and in the Air
Corporation Act 1969. Each corporation consists of 5 to n members, includ¬
ing the chairman. The chairman of each board is a member of the other.
As a result of BOAC’s capital reconstruction in 1966, £35 million ‘Exchequer
Dividend Capital’ on which a variable dividend, related to each year’s
earnings, is payable, was created, together with a reconstruction reserve of
some £30 million and appropriate loan capital. The introduction of Public
Dividend Capital (now £65 million) is experimental. The statutory limit on
BOAC’s total borrowings is £120 million. BEA’s borrowing limit is £200
million, which can be increased by Order to £230 million.
Total capacity-ton-miles offered on all services has more than trebled since
1959, and had risen to 3,375 million capacity-ton-miles in 1969. In 1955,
2-5 million passengers entered or left the United Kingdom by air, compared
with 5’7 million who arrived or departed by sea; in 1962 there were for the
first time more air than sea passengers, and by 1969 figures had risen to
18-5 million by air and 10-5 million by sea.
BOAC is engaged on long-haul airline operations. Its scheduled services link
Britain with Europe, the Middle East, the Far East, Australasia, Africa and
North and South America, and it also provides complete round-the-world
services. It co-operates closely with airlines of several other Commonwealth
countries; it also has financial interests in eight companies operating local and
regional services in the various parts of the world adjacent to BOAC s main
routes; and in a number of hotel companies in areas attractive to business and
holiday travellers.
The capacity offered on BOAC’s own scheduled services reached 1,856
million capacity-ton-miles in the year ended March 197° having risen by
21 per cent over the previous year. Over half of this capacity was on the
western routes to North and South America. The overall load factor in
1969-70 was 51 per cent; the break-even load factor (the figure at which
operating costs are covered) was 41-8 per cent. The Corporation’s fleet, made
up entirely of pure jets, consists (June 197°) Super VC 10s (iy), VC 10s
(11), Boeing 707-436$ (18), Boeing 707-336* (8 with a further 2 on order);
and 3 Boeing 747s with another 9 on order and option on another 4.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
349
Financial Results
British
European
Airways (BEA)
Operations
Financial Results
The
Independent
Airline
Companies
The VC 10, introduced into service in 1964, operates alongside Boeing 707s
on world-wide routes. The Boeing 70J—336C took over transatlantic all¬
freighter operations in January 1966 and also operates all-traffic services to
Johannesburg, the Far East and Australia.
BOAC’s own passenger terminal at Kennedy International Airport, New
York, is now in use.
The Corporation is making a substantial investment over a period of ten
years on the installation of an advanced airline computer system to control
a wide variety of international activities, including accounting and flight
planning. The first stages, controlling seat reservations, came into operation
in 1968.
BOAC had another profitable year in 1969-70 when it earned an operating
surplus of £31 million and net profits of £19 million after interest on
borrowings and taxation. Of its gross traffic revenue (^198 million), ^137
million was earned in foreign currencies.
BEA operates a network of services to about 90 places in Britain, Europe,
North Africa and the Middle East. Its services in Britain include a number
which cannot be operated on a commercial basis but which meet a vital
social need, mainly the services to the Highlands and Islands of Scotland.
BEA also co-operates with other airlines in order to create ‘through travel’
facilities. It has a financial interest in several associated companies, most of
which collaborate with BEA in providing a network of services. Two major
subsidiaries are British Air Services, operating secondary domestic services,
and Airbus, a new tours company.
For the year ended 31st March 1970 the increases in capacity offered, and
passenger-miles and freight-ton-miles flown on scheduled services, were io-8
per cent, n-6 per cent and o-8 per cent respectively over the previous year:
in the same year some 8-5 million passengers were carried.
BEA’s fleet consists (March 1970) of BAC One-Elevens (18), Trident Twos
(14), Trident Ones (21), Comet 4BS (4), Viscount 802s (20), Viscount 806s (7),
Argosys (4), Vanguard 951s (5), Vanguard 953s (10), and Herons (2). Twenty-
six Trident Threes, enlarged versions of the Trident One, have been ordered
at a total cost of ^80 million.
In 1969-70 the corporation earned over ^126 million in revenue and made
a net profit of ^6*5 million. It has earned a profit in 13 out of the past 16 years.
Although the two State corporations had a statutory monopoly up to 1961
there has been a significant expansion in recent years not only of the number
of passengers and volume of freight carried but also in the diversity of services
operated by the independent operators. As well as a wide network of domestic
and international services they provide vehicle ferry services; specialised air
cargo facilities; and enable travel agents to offer low-cost all-in holidays
abroad. The independent companies compete with BEA over several domestic
routes, including the busiest internal route in Europe, from London to
Glasgow. In 1969 they carried some 8 million passengers. A large programme
of aircraft re-equipment has been carried out. Jet airliners on domestic
routes in Britain were first introduced by British United Airways in 1966.
In addition to the public transport operators there are a large number of
companies engaged in miscellaneous aviation activities such as crop-spraying,
aerial survey and photography, and flying instruction. About 30 companies
carry out air-taxi operations.
35°
Overseas
Trade by Air
Air Freight
Private Flying
Aerodromes
Development
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The proportion of Britain’s overseas trade carried by air is increasing steadily.
In 1956, 1*7 per cent of imports and 2-9 per cent of exports (by value) were
carried by air. In 1969 the corresponding percentages were 13-3 and 13, and
the total value of exports, imports and re-exports by air was £2,063 million.
The chief export items are expensive machinery and parts, aircraft and vehicle
parts, and electrical and electronic products; furs and skins account for a large
proportion of the total value of re-exports.
At Heathrow, London, freight traffic is increasing at an annual rate of
18 per cent and totalled 343,000 metric tons in 1969. Scheduled services of
British airlines carried about 300,000 tons of freight in 1969, compared with
196,000 tons in 1959.
The estimated number of aircraft on the United Kingdom register used for
business and private purposes is over 1,000, while approximately 860 are
owned by clubs, groups and training schools. About 15,000 private pilots
hold licences. About 130 companies use private aircraft and some 80 companies
are members of the Business Aircraft Users’ Association. There are some
4,000 glider pilots.
The Board of Trade has a general responsibility for civil aerodromes. It may
itself establish and maintain airports, and local authorities may also do so
subject to its approval. Aerodromes which are municipally or privately owned
and which are used for the public transport of passengers and/or flying
instruction are subject to government licensing, inspection and regulation.
The Board is also responsible for navigation facilities at a number of main
municipal airports.
The British Airports Authority, an independent statutory body operating
on a commercial basis, took over on 1st April 1966 the ownership and
management of London’s two major airports (Heathrow and Gatwick),
Prestwick in Scotland and Stansted in Essex. At these airports the Board of
Trade is responsible for the provision of navigation services and may direct
the Authority to take measures to control noise and vibration.
There are approximately 140 civil aerodromes in the United Kingdom;
in addition, 56 Service aerodromes are available for civil use. Those under
civil control include 12 directly controlled by the Board of Trade, 3 in the
Channel Islands and 1 in the Isle of Man administered by the local island
governments, and 40 aerodromes licensed for public use, of which 24 are
owned by municipalities. Two of the Board of Trade’s aerodromes and 28
others are designated Customs airports; limited customs facilities are avail¬
able at a further 31 aerodromes.
A Commission of Enquiry was set up in May 1968 to consider the need for
a third London airport and possible sites.
Aircraft and passenger movements at the principal airports have risen very
markedly in the last five years, and in 1969 United Kingdom civil airports
handled 28-9 million passengers. The number of movements of aircraft
engaged on commercial transport operations was 591,000.
For international scheduled services Heathrow and Gatwick are the main
airports, and Heathrow is the busiest centre of international travel in the
world. The number of passengers handled at Heathrow, 14 miles (24 kilo¬
metres) west of central London, has increased from 5*4 million in i960 to
14-3 million in 1969 of which 11-3 million were international passengers. The
British Airports Authority plans to spend nearly £80 million on improve-
Air Safety
Aircraft Research
Flight Safety
The Air
Registration
Board
Air Operators'
Certificates
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
merits to Heathrow and its other airports in the period ending in 1973. The
shorter of the two main Heathrow runways is being extended to 12,800 feet
(3,900 metres). An fn million passenger terminal primarily for British
short-haul airlines and Aer Lingus was completed in 1969, and extensions
are being made to several other buildings. To accommodate the rapid
expansion expected in freight movements, £25 million has been invested in
a new cargo terminal and associated developments, which came into use in
1969. New facilities costing some £13 million are being provided for handling
Boeing J4J (jumbo jet) aircraft, which began to use the airport early in 1970.
An extension of an existing London Transport rail line into Heathrow is
under consideration.
The airport at Gatwick, 28 miles (45 kilometres) south of London, was
opened in June 1958 as the second airport for the London area. Built along¬
side the main London to Brighton railway and the A23 road, Gatwick airport
was the first in the world to contain road, rail and air transport in one unit.
In 1969 it handled 3 million passengers. The existing runway is being
extended and a second runway has been proposed.
A privately owned helicopter terminal (or ‘heliport’) is in operation at
Battersea on the south bank of the Thames.
Prestwick airport in Scotland has been developed to accommodate large
jet aircraft. The freight facilities have been extended and further improve¬
ments are planned. The airport at Abbotsinch, owned and run by the Glasgow
Corporation, handled i-6 million passengers in 1969.
Manchester (Ringway), Belfast (Aldergrove) and Luton each handled over
a million passengers in 1969; Birmingham and Edinburgh (Turnhouse) each
handled over 500,000.
The role of the Government in promoting air safety lies in research and in
setting up and supervising standards for both aircraft and personnel.
Research on aircraft design and construction is done at the Ministry of
Technology’s Royal Aircraft Establishments at Farnborough and Bedford,
which are exceptionally well equipped with testing facilities.
The Board of Trade determines the policy and legislative requirements for
the safe operation of civil aircraft, analyses accidents and initiates preventive
measures and research in flight safety.
All aircraft registered in the United Kingdom must have a valid certificate
of airworthiness issued (or rendered valid) by the Board of Trade on the
recommendation of the Air Registration Board (ARB), which was set up in
1937 and consists of 18 members, four of whom are independent, including
the chairman. No aircraft built in Britain is granted a certificate of airworthi¬
ness unless it has been constructed in accordance with British Civil Air¬
worthiness Requirements, a code compiled and frequently reviewed by the
ARB. Continued airworthiness is ensured by regular inspection and by re¬
quiring aircraft to be maintained in accordance with a schedule approved by
the ARB.
Every operator of aircraft above a certain weight used for public transport
must possess an Air Operator’s Certificate which is granted by the Director of
Aviation Safety when he is satisfied that the operator is competent to secure
the safe operation of his aircraft. The Director is advised by the Board of
Trade’s flight operations inspectors (who are experienced airline pilots) on
all matters affecting the operation of aircraft, except aircraft maintenance,
which is the responsibility of the Air Registration Board.
M*
352
Flight Crezu
Qualifications
Training
Air Traffic
Control and
Navigation
Services
Technical
Provisions
Eurocontrol
Noise Control
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Each member of a flight crew must hold the appropriate official licence. Flight
operations inspectors check the standards maintained by the operators, which
must be adequate for purposes of the Air Operator’s Certificate.
In order to supplement the diminishing supply of well-trained pilots for civil
airlines from the Royal Air Force, the College of Air Training was set up at
Hamble in i960. It is sponsored by the Government and the two airways
corporations. Commercial pilots must attend a course of training approved by
the Board of Trade. Such courses have been approved at the training schools
at Carlisle, Oxford and Perth, in addition to Hamble. The corporations set up
a new engineering apprentice school at Cranebank, near Heathrow, in 1970.
An Air Transport and Travel Industry Training Board has been established
under the Industrial Training Act 1964.
Responsibility for policy, planning and execution of both civil and military
air traffic control over the United Kingdom and the surrounding seas rests
with the National Air Traffic Control Services Organisation, under the joint
control of the Board of Trade and the Secretary of State for Defence.
In 1950 a system of airways covering the main traffic routes with control zones
around the major airports was introduced. Subsequently, the airway system
has been revised and extended to meet traffic requirements. There are three
main air traffic control centres: at London for southern England, at Preston
for the north of England and Wales, and at Prestwick for Scotland and the
Atlantic Ocean to 30°W.
A variety of radar installations and other equipment provide the means by
which the system can accept the increasingly heavy load of air traffic. Britain
was the first country to use radar for the control of civil air traffic. During
the next few years virtually the whole of the airspace over Britain above
5,000 feet (1,500 metres) will be brought under surveillance by the latest
types of primary and secondary radar equipment, which will provide data to be
used in two air traffic control centres, located at West Drayton (near London)
and Prestwick. A subsidiary centre will be located at Manchester to deal with
traffic in the Manchester terminal control area. Extensive use will be made in
these centres of automatic data processing and other advanced electronic
techniques. The first stage in a £25 million development (Mediator) will
begin in 1971.
The Board of Trade provides radio navigational aids to help pilots navigate
in all weather conditions, and has installed the Instrument Landing System
(ILS) at all its major airports.
Britain has pioneered in the development of all-weather landing systems.
The Blind Landing Experimental Unit of the Royal Aircraft Establishment
at Bedford and private industry have worked towards fully automatic blind
landing, which has now been achieved with passenger-carrying aircraft,
in good visibility.
Britain is a member of Eurocontrol, a European international agency con¬
cerned with the traffic control problems arising from the increasing use of
high-flying, high-speed jet aircraft. Set up in 1963 it provides control at the
higher flight levels for civil aircraft and for military aircraft operating accor¬
ding to civil procedures.
From 1st January 1971 all new types of subsonic aircraft using British airports
are required to hold a ‘certificate of quietness’. The noise standards laid down
in the certificate follow the recommendations of the special meeting on air-
Organisation
Finance
Postal Services
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS 353
craft noise held by the International Civil Aviation Organisation in Montreal
in 1969.
Noise abatement measures in force at Heathrow and Gatwick airports
include limitations on noise levels at take off, route restrictions, procedures
designed to lessen noise on the ground, and at Heathrow a limit on the
number of jet movements during summer nights.
THE POST OFFICE
The Post Office, founded in 1657, provides the postal and public telecom¬
munications services of the United Kingdom. It was formally set up as a
public authority under the Post Office Act 1969, having been a government
department.
The Post Office, previously controlled by the Postmaster General, is now
headed by a chairman and board, appointed by and responsible to the
Minister of Posts and Telecommunications. It has some 420,000 employees
and approaching 25,000 post offices.
The Post Office has authority to borrow up to £2,300 million. At 31st March
1970 it had borrowed £1,921 million. Over 90 per cent of total expenditure
on fixed assets is accounted for by telecommunications. The postal, tele¬
communications and data processing services are now managed separately.
In 1968-69 there was a profit of ^44 3 million, a profit for telecommunications
being partially offset by a loss of £5-8 million on postal services.
The development of postal communications in Britain can be traced from
the time when horsemen carried dispatches to the Tudor Court up to modern
airmail transport. The first dispatch of mails by train was made in 1830
between Liverpool and Manchester. The inauguration of the penny post
(the uniform charge for any inland distance being prepaid by means of postage
stamps, which originated in Britain) in 1840 was followed by a rapid exten¬
sion of the scope of the postal services. The registered post, ensuring addi¬
tional safety for valuable mail, was introduced in 1841. The money order
system, which had operated as a private venture from 1792 to 1838, was
supplemented in 1881 by the issue of postal orders for fixed amounts. Letter¬
boxes had been instituted in London in 1855, and in 1883 the parcel post was
introduced. In 1919 the Post Office inaugurated its own motor transport
fleet and the first mail was carried by air in Britain in 1911.
Approaching 11,000 million items of correspondence are carried annually
by the inland postal services. Each year about 7,500 tons of mail are carried
by air within the United Kingdom. Out of the 575 million items of overseas
mail carried in 1969-70, 68-2 per cent was carried by air, compared with
56 per cent in 1959-60. The air parcel service now operates to all countries
in Europe and to over 190 countries outside Europe.
Several new highly mechanised sorting office buildings were opened in
1969 and 1970. About £40 million will be spent on letter coding and automatic
letter-sorting machines. Letter segregating and facing machines are being
installed at over 60 centres. Postal address coding is being continuously
extended, and will cover over 10 million addresses by the end of 1970; the
remainder of Britain’s 18 million addresses are to be included by mid-1972.
A two-tier letter service was introduced in 1968 consisting of a more highly
priced service for first-class mail and a cheaper one for less urgent items. Some
£50 million is being invested in an improved parcels service.
354
Counter
Services
Telegraph
Services
Telex Service
Datel
Services
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
A Postal Consultancy Service offers facilities to overseas countries to aid
them in the planning and mechanisation of their services.
At the post office counter, besides making use of its postal and telegraph
facilities, the citizen can draw his pension and his family allowance, buy a
licence for his dog, sound radio or television receiving set, renew his car
licence and buy national insurance stamps. He can also use the wide range of
facilities for savings and investments (see p. 373) offered by the Department
for National Savings, and the money transmission services of the National
Giro. In much of the work at its counters the Post Office acts as agent for
other government departments or local authorities.
All private telegraph systems in Britain were transferred to the control of
the Postmaster General in 1870. Teleprinter-working for the transmission
of inland telegrams was introduced generally in 1928 and conversion to the
present automatic switching system was completed in mid-1954. It is now
one of the most up-to-date systems in the world and gives direct connection
between any of the 350 or so larger telegraph offices. The overseas telegraph
services were shared until 1950 between the Post Office and Cable and
Wireless Ltd. This company was brought into public ownership in 1947.
The Post Office, which acquired the British services, operates all overseas
telegraph services from the United Kingdom, except those offered by foreign
telegraph companies. Cable and Wireless Ltd. continues to operate its cable
and wireless services in many dependencies and foreign countries.
Telegraph services to overseas countries are operated from Electra House in
London, the world’s largest overseas telegraph office, and from nine other
London and provincial area telegraph offices. Direct connection via the Centex
system between these British offices and the larger towns in Belgium, France,
Federal Republic of Germany, Holland, Luxembourg, Italy and Norway
minimises delivery delay. In addition, the Post Office is well to the fore in the
development of telegraph message relay techniques for services beyond Europe.
The Telex Service (opened in England in 1932) combines the speed of the
telephone with the accuracy of the printed word. Calls may be made direct
between the rapidly increasing number of telex users in Britain (about 29,000
by the end of 1969) and also to well over 300,000 subscribers throughout the
world. Britain is linked to over 140 countries by telex. For call charging
purposes Britain is divided into 50 charging areas, each with its own telex
centre. The United Kingdom telex service is fully automatic and immediate
connection is made by direct dialling to any subscriber in this country, and to
many subscribers in Europe, New Zealand, the United States, Canada and
Australia. Calls to countries without an automatic service are connected
through the International Telex Exchange in London. Inland and overseas
telex traffic is growing annually by about 20 per cent; the Post Office is plan¬
ning for a system of about 140,000 United Kingdom subscribers by 1980.
A radioteleprinter service extends the use of telex to ships at sea (see p. 357).
The demand for facilities enabling digital data for computers to be trans¬
mitted over telephone and telegraph lines has greatly increased; to meet it
the Post Office has developed a range of datel services providing for trans¬
mission at speeds of up to 50 bits per second over telegraph-type circuits
and up to 2,400 bits per second over speech-type circuits. Higher speeds
can be accommodated by special arrangement. Datel facilities are available
to a number of European countries and over speech-type circuits to the
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
355
Telephone
Services
Special Teleph
Services
United States. In the year ending March 1970 the number of British datel
terminals more than doubled to some 8,700.
When the Post Office bought the property of the National Telephone Com¬
pany in 1912 it became the owner of almost the whole telephone service.
Hull Corporation was the only municipality to exercise its option of operating
its own service under licence from the Postmaster General; this service is
connected to the Post Office trunk network.
At the end of March 1970 there were 6,110 local telephone exchanges and
13 million telephones. On that date, only 103 exchanges remained to be
changed to automatic working. New exchanges are being opened at a rapid
rate—one or two a month in London. Trunk dialling by subscribers (STD)
began in Bristol in December 1958; by March 1970 the facility had been
extended to 2,738 exchanges, serving 86 per cent of all subscribers. STD
brings the advantages of quicker service, automatic accounting and cheap
long-distance calls of short duration. Telephones in London and five other
large cities have been given all-figure numbers in which exchange names
are replaced by figures, to facilitate handling of rapidly expanding domestic
and international traffic.
The first operational electronic exchange in Europe was opened at Amber-
gate, Derbyshire, in December 1966. All new small and medium-sized
exchanges are being ordered as electronic exchanges. Similar equipment for
larger exchanges has been developed and tested.
Pulse code modulation systems are being used to increase the circuit
capacity of lines on short-distance routes between exchanges. Over 231
should be installed by the end of 1970. A new time-division electronic
switching system for interconnecting routes equipped with pulse code modu¬
lation systems has been used experimentally.
International subscriber dialling operates between London, Edinburgh,
Birmingham, Glasgow, Liverpool, Manchester, and most of Western Europe.
The first major international subscriber dialling service in the world was
opened in 1970 between London and New York; it will be extended during
1971 to other parts of Britain and North America. Britain has two automatic
international telephone exchanges in use and a third under construction.
It is expected that by 1975 70 per cent of international calls will be dialled,
compared with 50 per cent in 1970.
Operator-connected calls are handled at the London Continental Exchange,
from which well over 2,000 direct telephone circuits give service to European
countries, and at the London International Exchange, which has direct links
via the transatlantic and Commonwealth cable networks, communications
satellites and high frequency radio to over 70 countries. Almost every country
can be reached from these two exchanges, via intermediate points where
necessary.
A radio tower, 620 feet (189 metres) high, in London provides microwave
radio links for carrying long-distance telephone and television circuits. There
are over 100 Post Office communications masts and towers in use, including a
tower of 500 feet (152 metres) in Birmingham.
one Several specialised services are available by telephone, including the ‘999’
emergency dialling service enabling subscribers to be connected as quickly
as possible, and free of charge, to the police, ambulance or fire brigade
services. A public radio telephone service operating in London and South
Lancashire enables users of vehicles fitted with suitable equipment to make
356 BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
or receive calls to or from any telephone in the United Kingdom network.
Recorded information services include: the speaking clock, weather forecasts,
motoring information, ‘Test match’ cricket scores, Financial Times share
index and ‘Dial a Disc’. In London a recorded service provides details in
five languages of events taking place, and a similar service, in English only, is
provided in Edinburgh during the Summer.
Private
Telecom¬
munications
Services
There are over 100,000 private circuit stations not connected with the public
exchange networks. These are associated with circuits rented for private use
for telephone conversations, teleprinter connections, photo-telegraphy, tele¬
vision, music, or for the transmission of signals which represent data for
computers or operate other devices.
Submarine The first transatlantic telephone cable, TAT 1, connecting Britain with Canada
Cables and the United States, was laid in 1956. Many submarine telephone cables
have been laid in succeeding years. Cable and Wireless Ltd., in co-operation
with the Post Office, carried out a comprehensive Commonwealth telephone
cable plan. The plan was agreed upon in 1958, and covered the construction
of three long-distance telephone cable systems: CANTAT (2,100 nautical
miles), from Scotland to Canada, was opened in 1961; COMP AC (8,130
nautical miles), connecting Canada, Hawaii, Fiji, New Zealand and Australia,
opened in 1963; and SEACOM (7,070 nautical miles), connecting Australia,
New Guinea, Guam, Hong Kong, Malaysia and Singapore, was completed
in stages from 1965 to 1967 and opened as a complete system in March 1967.
All three can provide 80 telephone circuits throughout, apart from the heavily
used section of SEACOM between Guam and Australia, which can provide
160. The submarine cables are linked overland across Canada and Australia
by radio microwave systems. CANTAT was the first single-cable ocean
telephone system to use the new lightweight cable and rigid two-way re¬
peaters, both developed by the Post Office.
Submarine cable systems using transistors in place of thermionic valves
have been developed by British manufacturers in consultation with the Post
Office Research Station and are used in many new systems. High capacity
submarine cable systems capable of providing 1,800 telephone circuits have
now been developed and the first systems will be brought into service during
1971.
There are 350 underwater cables in the national network, totalling over
2,000 miles (3,200 kilometres).
Satellite
Communica¬
tions
The Goonhilly satellite communication earth station in Cornwall was brought
into operation in 1962, and took part in the first experiments in satellite
communications using the Telstar and Relay satellites. After major extensions
and improvements, including the installation of a second large aerial, the
station now provides commercial telephone and television circuits via high-
capacity, geo-stationary satellites positioned over the Atlantic and Indian
Oceans. By May 1970 Britain had satellite links with 17 countries via 11
earth stations. By the end of 1971 services to 34 countries will have been
established via 25 earth stations, and a third large aerial at Goonhilly should
be nearing completion. The satellites used in the global communications
systems are provided by INTELSAT (International Communications
Satellite Consortium) of which Britain is the second largest shareholder.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
357
In addition to the radio stations for overseas telecommunications, the Post
Office has n coast radio stations in the United Kingdom. These stations
provide radiotelegraph and radiotelephone communications with ships at sea
at ranges of up to some 500 miles (800 kilometres) and 250 miles (400 kilo¬
metres) respectively. There is also the long-distance radiotelegraph and radio¬
telephone station, Portishead Radio, which communicates with ships in all
parts of the world; facilities were improved in 1970.
These coast stations play an important part in the services concerned with
safety of life at sea. They keep continuous watch on the international radio¬
telegraph and radiotelephone frequencies for distress calls from ships or
aircraft and take immediate action to obtain assistance for any vessel in
distress. During 1969-70 the stations handled 507 urgent and SOS calls
from ships and aircraft.
In addition to the services for safety of life at sea, the stations exchange
radiotelegrams with ships and connect radiotelephone calls between telephone
subscribers ashore and suitably equipped ships; they also broadcast naviga¬
tional warnings and weather bulletins.
The stations operate a free medical advice service whereby the master of a
ship of any nationality may obtain advice from appropriate medical authorities
on the treatment to be given in cases of sickness or injury aboard ship. During
1969-70, 444 medical cases were dealt with in this service.
An Act passed in 1967 enabled the Post Office to offer its data processing
facilities developed for its own use to commerce and industry. Through the
National Data Processing Service it provides a range of commercial computer
services, from simple card punching operations to complete systems covering
development, programming and processing at one of the Post Office computer
centres.
The Post Office is spending nearly £11 million a year on research and
development, in collaboration with industry and the universities. A new
£8 million research centre is being built at Martlesham Heath, Suffolk, to
replace the centre at Dollis Hill.
14 FINANCE
PUBLIC FINANCE
Public finance is concerned with the way public authorities (that is, the
central Government and local authorities) finance their activities—how their
expenditure is decided upon and how their revenue is obtained.
Money administered by public authorities1 can be roughly divided into:
1. The funds of the central Government raised mainly by taxation which are
paid into and out of the Consolidated Fund in accordance with the
proposals of the Government as approved by Parliament (principally the
House of Commons). Additional central Government funds are raised by
borrowing and are paid into the National Loans Fund set up under the
National Loans Fund Act 1968.2
There are also funds administered for special purposes by central
Government departments and wholly or partially maintained by receipts
which do not pass through the Consolidated Fund. The most important
one is the National Insurance Fund, administered by the Secretary of
State for Social Services and used for the payment of benefits under the
National Insurance Scheme.
2. The funds of local authorities, obtained partly from rates (local taxes on
dwelling-houses and other real estate) and income from property and
trading receipts, partly from grants and loans from the central Government
and partly from loans raised in the open market (see p. 74).
The following broad account of government finance is concerned mainly
with central Government taxation and borrowing and only incidentally with
local government and other public funds.
Financial control, as exercised by the House of Commons, is based on law,
parliamentary rights and custom.
As the power of Parliament grew in late medieval and Tudor times, the
principle that taxation by the Crown required parliamentary consent was
gradually evolved. The principle was established, at the end of the constitu¬
tional struggles of the Stuart period, by the Bill of Rights 1689.
In medieval, Tudor and Stuart times, it is broadly true to say that once the
king was granted the right to raise a given sum by taxation, he was free to
spend it as he chose. In the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, the House of
Commons gradually developed the modern system of controlling expenditure
through the device of Appropriation which was embodied in the Exchequer
and Audit Departments Act 1866. But by a Standing Order of the House of
Commons dating from the early eighteenth century the Crown’s consent is
required for all proposals involving new spending from the Consolidated Fund.
The House of Commons cannot, therefore, initiate expenditure, which must be
proposed by a Minister.
From the very early days of Parliament it had been established that such
1 For an account of public finance in Northern Ireland and its relationship to that of
the United Kingdom, see pp. 368.
2 Prior to April 1968 the funds from both these sources were paid into the Exchequer.
The term ‘Exchequer’ took its name from the ‘chess-board’, or table with chequered
cloth, round which the King’s financial officials sat for accounting purposes in the
twelfth century.
DECIMAL COINS
The diverse side, common to all
coins.
(shown twice their actual size)
AMENITIES FOR CHILDREN
Nursery education
provided by the
London Borough of
Newham.
Teaching pool at
Crystal Palace
National Recreational
Centre.
A Greater London
Council mobile
cinema.
Environmental studies
for city children at the
High Beech Centre,
Epping Forest, Essex.
New class of steel
lifeboat.
SAFETY AT SEA
New Royal Sovereign
lighthouse under
construction. Built on
land in two sections,
the main structure
(light tower, cabin and
helicopter deck) and
the underwater column
(inset) are fastened
together on the
Sovereign Reef in the
English Channel.
Isotope-powered
marine light.
Powerful binoculars used by
coastguards.
Marconi marine radar ‘Predictor’
provides fully automatic plottings.
FINANCE
359
financial control as Parliament possessed should be exercised by the House of
Commons. This control became effective, as regards taxation, in the seven¬
teenth century, but as regards expenditure it was not effective until the
nineteenth century. The controlling power of the House of Commons is
acknowledged today in the Speech from the Throne at the opening of a new
session of Parliament, which is addressed to both Houses but contains a
special paragraph on expenditure addressed to the Commons alone.
The Commons have traditionally claimed that the Lords have no power to
modify financial provisions, though they may reject such provisions, thus,
to minimise the chance of rejection, the practice was started in 1861 of
embodying the main financial provisions for the ensuing year in a single Bill.
Since the passing of the Parliament Act 1911, however, if the Finance Bill is
certified by the Speaker to be a Money Bill, it may be presented to the Queen
for the Royal Assent and become law without the consent of the House of
Lords if it has not been passed by them within one month (see p. 38).
Today, the authority of the House of Commons has to be obtained for all
expenditure by the central Government itself and for the raising of revenue
by taxation or borrowing. All government revenue, other than the proceeds of
borrowing and sums received by government departments in the course of
their normal activities (known as appropriations-in-aid), is paid into an
account with the Bank of England (known as the Account of Her Majesty s
Exchequer) which forms the Consolidated Fund. With certain exceptions (the
main ones being government loans and national insurance benefits), all
payments by the Government come out of this account.
The following sections outline the machinery by which expenditure and
revenue are authorised and controlled, the purposes on which public money
is spent and the sources from which revenue is obtained.
ESTIMATES AND
EXPENDITURE
Classification of
Expenditure
Central government expenditure falls into three main groups:
1. The main part of government expenditure which is authorised by annual
Appropriation Acts and includes, broadly, expenditure on defence, on the
social services and on the general administration of the country. These are
called Supply Services because the House of Commons, when voting
money, is granting to the Crown ‘such aids or supplies as are required to
satisfy ... the pecuniary necessities of the Government’. It should be
noted that some of this expenditure may also depend on legislation, such
as the National Health Service Acts, which relates to a specific object of
expenditure.
2. Expenditure which is specifically authorised by Acts of Parliament other
than annual Appropriation Acts. These are the Consolidated Fund
Standing Services which represent a direct charge on the Consolidated
Fund, covering the residual cost of servicing the National Debt,1 the
financial provision made for members of the royal family, and salaries and
pensions of judges and certain high officers, such as the Speaker of the
House of Commons and the Leader of the Opposition, whose indepen¬
dence of the Government is thought to be better guaranteed by permanent
grant than by annual vote. This group also includes expenditure from the
National Insurance and similar special funds.
1 The servicing of the National Debt is charged in the first instance to the National
Loans Fund. After taking account of certain receipts by the Fund, including interest
received on loans to nationalised industries and local authorities, the residue is charged
to the Consolidated Fund.
36°
Authorisation
of Expenditure
Scrutiny of
Expenditure
The Treasury
BRITAIN I971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
3. Government lending and debt, which under the National Loans Act 1968
are channelled through the National Loans Fund. These include most of
the Government’s domestic lending to the nationalised industries, local
authorities and public corporations as well as the principal repayments and
the servicing (that is, interest and expenses) of the National Debt.
The Estimates for the Supply Services are considered by the House of
Commons during the 29 days (known as Supply days) which are allotted by
Standing Order of the House to consideration of Supply business in each
session. The choice of subject for debate on these days rests with the
Opposition. The House usually discusses general questions of policy relevant
to the Estimates, though any Estimate may be examined in detail if members
wish and if time allows (see p. 40).
Estimates for Supply Services in the financial year beginning on 1st April
are submitted to the Treasury by each department in the preceding December.
Estimated expenditure is grouped under main headings called ‘Votes’ which
are further broken down into subheads and items. If the House of Commons
approves the Estimates, the sums asked for are voted and later confirmed in
the Appropriation Act; this Act appropriates the money to specific Votes.
No department may spend money granted on one Vote for the purposes of
another. Within each Vote, ‘virement’, that is, the spending of money on one
subhead instead of on another, is permissible so far as Parliament is con¬
cerned, but only with Treasury consent.
An insufficient Estimate, or a new service not covered by the Vote, or
virement of a magnitude or character which the Treasury considers should be
brought to the attention of Parliament, requires a Supplementary Estimate.
The Treasury exercises the same power of scrutiny over this as over the
ordinary Estimates.
Control of expenditure is maintained by the Treasury, by the Comptroller
and Auditor General, and by the Public Accounts and Estimates Committees
of the House of Commons.
The power of the Treasury to control expenditure derives from the responsi¬
bility of the Chancellor of the Exchequer for financial policy.
A central function of the Treasury is to present the Estimates to the House
of Commons. In considering the Estimates submitted by departments,
the Treasury has to look at the proposals for expenditure in relation to the
results of the public expenditure surveys (see below); and to eliminate any
overlapping, uneconomic or wasteful expenditure where this has escaped the
net of departmental financial control. Apart from the scrutiny of Estimates,
throughout the year the Treasury exercises a general supervision over all
departmental expenditure. The Treasury also lays down general rules of
financial and accounting procedure for departments and prescribes the
principles on which departmental contracts shall be made and the limits
within which certain classes of losses may be written off.
In 1961 the Plowden Committee on the Control of Public Expenditure
recommended in its report (Cmnd. 1432) that regular surveys should be
made of public expenditure as a whole over a period of years ahead and in
relation to prospective resources, and that decisions involving future expendi¬
ture should be taken in the light of these surveys. Surveys, therefore, are now
made annually and have become an established part of the Government’s
machinery for the planning and control of public expenditure (see p. 235).
FINANCE
The Comptroller
and Auditor
General
The Public Accounts
Committee
The Estimates
Committee
361
Proposals for changes in the presentation and the procedures for consideration
by Parliament of public expenditure estimates were published in April 1969.
A White Paper (the first of an annual series) prepared in accordance with these
new proposals was published in December 1969 {Public Expenditure ig68-6g
to ig73~74, see Bibliography, p. 486) which set out the Government’s plans
for public expenditure in detail for 1969-70 and the following two years and
its allocations of expenditure on a provisional and approximate basis for
1972-73 and I973-74-
These plans and allocations covered all public expenditure—the capital and
current expenditure of central and local government and the capital expendi¬
ture of the nationalised industries and other public corporations. They gave
expression to the Government’s policy that expenditure on public services
should expand throughout the period broadly in line with the growth of the
nation’s resources. The assumption adopted was that the annual rate of growth
of national resources would be close to 3 per cent, the lower end of the range
of rates envisaged in Government planning documents (see p. 235).
Control over issues of money to departments and the audit of accounts is
exercised by the Comptroller and Auditor General, which is a permanent
Crown appointment. Since 1866 he has had two functions: as Comptroller he
controls receipts and issues of public money to and from the Consolidated
Fund and the National Loans Fund; and as Auditor General he audits
departmental accounts and submits his report on the Appropriation Accounts
and other accounts, as required by statute, to Parliament. His statutory
function is to ensure that all expenditure is properly incurred, for example,
that no payments are made which go beyond any relevant statutory authority,
and that Treasury sanction has been obtained wherever necessary. In addition,
however, he has been encouraged by successive Public Accounts Committees
(see the next paragraph) to examine departmental expenditure with a view to
drawing attention to any cases of apparent waste or extravagance.
The accounts of each department and the reports on the accounts made by
the Comptroller and Auditor General are considered by a select committee
called the Public Accounts Committee. This was first set up in 1861, on the
motion of Mr. Gladstone, for the purpose of ensuring that expenditure was
properly incurred in accordance with the purpose for which it was voted and
with any relevant Acts of Parliament. The terms of reference of the committee
are to examine the accounts and these terms have been widely interpreted by
successive committees which have investigated whether full value has been
obtained for the sums spent by departments and have examined cases in which
the administration appears to have been faulty or negligent. The committee
has therefore become a powerful instrument for the exposure of waste and
inefficiency. It embodies its findings in reports which may be debated in the
House of Commons. Its recommendations are considered by the Treasury
in consultation with departments and put into effect, so far as they are
accepted, according to Treasury instructions. A reply to each report is sub¬
mitted by the Treasury to the committee of the following session and where
the recommendations have been unacceptable to the Treasury the committee
may either accept the objections or return to the charge in subsequent reports.
This committee was originally set up in 1912 and has been reappointed
annually except during the war years. In i960 it was made a select committee
set up each session under standing orders. The committee’s functions are
to examine the Estimates, to report how, if at all, the policy implied in the
Estimates can be carried out more economically and to consider the principal
362
THE BUDGET
Budget Policy
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
variations between the Estimates of the current year and those of the previous
year and the form in which the Estimates should be presented. Usually, the
committee selects each year a few Votes for review.
Through the medium of a number of sub-committees, the committee carries
out extensive investigations into the departments or subjects under considera¬
tion. In practice the Estimates for the current year are not affected, but the
committee’s recommendations produce changes in future Estimates and
strengthen Treasury control. One of these sub-committees examines the
winter and spring Supplementary Estimates and the principal variations
between the Estimates presented and those of the previous year. The other
sub-committees are organised on functional lines, each sub-committee being
allocated a different sphere of government policy and administration. Addi¬
tional parliamentary time has been allocated for discussion of the reports of
the Estimates and the Public Accounts Committees.
‘Budget’ is an old word meaning a bag containing papers or accounts. The
use of the word in public finance originated in the expression ‘The Chancellor
of the Exchequer opened his Budget’, v/hich is applied in Parliament to the
annual speech of the Chancellor of the Exchequer explaining his proposals for
balancing revenue and expenditure.
The annual Budget speech is normally the main occasion of the year for
reviewing the central Government’s finances and the economic state of the
nation, and its formal basis is the Chancellor’s proposals for raising money by
taxation. In recent years it has become the practice for Chancellors to discuss
in the Budget speech the prospects for the economy in the period ahead in
some detail. By the time the Budget is introduced (usually in April) the
Estimates of expenditure under various headings will have been presented to
Parliament and published, and the expected total of government expenditure
for the year will be known. The Chancellor estimates the yield of the revenue
on the basis of existing taxation and proposes such changes in taxation as he
considers desirable on economic grounds. These proposals are later embodied
in detail in a Finance Bill. The interval between the Budget Statement and the
Royal Assent to the Finance Bill (usually given in July) is covered by legisla¬
tion (mainly the Provisional Collection of Taxes Act 1968), whereby changes
in income tax, corporation tax, purchase tax, selective employment tax and
customs and excise duties have statutory effect before the passing of the
Finance Bill if adopted by Resolution of the House of Commons.
The Budget also takes into account the finance needed to cover government
lending. Details for the years 1967-68 to 1970-71 were given in a White Paper,
Loans from the National Loan Fund igyo-yi, issued on Budget day. For
1970-71 it is estimated that rather more than one-third of the net issues from
this Fund would be loans to nationalised industries; more than a half would
be loans to local and harbour authorities; and the remainder loans to other
public corporations, the private sector, and certain advances within the central
Government.
The original purpose of the Budget was purely financial—to provide money
for government expenditure. From an early stage, however, it was appreciated
that taxation would affect the distribution of income and property and the
level of expenditure on particular goods and services. At a later period it was
realised that taxation also affected the nation’s total expenditure and therefore
the general level of economic activity. Since the second world war, Budgets
Sources of
Revenue
Income Tax
FINANCE 363
have been consciously designed in greater or lesser degree to bring the total
demand for goods and services into balance with total national output.
The Budget affects the general level of expenditure and, therefore, the total
demand for goods and services in the following way: if there is an increase in
government expenditure without an increase in taxation then total demand for
goods and services will tend to rise; the same thing will happen if there is a
decrease in taxation without a decrease in government spending. In this way
the Budget can be used to counter unemployment. On the other hand, if
there is an increase in taxation without an increase in government expenditure,
or a decrease in government expenditure without a decrease in taxation then
the total demand for goods and services will tend to fall. Particular taxes may
be used with the intention of bringing about certain desired effects. For
example, taxes on income and capital affect the distribution of wealth because
the rates vary according to the size of the income or capital, the proportion of
a high income or capital taken in tax being much greater than the proportion
of a small one; while taxes on expenditure may influence the allocation of
resources and the pattern of trade by discouraging or encouraging the con¬
sumption of particular goods.
The main objectives of British budgetary policy in recent years have been
the achievement and maintenance of a strong balance of payments together
with a sustained rate of economic growth and a high level of employment. In
order to regulate demand more closely, successive governments have adopted
a much more flexible attitude towards fiscal policy and have not hesitated to
use budgetary measures between annual Budgets. At the same time considera¬
tion is given to the long-term strategy for taxation and to ways in which the
existing system of taxation can be improved by ensuring that its incidence is
fair. Against a background of substantial improvement in Britain’s balance of
payments position the 197° Budget was designed to maintain the strength of
the balance of payments and to guide the economy into steadily increasing
growth.
In the United Kingdom the principal taxes fall into three main categories.
First, taxes on income, which include income tax, surtax and corporation tax;
second, taxes on capital, which include estate duty, capital gains tax and the
tax on short-term gains; and third, taxes on expenditure (including taxes
on the ownership or use of certain assets)—these include not only customs and
excise duties and the purchase tax, but also the selective employment tax,
local rates, stamp duties and licence duties (for example, on motor vehicles and
dogs). Taxes on individual (but not corporate) incomes are progressive taxes,
that is, larger incomes and estates bear a proportionately higher rate of tax.
The Board of Inland Revenue collects the taxes on income and capital and
the stamp duties, the Board of Customs and Excise collects the most import¬
ant taxes on expenditure, the customs and excise taxes and the purchase tax,
while a variety of authorities are responsible for the collection of the re¬
mainder, including the Department of Health and Social Security for the
selective employment tax.
Income tax is imposed at a standard rate for the year of assessment beginning
on 6th April, which is at present 41*25 per cent. The tax imposed on an
individual is graduated by means of personal allowances and reliefs, and by
the surtax. In the case of a married couple the incomes of husband and wife are
aggregated and are treated as one income, but higher allowances are given
than for a single person. A special allowance is given against any earnings of
364
Surtax
Company
Taxation
Estate Duty
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
a married woman. Earned income bears less tax than other income as certain
fractional deductions (‘earned income relief’) are allowable.
A single person earning £ 1,000 a year pays £187 in income tax, while a
married man with the same earned income pays ^129; if he has two children
under the age of 11, his tax (after taking into account the receipt of family
allowances) falls to £66; when the children are between the ages of 11 and 16,
the tax is £46; if the children are over 16 and receiving full-time education,
only £25 is paid. The range of tax payable by a single person varies from, for
example, £26 on an earned income of £500 a year to £1,516 on an earned
income of £5,000; if the income is unearned, tax liability on £500 will be £38
and on £5,000 will be £2,441.
Most wage and salary earners pay their income tax under a PAYE (‘Pay-as-
you-earn’) scheme, under which tax is deducted at source, thus enabling them
to keep up to date on tax payments.
In general, income tax is charged on all income which originates in the
United Kingdom and on all income arising abroad of persons (including
companies) resident in the United Kingdom. The main exceptions are that
interest on certain United Kingdom government securities belonging to
persons not ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom is exempt; and
income from certain classes of possessions abroad is chargeable not on the
amount of income arising but on the amount of income remitted to the United
Kingdom. The United Kingdom has entered into agreements with many
countries providing for relief from double taxation; where such agreements
are not in force unilateral relief is allowed.
The surtax, which is essentially an income tax at higher rates, is charged on
personal incomes exceeding £2,500 a year after deducting certain personal
allowances in excess of the single person’s basic allowance. In addition, the
same earned income relief as for income tax and a special earnings allowance
(not exceeding £2,000) are deductible from earned income only. Surtax is
imposed at rates which increase progressively until, on the portion of taxable
income above £15,000, the combined rate of income tax and surtax payable
in 1970-71 (being income tax for 1970-71 and surtax for 1969-70) reaches
91-25 per cent.
Companies are liable to corporation tax on both their profits and their capital
gains. In addition, a company deducts income tax from dividends and other
distributions and pays it over to the Inland Revenue as a separate matter
from its own liability. The rate of corporation tax is fixed retrospectively in the
Budget for the past financial year; for 1969-70 it is 45 per cent. The tax is
assessed on the profits of accounting periods, the rate of tax being the rate for
the financial year in which the accounting period falls. The basic rule for the
calculation of income for corporation tax purposes is that, except for special
provisions, it is computed in accordance with income tax principles.
Estate duty is chargeable on the value of all property which passes at death.
The charge to duty is not limited to property owned by the deceased but may
extend to other property, for example, to trust funds from which the deceased
received income in his lifetime and to gifts made by the deceased within
seven years of his death (one year in the case of a gift for public or charitable
purposes). Since the 1969 Budget estates not over £10,000 are exempt from
duty; but on estates of a higher value duty is chargeable by reference to rates
ranging from 25 per cent to 85 per cent applied to successive slices of the
estate.
FINANCE
Capital Gains
Tax
Customs and
Excise Duties
Purchase Tax
Betting Duties
Motor Vehicle
Licence Taxes
Selective
Employment Tax
365
Capital gains accruing on the disposal of assets are liable to capital gains tax
or, in the case of companies, to corporation tax. Where assets were acquired
before 6th April 1965, the charge is restricted to the part of any gain attribut¬
able to the period since 6th April 1965. The rate of tax for persons other than
companies is 30 per cent, but in the case of individuals may be less, depending
on their circumstances. Certain assets are exempt from tax including the
principal private residence, chattels worth less than £1,000 (and any chattels,
except those used for the purpose of a trade, with a predictable life of less than
50 years), private motor cars, National Savings Certificates and (from 15th
April 1969) British Government and Government-guaranteed securities. The
gains of an individual for a year are exempt if, after deducting losses, they do
not exceed £50. Gains arising to individuals from the disposal of assets
within 12 months of their acquisition are in general liable as short-term gains
to income tax (and surtax) and not to capital gains tax.
The largest group of taxes on expenditure are those administered by the
Customs and Excise Department, namely, the duties on tobacco, hydrocarbon
oil, alcoholic drinks, purchase tax, protective duties, betting and certain
miscellaneous items.1 In British usage the distinction between customs and
excise depends on whether the goods are imported (customs duties) or British
produced (excise duties). These taxes are sometimes known as indirect taxes
since they are normally paid by the importer, manufacturer, or wholesaler,
who adjusts the prices charged to customers accordingly. In 1970 the tax
burden was equivalent to about £0-22^ on a gallon of petrol, £0*24 on a
packet of 20 standard plain cigarettes, £2*20 on a bottle of whisky, and £0-04!
on a pint of beer of average strength.
The Chancellor of the Exchequer has power to vary by Order by up to 10
per cent the rates of purchase tax and any of the other main groups of customs
and excise duties (that is, tobacco, alcoholic drinks, oil and the minor revenue
duties). This power, known as the ‘regulator’, requires annual renewal.
Purchase tax is charged on a wide range of goods, nearly all of them consumer
goods, at four rates, which are currently 13I per cent, 22 per cent, 36! per cent
and 55 per cent of the wholesale value. Articles subject to revenue duties of
customs and excise are in general exempt from this tax; other goods free of
purchase tax include food (other than confectionery, soft drinks, ice cream and
crisps), fuel, books and newspapers, young children’s clothing and footwear,
certain non-proprietary drugs and medicines, and some household appliances.
The principal betting duties are: the pool betting duty (which applies to
football pools and betting by coupon at fixed odds) charged at a rate of 33^ per
cent of the stake money; and the general betting duty, which is charged at the
rate of 6 per cent of stake money except for on-course betting which is charged
at 5 per cent. Gaming is taxed at different rates mainly by licence fees.
Taxes on motor vehicles are collected by the local taxation authorities (the
county or county borough councils in England and Wales and the correspond¬
ing councils in Scotland); the proceeds are paid by the local authorities into
the Consolidated Fund. The licence duty on a private motor car is £25 a year;
motor cycles and three-wheel vehicles, etc., pay £2-50, £5 or £10 a year
according to engine capacity.
The selective employment tax was introduced in the 1966 Finance Act. It
is paid by all employers throughout the United Kingdom at a rate per week
1 The duties other than purchase tax and protective duties are known as revenue
duties.
366
BRITAIN I971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
of ^2-40 for men, ^1*20 for women and boys and ^o-8o for girls. However,
the tax is refunded to eligible employers in manufacturing industries, most
of transport and communications, agriculture and the extractive industries.
Manufacturers in the development areas receive in addition the regional
employment premium (see p. 252). Most activities of the nationalised
industries and local authorities also receive repayment of the tax. Employers
TABLE 23
Taxation and
Miscellaneous
Receipts
1969- 70 and
1970- 71
£ million
Taxation
Inland Revenue—
Income Tax
Surtax ..
Corporation Tax
Capital Gains Tax
Death Duties ..
Stamp Duties ..
Special Charge. .
Other
Total Inland Revenue
Customs and Excise—
Tobacco
Purchase Tax ..
Oil  
Spirits, Beer and Wine
Betting and Gaming ..
Other Revenue Duties
Protective Duties
Import Deposits
Less: Export Rebates, etc.
Total Customs and Excise
Motor Vehicle Duties
Less: Export Rebates, etc.
Selective Employment Tax
(gross)6 
Total Taxation
Miscellaneous Receipts
Broadcast Receiving
Licences
Interest and Dividends
Other
Total
1969-70
Budget
Estimate
4,881
240
1,805
136
380
120
25
3
7,590
1,125
1,101
1,309
844
109
10
220
-175
-9
4,534
422
-2
420
1,920
14,464
102
87
355
15,008
Outturn
4,900
255
1,687
127
365
120
20
2
7,476
1,143
1,110
1,302
862
119
10
228
189“
-11
4,952
419
-2
417
1,888
14,733
101
92
340
15,266
1970-71 Estimate
Before
Budget
changes
5,800
280
1,900
150
365
120
4
1
8,620
1,160
1,260
1,380
905
119
10
230
-390
-5
4,669
431
-1
430
2,042
15,761
102
100
340
16,303
After Budget
changes
5,653
277
1,900
150
371
119
4
1
8,475
1,160
1,260
1,380
905
120
10
230
-425
-5
4,635
431
-1
430
2,042
15,582
102
100
340
16,124
Source: Financial Statement and Budget Report 1970-71.
0 Import deposits were extended for a further period of 12 months from 5th December
1969.
6 Respective figures for net yield of selective employment tax from the private sector
and public corporations are (left to right): £606 million, £527 million, £588 million
and £588 million.
FINANCE
THE BUDGET
ACCOUNTS
1969-70 and 1970
TABLE 24
Expenditure :
General
Functional
Analysis of the
Estimates 1968-
to 1970-71
Summary
367
in construction, distribution, insurance, banking and miscellaneous services
pay the tax without refund, except that two-thirds of the tax is refunded for all
employees aged 65 and over and for part time staff working fewer than 21 hours
a week.
After allowing for the Budget changes and for certain supplementary provi¬
sions total expenditure for the financial year ending 31st March 1971 is
^ estimated to reach ^I3>52^ million, including ^593 million for Consolidated
Fund Standing Services and £12,933 million for Supply Services. The esti¬
mate for total revenue is ^16,124 million of which £i5»5^2 million is receipts
from taxation. A surplus of £2,598 million for transfer to the National
Loans Fund is therefore expected. Net lending from the National Loans
Fund (see p, 360) is estimated to reach £1,544 million. Thus in 1970—71 after
special transactions, there is likely to be a net repayment of debt by the central
Government of some £1,054 million.
Table 23 shows total revenue from taxation and other sources anticipated
in 1969-70 and 1970-71. Table 24 gives a general functional analysis of
expenditure in the Estimates.
•69
Defence budget ..
Other military defence
Overseas aid
Other overseas services
Technological services
Other assistance to employ
ment and industry
Research councils, etc.
Agriculture, fisheries and
forestry ..
Roads and public lighting
Transport..
Housing ,,
Local environmental
services ..
Law and Order ..
Arts
Education
Health and Welfare
Social security
Financial administration
Common Services
Miscellaneous services .
Selective employment tax
refunds (including refund
element of manufacturers’
premium)
Non-specific grants to local
authorities
Total
1968-69
Outturn
£ni.
%of
total
2.247
90
203
130
170
880
85
345
287
207
165
32
236
15
342
1,308
1.248
217
164
44
20-7
0-8
1- 9
1-2
1-6
81
0-8
3-2
2- 7
1-9
1- 5
0-3
2- 2
0-1
3- 2
12-1
11-5
2-0
1*5
0-4
726 6-7
1,702 15-6
1969-70
Budget
Estimates
°/ nf
/o OI
total
2,266
83
212
134
197
842
97
395
325
190
193
47
260
17
349
1,389
1,356
237
217
46
19-2
0-7
1-8
M
1*7
7-1
0-8
3-4
2-8
1-6
1*6
0-4
2-2
0-1
3-0
11-8
11*5
2-0
1*8
0-4
1,080 9-2
1,868 15*8
1969-70
Total
Estimates
£m.
%of
total
2,275
91
225
139
205
997
99
376
341
199
193
47
269
18
358
1,460
1,365
246
218
48
18*6
0-7
1-8
M
1*7
8-2
0-8
31
2-8
1*6
1-6
0-4
2-2
0-2
2-9
11-9
11-2
2-0
1*8
0-4
1,093 8-9
1,971 16-1
10,843 100*0 11,800100-0 12,233 100-0 12,791a100*0
1970-71
Estimates
%of
total
2,280
95
218
135
184
975
110
17*8
0*7
1*7
11
1*4
7*6
0-9
383 3*0
373 2*9
165 1*3
250 2*0
49
294
21
378
1,554
1,432
272
258
50
0*4
2*3
0*2
3*0
12*1
11*2
2*1
20
0-4
1,151 9*0
2,164 16*9
Source: Estimates 1970-71 Memorandum by the Chief Secretary to the Treasury.
a This total excludes a supplementary provision of £141 million.
368
CAPITAL
PAYMENTS AND
RECEIPTS
The National
Debt
PUBLIC FINANCE
IN NORTHERN
IRELAND
BRITAIN I97i: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Capital expenditure consists chiefly of loans to the nationalised industries, the
local authorities and other public corporations, such as the New Towns
Development Corporations. These loans, less repayments, are financed from
the National Loans Fund by the surplus of revenue over expenditure (if any),
by the proceeds of government borrowing including borrowing from extra-
budgetary funds, such as the National Insurance Fund, and by the sterling
receipts (if any) accruing to the Exchange Equalisation Account.
Central government borrowing may be in the form of borrowing from the
public either through the National Savings Movement (see p. 373) or by bor¬
rowing on the market by means of new issues of securities. New issues of
government securities are made from time to time for the purpose of refinan¬
cing maturing issues (conversion issues) or to raise new money (issues for
cash). The capital requirements of the nationalised industries are met by the
central Government while those of the local authorities are met partly through
the Public Works Loan Board (see p. 74) and partly by borrowing direct from
the public, although both may also now borrow, with Treasury consent, in
foreign currencies.
The National Debt increased particularly rapidly during and immediately
after the first and second world wars. It rose from £650 million in 1914 to
£7,435 million at the end of the first world war, and from £7,131 million in
I939 t0 j£23>637 million in 1946. On 31st March 1970 the total National Debt
(provisional) was £33,071 million, of which £2,232 million was repayable
in currencies other than sterling, mainly to the United States and Canadian
Governments. Of the £30,839 million of internal debt, £4,989 million was
short-term debt, mainly in the form of 91-day Treasury bills, while the long¬
term loans included a variety of stocks, bonds, loans and certificates carrying
fixed rates of interest (ranging from 2^ to 9 per cent) and with fixed or
indeterminate dates of repayment.
The general system of public finance in Northern Ireland is, in its main
features, similar to that operating in the United Kingdom as a whole, under
which public revenues, with a few minor exceptions, are paid into the
Exchequer Account, from which no money can be withdrawn except on the
authority of Parliament. That authority is expressed in the case of Consolidated
Fund charges in permanent legislative form, and in the case of Supply Services
by annual Appropriation Acts based on estimates prepared by departments
and sanctioned by the Ministry of Finance.
The major sources of revenue flowing into the Northern Ireland Exchequer
are the main national taxes imposed by the United Kingdom Parliament over
the whole country and paid, in the first instance, into the United Kingdom
Consolidated Fund. These taxes, which are referred to in the Government of
Ireland Act 1920 as ‘reserved’ taxes (that is, reserved to the United Kingdom
Parliament), comprise the Inland Revenue group (income tax, surtax,
corporation tax and capital gains tax) and customs and excise duties on goods.
After the cost of collecting these taxes in Northern Ireland (and the cost of
some other reserved services) and an Imperial Contribution have been
retained in the United Kingdom Consolidated Fund, the balance, termed the
‘Residuary Share of Reserved Taxes’, is paid to the Northern Ireland Ex¬
chequer where it joins up with the ‘transferred’ taxes (that is, where taxation
powers have been transferred to the Northern Ireland Parliament) to form the
public income. Among items of Transferred Tax Revenue are estate duties,
FINANCE 369
stamp duties, betting duties, various excise licence duties, motor vehicle duties
and selective employment tax.
A joint Exchequer Board, representative of the Treasury and the Ministry
of Finance for Northern Ireland, constituted in accordance with the Govern¬
ment of Ireland Act 1920, determines the amount of Reserved Revenue and
the cost of Reserved Services attributable to Northern Ireland for each year,
the amount of the Imperial Contribution, and such other questions affecting
the financial relations of the two Governments as may be referred to it.
In the Northern Ireland Budget for 1970-71 (year ending 31st March),
total revenues were forecast at ^373 million and expenditure at £372 million.
After allowing for the Imperial Contribution, provisionally estimated at ^1
million, there was a Budget surplus of £85,000.
The Public Debt of Northern Ireland, totalling £319 million on 31st
March 1970 is covered by repayable advances and investments held by the
Ministry of Finance.
Outside the Exchequer system in Northern Ireland, various funds have been
established, in addition to statutory Reserve and Sinking Funds, for specific
purposes. In general, these funds follow the United Kingdom pattern, the
principal funds being those relating to National Insurance and government
loans. The latter constitutes a pool of capital money available mainly for local
and public authority borrowings; on 31st March 1970 a sum of approximately
£244 million was outstanding against such borrowers.
THE CENTRAL BANK
The British banking system is long established and well integrated. It
comprises a central bank; commercial banks which carry on the usual main
banking services; the United Kingdom offices of banks whose main business
is in other countries; merchant banks and other specialised institutions.
The Bank of England was established in 1694 by Act of Parliament and
Royal Charter as a corporate body; the entire capital stock was acquired by
the Government under the Bank of England Act 1946. As the central bank,
the Bank acts as banker to the Government, to overseas central banks and to
commercial banks; it is the note-issuing authority and the registrar for some
200 government, nationalised industry, local authority, public board and
Commonwealth government stocks. As agent for the Government the Bank
administers exchange control and the voluntary arrangements to limit invest¬
ment in the more developed countries of the sterling area. On behalf of the
Treasury it manages the Exchange Equalisation Account (EEA), which holds
Britain’s official reserves of gold and foreign exchange; using the resources of
the EEA the Bank designs its interventions in the foreign exchange market
both to prevent undue fluctuations in the exchange value of sterling and to
conserve the means of making payments abroad.
As banker to the Government in the widest sense, among other things, the
Bank examines and seeks to anticipate banking and financial problems and to
undertake the appropriate operations in the money, capital and the foreign
exchange markets; consequently the Bank has a major responsibility for
advising the Government on the formulation of monetary policy and for its
subsequent execution.
In implementing monetary policy the Bank acts almost daily in the money
market, by buying or selling Treasury bills, and similarly in the market for
government stocks. A prime concern is to maintain orderly conditions and,
when necessary, the Bank also exerts influence on interest rates; an important
370
Decimal
Currency
The Deposit
Banks
BRITAIN I97i: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
instrument in this context is Bank Rate, which is the minimum rate at which
the Bank will discount approved bills of exchange for the members of the
London Discount Market or will normally lend to them; a wide range of other
short-term interest rates is related to it.
As the recognised channel of communication between the commercial banks
and other financial institutions of the City of London on the one hand,
and the Government on the other, the Bank has been called on in recent
years to administer direct control of credit. This has been achieved by means
of ‘special deposits’ which the London clearing banks and Scottish banks are
called upon to make with the Bank; through requests to the banks and other
financial institutions not to extend credit above stipulated quantitative
ceilings; and by general guidance to them on lending policy.
The Bank of England has the sole right in England and Wales of issuing
bank notes. Notes thus issued need a 100 per cent cover in gold, securities
and coin. Very little gold is now held by the Issue Department of the Bank, by
far the major part of the note issue being covered by securities and coin;
this part is the fiduciary issue, the level of which is subject to parliamentary
control. (The Scottish and Northern Ireland banks have limited rights to
issue notes; these issues, apart from an amount specified by legislation for
each bank, must be fully covered by Bank of England notes and by coin.)
The provision of coin for circulation is the responsibility of the Royal Mint,
a government department.
On Monday, 15th February 1971 (‘D Day’) the United Kingdom, under the
Decimal Currency Acts 1967 and 1969 will begin changing to a decimal
currency system which will greatly simplify calculations affecting Britain’s
domestic and external business affairs. The £ sterling is unchanged under the
new system, but instead of the old ^sd division it will be divided into 100 new
pence. The new decimal coinage has six denominations. Three of these, in
cupro-nickel, have been brought into circulation before ‘D Day’: the lop and
5p (equivalent to 2s. and is. respectively) in 1968 and the 50p (equivalent to
10s.) in 1969. Three bronze coins—the 2p, ip and £p (equivalent to 4*8d.,
2-4d. and i-2d. respectively) will be issued on ‘D Day’.
‘D Day’ will be followed by a changeover period of not more than 18
months, during which it will be legal to conduct business (except banking) in
either ^sd or ^p and during which businesses will change over to the decimal
system on their own selected date (mainly because of the machine conversion
problem). Pennies and threepenny bits will remain legal tender during the
changeover period, and the sixpence will remain legal tender for at least two
years from ‘D Day’.
On and from ‘D Day’ all banking documents, including cheques, will have
to be written in decimal currency, and income tax and social security benefits
and deductions will be decimalised. The Post Office and a large number of
shops and businesses will also change over at once. It is expected that about
three-quarters of the nation’s business will be transacted in decimals in a
matter of weeks with the large firms leading the way.
BANKING AND PRIVATE FINANCE
The primary business of the deposit banks is the receipt, transfer and encash¬
ment of deposits. The principal deposit banks are the six London clearing
banks, four Scottish banks and two Northern Ireland banks. Recent mergers
have resulted in the formation of six banking groups, four based in London
FINANCE
371
and two in Scotland. When they have been completed there will be three
Scottish banks. The two Northern Ireland banks are owned by London
clearing banks, but two groups of banks based in the Republic of Ireland
also operate in Northern Ireland.
At the end of 1969 current and deposit accounts with the deposit banks
operating in Britain amounted to over -£1 i,8oo million, and accounted for
just under half of the total deposits (in sterling and foreign currencies) of the
banking sector, which also includes the National Giro, the accepting houses,
overseas banks, other banks and the discount market. The deposit banks
provide full hanking services throughout Britain, operating through over
14,000 branches at the end of 1969; several have interests in British overseas
and Commonwealth banks, and in other banks which have been formed
specially to compete in international markets. They have also acquired
substantial interests in hire-purchase finance houses, and some have set up
their own unit trusts.
Together with the Bank of England the London clearing banks make up
the membership of the London Bankers’ Clearing House. In 1969 cheques,
drafts, bills and bankers’ effects passing through the clearing system averaged
in value £58,266 million monthly, while the average monthly value of the
credit transfer clearing was £1,137 million.
Current account balances with the deposit banks are repayable on demand
and no interest is paid on them, but on deposit account balances interest is
paid at a rate generally 2 per cent below Bank Rate. The London clearing
banks maintain a ratio of about 8 per cent between cash reserves and total
deposits. It is also a convention among the London clearing banks that at
least 28 per cent of deposits should be held in the form of liquid assets.
The banks’ profits are largely earned through their advances to customers
partly in the form of overdrafts and partly in the form of loans (with or
without collateral security); these are normally for a short term only unless
renewed. The ratio of London clearing bank advances to total deposits
declined from about 43 per cent in 1938 to 17 per cent at the end of the
second world war but it has since risen and in July 1970 it was around 57 Per
cent. In recent years the banks have several times been asked to restrain the
growth of their lending and to ensure that, within the total, priority is given
to finance for exports and for productive investment in manufacturing industry
and agriculture: this has involved the restriction of advances to the personal
sector. In the 1970 Budget, while the priorities for lending remained un¬
changed, a modest relaxation was announced in the quantitative control over
lending and a gradual and moderate increase was envisaged over the next
12 months. The banks’ ‘liquid’ assets, that is, those that are quickly realisable,
are their loans to discount houses (money at call), and their holdings of
Treasury and commercial bills and certain export and shipbuilding credits
refinanceable with the Bank of England: they also hold a proportion of their
assets as portfolio (mainly British Government securities) or trade invest¬
ments.
The bank giro, originally introduced as the credit transfer scheme, and the
direct debiting system, by which a creditor with the prior approval of the
debtor may claim money due to him direct from the latter’s banking account,
have helped to improve the money transmission services. Another fairly
recent banking innovation has been the introduction by some banks of
automatic cash dispensing machines, which allow customers to obtain cash
at any time. Credit cards have become increasingly popular for the settlement
of accounts in retail shops. Cheque cards, which enable the card holder to
372
Overseas
Banks
National Giro
The Merchant
Banks
The Discount
Market
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
cash a cheque not exceeding ^30 at any office of the major British and Irish
banks, are also becoming more widely used.
There are also some 36 British overseas and Commonwealth banks, many of
them having their headquarters in London. They provide a comprehensive
banking service in many parts of the world and engage in the financing of
trade not only between Britain and other countries but also between third
countries. There are also currently in London about 32 United States banks,
13 Japanese banks and over 80 other foreign banks.
The Post Office National Giro was opened in October 1968 to provide a
low-cost current account banking and money transfer service which can be
operated through most post offices in Britain. All accounts and transactions
are maintained by means of a computer complex at the National Giro Centre
at Bootle, near Liverpool. Giro now has more than 200,000 accounts, one-
sixth of which are business accounts. In April 1970 a scheme was introduced
to make available personal loans from a finance company for credit-worthy
Giro customers. In May 1970 a scheme was begun to encourage the payment
of wages through Giro.
The merchant banks have helped to give London an international reputation
as a world financial centre for short-term and long-term borrowing. They
are of two kinds, and are known as accepting houses and issuing houses
according to whether they specialise predominantly in the work of acceptance
credit1 or in transactions involving the sponsoring of capital issues on behalf
of their customers. They arrange to issue and themselves underwrite long-
and short-term loans to governments of, or enterprises in, overseas countries
in sterling (where permitted by exchange control regulations) or in other
currencies which have been deposited with them; this latter type of trans¬
action, in what are called the euro-dollar markets, has increased considerably
in recent years. They are also engaged in the work of the gold and foreign
exchange markets, and they have many other functions in connection with the
financing of trade, investment management and insurance.
The London discount or money market is a distinctive part of the British
banking system. It consists of 11 discount houses and its principal function
is to marry the needs of lenders of money for short periods with those of the
borrowers of such money.
The discount houses borrow ‘at call’ from banks and other financial
institutions at a relatively low rate of interest. To them the Bank of England
acts as a lender of last resort. The clearing banks do not borrow money
directly from the Bank of England; if they need to add to their cash resources
they call in part of their loans to the discount market. If, as a result, any
particular discount house is unable to cover its needs for cash elsewhere, it is
obliged to borrow from the Bank of England, normally at Bank Rate for
seven days, but the Bank may charge a higher rate and has also at times lent
overnight, or for short periods, at the rates of interest prevailing in the market.
An important part of the money borrowed by the discount houses is
invested in British Government Treasury bills. The discount houses accept as
1 Acceptance credit has been defined as fundamentally a three-month operation
financing exports from and imports to Britain and to other markets. The expression is
derived from the method of financing trade by which commercial bills are ‘accepted’
or guaranteed by a merchant bank against documents, after which they may be
discounted for cash by a discount house.
FINANCE
373
The National
Savings
Movement
National Savings
Securities
an informal responsibility that they should cover the Government’s need to
borrow on Treasury bills, which are offered on tender each week. The clearing
banks do not buy Treasury bills at the weekly tenders except on behalf of
customers, but they purchase, from the discount market, bills which are of a
maturity required by them.
The discount houses provide a specialised market in commercial bills and
in short-dated Government bonds (that is, those with not more than five years
to run before repayment), local authority bonds, and certain other negotiable
instruments.
The National Savings Movement started in 1916 to help finance the war by
promoting savings. The present movement encourages the widespread invest¬
ment of savings in Trustee Savings Banks and the National Savings Bank
(see p. 374), formerly known as the Post Office Savings Bank, and in National
Savings securities. The movement is led by the National Savings Committee
for England and Wales and similar committees for Scotland and Northern
Ireland.1 The committees are bodies of independent persons representing
regional savings organisations and various national institutions connected
NATIONAL SAVINGS
Amounts outstanding at end-year in £ million
Trustee Savings Banks
(ordinary departments)
£815
Premium Savings
Bonds £200
Trustee Savings
Banks
(special investment
departments)
£345
Trustee Savings Banks
(ordinary departments)
£1,032
Premium Savings
Bonds £751
Other
securities
on the Post
Office Register
£187
Trustee Savings
Banks
(special investment
departments) £1,368
Other securities
on the National
Total £6,439 1 958
„ , , *qco Savings Stock
Total:£8,449!) 1969 Ror,ietor ft>na
‘Principal and accrued interest jlncludes investment accounts
includes the earlier National Development Bonds and Defence Bonds
^Includes SAVE
with such matters as finance, industry and education. They are assisted by a
salaried staff of civil servants. Voluntary local savings committees, often
assisted or promoted by local authorities, co-ordinate the work of voluntary
local savings groups.
The administration of the National Savings Bank and other forms of national
savings is carried out by the Department for National Savings. Four forms
of National Savings securities are currently on sale: the National Savings
Certificate, the British Savings Bond,2 and the Premium Savings Bond and
1 The Northern Ireland Ministry of Finance is responsible for the administration of
Ulster Savings, but the furtherance and organisation of the savings movement in
Northern Ireland is the concern of a central voluntary committee, which is voluntarily
assisted by county and local committees and district groups.
2 These bonds, which were introduced in 1968, are similar to the earlier National
Development Bonds and the Defence Bonds.
374
Contractual
Savings
National Savings
Bank
Trustee Savings
Banks
BRITAIN 1971: an OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
National Savings Stamps and Gift Tokens. National Savings Certificates, in
units of £1, are encashable at par at any time; interest, which is free of income
tax, surtax and capital gains tax is only paid on encashment; the limit on
individual holdings is 500 units of the current issue. British Savings Bonds,
sold in units of ^5 with a maximum holding of 10,000, bear interest at 7 Per
cent and are repayable at par on one month s notice. If the Bonds are held to
maturity (five years from the date of purchase) they are repaid with a bonus of
£2 per cent tax free. Premium Savings Bonds are in units of £1 and individual
holdings are limited to £1,250. After a qualifying period of three months the
bonds give investors a chance to win tax-free prizes instead of receiving
interest. There is now a weekly draw for a prize of £25,000 and a monthly
draw for prizes ranging from £25 to £5,000. At the end of August iQ?0*
£782*8 million was invested in this form of savings. A selection of British
Government securities is held on the National Savings Register and can also
be bought or sold through the Bonds and Stock Office. Trustee Savings Banks
also deal in stock on the National Savings Register.
A contractual savings scheme was announced in the 1969 Budget for
introduction in October 1969. Known as Save as You Earn (SAYE), it
enables savings to be made in regular monthly amounts within a minimum of
£1 and a maximum of £10 in deposits with the Department for National
Savings or Trustee Savings Banks by means of deductions from pay or by
other regular payments. At the end of five years, savings will qualify for a
bonus equivalent to one year’s savings free of tax. Completed savings which
are not withdrawn will qualify for a double bonus at the end of seven years,
that is, two years’ savings. For example, contributions totalling £60 payable
over five years at a rate of £1 per month will qualify for a bonus of £12 at the
end of that period, or £24 if left on deposit for a further two years. Savers who
wish to stop payments will be able to withdraw the total sum saved (but there
cannot be partial withdrawals). Tax-free compound interest will be paid at the
rate of 3-^ per cent on amounts withdrawn after the first but before the end of
the fifth year, or at 4^ per cent where the contributions cease but the savings
are left invested for the remainder of the five years or where the saver dies
before the contributions are completed. A separate Save as You Earn scheme
(with the same £10 limit) is operated by the building societies.
The National Savings Bank, formerly known as the Post Office Savings Bank
which was set up in 1861, is the largest organisation of its kind in the world.
It provides a countrywide system for depositing and withdrawing small
savings and has over 22 million active accounts. Ordinary Accounts bear
interest at 3 per cent and the first £ 15 of interest is tax-free. (The Government
is to seek power to increase this to £21 in the 1971 Finance Bill.) Up to £20 can
be withdrawn on demand at any post office, but a few days notice is required
for larger amounts. The moneys are lodged with the National Debt Office
and are invested in government securities. Deposits up to a limit of £10,000
bearing a higher rate of interest may be made in Investment Accounts where
investors have a qualifying deposit of £50 in an Ordinary Account. All
deposits carry a government guarantee; at the end of August 197° both
accounts totalled 1,747 million.
The Trustee Savings Banks, many of which also started in the nineteenth
century, operate under their own trustees but are subject to statutory provi¬
sions and National Debt Office surveillance. There are 77 individual banks
with 1,485 Trustee Offices and over I2| million accounts. Deposits can be
made either in the Ordinary Departments, the Special Investment Depart-
FINANCE
Co-operative
Banks
OTHER
FINANCIAL
INSTITUTIONS
Finance
Corporations
Finance
Corporation for
Industry Limited
375
ments or the Current Account Departments. The terms for deposits in the
Ordinary Departments are similar to those in the National Savings Bank.
Withdrawals can usually be made on demand though notice is required for
large sums. Deposits are invested with the National Debt Commissioners and
both capital and interest are guaranteed by the Government. The Special
Investment Departments offer a higher rate of return, which is taxable.
Deposits are limited to £10,000, but are not government guaranteed. At
the end of August 1970 total sums in the Ordinary Departments of the
Trustee Savings Banks were £1,043 niillion and in the Special Investment
Departments £1,438 million. Most Trustee Savings Banks operate cheque
services on deposits in the Current Account Departments. In January 1968
the Trustee Savings Banks set up their own unit trust (see p. 377).
At end-August 1970 National Savings totalled £8,500 million. The diagram
on p. 373 shows the distribution of National Savings between the different
outlets in 1958 and 1969.
The Co-operative Wholesale Society formed a deposit and loan department
about the year 1870, and the right of a co-operative society to engage in
banking was recognised in the Industrial and Provident Societies Act of 1876.
The primary purpose of the Co-operative Wholesale Society Bank was to
serve the co-operative movement, whose financial centre it has become, but
its clients include trade unions and other mutual societies, local authorities
and individual depositors. The bank’s headquarters are in Manchester. The
Scottish Co-operative Wholesale Society, which has its headquarters in
Glasgow, has similarly engaged in banking since 1948.
It has been the policy of the commercial banks to leave the provision of many
special financial facilities to other financial institutions. These facilities,
which are supplementary to the credit facilities of the banking system, are
mainly provided through the savings banks, finance corporations, hire-
purchase finance companies, the stock exchanges, investment trusts, building
societies and the insurance market. The firms engaged in such activities are
in the main highly specialised, for example, discount and other finance houses,
stockbrokers, insurers, insurance underwriters and brokers.
Two corporations, the Finance Corporation for Industry Limited (FCI) and
the Industrial and Commercial Finance Corporation Limited (ICFC), were
set up in 1945 to assist in dealing with the problems of post-war reconstruction
and development. The corporations are ordinary limited companies with no
official representation on their boards and no recourse to public funds.
Another corporation, the Commonwealth Development Finance Company
Limited (CDFC), was established in 1953 to assist development projects in
the Commonwealth.
The FCI was formed to assist in the provision of capital (in amounts of
£200,000 and upwards) for the re-equipment and development of industry.
The FCI has an authorised and issued capital of £25 million and may
borrow up to four times this amount, making a possible total of resources of
£125 million. The share capital is held by insurance companies, by invest¬
ment trust companies and by the Bank of England. At 31st March 1970 the
capital called and paid up was 10 per cent (£2*5 million); the Bank of
England paid £5 million in advance of call in 1959. The liability of the
shareholders in respect of the uncalled capital represents security to the banks
providing loans for the corporation’s working capital. The value of its loans
N
37^
Industrial and
Commercial Finance
Corporation
Limited
Commonwealth
Development
Finance Company
Limited
The Stock
Exchanges
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
and investments at 31st March 1970 was £30 million. It is expected that most
of the £63 million of commitments not taken up at that date will be taken
up within the next two years.
The main function of the ICFC is to invest long-term capital in British based
small and medium-sized companies which are capable of using additional
resources profitably. In addition it provides a wide range of financial and
other specialist services. It has a number of subsidiaries, including Technical
Development Capital Ltd. established in 1962 to rpovide venture capital for
the commercial development of technological innovation. The shareholders
of ICFC are the Bank of England, the English Clearing and the Scottish
Banks. At 31st March 1970 the ICFC had more than £130 million invested in
2,000 British companies.
The Commonwealth Development Finance Company is a private enterprise
institution. Established in 1953, CDFC is no longer confined to the Common¬
wealth. It aims to support business enterprise overseas by providing finance
in the form of share capital and loans on mutually acceptable terms. Its
authorised share capital is £30 million, of which about 14^ million ‘A’
ordinary shares of £1 (£0-10 paid) are held by industrial, shipping, mining
and banking interests in the United Kingdom, and n| million ‘B’ ordinary
shares of £1 (£0-50 paid) are held by the Bank of England and certain central
banks in the Commonwealth. At 31st March 1970 CDFC held investments
worth more than £27 million spread over a wide range of industries placed in
27 countries.
There are eight stock exchanges in the British Isles, including the Provincial
Brokers’ Stock Exchange which operates in 78 cities and towns throughout
Britain and the Irish Republic. The Federation of Stock Exchanges in Great
Britain and Ireland, comprising with one exception all these organisations,
was set up in July 1965 to co-ordinate their work.
The London Stock Exchange is by far the most important of these stock
exchanges and is one of the world’s two foremost free markets in securities.
Some 9,000 securities are quoted on the London Stock Exchange; at the
end of March 1970 these had a total market value of £120,040 million. About
7,900 securities of companies are quoted, including a number of leading
overseas companies. Company issues represented 45 per cent of the securities
at nominal values, and the remainder were United Kingdom and overseas
government and corporation stocks; at market values the propoition was over
four-fifths.
The London Stock Exchange is linked by cable or telephone with stock
exchanges all over the world. Therefore, a quoted company, subject to any
limitations imposed by the exchange control regulations, has a world-wide
market for its issues. This is an important factor in the raising of new capital
by government and commercial borrowers. Arbitrage transactions by brokers
 the buying or selling of a particular security on one stock exchange with the
intention of reversing it on another—play an important part in equating
price differentials between different markets and maintaining a continual
flow of business between centres.
The stock exchanges do not fix dealing prices; the terms on which bargains
are made between members reflect the interaction of supply and demand for
the securities concerned. All the stock exchanges operate under strict rules of
conduct which they formulate themselves.
FINANCE
377
There has been substantial growth in demand in the post-war period for
ordinary (equity) shares, partly in expectation that such shares will maintain
their real value or increase in value in periods of rising prices. Insurance
companies and pension funds invest a larger proportion than formerly of their
assets in these shares, and the Trustee Investments Act 1961 permits trustees,
under certain conditions, to invest up to half the funds they hold in trust in
equity shares.
The ov/nership of securities on the London Stock Exchange is much more
widespread than formerly: it is estimated that there are about 2^ million
shareholders in the United Kingdom and that their shareholdings are widely
distributed.
Through investment trusts and units trusts, investors may spread their risks
and obtain the benefit of skilled management.
The ordinary type of investment trust is constituted as a public company
registered under the Companies Acts with limited liability; its business is
to invest its capital in a range of stocks and shares. Like other companies,
it may issue several types of stocks or shares and may retain part of its profits
to build up reserves. Investment trusts grew to importance in the latter half
of the nineteenth century and have been prominent in directing capital
towards overseas investment.
Unit trusts are constituted by trust deed between a management company
and a trustee company which holds the securities. Normally, the managers
sell units to the public and invest the proceeds in a fairly wide range of
Stock Exchange securities. The costs of running the trust are defrayed partly
by an initial charge which forms part of the price of a unit, and partly by a
semi-annual service charge which is taken usually out of the income of the
trust. The level of both charges is controlled by the Board of Trade, whose
authorisation is required before units can be offered to the public; this is
only granted if the trust deed is satisfactory to them.
The first British unit trust was formed in 1931 and by 1939 there were
98 trusts, with assets estimated at ^80 million. This medium of saving has
grown considerably since 1957. At the end of June 1970 there were nearly
2b million unit holdings. The value of the funds invested in authorised trusts
has risen from £60 million in 1958 to £1,276 million in June 1970; it has more
than doubled since the end of 1966. There are now a wide variety of trusts,
both as to the range of investments covered and the ways in which they cater
for the differing needs of investors.
Although a certain amount of insurance is provided by friendly societies and
trade unions, most insurance services in Britain are in the hands of mutual or
joint stock companies or Lloyd’s underwriters.
Table 25 shows the distribution of business in terms of net premium
income in 1968, the latest year for which figures are available.
There are about 570 insurance companies incorporated in the United
Kingdom but most of the business is in the hands of about 100 companies.
This figure includes companies which became subject to the provisions of the
Insurance Companies Acts 1958-67 as a consequence of the extension of
those Acts to all classes of insurance business. Most British insurers write
several of the main classes of business although some specialise in one class,
particularly in life assurance, where about 105 companies write only that type
of business. A few specialise in re-insurance.
378
TABLE 25
Insurance
Companies—
Net Premium
Income 1968
BRITAIN I97i: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
In addition about 170 overseas companies carry on business (and even more
companies are represented) in the United Kingdom, thus emphasising the
international nature of the London market. Some of the large British com¬
panies, however, have their administrative headquarters in the provinces.
In 1968 the total insurance funds of the British insurance companies and
collecting societies amounted to about £14,832 million, the bulk of which is in
respect of life assurance business. The accumulation of life funds has in¬
creased greatly with the growth of group pension schemes.
There is no government control over the investment policy of insurance
funds at home and these represent one of the most important sources of funds
for investment in commerce and industry. Almost a half of the total assets
of British insurance companies is now invested in equity shares and deben¬
tures.
£ million
Companies incorporated in the UK
Lloyd’s underwriters . .
Total
Life®
1,539
1,539
Marine
210
260
470
Other
general
business
1,790
336
2,126
Total
3,539
596
4,135
Source: Board of Trade.
a Including Industrial Life assurance, which is a type of life assurance in which the
premiums are collected at frequent intervals of two months or less by house-to-house
collection. It is conducted by both friendly societies (called collecting societies) and
companies, the former accounting for a net premium income of £42 million in 196s
and the latter for a further £235 million.
Lloyd’s is an incorporated society of private insurers in London. The name
‘Lloyd’s’ is derived from Edward Lloyd’s coffee house, established in the late
seventeenth century, where merchants with maritime and other interests
gathered to transact business. By the middle of the eighteenth century,
Lloyd’s coffee house had become the principal centre of underwriting
business and intelligence of shipping movements. Although in its earlier
history the activities of Lloyd’s were confined to the conduct of marine
insurance business, there has also been built up at Lloyd s a very considerable
world-wide market for the transaction of other classes of insurance business
in its non-marine, aviation and motor markets.
Lloyd’s is now regulated by a series of special Acts of Parliament starting j
in 1871; the affairs of the Society of Lloyd’s in its corporate capacity are
administered by the Committee of Lloyd s, which does not itself transact
insurance business.
Lloyd’s is not a company but a market for insurance, where business is
transacted by individual underwriters for their own account and risk and
in competition with each other. Insurance may only be placed through
Lloyd’s brokers, who negotiate with Lloyd’s underwriters on behalf of the
insured. Only elected underwriting members of Lloyd’s, who must transact
insurance with unlimited liability and who have met the most stringent
financial regulations laid down by the Committee of Lloyd s, are permitted to
transact business at Lloyd’s; these financial safeguards give a security behind
the Lloyd’s policy which is second to none. Since 1969 non-Commonwealth
FINANCE
379
Insurance Brokers
International
Insurance Services
Building
Societies
underwriters have been admitted to membership of Lloyd s, if they satisfy
the requirements.
Today there are about 6,000 underwriting members of Lloyd’s grouped
into some 280 syndicates and represented at Lloyd’s by underwriting agents
who accept risks on behalf of the members of their syndicates.
In conjunction with its marine insurance business Lloyd’s has built up a
world-wide organisation for the collection and diffusion of shipping intelli¬
gence.
The insurance market is completed by the insurance brokers, acting on behalf
of the insured; brokers are an essential part of the Lloyd’s market and a
valuable part of the company market. Many brokers specialise in re-insurance
business, acting as intermediaries in the exchange of contracts between
companies, both British and overseas, and often acting as London repre¬
sentatives of the latter.
Over two-thirds of the fire, accident and marine insurance business is
carried on overseas, partly by re-insurance on the London market and partly
through branches and agencies established in over 100 countries. I he basic
principle of this international business is that resources capable of meeting
any potential loss are instantly available for use in any part of the world.
Behind this large and international volume of business stand the very
substantial assets of the companies, in addition to substantial reserves of
uncalled capital, and the whole of the deposits, underwriting trust funds and
personal fortunes of Lloyd’s underwriters.
The principal function of building societies is to supply long-term loans on
the security of private dwelling-houses purchased for owner-occupation,
though loans are occasionally made on the security of commercial and
industrial premises and farms. The funds of building societies are derived
mainly from the general public who invest in shares or deposits. The amount
of share capital is not fixed; shares, which have a fixed value, are not dealt
with on the Stock Exchange but may be withdrawn in cash if notice is given.
The Building Societies Act 1962, which consolidated a number of earlier Acts,
prescribes the general way in which societies must conduct their business.
The Chief Registrar of Friendly Societies has discretionary powers to stop
a society either advertising or accepting money from investors if he considers
that the way in which the society’s business is conducted is jeopardising
investors’ money. The rapid expansion of building society activity in the
twentieth century has been accompanied by a concentration of most of the
business in the hands of a few large societies. At the end of 1969, 504 societies
were in operation, with total assets of £9,289 million. Eight of the largest
societies, however, each with assets of over £250 million, account for well
over half of the total funds. The amount advanced on mortgage in 1969 was
£i,559 million.
15 TRADE AND
PAYMENTS
PATTERN OF
TRADE
Value and
Volume
OVERSEAS TRADE
Although relatively small in area and accounting for less than 2 per cent of
the world’s population, the United Kingdom is the world’s third largest
trading nation, conducting about 11 per cent of international trade in manu¬
factured goods in 1969.
For well over a century international trade has been of vital importance to
Britain’s economy. Britain relies upon imports for about half its total con¬
sumption of foodstuffs and nearly all the raw materials needed for its industries.
Its exports of goods and services together represent about a fifth of the gross
national product. It is a major supplier of machinery, vehicles, aircraft, metal
manufactures, electrical apparatus, chemicals and textiles. It is the world’s
largest market for foodstuffs, and among the largest for metals and ores,
textile raw materials, petroleum and many other products.
Changes in value, volume, composition and geographical distribution of
imports and exports are outlined in the following paragraphs.
The value of imports (including cost, insurance and freight) during the 1950s
fluctuated between £3,000 million and £4,000 million a year. Since i960
imports have risen in all years except 1961 and 1962. There was a particularly
rapid expansion in 1964 (of 14 per cent) and again in 1968 (of 21 per cent),
but a much smaller increase (of 5 per cent) in 1969, when they totalled £8,324
million (excluding US military aircraft, see note a to Table 26). Exports (valued
free on board) increased fairly steadily between 1950 and 1966; the average
annual rate of increase during this period was 6 per cent. After a slight fall in
1967, they then rose fast and for 1969 were 40 per cent above their level
in 1967.
Between 1961 and 1969 the total volume of exports and re-exports rose by
50 per cent (21 per cent since 1967) and that of imports by 46 per cent. From
1956 to 1967 Britain’s terms of trade improved slowly but fairly steadily, that
is, the rise in the average price of exports was greater than that in the price of
imports. In the seven months following sterling devaluation, sterling prices of
British exports rose about 8 per cent, but rose only a further 4 per cent in the
following 18 months to the end of 1969. They were then in terms of US dollars
still lower than in 1967. Import prices rose steadily, by about 18 per cent in all,
in the two years following devaluation.
The value and volume of exports and imports in selected years from 1959
to 1969 are shown in Table 26.
Commodity
Composition
Imports
The expansion of domestic agricultural production has reduced Britain’s
dependence on imported food supplies and the proportion of imported food¬
stuffs to total imports has fallen from 39 per cent in 1954 to 23 per cent in
1969 when imports of foodstuffs (including beverages and tobacco) were
£1,934 million. There has been a similar downward trend in the proportion
TABLE
Imports
Exports:
Annual
Exports
TRADE AND PAYMENTS
accounted for by basic materials—from 30 per cent in 1954 to 15-1 per cent in
1969. One reason for this is the growing use of synthetic materials to replace
such imported natural materials as rubber, wool and cotton.
26
AND
Figures
Value (£ million)
Imports'1 c.i.f.b
Exports of U.K. produce and
manufactures, and
re-exports f.o.b.c d . .
Volume Index Nos. (1961 = 100)
Imports
Exports
Unit Value Index Nos. (1961 =
100)
Imports
Exports
Terms of Tradee (1961 = 100) . .
1959
4,087
3,554
90
93
102
98
96
1960
4,655
3,789
101
97
102
100
97
1966
5,949
5,255
122
121
109
113
104
1967
6,437
5,230
131
119
109
114
105
1968
7,897
6,434
143
136
121
123
102
1969
8,324
7,338
146
151
126
127
102
Source: Board of Trade.
0 The import figures are shown exclusive of purchases of United States military
aircraft (including some missiles) which are being financed by a special United States
Export/Import Bank credit. (The effect of these transactions is shown in the balance
of payments table, p. 394.)
6 ‘Cost-insurance-freight’, that is, including shipping, insurance and other expenses
incurred in the delivery of goods as far as their place of importation in the United
Kingdom. Most of these expenses represent earnings by United Kingdom firms.
c ‘Free on board’, that is, all costs accruing up to the time of placing the goods on board
the exporting vessel having been paid by the seller.
d Including, for the years 1966-69, an allowance for under-recording of exports
(details first published in June 1969).
4 The ratio of export to import unit value index numbers; a fall indicates an adverse
movement.
Imports of crude petroleum and lubricants are by far the biggest single
item by value—about 11 per cent of the total value of imports during the past
ten years. In 1969 their value was £902 million.
The most marked change in recent years has been the rise, in Britain as in
other industrial countries, in the proportion of imports of finished manu¬
factures, particularly capital goods. Such imports rose from nearly 7 per cent
of total imports in 1957 to 22 per cent in 1969, when three-quarters were of
capital goods. Imports of semi-manufactures have also been increasing steadily
and since 1962 have formed a larger part of the total import bill than basic
materials, partly because the countries producing the basic materials tend to
embark upon the subsequent stages of manufacture themselves. Imports of
semi-manufactured (excluding chemicals) and manufactured goods amounted
to £1,840 million and £i,834million respectively in 1969, thus each accounting
for about 22 per cent of Britain’s total imports.
More than five-sixths of Britain’s exports consist of manufactured goods.
By far the most important group are engineering products—in 1969 42 per
cent of total exports. Within this group, exports of many types of machinery,
electrical equipment, road vehicles, tractors and scientific instruments have
been increasing rapidly. The share of chemicals has grown fairly steadily,
382
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Geographical
Distribution of
Trade
COMMODITY COMPOSITION OF IMPORTS AND EXPORTS IN 1969
(Percentages of total values)
Composition of Food, Drink and
Tobacco Imports
Composition of Engineering Products Exports
Machines for special industries 6 0
reaching 9-8 per cent of total exports in 1969. The share of metals has tended
to fall (being n-6 per cent in 1969). Textiles’ share fell from over 18 per cent
of the total in 1948 to 8 per cent in i960 and 5 per cent in 1969. Exports of coal
are now of minor significance (0-3 per cent), and those of petroleum products
constituted 2-1 per cent in 1969, a slight fall from their level in the previous
five years. The proportion accounted for by foodstuffs at 5*9 per cent has also
shown a fall from the previous level of about 6-5 per cent.
An analysis of the commodity composition of total imports and exports
and the composition of engineering exports and food imports is given in the
diagram above.
Trade between Britain and Western Europe has been increasing in recent
years, and conversely there has been a decline in the proportion of Britain’s
exports going to primary producing countries. In 1958, 27 per cent of exports
went to Western Europe, but in 1962, for the first time, these exports began
to exceed those to the sterling area and by 1969 they formed over 39 per cent
of the total. Exports to Western Europe increased by over 19 per cent in 1969,
following a similar increase in 1968. Exports to the European Economic
Community (EEC) increased by 18 per cent in 1969 compared with 24 per
cent in 1968 and less than 1 per cent in 1967, and to the European Free Trade
Association (EFTA) they increased by over 21 per cent compared with 13 per
cent in 1968 and only 3 per cent in 1967. Both rates of increase were signi¬
ficantly higher than the average over the past decade.
Imports from Western Europe increased by only 5 per cent in 1969,
TRADE AND PAYMENTS
383
AREA PATTERN OF TRADE IN 1969
(Percentages of total values)
IMPORTS
EXPORTS
following a 23 per cent rise in 1968, and formed over 36 per cent of total
imports.
Relatively, trade with other members of the Commonwealth and with the
sterling area as a whole has tended to decline. Exports to the sterling area
increased by 12-7 per cent in 1969 but as a proportion of total exports dropped
TABLE 27
Principal
British Markets
and Sources of
Supply, 1969
£ million
Imports from
United States . . . . 1,130*9
Canada . . . . . . 506*4
Federal Republic of Germany 466*8
Netherlands . . . . . . 409*2
Sweden . . . . . . 332*9
France . . . . . • 324*5
South Africa. . . . . . 302*4
Irish Republic . . . . 296*3
Denmark . . . . . . 246*2
Australia . . . . . . 237*5
Italy .. .. .. • • 223*0
New Zealand . . . . 216*2
Western Europe . . . . 3,031*0
EEC  1,610*9
EFTA“6   1,247*9
Sterling Area . . . . 2,407*3
Commonwealth . . . . 1,930*9
Commonwealth Asia . . 369*5
Commonwealth Africa . . 402*0
North America . . . . 1,637*3
Middle Eastb . . . . 660*6
Latin America . . . . 355*7
USSR and Eastern Europe 332*1
Exports to
United States .. . . 912*0
Federal Republic of Germany 415*6
Irish Republic . . . . 337*4
Australia .. . . . • 323*0
France . . . . . • 313*0
Canada . . . . . • 310*9
Sweden . . . . . . 302*0
Netherlands . . . . . . 295*7
South Africa. . . . . . 292*8
Belgium-Luxembourg . . 290*5
Italy . . . . . . . • 210*4
Denmark  197*9
Western Europe . . . . 2,869*1
EEC   1,526*0
EFTAa 6   1,080*7
Sterling Area . . . . 2,041*0
Commonwealth . . . . 1,289*5
Commonwealth Asia . . 340*7
Commonwealth Africa . . 263*6
North America . . . . 1,223*0
Middle Eastb . . . . 486*3
Latin America . . . . 248*4
USSR and Eastern Europe 231*8
0 Including Finland.
6 Both sterling and non-sterling areas.
Imports are valued c.i.f. and exports f.o.b.
Source: Board of Trade Journal.
BRITAIN I971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
to 28 per cent, compared with 30 per cent in 1967 and with 43 per cent in 1958;
there has been a similar relative fall in respect of imports. Canada, Australia,
South Africa and the Republic of Ireland, however, are still among Britain’s
most important trading partners, but since 1957 the United States has been
Britain’s largest single market and source of supply. The proportion of total
exports going to North America in 1969 was over 16 per cent, slightly less than
that of 1968. Exports to Latin America increased by 8 per cent in 1969 com¬
pared with the very high increase of 35 per cent in 1968. Britain’s trade
with the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe though still small in relation
to its total trade has been growing rapidly over the past decade. Trade with
Japan continues to grow; exports rose by 31 per cent in 1969, while imports
fell by 9 per cent.
Re-exports are goods which are exported (1) in the condition in which they
were imported or (2) after having undergone minor operations—such as
simple blending, cleaning, husking, repacking—which leaves them essentially
unchanged. Traditionally, the greater part of United Kingdom re-export trade
has been in raw materials and foodstuffs, for example, wool, rubber, tea, non-
ferrous metals and fur-skins. Commodities imported from Commonwealth
countries and sent on to countries in Europe, particularly traditional re-exports
such as tea and wool, account for much of the total value. In recent years a
considerable re-export trade has developed in manufactured goods, including
machinery, aircraft and aero-engines repaired or overhauled in Britain.
In 1969 the value of re-exports was £259 million, easily a record and an
increase of 20 per cent over the 1968 level. The principal items were: fur-skins,
non-ferrous metals, electrical and other machinary and tea. Over half of the
re-exports went to countries in Western Europe.
For nearly two centuries Britain has been able to pay for part of its imports of
goods with its net earnings from invisible overseas transactions, that is, trans¬
actions in services, including the provision of finance.
Invisible transactions are divided for statistical purposes into six main
groups: government, transport (shipping and civil aviation); travel; other
services (which covers a variety of items including royalties, films and tele¬
vision transactions, financial services, and other commercial and miscellaneous
services); interest, profits and dividends; and private transfers (migrants’
funds, legacies and private gifts). Table 28 shows the breakdown of the
figures from 1964 to 1969. Some of these figures are reliable (for instance, for
government transactions), others are only approximations. The total invisible
balance in 1969 was a record £524 million (in the five years to 1967 the annual
surplus averaged £190 million). Excluding government expenditure on services
and transfers, the net balance was a surplus of ,£981 million. Private invis¬
ible receipts in 1969 rose to £4,008 million (second only to the United States).
Earnings from invisibles amounted to well over half the total from visible exports.
As shown in Table 28, in recent years there has been a considerable net
surplus on ‘other services’ and on interest, profits and dividends. About half
of Britain’s receipts under this heading comes from investments in the sterling
area. There has also been a surplus on civil aviation services throughout the
past decade. Shipping transactions have been in surplus since 1966. Travel
credits exceeded debits for the first time in 1968 and again in 1969. About
half the net deficit in respect of government expenditure relates to military
expenditure overseas; other substantial items of expenditure are grants to
developing countries and subscriptions to international organisations.
TRADE AND PAYMENTS
385
£ million
TABLE 28
Britain’s
Invisible
Overseas
Transactions
1964-69
Tourist Trade
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
Invisible
Balance
(net)
+ 124
+ 160
+ 116
+ 240
+ 324
+ 557
Total Invisibles
Debits
2,518
2,689
2,782
2,894
3,345
3,572
Credits
2,642
2,849
2,898
3,134
3,669
4,129
T ravel
(net)
-71
-97
-78
-38
+ 11
+ 35
Other
Services
(net)
+ 267
+ 270
+ 303
+ 389
+ 465
+ 520
Govern¬
ment®
(net)
432
447
470
464
462
458
Transport
Shipping
(net)
-39
- 4
+ 16
+ 60
+ 45
Civil
Aviation
(net)
+ 27
+ 28
+ 30
+ 27
+ 29
+ 41
Interest,
profits and
dividends
(net)
+ 395
+ 442
+ 380
+ 368
+ 317
+ 451
Private
transfers
(net)
-23
-32
-49
-58
-96
-77
Source: Balance of Payments 1970.
a Service and transfer expenditure.
Tourism yields a substantial income from overseas; in the ten years 1960-69
overseas visitors spent around £2,300 million in Britain. For 1969 these travel
and tourist receipts, excluding fares, are estimated at about £355 million.
United Kingdom residents on holiday, or travelling for business or other
purposes overseas, spent about £329 miHion (excluding fares) in the same
year. The continuing increase in both the average expenditure per visitor
and in the number of travellers visiting Britain caused travel credits to
exceed debits in 1968 and 1969. The estimated total number of visits to the
United Kingdom in 1969, including visitors from the Republic of Ireland, was
a record figure of over 5-5 million—more than tv/ice the level of 1956 and an
increase of almost 25 per cent over the 1968 level.
Britain’s national travel organisation is the British Tourist Authority
which, following the Development of Tourism Act 1969, took over some of
the functions of the British Travel Association in January 1970. Unlike its
predecessor, which was a voluntary body deriving most of its income from a
government grant, the new organisation is a statutory body responsible for
the overseas promotion of tourism to Britain. It also has an important co¬
ordinating role in the operations of the three regional Tourist Boards for
England, Scotland and Wales which (along with the Northern Ireland Tourist
Board which is a statutory body receiving a grant from the Government of
Northern Ireland) carry out promotional work and publicity within Britain
and have powers to assist tourist projects in their respective countries. The
English, Scottish and Welsh Boards are also responsible for administering a
scheme of grant and loan assistance towards the development of new and
improved hotel accommodation.
386
COMMERCIAL
POLICY
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Britain’s prosperity depends on the prosperity of those who buy her exports
which in turn depends on how they sell their exports elsewhere. Thus Britain
is a strong advocate of the removal of artificial barriers to trade and to this end
has taken a leading part in the setting up and subsequent activities of such
organisations as the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the General Agree¬
ment on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) and the Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development (OECD). It has also played a full part at the
two plenary sessions of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Develop¬
ment held in 1964 and 1968 and is a member of the Trade and Development
Board which acts on behalf of the Conference between sessions.
Customs duties on imports into Britain are divided into two broad cate¬
gories: revenue duties (to which there correspond excise revenue duties on
comparable British-produced goods) and protective duties. Purchase tax is
chargeable on imported as well as home-produced goods but in the main the
charge on imports is deferred until the goods are sold by a registered to a
non-registered trader. In the financial year 1969-70 revenue duties charged
on imported goods yielded about £2,610 million, by far the greater part of
which came from tobacco and hydrocarbon oils (petroleum products). The
yield from protective duties was £228 million, or about 3 per cent of the value
of all imports.
At the beginning of the twentieth century the only customs duties were
those imposed for revenue purposes on a small range of products. Certain
duties were imposed during the first world war (the McKenna Duties), in
1921 (for strategic reasons) and in 1925 (initially for revenue purposes) but it
was not until the Import Duties Act 1932 that any serious departure was made
from the principle of free trade. This measure provided a degree of protection
for British industry and, at the same time, a basis for negotiations with foreign
countries already in possession of a tariff structure. A series of bilateral trade
negotiations between 1932 and 1939 led to some modification in the level of
protection but in the next ten years, because of government purchase and
imports controls introduced during and immediately after the second world
war, the tariff lost much of its importance. The substantial relaxation of
quantitative import controls from 1949 onwards re-established the tariff as
the main instrument of protection.
The Import Duties Act 1958 replaced existing legislation relating to the
protective tariff and brought it up to date in a single measure. The tariff was
recast into an internationally agreed form (the Brussels Nomenclature), which
came into use from 1st January 1959. Under the Customs Duties (Dumping
and Subsidies) Act 1969, the Board of Trade is empowered to impose duties
on imported goods of any description which are being dumped or subsidised
if it is satisfied that this is causing or threatening material injury to a particular
industry and that such action would be in the national interest. The Act also
empowers the Board of Trade to take provisional action where a prima-facie case
of dumping or subsidisation and consequent material injury has been made out.
An import deposit scheme was introduced for a one-year period in
November 1968 as part of measures taken to assist in bringing the balance of
payments into surplus. Importers of those classes of goods subject to the
scheme (these exclude, for example, foodstuffs and raw materials) were
required to deposit 50 per cent of the value of the goods for six months with
Customs and Excise. The scheme continued at a reduced rate of 40 per cent
from December 1969 and the deposit was further reduced twice, to 30 per
cent on 1st May 1970, and to 20 per cent on 1st September 1970. The
scheme will end on 4th December 1970.
TRADE AND PAYMENTS
387
General Agree- The United Kingdom’s protective tariff has been considerably modified in
ment on Tariffs recent years as a result of a series of international tariff negotiations held under
and Trade the auspices of the GATT, which seeks to increase the volume of world trade
by reducing tariffs and other barriers to trade, and by eliminating discrimina¬
tion in international commerce. Tariff reductions, and bindings against
increase, negotiated between countries under the GATT are applied equally
to all other GATT countries under the ‘most favoured nation’ clause.
As a result of the latest series of GATT tariff negotiations, the ‘Kennedy
Round’ (May 1964-June 1967), average reductions of over 30 per cent are to
be made by the major trading countries in their tariffs on industrial goods.
The reduction to be made in the British tariffs on dutiable industrial goods
imported from the EEC, the United States and Japan will amount to about
37 per cent, 40 per cent and 34 per cent respectively. This is closely in line
with the reductions which these countries are making, which will affect well
over 70 per cent of British exports of dutiable industrial goods to these coun¬
tries. Some reductions in the tariffs on agricultural goods are also being made.
The implementation of the British tariff reductions will be spread over
1968-72; the first cuts were made on the 1st July 1968 and 1st January 1970;
subsequent reductions are due to be made on the 1st January 1971 and 1972.
Commonwealth The principle of Imperial Preference was introduced into the United Kingdom
Preference customs duties in 1919 and at the Ottawa Conference in 1932 agreements
were concluded with independent Commonwealth countries providing for
reciprocal preferential tariff treatment over a wide range of goods. The
Import Duties Act 1932 had already provided for the duty-free entry of goods
from the United Kingdom dependencies.
Most imports into Britain from the Commonwealth preference area (which
includes the Republic of South Africa, Burma and the Republic of Ireland)
enter free of duty. Some two-fifths of the value of imports from the area enjoy
a tariff preference of about 11 per cent (defined as the difference between the
full duty rate and the preferential rate—in this case generally nil—expressed
as a percentage of the import value). It is estimated that approximately half of
Britain’s exports to the Commonwealth preference area enter free of duty and
about the same proportion enjoy an average tariff preference of 12 per cent.
In 1964 at the first United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
(UNCTAD) in Geneva, Britain declared itself prepared to extend tariff
preferences on a non-reciprocal and non-discriminatory basis to all the
developing countries if other major industrialised countries would do the
same, if the Commonwealth countries concerned would agree and provided
that preferences were not given in such a way as to impede the continuing
reduction of tariffs on a most-favoured-nation basis. The establishment of a
system of generalised preferences for manufactures and semi-manufactures
exported by developing countries was agreed in principle at the second
UNCTAD conference in New Delhi in 1968. The detailed arrangements are
still under discussion.
European
Economic
Integration
The European Free Trade Association (EFTA) was set up under the Stock¬
holm Convention of January i960 by Austria, Denmark, Norway, Portugal,
Sweden, Switzerland and Britain, with the object of creating an industrial free
trade area between the members and of working towards a wider European
settlement. Under the Convention, protective tariffs and quotas on trade in
industrial products between members of EFTA were to be eliminated by
1st January 1970. The first tariff cuts were made in July i960, and duties were
388 BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
finally removed (with certain minor exceptions) on 31st December 1966, three
years earlier than originally planned. Finland, which joined EFTA in 1961 as
an associate member, made its final cuts in December 1967. EFTA was the
first completed free trade area in the world and forms a single market of almost
100 million people. Since 1959 intra-EFTA trade has nearly trebled while
trade between EFTA and non-member countries has doubled. Iceland joined
EFTA as a full member on 1st March, 1970.
A free trade agreement between the United Kingdom and the Republic of
Ireland came into operation on 1st July 1966. On that date the United
Kingdom removed all protective import duties on goods of Republic of
Ireland origin imported from that country. After 1st July I975> with certain
exceptions, the Republic of Ireland will not apply any protective duties on
goods of United Kingdom origin.
In August 1961 the British Government applied formally to join the EEC
but negotiations were suspended in January 1963. A renewed application for
membership was made in May 1967. At the meeting of the EEC Council of
Ministers in December 1967 five of the member states favoured the opening
of negotiations with Britain, but the French Government did not agree, and
the request for accession remained on the Council’s agenda. Negotiations for
the enlargement of the EEC opened formally in Luxembourg on 30th June
1970-
Methods of The export trade and virtually all the import trade of the United Kingdom are
Trading conducted by private firms.
Methods of export trading vary considerably, according to the firm, the
industry, the product and the market. A good deal of United Kingdom export
trade, especially of the smaller manufacturing firms, is conducted through
export merchants in the United Kingdom; many firms, however, sell to
importers and consumers abroad through their own agents or resident repre¬
sentatives in the countries concerned; in other cases, sales are made through
a firm’s own branch offices, distributing organisations or subsidiary companies
established in overseas markets.
Similarly, in import trade, many large firms engaged in manufacture or
domestic trade buy directly from overseas suppliers, while smaller firms may
find it more convenient to buy through intermediaries such as import/export
houses, commission agents, and the representatives of overseas firms.
CONTROLS ON
TRADE AND
PAYMENTS
Exchange
Control
Most of the restrictions imposed on the movement of goods and services
during and immediately after the second world war have been progressively
abolished.
Exchange control is confined mainly to transactions between residents of the
United Kingdom and residents of countries outside the sterling area. The
latter may settle transactions between themselves in sterling, and any sterling
held on an external account is freely convertible into other currencies,
including dollars.
The remaining important restrictions relate to the movement of capital
from the United Kingdom to non-sterling area countries. Because of the
balance of payments deficits, exchange control requirements for investments
outside the sterling area have, since 1961, been revised and made more
stringent. Exports of goods to destinations outside the sterling area are
subject to exchange control and, in general, have to be paid for within six
months in any foreign currency (except Rhodesian currency) or by sterling
Import and
Export Control
Import Licensing
Export Controls
GOVERNMENT
ASSISTANCE
TO OVERSEAS
TRADE
TRADE AND PAYMENTS 389
from an external account. Control is also exercised over imports to ensure that
currency authorised for their payment is used for that purpose.
There are also certain restrictions on the release of gold for manufacturing
and industrial purposes, and on the buying, selling and holding of post-1837
gold coins.
Exchange control policy is the responsibility of the Treasury, but most of
the administration is, in practice, carried out by the Bank of England as agent
of the Treasury; and, in turn, the Bank of England has delegated to the
commercial banks a wide variety of powers to deal with applications.
Under the Import, Export and Customs Powers (Defence) Act 1939 the
Board of Trade is empowered to prohibit or regulate the import or export
of goods.
In accordance with its international obligations under the GATT and the
IMF, the United Kingdom Government has progressively removed quanti¬
tative restrictions from almost all its imports from the countries of the free
world. There has also been a continuing substantial relaxation of quantitative
controls on imports from the Soviet Zone. The very short list of goods on
which controls remain includes some items of special difficulty and a few
where restrictions are recognised internationally, such as arms, ammunition
and radioactive materials. They require a specific import licence and quotas
have been set up for many of them. Some quotas refer specifically to individual
countries and are usually shared out among exporters by the authorities of the
countries concerned. Others are accorded on an overall or global basis, and
are generally allocated by the United Kingdom authorities to United Kingdom
importers, usually on the basis of their share of the trade in the commodity
in the past. Apart from these quantitative controls, some further restrictions
or prohibitions are applied on health grounds (for example, on animals, plants
and drugs). There is also a general import restriction on goods from Rhodesia.
Except for the control necessary to ensure that exports to destinations outside
the sterling area are paid for in the proper manner, United Kingdom exports
are not generally subject to any government control or direction. The few
controls that are in operation are imposed to supervise exports of military
and strategic importance; to conserve materials which may be in short
supply; to assist exchange control operations in preventing the export of
capital in the form of valuable goods; to ensure the humane treatment of
horses, cattle, sheep and pigs; and to prevent the export of antiques (including
works of art) on grounds of national importance. Normally, individual licences
are required for specific consignments of goods subject to export licensing
control. Goods controlled for strategic reasons, not included in the category
of atomic energy materials and appliances, arms and ammunition, may, with
certain exceptions, be exported to the Commonwealth, the Irish Republic,
the Republic of South Africa and the United States of America without
licence. There is also a general export restriction on goods to Rhodesia.
The British Government1 assists exporters by its efforts to create conditions
favourable to the export trade and by providing credit insurance facilities and
information and advice about opportunities for trade in other countries.
1 Export promotion is also assisted by the Scottish Council (Development and Industry)
and the Development Corporation for Wales. In Northern Ireland, the Ministry of
Commerce provides a liaison service with the Board of Trade Export Services Branch
and the overseas posts.
390
Information
and Advice to
Exporters
Support for
Marketing
Organisations
Export Credit
Insurance
BRITAIN I971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Facilities exist for the repayment of protective duties paid on goods which
have been imported for export trade purposes.
Exporters wanting assistance and advice can consult Board of Trade offices
throughout Britain and, through these offices, the commercial posts of Her
Majesty’s Diplomatic Service overseas. There are 200 posts located in all
the principal cities and trade centres abroad and they supply the Board of
Trade with information of every kind affecting trade with their territories.
Overseas officers regularly report on local economic and commercial
conditions, pay special attention to local demand for particular commodities,
and generally assist the exporter to overcome any difficulties he encounters
in trade with the country in question, particularly those arising out of govern¬
mental regulations. These officers investigate potential markets for British
products, advise about methods of trading with particular areas, and seek out
and pass on opportunities for export business and enquiries for British goods.
Assistance is also given to United Kingdom exporters in appointing agents
and locating potential importers. From records kept up to date in London by
reports from its overseas commercial officers, the Export Services Division of
the Board of Trade can provide information concerning any country on the
prospects for exports and requirements of particular markets, government
regulations affecting trade (including import restrictions and tariffs and duties
on particular commodities), methods of trading, local tastes and preferences
in design, and the commercial standing of firms with which an exporter
contemplates business relations.
The Government’s official information services overseas are used exten¬
sively to promote Britain’s export trade.
The Overseas Marketing Corporation, financed partly by private equity
capital and partly by loan capital made available by the Board of Trade, was
set up in November 1967 to promote exports from British firms which
encounter difficulties in selling abroad because of their size or structure. It
seeks out new export opportunities overseas and ensures an adequate marketing
effort to exploit them.
The Export Credits Guarantee Department (ECGD) is a government
department, responsible to the President of the Board of Trade, which
provides insurance for exporters against the main risks in selling overseas,
and guarantees to banks providing finance for export credit. It covers more
than a third of the country’s export trade. The ECGD is required to carry
on its business on a self-supporting basis and is therefore not a charge on the
taxpayer.
The risks covered include insolvency or protracted default of the buyer,
governmental action which blocks or delays transfer of payment to the
United Kingdom exporter, imposition of new import licensing restrictions
in the buyer’s country, war between the buyer’s country and the United
Kingdom, cancellation or non-renewal of a United Kingdom export licence,
additional handling, transport or insurance charges incurred after shipment
through interruption or diversion of voyage or ‘any other cause of loss
occurring outside the United Kingdom and not within the control of the
exporter or the buyer, and not normally insurable with commercial insurers’.
Cover may commence from the date of contract or (at lower premiums) from
the date of shipment.
Policies may be comprehensive, covering all export business in all markets
Trade Fairs
Export
Councils
FINANCING OF
INTERNATIONAL
TRADE
TRADE AND PAYMENTS 391
(or in an agreed group of markets) on goods sold on six months’ to five years’
credit, or specific, covering large, single capital transactions sold on credit
terms of five years or more.
Over 300 exhibitions, of which about 200 were trade fairs, were held in
Britain in 1969. Some of the shows attracting the general public, such as the
Boat Show and the Motor Show, are also attended by many trade buyers from
overseas. These exhibitions provide an important means of advertising and
selling British goods.
United Kingdom products are shown at most of the large international
trade fairs throughout the world and United Kingdom manufacturers have
been prominent at the many specialised fairs held in Europe and North
America. Special displays of British consumer goods have also been presented
in hotels in North America and elsewhere.
Participation in trade fairs, ‘British weeks’ and store promotions overseas is
a form of export promotion for which the Government provides information,
financial assistance and, in certain cases, free facilities. (‘British weeks’ differ
from trade fairs and exhibitions in that they are primarily designed to promote
sales of consumer goods in shops overseas.) The amount allocated to the
Board of Trade for these purposes has risen from £60,000 in 1955-56 to nearly
£4 million in 1968-69. In 1969 the Board of Trade assisted 5,600 British
firms at 263 specialised and general trade fairs in 50 countries; and gave
practical help to two major British Weeks and six ‘British Shopping Weeks’,
and to some 68 overseas store promotions.
The British National Export Council (BNEC), a promotional body formed in
July 1964, is sponsored by the Government and by representatives of industry,
trade, finance and organised labour in Britain. Associated with it are 12 Area
Committees with the primary responsibility for developing British exports
to a particular market or group of markets: Africa, Asia, Australia, the
Caribbean, Israel, Latin America, the Middle East, New Zealand, Europe,
Canada, southern Africa and the United States.
The tasks of the BNEC are to keep all British export activity under constant
review; to stimulate exports in all markets; to advise on organisations relating
to particular markets; to provide a central point for the export effort; and
services for this purpose such as the sending overseas of export missions.
There is an annual scheme for royal recognition of outstanding export and
technological achievement by industry, namely, the Queen’s Award to
Industry; the first awards were made in 1966. In addition the BNEC gives
awards for outstanding achievements by small exporters; the first awards were
made in 1969.
In the nineteenth century, the rapid growth of British industry, commerce
and shipping under the stimulus of the industrial revolution made Britain
the market as well as the workshop of the world. It became the site for the
chief world markets in raw materials (see below), freight, insurance and
precious metals. A sound commercial banking system and a flexible system
of central bank control have been built up, while specialised institutions such
as discount houses, merchant banks, accepting houses, the stock exchanges,
investment trusts and finance corporations have evolved to satisfy particular
needs for short-term or long-term finance. The facilities provided by merchant
banks and accepting houses, for example, have long been used to finance
shipments of goods not only to and from Britain, but also between other
392
Commodity
Markets
The Foreign
Exchange
Market
The London
Gold Market
The Sterling
System
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
overseas countries. (Exchange control no longer allows the financing of trade
between two non-sterling area countries.)
At the same time, the banks which were already engaged in financing trade
were able to assist in raising finance for longer-term ventures. British capital
invested in overseas countries has furthered their development, increased
their output and exports, and provided markets for manufactured goods. A
number of specialised institutions help in providing financial services for
overseas countries.
Britain is the traditional centre for marketing many of the world’s basic
commodities. Among the more important are the Baltic Exchange (the market
for shipping and air transport, grain, seeds and vegetable oils), the London
Commodity Exchange (cocoa, coffee, copra, hides and skins, rubber and
sugar), the London Wool Exchange, the London Metal Exchange, the
Liverpool Cotton Exchange and the Liverpool Corn Exchange. A soya bean
oil futures market opened in London in 1967 an<^ a coconut oil futures
market in 1969. These markets not only cater for the import of goods for
home consumption but do much business in effecting transactions between
buyers and sellers in other countries. In addition to these formal markets,
there is scarcely any product which cannot be traded through an intermediary
in Britain. For example, London is the world’s most important philatelic
market and also the leading international centre for the sale of works of
art.
The market consists of approximately 190 authorised banks and nine firms
of foreign exchange brokers all linked together by telephone in the United
Kingdom, and by telephone, telex and cable with overseas centres. The
turnover of the market has increased progressively since the introduction in
December 1958 of external convertibility for the principal European currencies.
The Foreign Exchange Market is subject to United Kingdom exchange control
regulations governing the purchase and sale of foreign currencies.
The London Gold Market, which had remained closed from the outbreak of
war in 1939, was reopened in March 1954, under the general supervision
of the Bank of England. All authorised banks may deal in gold but, in
practice, dealings are largely concentrated in the hands of the five members
of the gold market. The five members meet twice daily to fix a price for all
transactions which customers ask to have executed at the fixing.
A gold pool was set up in 1961 to co-ordinate the gold operations in London
(including supplying gold to private buyers) of certain European central banks
and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Following heavy world-wide
speculation in gold at the end of 1967 and the beginning of 1968, the gold pool
was terminated in March 1968. Officially held gold is now used only to effect
transfers between monetary authorities where these are not replacing gold
sold in private markets.
As a result of Britain’s early lead in international trade and finance, several
countries tended not only to use sterling as their natural currency for inter¬
national transactions, but also to maintain central currency reserves in
Britain. When Britain abandoned the gold standard in 1931 these countries,
which came to be known as the ‘sterling bloc’ and later as the ‘sterling area’,
did likewise, and pegged their currency exchange rates to the pound sterling.
In 1939, after the outbreak of war, the pound sterling was no longer freely
TRADE AND PAYMENTS
393
convertible into other currencies and the sterling area became more formally
defined as a currency area for exchange control purposes. The United
Kingdom imposes no exchange control on transactions with residents of other
sterling area countries. Sterling became convertible again in December 1958
but there is still exchange control against the non-sterling area.
All the Commonwealth countries (except Canada and Rhodesia), together
with Iceland, the Irish Republic, Jordan, Kuwait, Libya, the Republic of
South Africa, South West Africa, the Republic of Southern Yemen, the
British Protected States in the Persian Gulf, and Western Samoa, are members
of the sterling area. The main features of the sterling area are that the greater
part of the overseas trade of member countries is financed in sterling, while
much of their foreign reserves are held in sterling. Member countries sell their
foreign currency earnings in London in exchange for sterling and purchase for
sterling the foreign currency they require.
Within the total of the sterling balances there have been considerable
changes in ownership since the second world war, and there have also been
some sizeable fluctuations. Thus the balances of the non-sterling area have
fallen, while the balances of sterling area governments also dropped signifi¬
cantly in 1968. This drop led to the series of agreements concluded between
the United Kingdom and the countries of the sterling area in September 1968
by which each country undertook to maintain an agreed proportion of its
official reserves in sterling, and the United Kingdom undertook to provide
a dollar-value guarantee of the bulk of official sterling holdings. Most of the
agreements last for three years, and include provision for extension for a
further two years’ mutual agreement; some last for five years. At the same
time as these agreements were concluded, 12 major non-sterling area countries
and the Bank for International Settlements undertook to provide the United
Kingdom with a $2,000 million credit facility on which the United Kingdom
could draw to the extent that the sterling balances of the sterling area (both
official and private) fell below an agreed starting level. These arrangements
have succeeded in their purpose of stabilising the sterling area’s balances;
since the agreements were concluded, the official sterling balances of the
sterling area have risen, very largely reflecting a rise in the sterling area’s
official reserves of both sterling and non-sterling currencies.
BALANCE OF PAYMENTS
Estimates of Britain’s balance of payments and its main constituent items are
given in summary since 1963 in Table 29 and in greater detail since 1967 in
Tables 30 and 31. The balance of payments statistics emphasise two in¬
dicators of particular importance.1 The first is the balance on current account,
covering both visible (exports and imports of goods) and invisible (trade in
services, investment income and transfers) transactions, which provides a
measure of how far Britain is paying its way abroad and thus adding to or
using up overseas assets. The second is the total currency flow. This is the
net result of all external flows, that is the current account, investment and
other capital flows (including official long-term capital transactions, invest-
1 The previous distinction between ‘long-term capital’ and ‘monetary movements’, on
which the concept of the ‘basic balance’ of current and long-term transactions combined
depended, had become increasingly unrealistic because of the growing complexity of
international financing transactions.
394
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
£ ?nillion
TABLE 29
United Kingdom
Balance of
Payments
1963-69
Current
balance
Total
currency
flow
Gold sub¬
scription
to IMF
SDR al¬
location
Total
Official
borrowing'
Official
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
+ 114
-395
- 77
+ 43
-312
-319
+ 416
- 58
- 695
- 353
- 547
- 671
-1,410
+ 743
-44
- 58
- 695
- 353
- 591
- 671
-1,410
+ 743
+ 5
+ 573
+ 599
+ 625
+ 556
+ 1,296
- 699
+ 53
+ 122
-246
- 34
+ 115
+ 114
- 44
Source: Balance of Payments 1970
a Drawings ( +)/, repayments ( -).
6 Drawings on ( +)/ additions to ( -).
TABLE 30
Current Account
1967-69
£ million
1967
1968
1969
Visible trade
Exports (f.o.b.)
Imports (f.o.b.)
Visible balance
Invisibles
Government services and transfers (net)
Other invisibles
Private services and transfers (net)
Interest, profits and dividends
Private sector
Public sector
Invisible balance . .
Current balance . .
5,122
5,674
-552
-464
+ 336
+ 542
-174
+ 240
-312
6,273
6,916
-643
-462
+ 469
+ 551
-234
+ 324
-319
7,061
7,202
141
-458
+ 564
+ 780
-329
+ 557
+ 416
Source: Balance of Payments 1970
ment flows, trade credit, changes in the balances of other countries held in
London) and other flows which are unidentified transactions reflected in the
balancing item. The total currency flow shows the impact of all external
flows on the reserves and debt position, that is how much is available to
add to the reserves and to repay any official borrowing in the case of a net
inflow or how much must be financed by drawing on the reserves or by
borrowing if there is an outflow. Allocation of the IMF Special Drawing
Rights (SDRs) and gold subscriptions to the IMF are shown separately.
Britain has traditionally had a deficit on visible trade but a surplus on
invisible earnings, and this pattern has continued since 1945 with a surplus
on visible trade being achieved in only two calendar years since then and a
deficit on invisibles incurred only exceptionally in the two years immediately
following the war. Table 30 gives details of the current account since 1967.
Both exports and imports have risen strongly since the devaluation of sterling
TRADE AND PAYMENTS
395
£ million
Current balance
Investment and other capital flows:
Official long-term capital
Overseas investment in UK public sector
Overseas investment in UK private sector
UK private investment overseas
Euro-dollar borrowing in London for invest
ment overseas
Import credit . .
Export credit . .
Balances (gross) of sterling area countries
Balances (gross) of non-sterling countries
Foreign currency transactions of UK banks
Other short-term flows
Total investment and other capital flows
Balancing item
EEA loss on forwards
Total currency flow ..
Allocation of Special Drawing Rights . .
Gold subscription to IMF
Total
Official financing
Net drawings from ( +)/ net repayments to ( - )
IMF 
Other monetary authorities . .
Transfer from dollar portfolios to reserves . .
Drawings on ( +)/ additions to ( -) official re¬
serves
Total official financing
1967
-312
- 57
+ 26
+ 335
-463
+ 73
+ 27
-185
- 82
-134
- 47
+ 32
-455
+ 201
-105
-671
-671
-339
+ 691
+ 204
+ 115
671
1968
-319
+ 17
+ 42
+ 573
-735
+ 176
+ 67
-345
-150
-227
-124
- 53
-759
- 81
-251
-1,410
-1,410
+ 506
+ 790
114
+ 1,410
1969
+ 416
- 98
+ 63
+ 621
-617
+ 70
+ 256
-333
+ 258
- 50
-106
- 16
48
279
743
+ 743
- 30
-669
- 44
-743
Source: Balance of Payments 197°
at the end of 1967. In 1968 the value of exports rose strongly but that of
imports rose at about the same rate, while there was a 5 per cent deterioration
in the terms of trade as an immediate result of devaluation, and the balance
of visible trade remained in heavy deficit. In 1969 exports rose faster than
imports, and there was a marked improvement in the balance of visible trade,
while net invisible earnings rose by about 70 per cent with a sharp increase
in interest, profits and dividends. The result was a large surplus on invisibles,
a small deficit in visibles, and thus a substantial surplus on current trans¬
actions as a whole. The net aggregates for the first half of 1970 show a similar
position, though most of the gross flows increased.
Total currency flow was outward in each of the years 1963-68 and inward
in 1969 and the first half of 1970. In the six years 1963-68, there was an
outward flow of £3,778 million (including a gold subscription of £44 million
to the IMF) financed mainly by official borrowing totalling £3,134 million,
but also by transfers to the reserves of the dollar portfolio, totalling £520
396
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
million and a reduction of £124 million in the reserves. Approximately one-
quarter of the outflow stemmed from current deficits. In 1969 and the first
half of 1970, there was an inward flow of .£1,885 million and this together
with the allocation to Britain by the International Monetary Fund of Special
Drawing Rights (SDR) of £171 million (which count as part of the reserves,
see below), made it possible to reduce official borrowing by £1,902 million
and add £154 million to the reserves. The inflow resulted from surpluses on
current account, a small net investment inflow, a substantial increase in the
sterling balances (which had fallen in the previous period) and a very large
positive balancing item reflecting unidentified transactions.
The general level of the reserves has not changed greatly since the early
1950s and has usually been about £1,000 million. At the end of June 1970
the reserves amounted to £1,163 milliom They were made up of £612 million
in gold, £432 million in convertible currencies and £119 million in Special
Drawing Rights.
Britain is a participant in the Special Drawing Rights scheme which came
into effect in 1970 and which is estimated to have added so far some 5 per
cent to world reserves. Special Drawing Rights are reserve assets created and
distributed by decision of the members of the IMF. Any member of the
IMF may join the scheme, and its share is based on its IMF quota. Partici¬
pants in the scheme accept an obligation to provide convertible currency,
when designated by the IMF to do so, to another participant in exchange for
SDRs up to a total amount equal to twice the net amount of their own
allocation of SDRs. Only those countries with a sufficiently strong balance of
payments are so designated by the IMF. SDRs may also be used in certain
direct payments between participants in the scheme and for payments of
various kinds to the IMF.
In recent years the United Kingdom has incurred short- and medium-term
debt to cushion the reserves against currency outflows. Britain has drawing
rights in the IMF based on its IMF quota which is due to be raised before
the end of 1970 to $2,800 million (£1,166 million). As an industrialised
country Britain is able to make drawings, subject to certain conditions, up to
125 per cent of the value of its quota. Britain has made such drawings on
several occasions. Two drawings are either wholly or partly outstanding. A
sum of $1,400 million (£583 million) drawn in 1968 was used to repay short¬
term debts to central banks; and a stand-by facility for $1,000 million
(417 million) agreed in May 1969 was drawn in instalments up to March
I97°-
Britain has also taken part since 1961 in the international network of re¬
ciprocal credit (swap) facilities arranged between central banks. Facilities
available to the United Kingdom include one of $2,000 million (£833 million)
with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Under these arrangements each
central bank is able to exchange on request its own currency for the currency
of another country up to a maximum agreed for a limited period. It agrees to
reverse the transaction at a specified date at the same rate of exchange. The
currencies so obtained can be retained in the reserves or used in exchange
operations.
United Kingdom official short- and medium-term borrowing outstanding
at the end of June 1970 totalled $3,506 million (£1,461 million) of which
$2,381 million (£992 million) represented outstanding drawings from the
IMF. The total represents a reduction of $4,565 million (£1,902 million) from
the peak level of borrowing reached at the end of 1968. Practically all of this
was a reduction on central bank and related facilities.
TRADE AND PAYMENTS
397
EXTERNAL
ASSETS AND
LIABILITIES
External
Liabilities
Inward Private
Investment
The significance of any inventory of Britain’s aggregate external assets and
liabilities1 is limited because a variety of claims and obligations are included
that are very dissimilar in kind, in degree of liquidity and in method of valua¬
tion. The inventory for the end of 1969 shows that Britain had a substantial
net creditor position estimated at some ^2*7 billion.
Identified external liabilities at the end of 1969 totalled some £16,685 million,
against assets of about £19,375 million. Total official short- and medium-term
financing liabilities to the IMF and other monetary authorities were £2,510
million. Inter-governmental loans to the United Kingdom and other official
liabilities, mainly a consequence of the second world war and its aftermath,
totalled £2,251 million. Of this sum £1,780 million was owed to the United
States and £361 million to Canada. Other public sector liabilities, including
overseas holdings of United Kingdom government and public corporations
sterling securities, holdings of Treasury bills and notes, local authority mort¬
gages and stocks, and foreign currency borrowing by United Kingdom public
corporations and local authorities, totalled £2,574 million. United Kingdom
banking and commercial liabilities including liabilities in sterling, overseas
sterling area currencies and foreign currencies, totalled £2,601 million.2 * * *
Liabilities in the form of overseas investment in the United Kingdom private
sector totalled £6,750 million.
Liabilities in the form of sterling balances comprise both public sector and
banking liabilities within the totals above. The sterling balances are normally
defined as the funds held in the United Kingdom by foreigners in the form of
bank deposits, deposits with local authorities and hire purchase companies,
Treasury bills and British Government securities (where these are held by
governments or banks abroad). At the end of June 1970 the total of these
balances held by residents of foreign countries was £4,729 million. Of this,
£469 million w'as the counterpart of the United Kingdom’s short- and
medium-term borrowing. Excluding this, the balances totalled £4,260 million,
of which £730 million was to residents of the non-sterling area, £3,530 million
to residents of the sterling area. The total of the sterling balances (excluding
the counterpart of borrowing) has remained broadly constant since the end of
the second world war. The balance reflect the international trading and
reserve role of sterling and in part the financial services of the City. (For
terms of measures designed to stabilise the sterling balances, see p. 392.)
Overseas liabilities arising from investment in the private sector of the British
economy rose from £3,160 million in 1962 to £6,750 million at the end of
i969-
Overseas investors in Britain are free to repatriate the proceeds of the sale
of their investments, including any capital gains that they may have accrued.
Earned profit and dividends are transferable irrespective of their size. In 1969
the inflow of direct, portfolio and other private investment, including oil,
amounted to £621 million.
The value of overseas investment in the United Kingdom private sector at
1 Figures at the end of 1969 and for earlier years are published in the 1970 United
Kingdom Balance of Payments, produced by the Central Statistical Office (see Biblio¬
graphy, p. 487).
2 This sector covers the London banks operations in the Euro-currency markets in
which very large non-sterling currency liabilities are broadly matched by non-sterling
assets. Only net liabilities of £264 million are included in the figure above; they
represent the difference between assets of £11,672 million and liabilities of £11,936
million.
398 BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
the end of 1969 comprised: the book value of direct investment in Britain by
companies incorporated abroad—£2,930 million (excluding oil, banking, and
insurance); portfolio holdings of British securities—£2,305 million; the book
value of the net assets in Britain of overseas oil companies—£1,250 million;
and the balance of £265 million which included borrowing by United King¬
dom companies overseas and identified investment in real estate and in the
insurance industry in Britain.
About three-quarters of the direct investment of £2,930 million came from
North America and about one-fifth from Western Europe. Of the £273 million
inflow of direct investment into Britain in 1969 £24^ million originated in the
non-sterling area and £25 million from the overseas sterling area. Foreign
investment inflow presents British industry with many opportunities to match
new competitive standards which in turn will strengthen the economy and its
balance of payments position.
Outward Private investment abroad may take several forms: portfolio investment, that
Private is, investment in overseas securities including the loans raised by overseas
Investment countries on the London capital market; or direct investment by the establish¬
ment of subsidiary companies abroad; or by acquiring an interest in an over¬
seas enterprise.
Although investment in the developing countries of the sterling area is in
general free from control the flow of capital from Britain to Australia, South
Africa, New Zealand and the Republic of Ireland is subject to prior approval
of the Bank of England. Approval is readily given for financing projects both
in these countries and in the non-sterling area by borrowing abroad on ap¬
propriate terms, and for financing from Britain where the project is expected
to yield substantial and continuing benefits to the United Kingdom balance
of payments. There is also considerable scope for the investment of retained
profits of subsidiary companies overseas and in recent years more than 60 per |
cent of net direct investment outflow has been financed in this way from un¬
remitted profits.
Board of Trade estimates show that direct investment outflow, excluding
oil, was £410 million in 1968; £177 million of this was placed in the overseas
sterling area and £233 million in non-sterling countries. Within the latter
figure the flow to the EEC area was £73 million, to EFT A £19 million and to
Latin America £17 million. In the same year the flow to Western Europe of
£101 million was of similar magnitude to the flow to North America of £114
million. Substantial growth in direct investment outflow in 1969 raised the
previous year’s level of £410 million to £531 niillion. Oil, portfolio and other
investment outflow, combined with the £531 milli°n direct investment, 1
resulted in an aggregate private investment outflow in 1969 of £617 million.
External Assets Britain’s assets arising from private investment overseas are estimated to have
been £14,060 million at the end of 1969. This compares with a figure of
£8,085 million at the end of 1962. Direct investment, including oil, accounted
for £8,360 million1 of the £14,060 million figure, the balance consisting of
£5,700 million of portfolio investment.
United Kingdom banking and commercial claims at the end of 1969 totalled
£3,035 million. Within this total banking claims in sterling and overseas
sterling area currencies were £748 million; trade credit on exports, which
1 Excluding banking and insurance other than the estimated value of direct investment
of United Kingdom insurance companies in the United States.
TRADE AND PAYMENTS
399
has been growing in recent years, was ^1,118 million. With the increase in
recent years in British aid to developing countries, inter-governmental loans
(£791 million) form the largest item among official external assets, which at
the end of 1969 were about £1,230 million. The latter figure, together with
official reserves of £1,053 million, £3,035 million in banking and commercial
claims and private investment overseas of £14,060 million resulted in aggre¬
gate identified external assets at the end of 1969 of £i9>375 million.
BRITISH
GOVERNMENT
AID TO
DEVELOPING
COUNTRIES
TABLE 32
Government
Aid to
Developing
Countries,
1966-69
Britain’s aid programme to the developing countries consists of loans and
grants for economic and social development, technical assistance, budget
support and contributions to multilateral agencies providing financial aid and
technical assistance to these countries. In addition to this official aid pro¬
gramme, an important contribution is made to economic development by
private investment and by private voluntary organisations engaged in relief,
development and educational work.
Since 1945 total official aid disbursements have amounted to over £2,700
million. Despite recent economic difficulties they have been maintained at a
high level, the average gross annual disbursement over the four years 1966-69
having been about £211 million (see Table 32). In 1969 they amounted to
nearly £211 million, of which bilateral aid accounted for £179 million
including £44 million technical assistance; assistance provided through multi¬
lateral agencies was £32 million. Repayments of capital and payments of
interest during the year on loans made previously totalled about £60 million.
The net flow of British resources to developing countries—private invest¬
ment and private export credits as well as official aid—exceeded the target
of 1 per cent of national income, as set by the first United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) in 1964, in each of the nine years
to 1966. In 1967 the percentage was 0-94. The second UNCTAD in 1968
recommended that the target should be raised to 1 per cent of gross national
product at market prices, which represented in Britain’s case an increase of
£ million
1966
1967
1968
1969
Bilateral Aid
Commonwealth countries (including
dependent territories)
Grants ..
Technical assistance (grants)
Loans
Other countries
Grants . .
Technical assistance (grants)
Loans
Contributions to multilateral agencies
Total ..
Total, net of capital and interest
repayments . .
193-6
169-5
56-5
27-3
85-6
24-2
5-1
3-1
16-0
19-9
213-6
155-6
189-4
168-4
56-4
29-6
82-3
21-1
7-2
3-9
10-0
19-2
208-6
151-0
192-0
171-2
47-8
34-4
89-0
20-8
4-3
7-0
9-5
18-8
210-8
150-9
178-7
157-0
39-8
34-9
82-2
21-7
3-5
8- 7
9- 6
31-8
210-5
150-3
Source: British Aid Statistics.
Columns may not total because of rounding.
400 BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
about one-quarter. No date for attaining this objective was agreed on but the
report of the Commission on International Development in 1969 recommended
that it should be reached by 1975 and suggested that the official component of
aid flows should be raised to 0-7 per cent of donor gross national product by
1975 and in no case later than 1980. The Commission recognised however
that the increase would pose considerable problems for certain countries,
including Britain, and recommended that as a first step these countries should
stem the decline in their aid as a proportion of gross national product.
Total British official and private flows in 1969 amounted to 0-97 per cent
of gross national product; official flows were 0-39 per cent. Public expenditure
on economic aid during the five years beginning in 1969-70 is to be pro¬
gressively raised to an estimated £300 million in 1973-74. This represents gross
official flows only; the volume of private flows, although influenced by govern¬
ment policies, is not determined by the Government and is difficult to predict,
as also is the future level of the gross national product.
Estimated expenditure on economic aid during the financial year 1970-71
is ^229 million, a figure which does not include special defence aid of
£6 million for Malaysia and Singapore and other defence aid of ^5-4 million.
Bilateral Bilateral financial aid in 1969 totalled ^179 million; over 48 per cent was in
Financial Aid grants and the rest in loans. Budgetary aid, £15 million in 1969, is provided in
the form of grants. Development aid is in grants or loans, depending on the
economic circumstances of the recipient countries; the greater part of it is in
loans. The terms of new development loans from Britain have been pro¬
gressively softened since 1958 and a policy of making interest-free loans to
lighten the repayment burdens of the poorer developing countries was intro¬
duced in June 1965. In 1969 the total value of loan commitments entered
into by the British Government, excluding investments by the Common¬
wealth Development Corporation (see below), was ^97 million and of this
over 91 per cent was on interest-free terms. The recipients included India,
Pakistan, Mauritius, Ghana, Turkey, Guyana, Ceylon and Indonesia.
Where loans are made on interest-bearing terms, waivers of interest for a
period of years are granted in appropriate cases, and both kinds of loan may
carry grace periods during which repayments of capital are not made. Of all
loans committed in 1969, 99 per cent of value carried grace periods averaging
6 years for capital repayments while the weighted average maturity of loans
was 24 years. Britain more than fulfils the recommendations of the Develop¬
ment Assistance Committee of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development (OECD), made in February 1968, on easing the terms of
financial aid.
Loans and grants are used mainly for the purchase of goods, equipment and
services from Britain, although there may be a substantial element for local
costs and for procurement from third countries in appropriate cases. Between
1958 and the end of 1969, 261 loans were negotiated involving a commitment
of £816 million, of which £655 million has been disbursed. The recipients of
the largest amounts have been India and Pakistan. During the same period
bilateral grants amounted to around £889 million.
Commonwealth Historically, Britain’s aid programme began as part of the discharge of its
Countries responsibilities towards dependent territories, and the main emphasis
remains on Commonwealth countries. In 1969 £157 million (88 per cent) of
the bilateral programme was disbursed to Commonwealth countries and
dependencies.
In the past, development aid to the dependent territories was given under
TRADE AND PAYMENTS
4OI
Technical
Assistance
Multilateral
Contributions
the Colonial Development and Welfare (CD & W) Acts, largely in the form
of grants but also in loans. When CD & W legislation terminated on 31st
March 1970, the total amount committed under it was nearly £486 million.
The aid requirements of the remaining dependencies, which are regarded
as a first charge on aid funds, will be provided under the authority of the
Overseas Aid Act 1966. In 1969 the territories received ^18 million in
bilateral financial aid and technical assistance (10 per cent of the bilateral
programme), including about £8 million under the CD & W Acts.
An important role in development assistance is played by the Common¬
wealth Development Corporation (CDC), set up by the British Government
in 1948, which provides finance and management for development projects
in Commonwealth countries and dependencies, often in partnership with
governments or private enterprise. In 1969 the CDC’s borrowing powers
were increased and the area of its operations was extended to non-Common-
wealth countries. By the end of 1969 some £130 million had been invested
out of a total commitment of ^157 million. Of the latter, £22 million was in
the Far East, £22 million in the Caribbean and virtually all of the remainder
in Africa. New investment approved in 1969 totalled over £13 million.
Expenditure on bilateral technical assistance (the provision of skilled person¬
nel, advice and training) has increased in recent years and was £44 million,
21 per cent total aid, in 1969. The largest component of expenditure (£27-6
million in 1969) was on sending or maintaining experts, including volunteers;
the next largest was for students and trainees in Britain (£8-i million).
Under the Overseas Service Aid Scheme (OSAS) and associated schemes
Britain meets the additional costs of employing experienced expatriate British
personnel in the public services of developing countries. The schemes cost
£22 million in 1969.
At the end of 1969, of the 12,400 British persons other than volunteers who
were working in developing countries and financed by the British Govern¬
ment, about 5,000 were engaged in the field of education, 2,600 in public
works and communications, 1,500 in public administration, 1,000 in agri¬
culture and allied fields, and 1,100 in health services.
In addition, the British Volunteer Programme has continued to expand (the
first volunteers were sent overseas in 1958) and in 1969 there were 2,157
volunteers, mainly graduates or otherwise qualified, working in developing
countries, the majority of them teaching. Recruitment, training and placing
overseas is undertaken by a number of voluntary bodies; 75 per cent of the
British costs (^o-8 million in 1969) are met by the British Government.
Britain receives large numbers of students and trainees from developing
countries. Over 10,800 were financed in Britain in 1969 under regional
programmes of technical assistance, by awards under the Commonwealth
Education Co-operation Scholarships and Bursary Schemes, and under the
various schemes of the British Council.
Britain is the second largest contributor (after the United States) to the
World Bank group of institutions including the International Development
Association (IDA). The British contribution to IDA in the three years 1968-70
has been nearly ^65 million; the proposed contribution for the three years
1971-73 is nearly £130 million. Britain has contributed £46 million to the
United Nations Development Programme since its inception in 1950 and has
provided more experts and training places under multilateral schemes than
any other country. Some 1,240 British nationals were serving in developing
402
WHOLESALE
TRADES
BRITAIN I97i: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
countries under the United Nations and its specialised agencies in 1969. Other
contributions include those to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees (UNRWA), the Asian Development Bank, the World
Food Programme and the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF).
INTERNAL TRADE
Britain’s internal trade can be divided into two broad categories: trade in raw
materials, capital goods and intermediate products (for example, vehicle
components) and trade in consumer goods, involving the network of distribu¬
tive trades by which home produced or imported goods reach the consumer.
(For the pattern of consumers’ expenditure see p. 232.)
There have been a number of official statistical enquiries into the distributive
trades. The latest censuses taken in Great Britain refer to the wholesale trades
in 1965 and the retail trades and certain service trades in 1966. Sample
monthly and annual enquiries are also undertaken, covering such aspects of
the distributive trades as turnover, stocks and capital expenditure. Most of the
figures given in the following pages derive from either the last published
censuses or the sample enquiries.
The first census of retail distribution and other services to be taken in
Northern Ireland relates to 1965.
Only a proportion of the trade in consumer goods passes through wholesalers:
sales are also made to consumers through producers’ own selling organisations
(including their own retail outlets and mail order businesses); and other sales
are made directly by producers to retailers. Wholesale channels are particularly
in evidence in the distribution of textiles, agricultural produce and foodstuffs.
The 1965 enquiry showed that out of a total of 23,643 business units engaged
in wholesale distribution in Great Britain, 3,435 dealt in clothing, footwear
and textiles, 2,007 in grocery and provisions, 2,630 in vegetables and fruit,
and 3,469 in other food and in drink. In addition, there were 8,282 dealers
(wholesale or retail) in coal, builders’ materials, grain or agricultural supplies,
and 9,117 dealers in other industrial materials and machinery. The value of
stocks held by wholesalers and dealers at the end of 1969 is estimated at
£1,220 million; expenditure on capital assets during the year was about
£140 million.
Methods of wholesale distribution vary according to the type of merchandise
handled. Fish, for example, is auctioned at the ports to port wholesalers (who
sell to inland wholesalers at the main distribution centres) or, increasingly, is
sold by contract to fryers and processors, or direct to retailers. Fruit and
vegetables may be sold by growers to commission agents (who dispose of the
produce either to wholesalers or direct to retailers) or the grower may deal
only with wholesale firms. The sale of some agricultural products is regulated
by statutory marketing boards (see p. 310).
London’s wholesale markets play a leading part in the distribution of
foodstuffs, particularly imported supplies. Every year Covent Garden (see
p. 315) handles about 1-2 million tons of fruit and vegetables, and over
340,000 tons of meat and poultry pass through Smithfield market; Billingsgate
is the principal distributing centre in Britain for fish. Others in London
include Leadenhall Market (poultry) and Spitalfields Market (fruit and
vegetables).
The co-operative movement in Britain has established its own wholesale
societies, the two largest being the Co-operative Wholesale Society Ltd.
TRADE AND PAYMENTS
4°3
(CWS) and the Scottish Co-operative Wholesale Society Ltd. (SCWS), to
serve the needs of retail societies, membership being restricted to incorporated
co-operative organisations. The CWS had sales of 3^5I9 in 19^)9 anc^
the SCWS had sales of some £90 million.
Since 1954, many wholesalers have joined, either singly or in groups, with
numbers of retailers to form voluntary groups to help to preserve the existence
of retail outlets for the wholesaler and to give to retailers the advantages of
the lower costs of large-scale trading without significant loss of independence.
The 1966 Census of Distribution showed that about 27 per cent (or 41 per
cent in terms of turnover) of independent grocers then belonged to these
chains and membership has since spread to many other kinds of business.
RETAIL TRADE
Types of
Retailers
Multiples and
Large Establish¬
ments
Retail
Co-operative
Societies
Retail businesses in Britain may be classified under three main headings:
(1) multiple traders, that is, organisations other than co-operative societies
with ten or more branches; (2) retail co-operative societies (see below); and
(3) independent retail businesses, including for this purpose the small
multiple stores (that is, chains of stores with nine or fewer branches). Busi¬
nesses in each of these categories may own department stores. Other retail
outlets include gas and electricity showrooms owned by the area gas and
electricity boards, and mail order houses (see p. 404).
The findings of the 1966 Census of Distribution (Table 34) show that, in
comparison with 1961, a larger volume of trade had been handled by rather
fewer shops. A notable feature is the continuing expansion of large multiple
firms relative to other types of shop. Independent shops, however, still account
for over half of Britain’s retail trade.
A very wide range is covered in the size of retailing establishments. Ten
shops (nine of them department stores) had sales in 1961 exceeding £5 million
or takings of more than £2,000 an hour; at the other extreme there were more
than 70,000 establishments taking less than .£2,000 a year. Some of these were
market and street traders, whose volume of business may be very small.
According to the Census of Distribution there were nearly 74,000 shops
owned by multiples (including multiple department stores) in 1966 with
a total turnover of £3,837 million. This form of organisation showed the
largest rise in numbers between 1961 and 1966 and their share in total sales
went up from 29 per cent to 34 per cent. Their turnover increased faster than
that of independent businesses between 1966 and 1969.
The share in total retail trade of co-operative stores dropped from 11 to 9 per
cent between 1961 and 1966 which was rather less than the relative decrease in
the number of stores. Between 1966 and 1969 their turnover increased slightly.
The retail co-operative societies are voluntary organisations controlled
by their members. Membership is open to anyone paying a small deposit
on a minimum share, which entitles the member to an equal voice with other
members in the society. Share investment by individual members is limited
to £1,000 (less in some societies) and only a low rate of interest is normally
paid on the shares.
In the past the trading surplus, after allocation to reserves and common
activities, has been paid out periodically to members in the form of a dividend
in proportion to their purchases. Some societies have used a system of
differential dividends by reducing prices in some departments such as food¬
stuffs. More recently a large number of societies have introduced dividend
stamps redeemable for cash, other goods, or credit to a share account, at
different redemption rates.
404 BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
At the end of 1969 there were 469 retail co-operative societies. Amalgama¬
tions are rapidly diminishing the number of societies (the total in 1958 was
1,015). The largest single society in Britain is the London Co-operative
TABLE 33
Main Groups of
Retail Business
Establishments
Number
1966
Percent¬
age
change
1961-66“
Turnover
£ million
1966
Percent¬
age
change
1961-66
Independent Businesses
Multiple Traders. .
Co-operative Societies
Total. .
403,876
73,852
26,684
- 9-5
+ 10-7
-11-0
6,279
3,837
1,016
504,412
7-0
11,132
+ 18-7
+ 48-8
+ 5*9
+ 26-1
Electricity and Gas Showrooms. .
Mail Order Businesses . .
3,012
495b
7-9
6-5
186c
429
+ 50-3
+ 89-5
Columns may not total because of rounding.
a Adjusted for the exclusion of certain mobile shops and market traders in 1966.
b Number of organisations.
c Excluding installation, maintenance and repair receipts.
Society with 1-15 million members and a turnover of £81 million in 1969.
Total sales of the retail co-operative societies in 1969 amounted to over
£1,130 million (this figure includes certain activities not covered by the
Census of Distribution figure in Table 33).
Independent Shops Independent shops have been giving ground gradually in the face of increased
competition from the larger undertakings. The proprietors of many of the
smaller shops often have other means of livelihood. Average turnover per shop
has continued to increase, though by less than for the retail trade as a whole.
None the less, even allowing for a 15 per cent increase in prices, the average
independent shop sold more goods in 1966 than in 1961.
Department Stores There were 760 department stores in Britain in 1969 with a turnover of
£653 million—about 6 per cent of the total turnover of all retail establishments.
Department stores were defined for the purposes of the census as having 25 or
more persons engaged in selling a wide range of commodities notably clothing
and household goods. Co-operative societies owned 238 department stores
in 1966; 214 were owned by multiples and 308 by independents.
Recent Trends Out of a total of over 500,000 establishments recorded by the 1966 Census
in Retail Trade of Distribution, and shown in Table 34, grocery and other food retailing
groups numbered over 227,000 establishments, and the clothing and foot¬
wear group over 83,000.
Though the total value of retail trade in Great Britain (inclusive of
electricity and gas showrooms and mail order business) rose by a quarter
between 1961 and 1966, rates of growth (measured in turnover) varied
appreciably between different types of trade. The slowest growth was in
general stores, in the food and clothing sectors, and department stores. The
fastest growth was in radio and television hire, mail order business, gas and
electricity showroom sales of durable goods, sports and leisure equipment,
chemists’ and photographic goods and sales of automatic vending machines.
TABLE 34
Retail Trades by
Kind of Business
Development
in Methods
of Retailing
Supermarkets
Automatic Vending
Machines
TRADE AND PAYMENTS
4°5
Type of trade
Establishmen ts
Number
1966
Percent¬
age
change
1961-66
Turnover
T million
1966
Percent¬
age
change
1961-66a
Grocers and provision dealers
Other food retailers
Confectioners, tobacconists, news
agents . .
Clothing and footwear shops
Household goods shops ..
Other non-food retailers. .
General stores
123,335
104,359
63,333
83,199
69,761
57,540
2,835
-15-9
- 9-0
- 9-7
- 3-9
+ 5-7
+ 5-6
-24-4
2,908
2,081
1,046
1,741
1,327
988
1,041
+ 23-7
+ 20-4
+ 31-0
+ 27-4
+ 34-5
+ 47-8
+ 11-9
Total
504,412
7-0
11,132
+ 26-1
Electricity and gas showrooms
Mail order houses6
Automatic vending
machine operators6
3,012
495
56
+ 7-9
-110
+ 115-4
186
429
11
+ 50-3c
+ 89-2
+ 167-3
a Adjusted for the exclusion of certain market traders and mobile shops in 1966.
6 Number of organisations.
c Excluding installation, maintenance and repair receipts.
However, the actual trends are blurred by the introduction into specialised
shops of other specialities, for example, clothing multiples opening food
sections, and vice versa. Though gas and electricity showroom business was
buoyant between 1961 and 1966, their combined turnover is relatively small,
amounting in 1966 to £186 million.
The real expansion in the volume of sales in Great Britain between 1961 and
1966, taking into account the exclusion of market traders (included in the 1961
Census) and a general increase in prices of 15 per cent, was about 9-6 per cent,
or an average of 1-9 per cent a year. Sales by all kinds of retail business
increased in real terms by 3 per cent between 1966 and 1969.
The Northern Ireland 1965 Census of Retail Distribution and Other
Services shows total spending of 3^385 million through 22,000 establishments.
The value increased by 14 per cent between 1965 and 1969.
The development of self-service trading has been a feature of the last two
decades. In 1969 there were some 23,000 stores operating wholly or partly
on self-service lines, compared with about 9,500 towards the end of 1961 and
less than 500 in 1950. This development has been accompanied by a trend to
larger shops in terms of both staff and floor space.
Supermarkets may be defined as self-service shops with a minimum selling
area of 2,000 square feet. There were about 870 supermarkets in 1961, accord¬
ing to the Census of Distribution, of which 524 were owned by multiples,
308 by co-operative societies and 38 by independents. It has been estimated
that by the end of 1969 over 3,300 had been opened and were handling some
25 per cent of Britain’s retail grocery trade.
New forms of automatic vending machines have come to the fore since 1955.
Over 300,000 machines are in use. Sales from automatic vending machines
406
Mobile Shops
'Out of Town'
Stores
'Cash and
Carry'
Promotional
Offers
'Credit Cards'
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
totalled nearly £169 million in 1969; over £100 million was accounted for by
sales from cigarette machines. Machines now sell not only cigarettes, sweets
and stamps but also hot and cold beverages, prepared foodstuffs, stockings,
paper-back books and other commodities, including various types of fuel.
Another form is the self-service petrol pump. Organisations selling automatic
vending machines (not otherwise engaged in retail trade) numbered 56 in
1966, with sales of nearly £11 million.
Some 11,700 mobile shops1 were reported in the Census of Distribution for
1961, with sales amounting to £93 million. Nearly a quarter of this turnover
was concentrated in Scotland (where the density of population is lower than
in England) compared with a tenth of all retail sales. Co-operative societies
accounted for 39 per cent of sales through mobile food shops, against 16 per
cent in ordinary food shops. For the most part, mobile shops were concerned
with food sales; about 42 per cent were travelling grocers, and over 28 per cent
and 21 per cent respectively were greengrocers and butchers. Only a very
small proportion (about 6 per cent) were non-food shops, and these specialised
mainly in paraffin supplies and hardware.
A number of large ‘out of town’ stores are being opened, providing a range
of goods under one roof, associated with extensive car parking facilities, away
from established central shopping areas.
‘Cash and Carry’ shops represent a combination of retail supermarkets and
wholesale warehouses covering practically every form of retail trade. By bulk
purchasing and little spending on attractive surroundings they can offer large
price discounts to retail customers. The numbers of this type of store have
grown rapidly from 398 in 1967 to an estimated 592 in May 1970, with a
turnover of some £420 million a year.
All forms of consumer sales promotion have been expanding, including
reduced price offers, gift schemes, and stamp trading. The stamps, by law,
have to be marked with their cash value and redeemed for cash on request.
It has been estimated that manufacturers spent some £160 million on
promotions in 1969 compared with £117 in 1965.
A facility which is spreading in Britain is the ‘credit card’. Users are issued
with a card on production of which their signature is accepted on bills in
participating shops, hotels and restuarants. The issuers then meet the bills and
recover from the card-holder through a single account presented periodically.
Users of certain cards are also required to pay a regular subscription.
Mail Order Mail order trading has been one of the most rapidly growing forms of selling
Sales and in Britain in recent years. The 1966 Census of Distribution showed that the
Direct Selling sales of retail mail order businesses had almost doubled in five years from
£227 million to £429 million; an increase of just under ten times since 1950,
when they amounted to £46 million. Turnover continued to rise steadily
between 1966 and 1969.
Sales by manufacturers direct to the public totalled £144 million in 1961,
compared with £70 million in 1950. Mail order sales accounted for 24 per
cent of the former total, sales to employees for 11 per cent, and charges for
work done for 9 per cent. Other direct sales, including sales by door-to-door
salesmen, accounted for the balance. Included in these sales were items as
various as carpets, washing machines, brushes, books and soft drinks.
1 Excluding roundsmen and vans selling ice-cream.
Service Trades
Catering
Laundries and
Dry Cleaning
Motor Trades
Hairdressing
Shoe Repairs
Other
Packaging
TRADE AND PAYMENTS 407
Closely connected with the distributive trades are those which offer a service
directly to the public, notably catering and hotel trades, laundries and dry
cleaners, garage and motor repair trades, hairdressers and boot and shoe
repairers.
In 1964 there were 149,000 establishments primarily concerned with catering
(defined to cover public houses, canteens and fish and chip shops, as well as
licensed hotels and restaurants, etc.) with a total turnover in that year of
£1,985 million. Hotels and holiday camps (excluding boarding houses and
unlicensed hotels) had receipts of about £286 million, of which £124 million
was from residential accommodation. Nearly half the total turnover of the
catering trades was from the sale of alcoholic drinks. Between 1964 and 1969
the catering trades’ turnover increased by 26 per cent. In addition coin-
operated machines are widely being installed in factories—some 60,000
beverage and snack machines are estimated to have been provided in industrial
sites—and in commercial premises as well as in normal retail outlets.
There were about 5,600 commercial laundry, launderette and dry cleaning
businesses with an annual turnover of about £172 million in 1966. Between
1961 and 1966 it increased by 53 per cent, but in the following three years
turnover of this group, other than launderettes and coin-operated dry cleaning
establishments, showed little change.
There were nearly 43,000 businesses in the motor trades in Britain in 1967
with 51,000 establishments. Total turnover amounted to £4,198 million.
Traders classified as new vehicle dealers had nearly 14,000 establishments
and accounted for over two-thirds of total turnover. Over 11,000 establish¬
ments were classified as being primarily petrol stations, and 11,000 were also
general repairers. Between 1967 and 1969 the motor trades turnover has
increased by about 11 per cent.
Takings in hairdressing establishments increased very rapidly between 1950
(£38 million) and 1961 (£97 million), and between 1961 and 1966 to £136
million. Between 1966 and 1969 they rose by only 4 per cent. In 1966 there
were about 48,000 hairdressing establishments.
There are some 8,700 establishments specialising in boot and shoe repairs
(excluding repairs handled through footwear shops); they had takings of £26
million in 1966.
Other establishments found in shopping areas and offering a service to the
public include those of radio and television rental companies (over 3,800
shops), licensed betting offices (over 15,700 in 1968) and over 3,500 funeral
undertaking businesses.
British industry’s current annual expenditure on packaging has been estimated
at £850 million. The expansion of self-service shops, the spread of branded
and standardised products, and developments in partly prepared foods, for
example, ready-washed vegetables and ready-made cake mixes, have been
major factors in the great changes which have taken place in packaging
methods. Paper packaging, including cartons and boxes, remains the most
extensively used (turnover of some £380 million a year), the fastest growing
sector being paper sacks. New uses are being found for tinplate (output,
£130 million a year), especially in sales of soft drinks and beer. Glass and
plastics packaging account for about £65 million and £70 million a year
respectively. The use of plastics continues to develop; output of plastics
films reached some 72,000 tons in 1969 and that of polypropylene, and other
o
408
Hire-purchase
Sales
Advertising
Public Relations
Consumer
Protection
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
film, about 10,500 tons, while some 25,000 tons of low-density polythene
were used for bottles.
The rapid growth of sales of household and durable consumer goods, such
as cars, furniture, washing machines, televison sets, refrigerators and cookers,
has been greatly helped by instalment purchase. Instalment credit debt
outstanding to the main providers amounted to ^1,055' million at the end of
March 1970; nearly three-quarters was owed to finance companies and the
remainder to durable goods shops and department stores. A few finance
companies which operate on a national scale account for a high proportion of
the total business.
The Board of Trade has powers to regulate the terms of hire-purchase and
credit sales agreements in order to restrain the expansion of consumer credit.
The current terms are: a minimum deposit of 33^ per cent on most durable
consumer goods except cookers and water-heaters (10 per cent), mattresses
and furniture (20 per cent), and cars (40 per cent). There is usually a maximum
repayment period of 24 months for most goods except cookers and water-
heaters (4 years).
Hire-purchase in Northern Ireland directly financed by the major finance
houses operating from offices in Northern Ireland amounted in 1969 to
£19-5 million.
About £530 million is estimated to have been spent on all forms of advertising
in 1969; as a proportion of the gross national product (1-4 per cent) and of
consumer expenditure (1-9 per cent), it has remained almost unchanged
over the last ten years. About £360 million was expended on press advertising
and £130 million (including tax) was spent on television advertising. The re¬
mainder was divided between outdoor signs, posters, films, and radio. Most of
the advertising is carried out by advertising agencies, which, in some cases,
also provide marketing, consumer research and other services; their repre¬
sentative organisation is the Institute of Practitioners in Advertising. The
trade association for the industry as a whole, including agencies, advertisers
and owners of advertising media, is the Advertising Association. It was
responsible for the setting up of the Advertising Standards Authority, an
independent body whose objective is the promotion and enforcement of the
highest standards of advertising, in particular through the British Code of
Advertising Practice.
Industry and commerce have in recent years paid increasing attention to
improving public understanding of their work and objectives. Public relations
consultancy firms and the public relations departments of advertising agencies
provide general services, apart from the increasing employment by industrial
organisations and trade associations of staff specialists in public relations.
Their professional body, founded in 1948, is the Institute of Public Relations;
not only commerce and industry, but the professions, national associations,
central and local government are represented within the Institute.
Various legislative measures exist in the United Kingdom to protect the
consumer against specific abuses. Non-statutory organisations also exist to
further the consumer’s interests. Weights and measures legislation, one of the
earliest forms of consumer protection, was brought up to date and extended
1 Not included in this total is the debt of £203 million outstanding to certain other
instalment credit retailers.
TRADE AND PAYMENTS
The Consumer
Council
Consumer
Associations
Resale Price
Maintenance
4°9
in scope by the Weights and Measures Act 1963; it is strictly enforced by
qualified inspectors of local weights and measures authorities. The Trade
Descriptions Act 1968 deals with misdescriptions of goods and services and
provides for positive enforcement by the same authorities. The purity,
hygiene and description of food are controlled by the Food and Drugs Acts
1955 and 1956. The Consumer Protection Act 1961 gives the Home Office
power to make regulations to ensure the safety of any class of goods.
The Hire-Purchase Act 1965 and the Hire-Purchase (Scotland) Act 1965
provide safeguards to the consumer who buys goods on hire-purchase or
credit sale terms. The protection extends to agreements up to £2,000 although
most of the safeguards do not apply to credit sale agreements for less than £30.
Similar legislation operates in Northern Ireland. As a precaution against
fraud, virtually every hire-purchase agreement on a car is registered with
H.P. Information Ltd., a non-profit-making company whose members are car
dealers or finance companies concerned with car sales; dealers and finance
houses can check with it in confidence.
The British Standards Institution (see p. 249) has established a number of
standards for consumer goods, and the Council of Industrial Design (see
p. 249) helps to foster improvements in the design of consumer goods.
The Consumer Council, financed by grant-in-aid from the Board of Trade,
was set up in 1963 to concern itself with and promote the consumer’s interests.
Within the limits of its finance and terms of reference it is fully independent
and so free to criticise government departments and to exert pressure on
other bodies. It undertakes research into consumer reactions to, and experience
of, goods and services, publishes reports, advisory booklets and leaflets,
promotes consumer education in schools, produces a monthly magazine,
Focus, and has introduced an informative labelling {Teltag) scheme. (It is
debarred from engaging in comparative testing of products, law enforcement
action or taking up complaints on behalf of individual consumers.) A general
advisory service dealing with individual consumers’ problems is provided by
the Citizens’ Advice Bureaux (see p. 124).
Advice to its members on the merits of consumer goods is provided by the
Consumers’ Association (CA), a private body financed by the subscriptions of
members. It arranges tests and makes reports on the quality of goods bought
on the open market and its findings are published in its monthly bulletin
Which ?, issued to subscribers. The Research Institute for Consumer Affairs,
established with a grant from the CA, undertakes research into consumer
goods and services, and publishes reports. There are also a number of local
independent consumer groups, which in 1963 formed themselves into a
national Federation of Consumer Groups. Assistance with certain aspects of
consumer guidance is also given by a number of other private bodies and by
certain government departments and local authorities. Individual trades and
industries have also taken measures to raise standards of quality.
The practice of resale price maintenance and its enforcement by cutting off
supplies was made unlawful under the Resale Prices Act 1964; some limited
exemptions for certain classes of goods (notably pharmaceuticals) have been
granted by the Restrictive Practices Court (see p. 240).
16 LABOUR
Less than 200 years ago, government concern with all aspects of employment
was at a minimum. State intervention came first in the sphere of safety, health
and welfare. The first factory legislation was enacted in 1802. The first
effective Factory Act was that of 1833 which set up a national system of
inspection to enforce its provisions. Trade unions—forbidden in the eighteenth
and early nineteenth centuries as a threat to civil peace and individual liberty
—ceased in 1824 to be ‘actionable conspiracies in restraint of trade’. During
the nineteenth century new unions of skilled and semi-skilled workers grew
up, more soundly organised than their forerunners and more acceptable to the
public because their ambitions were more restricted. A number of employers’
associations, mainly local, were formed; unions and employers learned to
bargain together; and procedures for conciliation and arbitration began to be
agreed. Legislation passed in the 1870s clarified and regularised the legal
status of trade unions. In 1910, the first employment exchanges were intro¬
duced to provide a national service for putting employers in touch with
workers and vice versa. In 1917 the exchanges were transferred to the newly
created Ministry of Labour, which also became responsible for arranging or
providing certain conciliation and arbitration services on request. The
factory inspectorate wras added to its responsibilities in 1940. This department
became the principal instrument of the Government’s labour policies in
Great Britain; it was re-named Department of Employment and Productivity
(DEP) in 1968 and took over responsibility for productivity and prices and
incomes policy. In Northern Ireland employment matters are among the
responsibilities of the Ministry of Health and Social Services.
MANPOWER
The total working population of Great Britain at the middle of June 1969 was
about 25 million, about 47 per cent of the total population, and included
about 73 per cent of persons of normal working age (15 to 59 years for
women, 15 to 64 years for men). About 91 per cent of the men of working
age are today in or seeking gainful work. The remaining 9 per cent consist
mainly of those continuing their education, of the severely disabled and of
some persons of private means. The proportion of women of working age in or
seeking gainful work is much lower, about 53 per cent, as many housewives
either do not wish or cannot manage to take employment outside the home.
Nearly 60 per cent of the women at work are married. Besides those of normal
working age, there are over a million older men and women still at work. The
great majority of the working population work for a wage or salary, but about
1*7 million are employers or self-employed.
Northern Ireland, which has 27 per cent of the total population of the
United Kingdom, has 2*3 per cent of its working population. The ratio of
working to total population in Northern Ireland is about 4*-1 per cent, and
farmers and smallholders working their own holdings account for about
one-twelfth of the working population.
LABOUR
Growth in
Working
Population
Deployment of
Labour
TABLE 35
Manpower
Position in
Great Britain
1960-696
411
The working population increased slowly until 1966, and has since fallen
mainly because of the lower pressure of demand for labour and the increased
numbers in full-time education. Because of demographic factors and the
rising demands for higher education, the working population is unlikely to
increase much above the 1966 levels before the mid-1970s, even if the pressure
of demand for labour were as high as in 1966. The raising of the minimum
school-leaving age in 1973 is expected to result in a sharp fall in the working
population during the following year.
Though successful development policies in the less-prosperous regions may
raise the numbers above the levels forecast, it is clear that increasing demand
for labour must be met by better deployment of manpower and improved
productivity. Married women form the only substantial reserve and the
Government is studying the nature of the obstacles to employing those who
are willing to work and how they may be overcome.
The industrial distribution of employees in civil employment is shown in
Table 35. Of all employees about 40 per cent are employed in the mining and
manufacturing industries and only about 2 per cent in agriculture and
fisheries. Over 56 per cent of those in manufacturing are in the metal, en¬
gineering, vehicles and chemicals groups of industries.
Thousands0,
Year
Numbers in
civil
employment
Registered
wholly
unemployed
H.M.
Forces0
Total
working
population0
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
23,711
24,044
24,232
24,250
24,527
24,770
24,913
24,509
24,326
24,344
297
255
372
461
317
270
253
466
506
483
518
474
442
427
424
423
417
417
400
380
24,526
24,773
25,046
25,138
25,268
25,463
25,583
25,391
25,233
25,207
Source: Department of Employment and Productivity.
0 Discrepancies in totals are due to rounding.
6 All figures are on comparable basis and relate to June: part-time workers counted
as units.
c The working population figures and the Forces figures include ex-Service personnel
on leave after completing their service.
Most industries employ women as well as men though not always for the
same types of work, for example, few women are managers and few personal
secretaries are men. It is illegal to employ women in certain jobs, such as
underground work in coal mines. The industrial groups in which women are
chiefly employed are: the metal-using industries; the manufacture of textiles
and clothing; the food, drink and tobacco industries; the distributive trades;
and professional and miscellaneous services.
The numbers given in Table 36 as working in any industry or service
include those engaged on administrative, technical and clerical work, so that
the totals given for the production industries are greater than the numbers on
BRITAIN 197U AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
productive processes. It is estimated that in April 1970 in manufacturing
industries in Great Britain 26-4 per cent were administrative, technical and
clerical employees (the ratio ranged according to industry from 13 per cent
in clothing to 39-1 per cent in chemicals and allied industries).
Manpower
Research Unit
The DEP has a Manpower Research Unit (MRU) set up in 1963 to examine
the problems of forecasting manpower resources and requirements by occu¬
pation, over a period 5 to 10 years ahead for both the whole economy and for
some particular industries and occupations.
The MRU also co-operates with industry training boards on technical
problems of forecasting. Its forecasts are designed to help with industrial and
manpower planning, recruitment, training and careers advice.
Unemployment The general unemployment rate in Britain as a whole in the last 25 years has
been among the lowest in the world—usually between 1 and 2 per cent—but
has been somewhat higher since 1966. It has been particularly low in the south¬
east and Midlands of England, and consistently higher in those parts of the
country which have the greatest dependence on shipbuilding, coalmining, and
Thousands0,
TABLE 36
Analysis of Civil
Employment in
Great Britain
mid-1969
Industry or Service
Employees6
Agriculture, forestry and fisheries
Mining and quarrying
Manufacturing industries:
Chemicals and allied industries
Metals, engineering and vehicles
Textiles
Clothing and footwear
Food, drink and tobacco . .
Other manufactures
Total: manufacturing industries
Construction ..
Gas, electricity and water
Transport and communications
Distributive trades
Professional, financial, scientific and
miscellaneous services
National government service . .
Local government service
Total: employees
Employers and self-employed persons
(all industries and services) . .
Total in Civil Employment ..
Males
316-0
422-8
330-9
3,459-4
359-1
131-7
489-8
1,237-6
6,008-5
1,356-7
337-0
1,282-0
1,193-0
2,171-3
354-9
584-2
14,027
1,383
15,410
Females
74-8
19-2
139-5
1,008-1
337-0
369-5
359-9
518-4
2,732-4
89-1
59-6
270-3
1,508-5
3,380-5
203-0
235-9
8,573
361
8,934
Total
390-9
442-2
470-4
4,467-4
696-2
501-3
849-6
1,755-9
8,740-8
1,445-8
396-7
1,552-4
2,701-5
5,551-5
557-9
820-1
22,600
1,744
24,344
Source: Department of Employment and Productivity.
a Discrepancies in totals are due to rounding.
6 The figures of employees include those temporarily not working but still on
employers’ pay-rolls and those unable to work because of short-term sickness but
exclude those registered as wholly unemployed. Part-time workers are counted as
full units.
Northern
Ireland
Placement and
Counselling
LABOUR 4X3
certain branches of the heavy engineering and metal manufacturing industries,
notably parts of Scotland and Wales, and north-east England and Merseyside.
These areas have been the subject of a series of measures of selective assis¬
tance to stimulate industrial expansion; and counter-measures have been
taken to limit expansion in areas of manpower shortage (see p. 251). The
general unemployment rate in Great Britain in August 197° was 2'6 per cent;
the areas with the highest rates were northern England, Wales and Scotland.
The total working population of Northern Ireland—including employers and
self-employed but excluding certain unpaid helpers—was about 596,000 in
December 1969 (393,000 males and 203,000 females). The number of insured
employees was 520,000. The largest productive industries are agriculture,
engineering, textiles and clothing. Most of the agricultural work in Northern
Ireland is done without hired help.
The unemployment rate in Northern Ireland has remained higher than in
other parts of the United Kingdom. In June 1970 it was 6*2 per cent of
insured employees. The Ministry of Commerce of the Northern Ireland
Government has wide powers (similar to those in Great Britain) to assist the
development and diversification of industry. It is using these powers vigor¬
ously in an attempt to improve the situation.
EMPLOYMENT, TRAINING AND PRODUCTIVITY SERVICES
The main government employment services are provided in Great Britain
through the country-wide network of over 900 offices of the Department of
Employment and Productivity, which act as employment exchanges. The
services in Northern Ireland are run on similar lines by the Ministry of Health
and Social Services but there are some variations related to the much smaller
area of administration.
The employment exchanges provide a free and confidential service for
employers needing staff and for workpeople, whether or not already in
employment, seeking jobs. Information and advice on any employment
problem is available to all and the service is voluntary. Employers and em¬
ployees alike remain free to use general or specialised fee-charging private
employment agencies and direct recruitment by advertisement or personal
introduction. Exchanges, including the specialist placing services described
below, handle the full range of occupations and deal with full-time, part-time
and temporary vacancies. Details of unfilled vacancies (or of people seeking
jobs) can be circulated quickly in the ‘travel to work’ area, or more widely if
necessary. Local employment committees, on which employers, workers and
other local interests are represented, are attached to certain employment
exchanges as advisory bodies to secure the full benefit of local knowledge
and the close co-operation of employers and workers.
The employment exchanges offer a special service to certain groups of
employers and employees. All exchanges operate a Commercial Register of
situations vacant and wanted in the distributive trades, clerical and secretarial
posts and catering and other services. Over 40 of the larger exchanges hold a
Professional and Executive Register concerned with senior posts in industry,
commerce, and the professions both at home and overseas. The Register is
also able to give information about the professions and allied occupations to
young men and women considering a career and to older people seeking a
new one, for example, ex-regular officers of the armed forces*
414 BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Regular Forces Resettlement Service, in which the DEP collaborates
with the Ministry of Defence and the voluntary organisations concerned with
ex-regulars, helps members of the Forces to achieve a satisfactory transition to
civilian life. Nearly all those leaving the Services are successful in securing
satisfactory resettlement.
In nearly 30 areas where there are large groups of hospitals, there are
officers specially trained to deal with the employment problems of nurses,
midwives and those in related occupations or who wish to enter those pro¬
fessions. Elsewhere nursing employment work is done as part of the general
employment service.
In view of the increasing number of older persons in the population,
employment exchanges have instructions to make special efforts to find them
employment and to encourage employers to consider them on their merits.
Vocational guidance services for young people and the Disablement
Resettlement Service are described below as is the selection of candidates for
the government vocational training scheme (see p. 417.) Vocational guidance
for adults is available through the Occupational Guidance Service which
operates in 40 main centres of population. Expert advice is given by specially
trained staff to any persons over the age of 18 who have left school and who
are in doubt about the kind of work or career for which they are best fitted.
Youth The Youth Employment Service in Great Britain is the responsibility of the
Employment Department of Employment and Productivity and is under the general
Service direction of the Central Youth Employment Executive (CYEE) composed of
senior officers of the DEP and the education departments. It is operated in
most areas through offices known as Youth Employment Offices or Career
Offices (COs) established by local education authorities in accordance with
schemes approved by the Secretary of State for Employment and Productivity
under which 75 per cent of the relevant expenditure of local education authori¬
ties is reimbursed by the DEP.
The service has four main activities: (a) the CYEE produces and circulates
careers literature to schools and careers offices. Careers employment officers
work with teachers in schools to give pupils information on employment and
careers; (6) COs give vocational guidance to individuals and in group sessions;
(c) school leavers are helped to find employment. Career offices also provide
an employment service for any young person seeking work, or employer
seeking young workers; (d) COs follow up the progress of the young people
and give any necessary further help and advice. In many areas there are
specialist officers to advise the more able young people, the handicapped and
the disadvantaged.
In Northern Ireland the functions of the Youth Employment Service are
similar to those in Great Britain but its organisation is different in that
parliamentary responsibility rests with the Minister of Education and the
service is operated by a statutory board composed of representatives of local
education authorities and other educational and industrial interests. Of the
board’s expenditure, 80 per cent is met by the Ministry of Education and
20 per cent by local education authorities.
Disablement The Disablement Resettlement Service is designed to help disabled persons
Resettlement to get and keep suitable work. It is available to anyone over school-leaving age
Service who is substantially handicapped as a result of injury, disease or congenital
deformity in obtaining or keeping employment. The DEP is responsible for
Vocational
Guidance
Placing in Ordinary
Employment
Industrial
Rehabilitation
Vocational Training
Sheltered
Employment
labour 4i5
the administration of the Service and is assisted by the National Advisory
Council on the Employment of the Disabled.
The help given falls under five main headings
Vocational guidance is given at local offices by specialised disablement
resettlement officers (DROs) in consultation, as necessary, with the local
disablement advisory committees, hospital resettlement clinics and medical
interviewing committees, and also in the industrial rehabilitation units.
Having regard to a disabled person’s qualifications and aptitude and to medical
guidance, the DRO endeavours to find the work most suited to him, and
where necessary arranges for a course of industrial rehabilitation or training
or both. A Register of Disabled Persons is maintained, and in mid-April
1970 the number registered was over 634,000; registration is voluntary. All
employers of 20 or more persons are required to employ a quota (at present
3 per cent for all industries, except shipping, in respect of the manning of
ships) of registered disabled persons. The number of registered disabled
persons unemployed in mid-April 1970 was 72,116.
There are 30 specialised Blind Persons Resettlement Officers (BPROs)
attached to offices of the DEP.
Industrial rehabilitation is provided at 24 units (including one combined
medical/industrial rehabilitation unit) run by the DEP. Their aim is to
provide the final link between sickness and employment by enabling men
and women to adjust themselves gradually to normal working conditions
and to receive vocational guidance based on skilled assessment of their
aptitudes in a practical workshop situation. Attendance at a unit is voluntary
and maintenance allowances are paid. They also provide special short
assessment courses for young people finding it difficult to enter suitable
employment and at some there are work preparation classes for handicapped
school leavers (run in co-operation with local education authorities). The
staff includes a doctor, occupational psychologist, social worker, DRO,
industrially experienced workshop supervisors, and sometimes a remedial
gymnast, all under the general leadership of a rehabilitation officer.
The Department of Employment and Productivity gives financial assistance
to two centres conducted by voluntary organisations which provide similar
facilities for the blind, to four schemes by other bodies for the rehabilitation
of patients with mental handicaps, and to two centres for spastics.
There are vocational training facilities for the disabled at Government
Training Centres (see p. 417), educational institutions and employers’ estab-
lislunents. For the more seriously disabled there are special residential
training colleges run by voluntary organisations with the financial assistance
and technical help of the DEP. There are also arrangements for the training
of special categories such as the blind, and for providing grants to disabled
persons qualified to undertake study or training for professional or comparable
employment.
Remploy Ltd., a non-profit-making company, provides sheltered employment
for registered severely disabled people who are unlikely to obtain work except
under special conditions. About 7,500 severely disabled men and women are
employed in 86 factories and some 180 home workers are supplied with
work from 6 centres. The directors are appointed by the Secretary of State;
loans and grants for capital development and to meet operational costs are
provided from public funds.
The DEP also gives financial assistance to local authorities and voluntary
O*
416
Manpower and
Productivity
Service
Mobility of
Labour
Commonwealth
Citizens
Employment of
Workers from
Countries
other than
Commonwealth
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
organisations towards the cost of providing facilities for sheltered employment
for 2,500 severely disabled sighted workers and for about 2,700 blind workers.
The Manpower and Productivity Service of the DEP, set up in 1968, seeks
to bring about the effective use of productive resources and to encourage the
adoption and spread of good management practices and modern techniques.
It consists of some 125 manpower advisers, organised on a regional basis,
with central consultancy and information services. The Service’s facilities
are available free, and one of its particular interests is in helping industry
to improve collective bargaining and to draw up productivity agreements.
As part of the policy of assisting geographical mobility of labour within
Britain to balance resources and demands, the Department of Employment
and Productivity makes grants and allowances to help with costs of fares,
temporary lodging and acquisition of and removal to the new home, in
specified instances. They are available to unemployed workers moving to new
employment, and therefore settling, in another area, to key workers transferred
by a firm into a development area to inaugurate a new plant, and local un¬
employed workers recruited to new plants in development areas and sent to
the parent works for preliminary training.
Commonwealth citizens from overseas are subject to control under the
Commonwealth Immigrants Acts 1962 and 1968 which apply, broadly, to
all Commonwealth Citizens1 (except for those who were born in Britain or
have close family links, see p. 12). If they wish to enter Britain to take or seek
full-time employment, they must first obtain a voucher issued by the DEP.
They can apply themselves if they have certain special skills and qualifications
(mainly of professional or graduate standard), or an employer can apply on
behalf of a particular individual. The issue of vouchers to citizens of in¬
dependent countries is mainly restricted to those with offers of employment
in manufacturing industries (these restrictions do not apply to citizens of
Malta or of dependent territories). Commonwealth citizens who wish to
work in Northern Ireland, and who are not ‘Northern Ireland workers’,2
need special Northern Ireland employment permits, which are issued only
for definite jobs. (For immigration and community relations, see p. 146.)
Foreigners are admitted to Britain to take up employment provided they
hold a permit issued to the prospective employer by the Department of
Employment and Productivity (the Ministry of Health and Social Services
for Northern Ireland if the proposed employment is in Northern Ireland).
In Great Britain, over 67,000 such permits were issued in 1969. About 17,800
workers, mainly skilled, came to work in industry and commerce, 21,000 to
work in the hotel and catering industry, 10,100 for domestic work and 7,500
as student employees. Employment is limited to a maximum of one year in
the first instance but may be extended on the employer’s application.
Before a permit is issued, the DEP must be satisfied that there is a vacancy
for which no suitable British or foreign worker already long-resident in
Britain is available, and that the wages and conditions of employment are not
less favourable than those enjoyed by British workers. These conditions are
1 The Commonwealth Immigrants Acts apply also to citizens of the Republic of
Ireland but no control is imposed on persons travelling between Ireland and Britain.
2 People qualified by birth and residence to work in Northern Ireland.
LABOUR
41?
Industrial
Training
Government
Vocational
Training
waived for student employees who are admitted for limited periods in order
to improve their English and to gain a wider knowledge of their occupations.
A foreigner in employment in Britain may not change his job unless his
prospective employer has obtained prior approval from the DEP.
Britain, as a member of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development, participates with 13 European countries in the arrangements
for assisting nationals of the countries concerned to obtain employment in
other member countries.
As part of its plans for increasing productivity in industry the Government is
fostering the expansion and improvement of industrial training. The whole
framework of training in industry and commerce was transformed by the
Industrial Training Act 1964. Under this Act industrial training boards are
appointed to be responsible for the quantity and quality of industrial training
in the industry concerned; up to June 1970, 28 boards had been set up com¬
prising over 15 million employees or about 85 per cent of those in industry
and commerce to whom the Act applies. Each board covers as wide a sector
of industry as possible to reduce costs of administration and simplify prob¬
lems of co-operation between boards. It can provide its own training courses
or arrange for other organisations to provide training. It raises a levy from
employers and makes grants to those whose training it approves. The Sec¬
retary of State meets the initial administrative costs of each board and is
making grants towards certain other expenditure: for example, training
courses for trainers and research projects. To advise the Secretary of State
on the administration of the Act and on industrial training questions generally,
a Central Training Council (CTC) consisting of employer and trade union
members, representatives of nationalised industries, educationists, selected
chairmen of training boards and others with a special interest in industrial
training has been set up. It also advises on the running of the Industrial
Training Service (ITS), an independent non-profit-making body sponsored
by the DEP and the CTC. The ITS provides companies, employers’ associa¬
tions and industrial training boards in any industry with help in the identifi¬
cation of training needs, the formulation of training policy, job analysis for
any occupational categories, training programme design and assessing the
effectiveness of training.
The Government Vocational Training Scheme, administered by the Depart¬
ment of Employment and Productivity, is intended to supplement what
industry is doing to overcome shortages of skilled workers in industries of
national importance as well as helping persons in special need, such as the dis¬
abled (see p. 414) and ex-Forces men and women, to fit themselves for suit¬
able employment. Training is provided for suitable persons over 18 years of
age who are unskilled or whose prospects of work in their existing trade
are poor. (Employed persons as well as the unemployed are accepted for
training in trades of importance to the national economy.) Most of it is done
at Government Training Centres (GTCs), which are within easy reach of the
main industrial centres of the country, and between them offer courses in
some 50 different trades, with emphasis on those in which there is a shortage
of skilled labour. In June 1970 there were 45 GTCs (to be increased to 54 by
the end of 1971). Schemes of training for particular trades are agreed with
representatives of the employers and workers concerned.
For the disabled and for ex-Regular Service men and women and the un¬
employed with special resettlement problems, training in trades and com¬
mercial work is also available under the scheme at technical and commercial
418
Special DEP
Services
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
colleges and private training establishments or by means of individual
courses at employers’ establishments. For severely disabled persons training
is provided at four residential training colleges run by voluntary organisations
with government financial assistance.
During training, trainees are paid good allowances to maintain themselves
and their dependants. During 1969 more than 14,000 people were trained
under the scheme and over 90 per cent of them were subsequently employed
in the trade for which they had been trained.
The expansion of GTCs has made it possible to use their facilities with
increasing flexibility, including, for instance, the provision of free training for
sponsored employees. Under this scheme employers can nominate selected
employees for courses to upgrade or broaden their existing skills. The DEP
arranges special six-week business training courses for Regulars and ex-
Regulars (mainly ex-officers) at commercial and technical colleges; four-week
courses in industrial supervision are provided at a centre in London for non¬
technical warrant officers and senior NCOs (or other Service equivalent ranks).
In addition to full courses for a civilian trade, refresher courses and conversion
courses required by ex-Service men and women can be arranged under the
Vocational Training Scheme.
The DEP also provides assistance with training for firms moving into a
development or intermediate area or expanding an existing business there.
The assistance includes grants for training carried out by the employer and
direct training of employees on the firm’s premises by staff loaned by the
DEP. Another scheme of government grants administered by the industrial
training boards has been introduced to promote craft and technician training
in development or intermediate areas. Grants are available to employers in
these areas who provide additional off-the-job training facilities for ap¬
prentices and technicians, or otherwise increase the numbers of such trainees.
A special service to industry is the Department of Employment and Producti¬
vity’s Training Within Industry for Supervisors (TWI) scheme. Its object is
to develop the skill of supervisors in instructing and communicating in human
relations, in improving methods and in preventing accidents (there are
separate programmes for each of these) in the shortest possible time. There
are special versions of TWI, usually in courses of a week’s duration, for
supervisors employed in offices, retail distribution and hospitals, and also an
in-plant training development service to aid selection and further the training
of operatives as instructors. Training Officers of the DEP either give these
courses or train employers’ nominees to enable them to run TWI courses in
their own concerns. A clerical training course is in preparation which associ¬
ates management and supervisory staff with the training of students. The DEP
also has an intensive course for training clerical staff in export offices in basic
export procedures.
In addition, two-week courses in industrial instructional techniques for the
training of apprentice and trade instructors are available to outside firms (as
well as GTC staff) at the Department of Employment and Productivity’s two
Instructor Training Colleges (one in England and one in Scotland), and at six
Instructor Training Units attached to GTCs. A one-week advanced course is
available for instructors likely to benefit.
Vocational training services at GTCs, TWI courses, and courses at In¬
structor Training Colleges are available to trainees from overseas under
approved schemes (for instance, those of the ILO or joint DEP/Ministry of
Overseas Development technical assistance).
LABOUR
419
TERMS OF EMPLOYMENT AND WORKING CONDITIONS
Legislation and There are few restrictions in Britain on the freedom of an employer to hire
Conventions an employee on any terms which the employee will accept. Recent legislation,
however, embodies certain safeguards for the employee. The Terms and
Conditions of Employment Act 1959 provides machinery for enforcing on
an employer the observance of terms or conditions established by collective
agreement in his industry; under the Contracts of Employment Act 1963
employers are required to give their employees written particulars of the
main terms of employment, and both employers and employees are given
rights to minimum periods of notice when employment is to be terminated;
and under the Redundancy Payments Act 1965 employees with a minimum
period of service of two years are entitled to lump sum payments if their jobs
cease to exist (for example, because of technological improvements or because
of a fall in demand) and their employers cannot offer suitable alternative work,
the cost being partly met from a fund subscribed to by industry as a whole.
Under present law employers are under no legal obligation to recognise a
trade union, or to refrain from refusing to employ trade unionists. Nor is a
collective agreement between a trade union and an employers’ association
held to be a legally enforceable contract, though the terms of a collective
agreement may be expressly or by implication incorporated in an individual
contract of employment. Such collective agreements have provided and
continue to provide the basis of terms of employment in most trades and
industries, though they are increasingly supplemented by agreements reached
between unions and individual undertakings (see p. 426). The determination
by statute of minimum wages, holidays and holiday pay is in principle
confined to those trades and industries where the organisation of employers
or workers, or both, is inadequate to negotiate collective agreements and to
ensure their observance.
Legislation prescribes minimum standards of safety, health and welfare in
most places of employment. However, it is recognised that the causes of
many accidents are not amenable to statutory control. Therefore, voluntary
action taken by employer organisations, often in association with trade
unions, is encouraged.
The further considerations which affect workers’ satisfaction with their
jobs and promote harmony between employers and employed, which can be
summed up as ‘good human relations’ between management and individual
employees, are hardly susceptible to codification; they have been recognised
for some time and are receiving increasing attention from managements and
from voluntary and official organisations.
Earnings
Minimum or standard time rates for the lowest-rated manual workers, as
determined by agreements or by statutory orders, vary between ^0-25 and
an hour for men and between ^0-15 and £0*371 f°r women. Actual
earnings are usually higher. Higher rates are sometimes paid, and piece rates,1
shift rates and overtime rates raise the level of average earnings.
On the basis of the latest survey in a series conducted regularly by the
Department of Employment and Productivity into earnings and hours of
work in manufacturing industries and some leading non-manufacturing
industries throughout Britain, the average earnings of full-time male adult
1 Piece rates are of declining importance in manufacturing industries, where methods
of production tend to dictate the output of a worker, not his or her own skill or energy.
420
Salaries and
Fees
BRITAIN I97i: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
A= April 0= October
manual workers in October 1969 were £0-53 an hour and £24-82 a week. Full¬
time women manual workers at the same date earned an average of £0 32
an hour and £12-11 a week.
Minimum time rates for women manual workers tend to be set at around
70-90 per cent of the corresponding male rate, though the gap is gradually
closing. Women’s earnings are markedly lower than those of men, partly
because on average they work shorter hours, with less overtime paid at
premium rates, but also because a smaller proportion of women do skilled
work. The Equal Pay Act 1970 provides that from 29th December 1975 a
woman doing the same or broadly equivalent work to a man qualifies for equal
pay and conditions of employment.
Earnings in coalmining, not covered by the half-yearly survey, are somewhat
above the average; earnings are about the average in railway work and below
the average in agriculture.
Between 1956 and October 1969 average weekly wage rates increased by
80 per cent and average weekly earnings of manual workers by 113 per cent.
Part of the increase has been offset by a rise in prices of about 57 per cent.
The trends of manual workers’ earnings, wage rates, retail prices, wages and
salaries from 1957 to 1969 are shown in the diagram above.
Remuneration in commercial, technical and professional careers is normally
by annual salary, often on a scale carrying annual increases, and such careers
generally afford opportunities for promotion to posts with higher remunera¬
tion. Starting salaries may be in the range of £8oo-£ 1,000 (lower for trainees
in their teens and higher for some graduates entering industry). The average
weekly earnings of male administrative, technical and clerical employees in
LABOUR
421
Hours of Work
Holidays with
Pay and Bank
Holidays
October 1969 were found by a Department of Employment and Productivity
survey to be £32-07. The average weekly figure for females was £17-05.
Most of the senior posts in business, the professions and the Civil Service
are in the range of £2,750 to £7,000 a year. The posts with salaries in the
range of £8,000 to £15,000 a year include those of Cabinet Ministers, top-
ranking judicial appointments, the highest positions in government depart¬
ments and the largest municipal authorities, editors of daily newspapers,
some persons outstanding in their professions and in the higher managerial
posts in industry, commerce and banking. A few persons in business draw
still higher salaries, while the earnings of star entertainers and certain other
very successful people exceed £20,000 a year.
Women have the same right of entry as men to nearly all public offices,
administrative posts and professions. They are paid the same salary for
doing the same work in journalism, broadcasting and architecture, and as
Ministers of the Crown, members of Parliament, salaried magistrates and
solicitors. Women in independent professions are not expected to charge
lower fees than men. The principle of equal pay for men and women applies
generally for non-manual work in the public sector, but is still exceptional in
the private sector. The Equal Pay Act 1970 will enforce the principle in all
occupations from the end of 1975.
The average earnings of all salaried employees increased by 123 per cent
between 1955 and 1969.
In October 1969 the number of hours actually worked by manual workers
averaged 46-5 for full-time men and 38-1 for women on full-time work. Agreed
weekly hours are mainly in the range 40 to 42 and are generally worked as
either a five-day or a five-and-a-half-day week according to the industry and
the rule of the particular establishment. Hours actually worked by men are
somewhat longer owing to overtime working.
National legislation limits and defines permissible hours of work for
women and young persons in a number of industries or trades—the maximum
permitted, with limited exceptions, being 48 hours a week and 10 hours a
day (9 hours a day for 6-day-week workers) in premises covered by the
Factories Act (see p. 422) for adult women over 18 and young people between
16 and 18; young people under 16 are limited to 44 hours a week. The
employment of women and young people at night is prohibited in industrial
undertakings, except that in certain continuous process industries young men
over 16 may, subject to certain conditions, be so employed. The Department
of Employment and Productivity can make exemptions from these restrictions
on grounds of public interest. In general the hours of work of adult men are
not restricted by statute.
With a few exceptions, manual workers (including shop assistants) in indus¬
tries covered by agreements or statutory orders are entitled to paid holidays
of at least 12 days or two weeks. Moreover, payment is made for public holi¬
days, which are as follows: in addition to Good Friday and Christmas Day
there are public holidays in England and Wales on Easter Monday, the last
Monday in May or first in June, the last Monday in August or first in Septem¬
ber and the first weekday after Christmas (Boxing Day); and in Scotland on
New Year’s Day, the last Monday in May or first in June and the last Monday
in August or first in September.1 Northern Ireland observes all the English
1 The appointed dates for the spring and autumn public holidays in 1971 are 31st
May and 30th August.
422
‘Fringe’
Benefits
SAFETY
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
holidays and, in addition, has a holiday on St. Patrick’s Day, 17th March,
and on 12th July (commemorating the Battle of the Boyne, 1690); the 'Puesday
after Easter is also a customary holiday for industry and trade. Many agree¬
ments provide that payments should also be made for specially proclaimed
holidays.
In some industries agreements provide for extended holidays related to
length of service, work status, or both.
A variety of additional benefits in monetary form exist in varying degree. It
has been estimated that in 1964 13 million employees were covered by
occupational sick pay schemes, and in 1967 12 million by occupational pension
schemes (additional or complementary to the State schemes, see p. 128). A
smaller number are covered by schemes for redundancy pajnnents above the
statutory minimum (see p. 419). Such ‘fringe’ benefits are rather more usual
among clerical and professional employees receiving a standard salary than
among manual workers with a chance to earn overtime and other additions
to their pay. The former also tend to get longer holidays. Senior members
of firms may use a company car. Some firms provide for profit-sharing.
Employers have a duty at common law to take reasonable care of their
employees and provide a safe system of working, while employees have a
duty of care towards each other. In addition, minimum required standards
of safety in certain kinds of workplaces or work are laid down under a number
of statutes; some of these also deal with health and welfare.
Factories,
Offices, Shops
and Railway
Premises
About 209,000 industrial premises (factories, warehouses, shipyards and
docks) come under the Factories Act 1961 (consolidating earlier legislation),
which is administered by the Department of Employment and Productivity
and enforced by Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Factories, which forms part of
the DEP. About 700,000 premises come under the Offices, Shops and Railway
Premises Act, which is also administered by the DEP; enforcement is shared
by Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Factories and local authorities. Under these
Acts, anyone intending to employ other people in industrial or commercial
premises to which they apply has to notify the enforcing authority of his
intention before he begins to employ people and every fatal accident and every
accident causing more than three days’ incapacity must be reported; under the
Factories Act provision is also made for compulsory notification and for
investigation of certain dangerous occurrences.
The Acts are designed to secure the health, safety and welfare of employed
persons, and a wide range of provisions in the Acts and in regulations,
according to the nature of the premises, deal with such matters as: the
fencing of machinery; precautions against fire, dangerous substances and
special risks; the safe condition of the premises, cleanliness, lighting, tem¬
perature and ventilation; and the employment of women and young persons.
Comparable provision with appropriate variations covers mines and
quarries under the Mines and Quarries Act 1954; two statutes are concerned
with agriculture—the Agriculture (Poisonous Substances) Act 1952 and the
Agriculture (Safety, Health and Welfare Provisions) Act 1956; and specialised
statutes and delegated legislation are concerned with transport—the Railway
Employment (Prevention of Accidents) Act 1900, the Merchant Shipping
Acts, the Road Traffic Acts and the Air Navigation Order and Regulations.
As with the Factories Act these other provisions are, with some exceptions,
enforced through inspectorates—the Mines and Quarries Inspectorate (part
AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH
Soil analysis.
Below left:
Hatchability research on eggs
includes ‘listening in’ to chick
heartbeats.
Studying the culture and diseases
of deciduous fruits and hops.
Fertiliser research using radio¬
isotopes.
AGRICULTURAL EXPORTS
Driverless tractor.
Butyl rubber
inflatable silo.
Tandem disc harrow.
Self-propelled beet
harvester.
Left:
Bloodstock: a three-
week-old foal at the
National Stud.
Combine harvester
with new telescopic
table system.
Tractor with safety cab.
Detachable sprayer on ‘hover’
pallet. The pallet can be used as
a general transporter.
Left:
Friesian bull.
AGRICULTURAL EDUCATION
Winter fodder class at
Seale-Hayne Agricul¬
tural College.
Below right:
Milking demonstration
at Harper Adams
Agricultural College.
Examining beet at
Shropshire Farm
Institute.
Dosing sheep at
Hadlow College of
Agriculture and
Horticulture.
Other Work
Premises
Prevention
Advisory Bodies
Training for
Safety
LABOUR 423
of the Ministry of Technology which is responsible for safety in mines and
quarries), the Agricultural Inspectorate of the agricultural departments, and,
as regards railways, the Railway Employment Inspectorate of the Ministry
of Transport. The Board of Trade is responsible for administering the
Merchant Shipping Acts and for safety in air transport (most of the powers
in respect of air worthiness are delegated to the Air Registration Board, see
p. 351), and the Minister of Transport is responsible for road and rail
transport safety matters.
There are at present no specific statutory safety requirements in hotels,
places of entertainment or educational establishments, except in so far as
they are covered by fire regulations applicable under local authority by-laws
to all large buildings or (in respect of their offices and shops) by the Offices,
Shops and Railway Premises Act. The Department of Employment and
Productivity has no statutory responsibility in regard to safety in workshops
or laboratories in educational establishments, though it keeps in touch with
university authorities and the education departments. Employers, however,
are bound by their common law obligation to provide a safe system of work,
and employers and educational authorities may voluntarily seek the advice and
help of the Factory Inspectorate, which is given freely on request.
The voluntary accident prevention movement is strongly supported by the
Factory Inspectorate. Inspectors enquire into notified accidents and safety
aspects of machine design and specification, circulate expert advice by personal
exhortation, lectures and literature, and encourage the appointment of safety
officers and the formation of works safety committees. The Factory Inspector¬
ate maintains an industrial health and safety centre in London, at which
various types of machinery demonstrating the effectiveness of guards are
displayed, as well as a wide range of protective clothing and equipment. The
DEP also actively encourages the development of voluntary central organisa¬
tion within each industry at national level for the consideration of safety
matters and the formulation of policy an accident prevention.
Organisations in industry are now concerning themselves to an increasing
extent with the promotion of safety at work and the provision of information
and advisory services to their members. They participate also in joint standing
and advisory committees appointed by the Secretary of State. Representatives
of the Trades Union Congress, the Confederation of British Industry, the
nationalised industries and other interests meet on the Industrial Safety
Advisory Council under the chairmanship of the Secretary of State.
Training for safety is an important facet of the accident prevention effort and,
to help in this work, the Department of Employment and Productivity
provides a safety course in its TWI scheme (see p. 418) and the Industrial
Training Boards (see p. 417) include specific provisions for safety training in
their general training recommendations.
The Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents (RoSPA) provides a
variety of safety courses for special needs at its Industrial Safety Training
Centre in Birmingham and elsewhere. Other courses are organised by bodies
such as local accident prevention groups and organisations such as the
Federation of Civil Engineering Contractors. RoSPA also helps the accident
prevention movement by providing publicity and organising conferences; its
corps of Regional Industrial Safety Officers work to promote safety activity
among top-level managers. The British Safey Council also provides publicity
and offers safety training courses.
424
Other Measures
HEALTH AND
WELFARE
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
A substantial amount of research is being done by industry, universities
and other academic bodies, and government research organisations into
problems of guarding machines, ergonomics, safe handling, electrical hazards,
protective personal equipment, construction methods, fires and explosions,
psychological factors and causes of accidents, both generally and in particular
sectors of industry. A register of research into industrial health and safety
matters has been compiled by the DEP to give an indication of the scale and
nature of research being undertaken. Industrial research associations include
amongst their more purely economic research projects the improvement of
working conditions and the reduction of hazards.
The National Coal Board has its own safety organisation—a Standing
Committee on Safety, a chief safety engineer, and safety engineers at divisions,
areas and the largest collieries. It conducts courses of safety training for
workmen and officials and is constantly on the alert for new methods of
reducing risks. Its research programme includes a number of projects with a
direct bearing on safety.
The Minister of Technology has a statutory responsibility for research con¬
cerning the safety and health of coal miners. This responsibility is largely
exercised through its Safety in Mines Research Establishment.
To safeguard the many interests which might be adversely affected by the
use of chemicals in agriculture and food storage, a voluntary scheme is
operated by the Government with the help of an advisory committee and with
the full co-operation of the chemical industry.
Transport operators and ministries concerned with road and air travel give
high priority to safety measures affecting crews and passengers. Every
endeavour is made to counter the higher risks resulting from rising traffic
densities, by improving the design of vehicles, transport plant and equipment,
by traffic regulation and control of standards of maintenance and by training
crews in competency and safety awareness.
Local authorities have power, under the Public Health Acts, to regulate the
provision of suitable sanitary accommodation in houses and at places of work
and to treat workplaces which are dirty or badly ventilated or overcrowded
as nuisances the abatement of which can be enforced. Factories, certain other
industrial premises, offices, shops and railway premises must comply with the
health and welfare requirements of the Factories Act or the Offices, Shops and
Railway Premises Act. These include: the cleanliness of workrooms, adequate
ventilation and suitable temperature and lighting, the avoidance of over¬
crowding and the provision of sanitary accommodation, and the protection
of workers against inhaling harmful dust or fumes; the provision of washing
facilities, lockers or other accommodation for outdoor clothing, drinking
water, first aid and seats. Legislation concerning safety in other types of
work, for example, agriculture, also prescribes appropriate measures.
The laws restricting the employment of children, young persons and women
form an important part of protective legislation. National legislation, besides
forbidding employment of children under 13 years of age, forbids the
employment of children who have not reached the statutory minimum school¬
leaving age (see p. 154) in any industrial undertaking; of women and young
persons underground in mines and in certain other dangerous occupations
(for example, certain processes connected with lead manufacture); and of
women in factories and workshops within four weeks after childbirth. It also
limits and defines the permissible hours of employment for women and young
persons (see p. 421). Local authorities, moreover, have wide powers under the
LABOUR
425
Industrial
Health Services
Other
Amenities
Children and Young Persons Acts 1933-63 as well as the Education Acts
1944-48, to regulate hours and conditions of employment of children under
15 years within their areas within the limits of national legislation.
There are some 1,550 appointed factory doctors and some 760 works
medical officers whose duties include the initial and periodic medical examina¬
tion of all young people entering industry, and certain other medical ex¬
aminations required under the Factories Act for workers in particular
hazardous trades. Legislation is under consideration to provide for the replace¬
ment of the appointed factory doctor service by a more expert medical
advisory service, with wider duties.
These are the main legislative provisions relating to health and welfare at
work, but it is essential to note that employers frequently achieve standards
considerably higher than those prescribed by law. They are helped to do this
by the inspectorates, by government departments and agencies, by employers’
associations and trade unions and by expert voluntary bodies.
A number of employers voluntarily maintain medical services for their
employees over and above the statutory requirements. It is estimated that
there are about 580 factories with doctors providing full-time medical cover
and about 4,500 factories with part-time medical cover. In addition several
thousand nurses are employed in industry.
The big employers, including the State and the boards of nationalised
industries, have naturally taken the lead but a number of smaller factories
also provide medical services and in a few cases have joined together in group
medical services. The Secretary of State is advised on measures to further the
development of industrial health services by the Industrial Health Advisory
Committee which includes members nominated by the Confederation of
British Industry, the Trades Union Congress, the nationalised industries,
the British Medical Association, the Royal College of Nursing and other
organisations closely concerned with the promotion of industrial health.
Occupational hygiene services can give valuable assistance in securing
healthy working conditions in industry. Her Majesty’s Factory Inspectors
give advice on occupational hygiene problems as part of their normal duties
and an industrial hygiene unit, with laboratory facilities, has been set up
within the inspectorate. In addition there are some six centres in Great
Britain (including the TUC’s Institute of Occupational Health) which under¬
take studies of particular problems or health risks and also carry out routine
physical, chemical and biological tests for industry.
Research facilities are provided by government agencies such as the
Medical Research Council; by university faculties of industrial health and
social medicine; and by the research departments of various industries and
large industrial concerns. Field investigations are carried out by the Factory
Inspectorate, which has specialised medical and technical branches.
Other types of amenity vary considerably from one firm to another. The
requirements of a factory, office or shop where the work is light, and where
many employees are women or young persons, are different from those of an
iron "foundry or steelworks, where much of the work is arduous and is under¬
taken by men. Progressive firms are careful to find out what their employees
want, and welfare policy is often decided in consultation with the workers,
through regular consultative machinery or by other means. An increasing
number of firms pay part or all of the cost of recreational facilities. Some have
their own rehabilitation centres or support convalescent homes. The provision
426
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
SAFETY, HEALTH
AND WELFARE
IN NORTHERN
IRELAND
HUMAN
RELATIONS
INDUSTRIAL
RELATIONS
of low-priced meals at the place of employment has become usual in large
undertakings and quite common in smaller ones. Many offices and shops
which are unable to provide canteen facilities for their staff have adopted
luncheon voucher schemes.
The safety, health and welfare of employees in Northern Ireland have been
the subject of legislation which, with some exceptions, is similar to that in
Great Britain and is embodied in the Factories Act (Northern Ireland) 1965
and the Office and Shop Premises Act (Northern Ireland) 1966. Many firms
voluntarily employ safety officers, and an Industrial Safety Group for the area,
supported by representatives of industry, trade unions, insurance companies
and public authorities, makes a valuable contribution in the field of industrial
accident prevention on similar lines to what is done in Great Britain.
Practically all large industrial firms and many small ones now have a personnel
department staffed by one or more specialist officers. While the form of
organisation of personnel departments varies, personnel officers are generally
responsible for advising all levels of management on every aspect of labour
relations. They also have particular duties with regard to recruitment,
selection, education and training, transfer of labour, the application of wage
agreements, the promotion of good communication and consultation and the
supervision of working conditions and employees’ amenities.
Recruitment and promotion policies are matters which each undertaking
decides for itself, although in some industries the decisions may be limited
by collective agreements or by trade practices. Great importance has recently
been attached to selection; and courses for training personnel officers in
modern interviewing techniques, including the use of test procedures, are
now well attended.
The Manpower and Productivity Service of the DEP (see p. 416) is
available to give advice on personnel policies, personnel management tech¬
niques and problems of human relations at the workplace. It also assists the
creation and support of machinery for negotiation and settlement of disputes.
Both official and voluntary organisations are concerned with promoting
better human relationships in industry. The Government has sought to
extend by research the available knowledge of the factors influencing human
relations in industry and human efficiency. Such research is sponsored or
conducted by the Social Science Research Council (see p. 203) and the
Medical Research Council (see p. 198). Voluntary organisations include
bodies which deal with management problems and provide a service to
subscribing firms; professional associations, linking individuals with a com¬
mon interest in particular functions of management; and bodies providing
specialist services, usually on a fee-paying basis.
The structure of labour relations in Britain is established mainly on a voluntary
basis, and the extensive changes currently proposed (see below) are designed
to retain the voluntary principle while modernising the conditions in which it
operates. The system will still rest on the organisation of employers and
workers into employers’ associations and trade unions. These organisations
discuss and negotiate terms and conditions of employment and other matters
affecting the workpeople at their work. In the past the emphasis has been on
detailed industry-wide agreements supplemented as necessary by informal
agreements in firms or factories, but in a major reform of attitudes and
structure emphasis is now being placed on formal agreements at firm and
LABOUR
427
Wages Councils
Employers’
Associations
factory level. In some industries, firms and factories negotiations are con¬
ducted simply by ad hoc meetings of employers’ and employees’ representatives,
which are held when necessary; in others, voluntary joint councils or com¬
mittees have been established on a permanent basis. The scope of the various
joint bodies—from the National Joint Industrial Councils for whole in¬
dustries to the Works Councils and Committees in individual workplaces—
varies widely. Some of them only negotiate. Others only discuss a wide range
of topics. But the scope of the bodies is tending in general to widen and the
distinction between discussion and negotiation to become blurred. Normally
these arrangements for collective bargaining suffice to settle all questions
which are raised, but provision is often made for matters not so settled to be
referred for settlement to independent arbitration; nowadays this provision is
seldom used. Standing arrangements exist for consultation at national level
between the Government, the Confederation of British Industry (CBI) (see
p. 428), the Trades Union Congress (TUC) (see p. 429) and the nationalised
industries through the National Joint Advisory Council, set up in 1939 to
advise the Government on matters in which employers and workers have a
common interest. It meets under the chairmanship of the Secretary of State.
I he Report of the Royal Commission on Trade Unions and Employers’
Associations (Cmnd 3^23) published in June 1968 analysed the industrial
relations system in Britain and made recommendations. In March 1969, the
Commission on Industrial Relations was established, on lines suggested by
the Royal Commission, to form a focus for the improvement of collective
bargaining machinery. Another recommendation of the Royal Commission was
implemented when early in 1969 companies with 5,000 or more employees
were invited to register with the Manpower and Productivity Service of the
DEP their procedure agreements, that is, all agreements about the machinery
for the determination of the terms and conditions of employment, the settle¬
ment of grievances and disputes and other matters which are generally the
subject of consultation between management and unions.
The Government intend to introduce legislation which will provide a new
legal framework within which the industrial relations system will operate.
In a small and decreasing number of industries and trades where the organisa¬
tion of employers or employees or both is not strong enough to provide a
basis for successful voluntary arrangements, there are statutory wage-regula¬
ting bodies, known as Wages Councils. These are composed of equal numbers
of representatives of employers and workers in the respective sectors of
industry, with additional independent members. Wages Councils may submit
proposals for fixing minimum remuneration and holidays with pay to the
Secretary of State who must then make orders giving statutory force to such
proposals, subject only to his right to return them as a whole for further
consideration. The DEP’s Wages Inspectorate helps employers and workers
to interpret the provisions of wage regulation orders and sees that they are
complied with.
Agricultural Wages Boards (there are separate Boards for England and
Wales and for Scotland) perform similar functions in relation to employment
in agriculture.
Many employers in Great Britain are members of employers’ organisations
wholly or partly concerned with labour questions. The primary aims of such
organisations are to help to establish suitable terms and conditions of em¬
ployment, including a sound wage structure and proper standards of safetv,
428
The Confederation
of British
Industry
Trade Unions
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
health and welfare; to promote good relations with employees and the
efficient use of manpower; and to provide means of settling any disputes
which may arise. Different employers’ organisations vary in the emphasis
which they put upon these different aims and in the means by which they try
to achieve them. Although the negotiation of wages and working conditions
and the settlement of disputes remain their essential function, the majority
of the organisations provide help and advice on many aspects of industrial
relations, with the aim of developing positive employment policies and
promoting productivity.
There is diversity of structure as well as function. Generally, however,
employers’ organisations are organised on an industry basis rather than a
product basis. A few are purely local in character or deal with a section of
an industry; others are national in scope and are concerned with the whole
of a particular industry. In some of the chief industries there are local or
regional organisations combined into national federations, while in others,
within which different firms are engaged on making different principal
products, there is a complex structure with national and regional federations
for these different sections of the industry as well as for the industry as a
whole. Although there are some 1,400 employers’ organisations dealing with
labour matters, most of these are federated to national organisations. There
are about 85 of these, many of which are in membership of the CBI and are
the ones that negotiate the important national collective agreements with
trade unions.
The final authority of a local or small national organisation may be a meeting
where all member firms are directly represented; but in larger organisations
some form of indirect representation is necessary, either through local
organisations or through regions or sections into which these are grouped.
The representatives thus chosen, together with a number of office holders,
form a general council or central committee, which meets perhaps once a
quarter, mainly to make major policy decisions, to elect committees and to
ratify their work. A paid staff under a director or secretary carries out the
organisation’s day-to-day work. There is usually a small working group,
consisting of senior officials and committee chairmen, which meets to deal
with urgent questions and co-ordinate the work of committees.
The central body of employers is the CBI, which deals with all matters (not
only labour relations) affecting the interests of organised employers and
represents them nationally to the Government and the public and also
internationally, for instance, in the International Labour Organisation. The
majority of national employers’ organisations, most nationalised industries
and a large number of individual companies are affiliated to the CBI. Its
representatives sit on various government advisory committees, on other
statutory bodies and on voluntary bodies concerned with labour matters.
In nearly all industries and occupations some workers—and in some industries
nearly all workers—are organised into trade unions. These have grown up
gradually and independently over a great many years and, consequently, their
form and organisation vary considerably as do their traditions and attitudes,
for example, their degree of concern with political movements. Trade unions
started more than two hundred years ago among the skilled craftsmen and
spread later to the general labouring and unskilled classes. More recently trade
unionism has increased among clerical, supervisory, technical and adminis¬
trative workers. A number of associations of professional workers, formed
primarily for the preservation and improvement of professional standards,
LABOUR
Trades Union
Congress
429
have also come to exercise many of the functions of trade unions, including
negotiations on salary and fee scales, and are legally trade unions. The
qualification for membership of some unions is occupational (for instance,
they may recruit clerks or fitters wherever employed), while in others the
qualification is industrial (that is, they seek to recruit all persons in an industry,
whatever their occupation). In a number of unions recruitment is based on a
combination of these principles. A few large unions recruit members in a
number of different occupations and industries.
At the end of 1968 the total membership of British trade unions was about
10 million. There were 534 unions, but nearly 70 per cent of all trade unionists
were in the 19 largest unions, while more than half were in the nine unions
with a membership of over 250,000. The number of trade unionists has
increased during the last decade but the number of unions has gone down
owing to amalgamations.
The basic unit of organisation in most British trade unions is the local
branch (sometimes called a lodge). Every member of the union belongs to a
branch. He may attend its meetings, make suggestions about terms and con¬
ditions of employment, discuss the work of the union, and take part in the
election of the union’s officers. The branch takes action on certain matters
considered to be entirely, or mainly, of local interest and forwards its views on
wider issues for action by the union’s national or regional bodies. The branch
draws its members from the locality and in only a few unions is it based on
the place of work. Many unions have shop stewards or other representatives
at the place of work to undertake organisation there. Where two or more
unions have members in the same workplace, shop stewards committees may
be formed to discuss matters of common concern.
In most large unions the central organisation is along the following lines:
elected officials, including a general secretary assisted by clerical and specialist
staff, are in charge of the work of the head office and are responsible to an
elected national executive council or committee which may be part-time or
full-time, and which is responsible to annual or biennial conferences of
delegates from the branches. Executive committees or councils play an
important part in the government of the unions; between conferences they
are the highest authorities and carry out policy decisions made by delegates.
Most unions also have some regional, district or area organisation.
Trade unions may affiliate to one or more federations or confederations
whose main purpose in most cases is to represent all or most of the trade
unions in an industry in negotiations with employers. The scope and authority
of these federations and confederations vary greatly.
In Britain the national centre of the trade union movement is the TUC, which
celebrated its centenary in June 1968. The TUC’s objects are to promote
the interests of its affiliated organisations and to improve the economic and
social conditions of the workers. Its membership comprises 160 organisations,
some of which are themselves federations of smaller organisations. Together
they represent about 9-4 million workpeople. The TUC deals with all general
questions which concern trade unions both nationally and internationally and
gives assistance on questions relating to particular trades or industries at the
request of the trade union concerned.
The congress of delegates, which constitutes the TUC proper, meets for a
week every year to discuss matters of general interest to trade unionists and
to employees generally. It elects annually a General Council which represents
it during the remaining 51 weeks of the year. This is responsible for carrying
430
Scottish Trades
Union Congress
State Provision
for Conciliation,
Arbitration and
Investigation
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
out congress decisions, for watching economic and social developments, for
providing educational and advisory services to unions, and for presenting to
the Government the trade union viewpoint on economic, social and industrial
issues. It is also empowered to mediate in inter-union disputes in certain
circumstances and its activities in this sphere were enlarged following a special
congress in June 1969 and subsequent agreement with the Government. The
General Council undertook to use its authority to deal with unauthorised and
unconstitutional stoppages of work, as well as the inter-union and official
disputes with which it had dealt previously.
The TUC is a non-political body but under the Trade Union Act 1913
individual trade unions can, by a ballot vote of members, decide to set up a
political fund, financed by a separate levy, which any member can refuse to
pay without loss of his normal union rights and benefits. About 100 separate
trade union organisations, including most of the largest trade unions, have
such a fund and, in most cases, it is used to support the Labour Party.
Both the TUC and many unions conduct extensive educational services for
members, mainly concerned with industrial subjects, trade unionism and
industrial relations principles and practice.
Branches of various trade unions in a locality generally affiliate to a local
trades council, which acts as a forum for the discussion of matters of common
interest and as a local agent of the TUC, by which it is registered each year.
There are just over 500 trades councils in England and Wales alone, grouped
together in 22 federations.
Affiliation to the TUC is open to all trade unions anywhere in the United
Kingdom, but Scottish trade unionists have their own national centre, the
Scottish Trades Union Congress, similar within its objects to the TUC. The
Scottish TUC, to which trade unions may affiliate in respect of their member¬
ship in Scotland (a number of unions are affiliated to both bodies), also accepts
affiliation from trades councils and has an affiliated membership of about
840,000. It holds an annual congress and has consultations with the Govern¬
ment on issues affecting Scottish trade unionists.
Matters which prove difficult to settle by negotiation are sometimes referred
by agreement to independent conciliators or arbitrators, and one way in which
the parties can find such persons is by invoking the help of the Secretary of
State. Under authority derived from the Conciliation Act 1896, and the
Industrial Courts Act 1919, the Secretary of State has certain powers to assist
industry to settle disputes which it is not found possible to resolve through an
industry’s own machinery and procedure. These powers are all intended to
supplement and not to supersede the industry’s own machinery. There is no
legal obligation on the parties to a dispute to notify the dispute to the Secretary
of State nor to place the question before a conciliator.
The Department of Employment and Productivity assists with conciliation
in industry through its Industrial Relations Division and the field staff of the
Manpower and Productivity Service, who keep in touch with the course of
relations between employers and workers at national, district and, in some
cases, factory level and assist them, if requested, to settle their problems by
joint discussion and negotiation. Conciliators have no legal powers.
Disputes which cannot be settled in this way may, at the request of both
parties, be referred to voluntary arbitration, either by a single arbitrator, or
an ad hoc Board of Arbitration, or by the Industrial Court, a permanent
tribunal established under the Industrial Courts i\ct. The court normally
Industrial
Disputes
Labour
Relations of
Public
Authorities
Central and Local
Government
LABOUR 431
consists of three members—the president, one member experienced in
representing employers and one in representing workpeople.
Like collective agreements, arbitration awards are not in themselves en¬
forceable at law, but, under the Terms and Conditions of Employment Act
1959, reports that a particular employer is not observing the recognised terms
or conditions of employment in his trade or industry may be made to the
Secretary of State by organisations which are parties to the relevant agreement
or award. If the matter is not otherwise settled, the Secretary of State must
refer it to the Industrial Court which, after hearing the case, may issue an
award requiring the employer to observe the recognised terms or conditions.
Such an award becomes an implied term of the contract of employment of
individual employees.
The Secretary of State is also empowered to appoint a Court of Inquiry or
Committee of Investigation into a dispute, whether existing or apprehended.
These procedures are primarily means of informing public opinion of the
facts of a dispute (the report of a Court of Inquiry has to be laid before
Parliament). Although the recommendations contained in the reports of such
bodies are not binding on the parties, they often provide the basis for further
negotiations leading to a settlement.
Over the past 10 years the number of working days lost each year through
stoppages of work arising from industrial disputes has been on an average
about 31 million which, taking the working population as a whole, works out
at approximately one hour per worker per year. The time lost through
stoppages of work due to industrial dispute is very much less than that lost
on account of sickness, accidents and absenteeism and Britain’s record over
the past ten years compares well with that of most other industrial countries.
Government, industry and trade unions have expressed concern both at
the number of strikes which take place without the backing of trade union
headquarters and without exhausting the agreed or customary procedures in
the industry or workplace, and at the concentration of a high proportion of
these strikes in a limited number of important industries. While the ultimate
economic impact of the strikes themselves is difficult to assess, they show that
there is still room for improvement in the industrial relations system and the
spirit in which it is operated.
While labour relations in government service and in the nationalised indus¬
tries are, in general, organised on the same principle as in private industry,
there are some special features.
Non-industrial employees in central government service, where salaries and
conditions of service are dealt with by the Civil Service Department (see p.
48), are permitted and encouraged to join the appropriate Civil Service staff
associations (trade unions) and there is a highly developed system of negotia¬
tion and joint consultation by means of the National and Departmental
Whitley Councils (see p. 65). If there is failure to reach agreement by
negotiation a department or association may, subject to certain limitations,
report the dispute to the Secretary of State for reference to the Civil Service
Arbitration Tribunal, an independent body appointed by the Secretary of
State by powers under the Industrial Courts Act 1919. Government indus¬
trial employees are similarly encouraged to belong to trade unions and
machinery exists for joint consultation. There are four Trades Joint Councils
on which representatives of the Government and the trade unions sit to
432
Nationalised
Industries
Northern
Ireland
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
consider pay and conditions of employment affecting individual grades and
certain other limited matters. A Joint Co-ordinating Committee, on which the
Government and Trades Joint Councils are represented, deals with national
pay negotiations, conditions of service and other matters of general applica¬
tion. In the main employing departments there are departmental Joint Councils
for the discussion of domestic matters. Disputes on wages or conditions of
employment that cannot be resolved by the existing machinery can be referred
to the Industrial Court for arbitration.
In local government service there are separate National Joint Councils for
the main grades of employees (such as manual, clerical and technical em¬
ployees) which deal with wages and conditions of service as well as other
matters. There are corresponding regional and district councils.
In the nationalised industries, the main corporations, though not subject to
detailed governmental control, have a statutory duty to establish satisfactory
arrangements for collective bargaining in their industries and for joint con¬
sultation with their employees; but in carrying out these duties they are free to
choose suitable arrangements. The main difference from private industry is
that the corporations are not usually members of employers’ associations
(although the majority are ‘industrial associates’ of the CBI). In some
industries they are sole or main employers, but even where part of the industry
is in private hands, as for example in road transport, the corporations are
separately and directly represented on wage-negotiating bodies.
Wages and conditions of service in the nationalised industries are generally
settled by negotiation between representatives of managements and trade
unions at the national level; in most cases there are also regional and local
bodies, similarly representative, to deal with, local implications. Most of the
industries use the facilities for arbitration offered to industry generally by the
Department of Employment and Productivity but coalmining and rail trans¬
port have their own special arrangements. Consultations at all levels, includ¬
ing the workplace level, have been arranged in all the nationalised industries
according to the traditions and needs of each industry.
Some of the nationalised industries have felt that joint consultation was
best carried out by their negotiating bodies; others have established separate
and specially constituted joint committees at all levels.
The system of labour relations in Northern Ireland is based on the same
principles as that of Great Britain and the Minister of Plealth and Social
Services has powers and duties similar to those of the Secretary of State in
Great Britain. Nearly 90 per cent of trade unionists in Northern Ireland are
members of trade unions with headquarters in Great Britain.
17 TELEVISION
AND RADIO
BROADCASTING
Broadcasting
Authorities
Broadcasting by television and radio in Britain is regulated by the Minister of
Posts and Telecommunications under the Wireless Telegraphy Acts 1949-
1967, which prohibit the sending or receiving of wireless communications,
except under licence.
Radio broadcasting services for Britain and abroad are provided by the
British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC), which was established by Royal
Charter in 1927.1 Television services are provided both by the BBC and by
the Independent Television Authority (ITA), which was established by the
Television Act 1954 as a supervisory body to control the operation of com¬
mercial television in Britain. The BBC operates nationally two television
and four radio services. The ITA provides one television service.
Users of television and radio sets must obtain an annual receiving licence,
which can be bought from most post offices. There were over 18-4 million
receiving licences current in Britain in June 1970 of which more than 16
million were for television and radio combined and nearly 2-3 million (includ¬
ing a million for sets fitted in cars) for radio only. The cost of receiving
licences is £6 for television and radio combined (^n for sound and colour
television), and £1-25 for radio alone. From April 1971 ‘radio only’ licences
will be abolished, and a television broadcast receiving licence introduced
costing ^6-50 (£11-50 for colour).
The number of hours of television broadcasting is regulated by the
Minister and an arrangement has been approved which permits any one
service a maximum of 53^ hours a week (32 hours a week for BBC 2), but
with additional hours for outside broadcasts, religious and educational
programmes and broadcasts in the Welsh language. Similar regulations
control the number of hours of radio broadcasting.
Both the BBC and the ITA are constitutionally required to provide a ‘public
service’ with the purpose of disseminating information, education and
entertainment. The constitution and finances of the BBC are governed by
the Royal Charter of 1964 and by the Licence and Agreement of 1969, and
those of the ITA by the Television Act 1964 and its 1969 Licence.
The BBC and the ITA are independent authorities in the day-to-day
operations of broadcasting, including programmes and administration. The
Government, however, retains ultimate control, and the Minister of Posts and
Telecommunications, as the responsible minister, is answerable to Parliament
on broad questions of policy and may issue directions to the BBC and the
ITA on a number of technical and other subjects. Both organisations are
expected to show balance and due impartiality in their general presentation of
1 In July 1970 the Government announced its intention to permit broadcasting by
commercial radio stations (see p. 437).
434
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The British
Broadcasting
Corporation
The Independent
Television
Authority
programmes—particularly where matters of public policy or controversial
subjects are concerned—and in this connection the Minister has powers to
prohibit the broadcasting of any particular item or class of item, or to revoke
the licences of the BBC or ITA at any time. These powers, however, are
treated as major reserve powers and, in fact, no formal veto has ever been
placed on the broadcasting of a particular item. Both the BBC and the ITA
are required to prepare annual reports and accounts which are presented to
Parliament.
The Corporation consists of 12 governors (including a chairman, a vice-
chairman and separate national governors for Scotland, Wales and Northern
Ireland), each appointed for a period of not more than five years by the
Queen on the advice of the Government. The governors are constitutionally
responsible for the conduct of the whole broadcasting operation, including
the production and presentation of the programmes on television and radio,
and the provision and working of the necessary installations and equipment.
A number of councils advise them on such matters as religious broadcasting,
music, agriculture, school broadcasting, further education, programmes for
immigrants, science and engineering and charitable appeals. The governors
appoint the chief executive officer of the BBC—the Director General—with
whom they discuss all major matters of policy and finance. He is chairman
of the Corporation’s board of management, which also includes the managing
directors for television, radio and external broadcasting, the directors of
programmes for television and radio, the directors of personnel, finance,
public affairs, and engineering, and the editor, news and current affairs.
The National Broadcasting Councils for Scotland and Wales control the
policy and content of television and radio programmes intended primarily
for reception in their respective countries. Local radio councils, representa¬
tive of the local community, are appointed by the Minister of Posts and
Telecommunications (in consultation with the BBC) to help in the develop¬
ment and operation of local radio stations.
The services of the BBC are financed from: an annual grant voted by
Parliament for the domestic services, which is the income from the sale of
broadcast receiving licences less certain deductions for collection and other
expenses; an annual grant-in-aid voted by Parliament for the external
services; and profits from BBC publications, mainly the Radio Times, which
has a weekly sale of about 4 million copies and attracts a large advertising
revenue; and income from BBC Radio and Television Enterprises. The net
revenue from the sale of licences for the year ended March 1970 amounted
to ^94-2 million and the grant for the external services was ^11-5 million.
The cost of providing the local radio services is met by the BBC out of
licence revenue, although local authorities are encouraged to contribute.
The Independent Television Authority consists of a chairman, a deputy
chairman and, at present, nine other members (three of whom have responsi¬
bility for Scotland, Wales and Monmouthshire, and Northern Ireland
severally) whose appointment is in the hands of the Minister of Posts and
Telecommunications. The ITA owns and operates the transmitting stations,
but the production studios and equipment are owned, and the actual pro¬
grammes are provided on a regional basis by, programme companies appointed
by the ITA.
The ITA is advised by a General Advisory Council and by committees
on educational broadcasting, religious broadcasting, charitable appeals and
advertising. A specialist panel advises on medical and allied advertisements.
TELEVISION AND RADIO BROADCASTING
435
The Programme
Companies
Control by
the IT A
Domestic
Television
and Radio
The chief executive officer of the ITA is the Director General. There are
also two deputy directors general, and a headquarters and regional office staff
covering all technical and administrative services. Regional officers act as
representatives of the ITA to the programme companies.
Fifteen programme companies hold six-year contracts to provide television
programmes in the 14 independent television regions of Britain (two com¬
panies share the contract for London, one providing programmes during
the week and the other at the weekend). The companies are financed from
revenue derived from commercial advertisements which are inserted into
and between programmes. The financial resources, advertising revenue,
and programme production of the companies vary considerably, depending
largely on the size of population in their areas. (There are 4-2 million homes
receiving independent television in London as against only 32,000 in the
Channel Islands.)
With the guidance and approval of the ITA, each company plans the
content of the programmes to be broadcast in its area. These consist partly
of material produced by the company itself, partly of that produced by the
other programme companies, and partly of that produced elsewhere, for
example, by the major film companies. The five largest companies (Granada,
Thames, Yorkshire, London Weekend and ATV Network Ltd.) produce a
larger proportion of their own programmes and provide more programmes
for broadcast elsewhere in the national network than do the smaller ones.
A common news service is provided by Independent Television News
Limited, a non-profit-making company in which all the programme com¬
panies are shareholders. The negotiations concerning the supply, exchange
and purchase of programmes and their co-ordinated transmission through
the independent television network take place largely on the Network
Planning Committee which consists of representatives of all the programme
companies and of the ITA.
When a company on the basis of negotiations with the other companies has
decided on a programme schedule for its area, it is required to submit this
to the ITA for approval.
The authority has wide-ranging powers to control and regulate the content
and quality of programmes, for example, it ensures that a ‘proper balance’ of
views is expressed and has drawn up a code on violence stating that special
precautions are to be taken when children are likely to be viewing. There
are also safeguards in the Television Act 1964 to prevent newspaper share¬
holdings in a programme company leading to results contrary to the public
interest. However, the ITA believes that newspapers bring valuable qualities
to the development of television and is not opposed to investment by
them.
The ITA receives no payments from licence revenue; the finance for its
operations is drawn from annual rental payments made to it by the programme
companies amounting to about £7 million in the year ended March 1970.
The programme companies also pay to the ITA for transfer to the Exchequer
a further sum (the levy) related to their advertising revenue; in 1970 this
amounted to some £23 million.
Television viewing has become by far the most popular recreational activity
in Britain. Most families now have television sets which they watch on
average over 4 hours a day. In the last decade there have been major advances
in the technical quality and diversity of the programmes. The introduction
of a second BBC television channel in 1964 both increased the choice of
436
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
BBC Television
Independent
Television
programmes available and provided television pictures of a clearer definition
than had previously been possible. The transmission of colour programmes,
v/hich began in 1967 on this new channel and has since been extended to the j
other two channels, further increased the scope of television. Some 80 per
cent of programmes transmitted on the three services during peak viewing
hours are in colour.
Radio attracts its largest audiences during the day-time when television is
not on the air. The musical interests of many young people have been
catered for by the introduction in 1967 of a fourth national radio channel
providing continuous ‘pop’ music, while local radio stations began in the
same year to provide programmes for all sections of the community with
emphasis on news, sport and local information.
In 1936 the BBC launched the world’s first regular public service of high
definition television. It now provides two services: BBC 1, which is trans¬
mitted on both 405 lines on very high frequency (VHP) and on 625 lines on
ultra high frequency (UHF); and BBC 2, which is transmitted only on
625 lines. Practically all British families live within range of BBC 1 trans- j
mitters. Three-quarters of the population are within range of BBC 2 transmit¬
ters, and some 25 million people are already equipped with sets and aerials
capable of receiving UHF transmissions.
The BBC started the first regular colour television service in Europe in
1967, on BBC 2. In November 1969 BBC 1 went into full colour. By June
1970 some 350,000 colour television sets were in use. BBC colour television
productions cover the whole range of television output: drama, documentary
programmes, feature programmes, films, sport and other outside broadcasts,
comedy and other light entertainment, children’s programmes, music, schools
broadcasts, educational programmes for adults, and religious programmes.
Through co-ordinated planning of programmes on its two television
services, the BBC is able to cater simultaneously for people of differing
interests. BBC 1 presents a high proportion of family entertainment pro¬
grammes and other programmes with a wide appeal. This allows BBC 2 to be
more experimental, to place greater emphasis on serious cultural and docu¬
mentary programmes, and to cater more for minority tastes.
All BBC 2 programmes and the majority of those on BBC 1 are broadcast
nationally. At certain times of day, programmes of regional news and interest
for different parts of the country are inserted into the BBC 1 service. An ex¬
tension and reorganisation of regional television production has been carried
out, based on proposals outlined in 1969 in the BBC plan Broadcasting in
the Seventies (see Bibliography p. 488). In the course of a year, the BBC
television service broadcasts on the national network for some 6,000 hours.
Some 16,000 of its programmes are exported annually to 88 overseas coun¬
tries, including those in Eastern Europe.
The first regular independent television (ITV) service was inaugurated in
1955 by a programme transmission from the ITA London station at Croydon.
Programmes are transmitted on 405 lines on VHF and are within the range
of almost all the population. In 1969 duplicate programmes in colour were
introduced on 625 lines on UHF. By mid-1970 over 60 per cent of the
population were within range of ITV colour transmissions.
The main items broadcast in an average week by the independent television
companies are entertainment programmes, plays and serials, discussions and
documentaries, sport, films, and children’s, religious and educational pro¬
grammes. More than one-third of viewing time is filled with ‘serious’ pro-
TELEVISION AND RADIO BROADCASTING
437
BBC Radio
Commercial Radio
BBC External
Services
grammes. There are about three short advertising intervals an hour, in and
between programmes.
The first regular radio broadcasts by the BBC began in 1927. BBC Radio
provides listeners with four alternative channels. Following changes intro¬
duced in 1970, each channel has a distinct character of its own. Radio 1,
broadcasting over 13 hours a day, provides a programme of ‘pop’ music,
while Radio 2, broadcasting over 21 hours a day, provides light music as
well as being the principal channel for the coverage of sport. Radio 3, broad¬
casting over 16 hours a day, provides continuous, mainly classical music
(much of which is in stereo) and in the evening offers, in addition, works of
artistic and intellectual interest. Radio 4, broadcasting 17 hours a day, is
the main speech programme, providing the principal news and information
service of the BBC. In addition a wide range of drama, talks and entertainment
programmes is presented as well as broadcasts to schools.
Local radio was started by the BBC as an experiment in eight towns in
1967 and has since been extended to cover 20 towns. Local stations transmit
programmes of particular interest to the community which they serve in
addition to their output from the BBC networks.
In July 1970 the Government announced its intention of permitting com¬
mercial radio stations under the general supervision of an independent
broadcasting authority. The Minister of Posts and Telecommunications is
consulting with interested parties in order to determine the future structure
of commercial radio.
The BBC broadcasts to most countries overseas. The main objectives of BBC
external broadcasts are to give unbiased news, to reflect British opinion and
to project British life and culture. The BBC broadcasts in 40 languages
(including English) for a total of over 700 hours a week. News bulletins (of
which there are more than 1,000 a week), current affairs programmes,
political commentaries and topical magazine programmes form the main
part of the output. A full service of sports commentaries and results, all
kinds of music, drama and a wide range of general entertainment program¬
mes are also included.
The languages in which the External Services broadcast and the length of
time each language is on the air are prescribed by the Government. Apart
from this the BBC has full responsibility for the broadcasting operations and is
completely independent in determining the content of news and other
programmes.
The BBC World Service broadcasts for 24 hours a day in English and is
supplemented at peak morning and evening listening times by two additional
series of programmes designed to be of special interest to Africa and Europe.
The foreign language broadcast services are divided into areas, namely,
the African, Arabic, Eastern, Far Eastern, Latin American, French (to
Europe and Africa), Central European, South European, German and East
European Services. Broadcasts range from 70 hours a week in Arabic, 33
hours in German and 30 hours in Russian to half an hour in Nepali. The
BBC’s English by Radio and Television Service is the most extensive lan¬
guage teaching laboratory in the world. Some 230 radio programmes of
English lessons are broadcast weekly with explanations in 40 other languages,
and recorded lessons are supplied to some 250 stations in 69 countries.
English by Television programmes, also produced for teaching purposes,
are shown in more than 60 countries.
438
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Transmitting
Stations and
Studios
BBC
ITA
Advertising
BBC news bulletins and other programmes are rebroadcast by the domestic
radio services of many countries. Rebroadcasting takes the form of direct
relays from BBC transmissions and the use of programme material supplied
in recorded form through the BBC tape and disc transcription service.
There are about 160 rebroadcasts daily of World Service news bulletins in
some 40 countries. The Transcription Service offers programmes to more than
100 countries.
Another part of the external services is the Monitoring Service which
listens to and reports on foreign broadcasts supplying a daily flow of signi¬
ficant news and comment from overseas to the BBC, the Press, and govern¬
ment departments.
Programme links, both permanent and temporary, are generally rented by
the BBC from the Post Office, although some are provided by the BBC with
Post Office agreement. The operation and maintenance of the many transmit¬
ting stations from which its various programmes are sent out are, however,
solely a BBC responsibility.
For its domestic radio programmes, the BBC uses 151 studios, and for its
external services 47 (all in London). In addition, there are 40 semi-automatic
studios which can be operated by programme officials without engineering
staff. BBC television productions come from main studios at the Television
Centre in west London and other studios in various parts of London, and
from fully equipped regional studios at Belfast, Birmingham, Bristol, Cardiff,
Glasgow and Manchester. Further provision of studios in the regions is
being made as part of the restructuring of regional broadcasting. Outside
broadcasting is covered by a number of mobile units.
The ITA now transmits programmes from 45 VHF and 12 UHF stations
throughout Britain, programme links being provided by the Post Office.
Independent television programmes are produced at studio centres in Aber¬
deen, Belfast, Birmingham, Bristol, Cardiff, Carlisle, Dover, Glasgow, Leeds,
London, Manchester, Newcastle, Norwich, Plymouth, St. Plelier, and
Southampton. The establishment of these studios is the direct result of the
ITA’s policy of encouraging the development of regional television, and the
programmes are designed for either local or national broadcasting. A number
of new studios have also been built for colour television.
The BBC does not give publicity to any individual firm or organised interest
except when it is necessary to provide effective and informative programmes.
Under the terms of the Charter it must not broadcast sponsored programmes
or, without the consent of the Minister of Posts and Telecommunications,
broadcast any matter for payment.
Advertisements are broadcast on independent television subject to the
relevant provisions in the Television Act, in particular that there should be
no sponsoring of programmes by advertisers, that all advertisements should
be clearly distinguishable as such and recognisably separate from the pro¬
gramme, and the amount of time given to advertising should not be so great
as to detract from the value of the programmes as a medium of information,
education and entertainment. In any one hour of broadcasting the amount of
advertising time is normally limited to 7 minutes. Averaged over the day’s
programmes it must not exceed 6 minutes per hour. The ITA has drawn
up a code governing standards and practice in advertising giving guidance
about the types and methods of advertisement that may not be used. Certain
TELEVISION AND RADIO BROADCASTING
Political
Broadcasting
Technical
Developments
Inter-continental
Television
International
Relations
439
types of advertising are prohibited, notably that of cigarettes (under a govern¬
ment ruling of 1965) and for betting. Advertisements may not be inserted in
certain types of programmes, for example, in broadcasts to schools. The cost
of inserting advertisements in the ITV service is borne by the advertisers,
who pay the programme companies for advertising time.
Broadcasts on political issues include a daily factual and impartial account of
proceedings in Parliament, transmitted on BBC’s Radio 4 when Parliament
is in session, and there is frequent coverage of political subjects in news
bulletins and current affairs programmes on both radio and television.
Ministerial and party political broadcasts are also transmitted periodically
under rules agreed between the major political parties, the BBC and the ITA.
The Minister of Posts and Telecommunications is advised on the technical
aspects of television and VHF sound broadcasting by the Television Advisory
Committee, which consists of an independent chairman, the Director General
of the BBC, the Director General of the ITA, representatives from the radio
industry, independent members, and representatives of interested government
departments.
Research into technical problems is carried out by the scientific and
engineering staffs of the BBC, the ITA, the Post Office, the Ministry of Posts
and Telecommunications, and the radio industry. Recent developments by the
BBC include the electronic conversion of monochrome and colour television
pictures between the European and the American systems; the reproduction
of television pictures in slow motion; and the development of a sound-and-
vision system, which enables the television sound and picture to be carried
over a single 625-line vision circuit, and thus eliminates the operational
complexity and expense of a separate circuit for the sound. The ITA has
carried out research into unattended transmitter networks and has based its
new UHF network entirely on unmanned transmitters.
Inter-continental television relays by means of communication satellites began
in 1962 when the first live programme exchanges between the United States
and Europe were made via Telstar, and have increased in range and scale as
synchronous satellites, which are stationary relative to the earth and thus
permit two-way transmissions, have been commissioned.
Direct links with other continents were achieved in 1964: between Europe
and Japan, and between Britain and Australia. In 1967 the first wo rid-wide
television programme, containing live sequences from several countries in
Europe and Africa, the United States, Canada, Mexico, Australia and Japan,
was broadcast.
The BBC and the ITA (together with the Independent Television Companies
Association) are active members of the European Broadcasting Union (EBU),
which was established to advance international broadcasting projects. The
union now has 33 full members among the broadcasting organisations in
Western Europe and 55 associate members (mostly from outside Europe,
including the United States and many of the nations of the Commonwealth).
It manages Eurovision; is responsible for the technical and administrative
arrangements for co-ordinating the exchange of programmes over that
network and for intercontinental satellite links; and it maintains a technical
monitoring station, where frequency measurements and other observations
on broadcasting stations are carried out.
p
440
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The BBC is a member of the Commonwealth Broadcasting Conference.
Each national organisation extends to the others facilities, for instance, in
the use of studios, recording channels, and programme contributions. The
BBC, in addition, provides a large amount of technical aid, particularly in
training the staff of other broadcasting organisations throughout the world,
and members of the BBC’s staff are seconded for service overseas.
The BBC, Reuters, the Australian Broadcasting Commission, the Canadian
Broadcasting Corporation and the New Zealand Broadcasting Corporation
are joint partners in Visnews which supplies a service of world news film to
more than 140 television organisations in over 80 countries and is the most
widely used newsfilm agency in the world. The International Television
Federation (Intertel), whose members are broadcasting organisations from
Canada, Australia, the United States and the BBC, produces high-quality
information programmes which are exchanged overseas. United Press Inter¬
national, a television newsfilm agency, and Independent Television News
jointly provide an international service to television organisations via the
Eurovision network and by satellite.
The Government has recently established the Centre for Educational
Development Overseas (CEDO, see p. 166), which includes in its activities
training in educational television for members of broadcasting organisations
overseas. The centre receives an annual grant from the Government and the
BBC provides some technical and other facilities. Training in television
work is also provided for overseas trainees at the Thomson Centre, in Glas¬
gow, run by the Thomson Foundation, a charitable trust. The Ministry of
Overseas Development spends about .£140,000 annually on radio and
television training for overseas students in Britain.
The BBC and the ITA participate in the work of the International Tele¬
communication Union (ITU)—the United Nations specialised agency
responsible for the regulation and control of all international telecommuni¬
cation services (including radio and television), for the allocation and regis¬
tration of all radio frequencies and, through its international consultative
committees, for the promotion and co-ordination of the international study of
technical problems in broadcasting. The BBC is also represented on the
United Kingdom Committee of the International Special Committee on
Radio Interference (CISPR).
18 THE PRESS
Ownership
The British press caters for all political views, different levels of education
and a wide range of interests. It is not subject to State control or censorship.
A very large number of newspapers per person are sold in Britain every day,
and although there are relatively few national newspapers, some of them have
circulations comparable with the greatest in any other part of the world. Ten
of the national newspapers (five dailies and five Sundays) and one London
evening newspaper have circulations in the millions.
The high consumption of newspapers in Britain is partly due to the fact
that some people buy more than one newspaper each day, and partly to the
concentration of the population in a relatively small area and the highly
developed system of distribution, which means that the national newspapers
are available almost everywhere on the day of publication.
Britain imports just over half its newsprint requirements, about i| million
tons annually, while the rest is made from imported raw materials. The average
size of national morning newspapers varies between 13 and 26 pages, and that
of the Sunday newspapers between 27 and 38. The price of the national
mornings ranges from £0-02^ to £0-04 and that of the national Sunday
newspapers from ^0*03! to ^0-06. Separate sections or pages on finance,
business or industry are common, and some papers carry special supple¬
ments on particular subjects, with related advertising. The quality Sunday
newspapers have separate sections for literature and the arts, business and
industry, as well as colour magazine supplements. A colour magazine sup¬
plement is published by a morning newspaper once a week.
According to The Newspaper Press Directory1 134 daily and Sunday news¬
papers and 1,171 weekly newspapers are published in Britain. These figures
include certain specialised papers, the circulations of which are limited not
by region, but by interest; for instance, business newspapers, sporting news¬
papers, newspapers in foreign languages for groups of nationals of other lands
resident in Britain and religious newspapers.
Newspaper ownership in Britain is concentrated mainly in the hands of a
comparatively small number of large press groups, although some enterprises
are organised as limited liability companies, and individual and partner
proprietorship survives. The six major newspaper and periodical publishers
are: International Publishing Corporation Limited; Associated Newspapers
Limited; Beaverbrook Newspapers Limited; the Thomson Organisation
Limited; United Newspapers Limited and Pearson-Longman Limited.
The large national newspaper and periodical publishers are major corpora¬
tions with diversified interests over the whole field of publishing and com¬
munications, and some have shares in the independent television contracting
companies. The International Publishing Corporation and the Thomson
Organisation Limited also have newspaper interests overseas.
Although pronounced views may be expressed in newspapers and their
political leanings may be obvious, they are financially independent of any
1 Changes in the number of newspapers occur constantly; figures are based on the
1970 edition of The Newspaper Press Directory.
442
Technological
Developments
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
political party and not obliged to follow any specific party line.1 In order to
preserve their character and traditions, a few newspapers and periodicals are
governed by arrangements which vest ownership of the undertaking in
trustees, or operate it in accordance with a deed of trust, or provide that the
transfer of shares be in the hands of trustees. Others have management arrange¬
ments intended to ensure the authority and independence of the editors.
The trend towards concentration of newspaper ownership, which began m
the early nineteen hundreds and was accentuated after the second world war,
giving rise to some public concern lest press monopoly would affect freedom
of information, was studied by two Royal Commissions on the Press, one of
which reported in 1949 and the other in 1962. The results of the recommenda¬
tions of these Commissions included the establishment and reconstitution of
the Press Council; the provision in the Television Act 1963 which stipulates
that if it appears to the Independent Television Authority at any time that
newspaper shareholdings in television programme companies have led or are
leading to results which are contrary to the public interest, the Authority may,
with the consent of the Minister for Posts and Telecommunications (formerly
the Postmaster General), notify the companies that their programmes may
cease to be transmitted; and the provision m the Monopolies and Mergers
Act 1965 under which the Department of Employment and Productivity has
powers to control the transfer of a newspaper or newspaper assets to a news¬
paper proprietor whose newspapers have an average daily circulation amount¬
ing with that of the newspaper to be taken over, to 500,000 or more copies
after (in some cases) the DEP has received a report from the Monopolies
Commission (see p. 240).
Technological advances in the newspaper industry include the introduction of
web-offset lithography (which is often combined with photo-composition and
the use of the computer in the composing room) and facsimile transmission.
The ‘National’
Press
English
Regional
Newspapers
Ten morning papers are ‘national’ in the sense of circulating throughout
the British Isles, and there are seven national Sunday papers (see Table 37).
All the national dailies are produced in London, but those with big circulations
also print northern editions in Manchester, and the Daily Express has a
Scottish edition printed in Glasgow. The leading Scottish papers {The
Scotsman and The Glasgow Herald) have a considerable circulation outside
Scotland Each of the (two) London evening papers has ownership affiliations
with a national daily, but both have their distinctive style drawing their
readership very largely from people living in and around London.
The regional newspapers of England (85 morning or evening dailies and
Sundays and 760 newspapers appearing once or twice a week) provi e
mainly regional and local news. Some of the daily newspapers also give
extensive coverage to national affairs, and a number co-operate to provide
their own foreign news service. The leading regional newspapers have wide
regional circulations; a few have nation-wide reputations.
Generally speaking, regional evening newspapers are non-political, while
the morning newspapers are independent or conservative in outlook.
The total circulation of the regional morning and evening papers is esti¬
mated at about 8 million. Of the morning papers The journal (Newcastle)^ the
Yorkshire Post (Leeds) and the Northern Echo (Darlington) have circulations
• The exception to non-alignment is the Stoe w^otm^by a^o-o^erattve
society
and is accepted as expressing the views of the Communist Party of Great Britain.
THE PRESS
443
TABLE 37
‘National’
Newspapers and
London Evenings
Title
Dailies
The Times (1785)
The Daily Telegraph
(1855)
The Guardian (1821)
Daily Express (1900)
Daily Mail (1896)
The Sun (1969)
Morning Star (1966)
Daily Mirror (1903)
Daily Sketch (1909)
Financial Times (1888)
London Evenings
Evening News (1881)
Evening Standard
(1827)
Sundays
The Observer (1791)
The Sunday Times
(1822)
The Sunday Telegraph
(1961)
News of the World
(1843)
The People (1881)
Sunday Express (1918)
Sunday Mirror (1963)
General
Political
Tendency
Independent
Independent
Conservative
Independent
Independent
Independent
Independent
Official
Communist
Left of centre
Conservative
Independent
Independent
Independent
Independent
Independent
Independent
Conservative
Independent
Independent
Independent
Left of centre
Controlled by
The Thomson
Organisation Ltd.
Daily Telegraph Ltd.
Guardian Newspapers
Ltd.
Beaverbrook
Newspapers Ltd.
Associated Newspapers
Ltd.
News of the World
Organisation Ltd.
People’s Press Printing
Society Ltd.
International Publishing
Corporation Ltd.
Associated Newspapers
Ltd.
Financial Times Ltd.
Associated Newspapers
Ltd.
Beaverbrook
Newspapers Ltd.
The Observer Trust
The Thomson
Organisation Ltd.
Daily Telegraph Ltd.
News of the World
Organisation Ltd.
International Publishing
Corporation Ltd.
Beaverbrook
Newspapers Ltd.
International Publishing
Corporation Ltd.
Circulation
average
Jan.-June
(inc.) 1970
401,110
1,402,362
303,332
3,607,460
1,916,510
1,509,330
49,493
4,696,950
806,396
174,745
1,016,593
549,667
847,572
1,464,142
756,406
6,215,079
5,241,697
4,281,056
4,885,296
444
London Suburban
Papers
BRITAIN I97i: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
of over 100,000 and two provincial Sudnay papers—the Sunday Sun
(Newcastle upon Tyne) and the Sunday Mercury (Birmingham)—have cir¬
culations of over 200,000. Individual circulation figures of regional evening
papers start at about 25,000; most are in the 50,000-100,000 range; a few
have circulations of between 200,000 and 400,000. Weekly papers are mainly
of local appeal; they are also a valuable medium for local advertising. Most
have circulations in the 8,000-35,000 range, but one or two have much
higher circulations—of up to 100,000.
Regional free distribution newspapers (without cover price), some of which
are published by orthodox newspaper publishers, are growing in number and
importance. Some 60 are published weekly and about the same number at
less frequent intervals. Estimated circulation is about 3 million. These news¬
papers carry about 20 per cent of editorial matter.
The London local weeklies (149) include papers for every district in Greater
London. They are assembled mainly in groups of six to eight, affiliated in
some cases to larger groups.
A number of new evening newspapers, using the latest production tech¬
nology, have recently been started in the outer metropolitan area on the
fringe of the circulation areas of the two London evening newspapers.
Scotland Scotland has five morning, seven evening and two Sunday newspapers, in
addition to the Scottish editions of the Daily Express and Sunday Express.
The leading morning papers are The Glasgow Herald and The Scotsman,
published in Edinburgh. Others are: the Daily Record published in Glasgow,
the Courier and Advertiser, published in Dundee; and the Press and Journal
of Aberdeen. Evening papers include the Evening News of Edinburgh,
Glasgow’s Evening Times and Evening Citizen, Dundee’s Evening Telegraph
and Post, Aberdeen’s Evening Express, the Paisley Daily Express and the
Greenock Telegraph. The Sunday papers are the Sunday Mail and the
Sunday Post.
Weekly and local newspapers published in Scotland number over 140.
The most widely known is the People's Journal, which has several local
editions.
Northern
Ireland
Wales
Channel
Islands and
Isle of Man
Northern Ireland has two morning newspapers, one evening paper and one
Sunday paper, all published in Belfast: they are The News-Letter (Unionist)
and the Irish News (Nationalist), the evening Belfast Telegraph and the
Sunday Nezvs. There are 42 weekly newspapers in Northern Ireland, with
circulations ranging from about 5,000 to over 25,000. The majority are
published by individual companies.
Wales has one daily morning newspaper, the Western Mail (101,666), pub¬
lished in Cardiff; it circulates mainly in southern Wales. In North Wales the
Liverpool Daily Post gives wide coverage to events in the area. Evening papers
published in Wales are the South Wales Echo, Cardiff, the South Wales Argus,
Newport, and the South Wales Evening Post, Swansea. North Wales is served
by the Liverpool Echo and to a smaller extent by the Manchester Evening News.
The weekly press (some 50 papers) includes the English language papers
(by far the largest category), some of which carry articles in Welsh; and 10
papers in Welsh, of which five are denominational.
The Channel Islands have two daily (evening) papers (one in Guernsey and
one in Jersey), a Sunday paper {Island Sun) and two weeklies, which also
circulate in Alderney and Sark. The Isle of Man Times is issued from Mondays
The
Periodical
Press
News Agencies
THE PRESS 445
to Wednesdays with a special weekly edition which is published on Friday:
there are four other weeklies.
There are over 4,250 periodical publications in Britain, classified as ‘general
and specialised’ and ‘trade, technical and professional’. There are also some
600 ‘house magazines’ produced by industrial undertakings, business houses
or public services for the benefit of their employees and/or clients.
General and specialised periodicals include magazines of general interest;
women’s magazines; publications for children; religious periodicals for all
denominations; fiction magazines; magazines dealing with sport, gardening,
hobbies and humour; journals specialising in various subjects such as politics,
finance and economics, science, agriculture, medicine and the arts; and the
publications of learned societies, trade unions, regiments, universities and
other associations.
The weekly periodicals with the highest sales in Britain are: Woman
(2,246,431); Woman's Own (1,854,645); Woman's Weekly (1,741,254);
Woman's Realm (1,115,653); and Weekend (1,330,607); together with the
Radio Times (3,690,439) and TV Times (3,212,697). The leading journals of
opinion are The Economist (circulation 104,551), a politically independent
publication covering topics from a wider angle than its title implies; the
New Statesman (circulation 77,539), which is a review of politics, literature
and the arts with an independent socialist political tendency; the Spectator,
which covers much the same subjects from an independent conservative
standpoint; Tribune, which has a strongly left-wing but anti-communist bias;
New Society, which covers the sociological aspects of current affairs; and
New Scientist, which reports on the progress of science and technology in
terms which the non-specialist can understand. Punch (124,079), traditionally
the leading humorous periodical, has in recent years devoted increasing
attention to public affairs.
Literary and political journals and those specialising in international and
Commonwealth affairs, published monthly or quarterly, appeal generally
speaking to the more serious type of reader.
Business magazines include technical, trade, export and professional and
semi-professional journals, the publication of which has become one of the
more important aspects of the British publishing industry. In addition to
circulating in Britain, these journals have a considerable circulation outside
the United Kingdom and are an important media for selling British goods
overseas. Their publication ranges in frequency from weekly to quarterly.
Periodicals published in England circulate throughout the United Kingdom.
Weekly papers are also published in Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland:
in Wales a farming weekly (the Welsh Farm News) and several monthly and
quarterly journals in both Welsh and English; in Scotland four monthly
illustrated periodicals (Scottish Field, Scotland's Magazine, Scots Magazine
and Scotland), two weeklies devoted to farming interests (Farming News and
Scottish Farmer), a number of literary journals, of which the most famous is
probably Blackwood's, and numerous popular magazines; and in Northern
Ireland weekly, monthly and quarterly publications covering farming, the
linen industry, building, motoring, politics and social work.
There are three principal British news agencies:
Reuters Ltd. is a world news agency owned by the newspapers of the
United Kingdom, Australia and New Zealand through the Newspaper
Publishers Association, the Press Association, the Australian Associated Press
446
Training for
Journalism
BRITAIN I971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
and the New Zealand Press Association, and operated on a non-profit-making
basis under the terms of a deed of trust entered into to safeguard the independ¬
ence and integrity of the news service. Founded in Aix-la-Chapelle in 1850
and transferred to London in 1851, Reuters has about 1,000 correspondents in
180 countries and territories, and links with 77 national or private news
agencies, which give it access to coverage by many thousands of local re¬
porters. Between 600,000 and 700,000 words of general news, sports, and
economic services reports are received in London every day over a global
network of leased cable and radio circuits. From these messages regionalised
news services, specially tailored to the needs of recipients in the United
Kingdom and eight main overseas regions, are transmitted to 120 countries
for distribution to information media, either direct or through national news
agencies. Reuters Economic Services supply up-to-the-minute information
to business houses throughout the world. Its computerised systems, including
Stockmaster, Videoscan and Videomaster, offer virtually instant coverage of
the important stock and commodity markets by computer interrogation or
video display. A computerised message-handling system, known as the Auto¬
matic Data Exchange, is used to speed up the handling and distribution
of news.
The Press Association Ltd., the British national news agency founded in
1868, is co-operatively owned by the principal newspapers of the United
Kingdom outside London, and the Republic of Ireland. It provides news¬
papers, the broadcasting organisations, Reuters (of which it is a major joint
owner) and other international agencies with a complete service of home
news, including general and parliamentary news, legal reports, and all
branches of financial, commercial and sports news; and includes in its services
to regional papers the world news of Reuters and the Associated Press.
Through its Photographic Department the Press Association serves London
and regional newspapers with a daily picture service, including its own world
photos and those of the Associated Press. Its Special Services Department
supplies reports of local or special interest to daily and weekly trade papers
and periodicals. All profits are used to develop the service.
The Exchange Telegraph Company Ltd. (Extel), an independent news
agency founded in 1872, is a public company with over 1,000 shareholders,
which supplies financial and sporting news to newspapers and broadcasting
organisations. Racing services are also supplied by teleprinter and telephone
to subscribers in London and the provinces from offices in all important cities
and towns.
The British press and broadcasting organisations are also served by
Associated Press Ltd., which is the British operating company of the Associa¬
ted Press of America, and by United Press International, an international
news agency with a headquarters in London.
A number of other United Kingdom, Commonwealth and foreign agencies
and news services have offices in London, and there are agencies in other
cities, specialising in various aspects of newspaper and periodical require¬
ments. Syndication of features is not as common in the United Kingdom as
in some countries, but a few agencies specialise in this type of work.
The Printing and Publishing Industry Training Board (which has 23 members
—nine employers, nine employees and five from educational interests) is
responsible for training in the printing, publishing and professional photo¬
graphy industries. Its responsibilities include the formulation of training
T HE PRESS
447
schemes, the establishment of standards, ensuring that adequate facilities exist,
and the provision of a regional advisory service.
The National Council for the Training of Journalists (NCTJ), which
represents the principal press organisations, works in consultation with the
Board. Its functions include superintending activities concerning entry into
journalism, setting and conducting examinations; and organising short
training courses and seminars for journalists.
There are two normal methods of entry to newspaper journalism: (i) by
selection for a place on a full-time course lasting for one academic year and
(2) by direct recruitment by a newspaper. Students selected for courses must
have gained two passes at the Advanced level of the General Certificate of
Education and be under the age of 20 at the beginning of a course; at the end
of their course the NCTJ assists them to find employment. All junior entrants
must also take part in a national training scheme consisting of a three-year
apprenticeship (two years for graduates) and parallel training on-the-job
(which includes two eight-week courses for direct entrants), and adult
entrants participate whenever possible. Entrants from full-time courses serve
a three-month and direct entrants a six-month probation. There are now
seven centres providing courses for reporters (five in England, one in Wales,
and one in Scotland) and one centre for photographers. The syllabus covers
practical journalism, shorthand, English, law, government and current affairs;
at the end of their apprenticeship trainees take a proficiency test which carries
a salary bonus. NCTJ approved training has been extended into the periodical
field on the basis of a special curriculum and courses are available for entrants
in London where the periodical publishing industry is mainly located.
Other training developments include a university course in management (at
Warwick University) sponsored by the Newspaper Publishers Association and
the Newspaper Society, and a one-year postgraduate course in journalism
at the University College of South Wales in Cardiff.
Under the Commonwealth Press Union Travelling Fellowship Scheme for
the training and education of young journalists throughout the Common¬
wealth, each year about eight journalists from overseas spend five months
in the United Kingdom; two months in the offices of newspapers or periodi¬
cals and three months acquiring a general idea of life in Britain. A limited
number of travelling scholarships are also awarded to British journalists to
enable them to visit Commonwealth countries overseas.
The Thomson Foundation offers scholarships and organises training
courses for journalists from all parts of the world at its Centre in Cardiff,
and provides consultants and tutors for courses for journalists overseas.
The Commonwealth Secreteriat is studying a plan for inter-Commonwealth
training arrangements in journalism and communications, based on a com¬
bination of indigenous schemes and training exchanges, and for the provision
of a special course in the United Kingdom on economics and finance for
Commonwealth journalists.
Press The most important organisations to which employers in the industry belong
Institutions are the Newspaper Publishers Association, whose members publish national
newspapers in London and Manchester; the Newspaper Society, which
represents the regional, local and London suburban press; the Scottish Daily
Newspaper Society, which represents the interests of daily and Sunday news¬
papers in Scotland; the Scottish Newspaper Proprietors Association, which
represents the owners of weekly newspapers in Scotland; Associated Northern
Ireland Newspapers, whose members are the proprietors of weekly newspapers
p*
448
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Press
Council
The Press and
the Law
in Northern Ireland; and the Periodical Publishers Association, whose
membership embraces the independent publishers of trade and technical
publications and general magazines. On the journalists side there are the
Institute of Journalists (loj), founded in 1884 as the National Association
of Journalists, and the National Union of Journalists (NUJ), founded in 1907.
All practising journalists (including those engaged in radio, television, public
relations and freelance journalism) are eligible for membership of both these
organisations. In order to achieve joint working and prepare the ground for a
single organisation, an arrangement has been made for dual membership
without the payment of extra subscriptions. At the same time, to avoid over¬
lapping, different activities have been allocated to each organisation, the loj
being responsible for professional questions and the NUJ, primarily, for
industrial relations. Total membership is about 24,750 (NUJ about 23,000
loj about 1,750).
The main aims of the Guild of British Newspaper Editors are to sustain
the dignity of editorship, to raise and safeguard the professional status of
editors, to protect the rights and freedom of the press, and to improve the
education and training of journalists: the Guild has about 400 members. The
British Association of Industrial Editors is the professional organisation to
which most editors of house journals belong.
The Printing and Kindred Trades Federation is the federation of the
printing trade unions which include the National Graphical Association, the
Society of Graphical and Allied Trades, and the Scottish Typographical
Association.
The Press Council, established in 1953 and reconstituted in 1963, has a lay
chairman and 25 members. Its aims are: to preserve the established freedom
of the British press; to maintain the character of the British press in ac¬
cordance with the highest professional and commercial standards; to keep
under review any developments likely to restrict the supply of information of
public interest and importance; to deal with complaints about the conduct
of the press or the conduct of persons and organisations towards the press; to
report on developments in the British press which may tend towards greater
concentration or monopoly; to make representation on appropriate occasions
to the Government, to organs of the United Nations and to press organisations
abroad; to publish its adjudications and periodical reports recording its work,
and to review from time to time developments in the British press and the
factors affecting them. Reports, which include statistics of the newspaper and
periodical press and a series of articles examining the structure of the leading
press groups, are published annually.
The press in Britain has the same freedom as the individual to do and say
what it likes provided it does not transgress the law; in general, it is at liberty
to comment on matters of public interest. Apart from enactments relating
directly to such matters as the registration of newspapers for postal purposes,
there are no specific press laws but certain statutes include clauses which
apply, in particular or incidentally, to the press. These relate to such matters
as the extent of newspaper ownership in television companies; the transfer
of newspaper assets (see p. 442); restrictions on newspaper reporting of
preliminary hearings of indictable offences (in England, Wales and Northern
Ireland); the right of press representatives to be admitted to meetings of local
authorities; restrictions on the publication of (a) divorce and domestic pro¬
ceedings in courts of law, (b) advertisement and investment circulars, which
THE PRESS
449
are governed by Acts dealing with the publication of false or misleading
descriptions of goods and services and with fraud and (c) advertisements of
remedies for certain diseases, which are covered by public health legislation;
agreements between the Post Office and newspaper proprietors on telegraphic
communications, which must comply with telegraphs legislation; restrictions
on certain types of prize competition; and copyrights, which come under
copyright laws.
Of particular relevance to the work of the press are the laws on libel and
defamation; contempt of court—a newspaper may not publish comments
on the conduct of judicial proceedings which are likely to prejudice their
reputation for fairness before or during the actual proceedings nor may it
publish before or during a trial anything which might tend to influence the
result; and seditious libel, incitement to disaffection and revealing official
secrets.
Legal proceedings against the press are comparatively infrequent; the
majority of actions that do take place are libel actions brought by private
individuals. In such cases, the editor, proprietor, publisher, printer and
distributor of the newspaper, as well as the author of the article, may all be
held responsible.
19 SPORT
Central and
Local
Government
Participation
In Britain, the word ‘sport’ is used generally to describe such activities as
organised outdoor games, athletics, field or country sports, indoor games and
sports, aquatic sports, and such popular pursuits as horse-racing, greyhound
racing, show jumping, riding, rock climbing, orienteering, motor racing, and
rifle shooting as well as those (for instance, archery, fencing, gliding and
skating) which, although less popular judged by the number of participants
and spectators, all have their own devotees. Those who engage in sport may be
professionals (that is, paid players) or amateurs.1 Professionals keep up the
technical standards of the sports in which they take part and spectators make
a vital contribution by their enthusiasm and their financial support; but the
sporting life of Britain derives its character principally from the amateur
element—people who devote time and energy to organising sport and to
teaching and training, as well as the many thousands of all ages who engage
in sport for pleasure alone.
The Government is not directly concerned v/ith the organisation or promotion
of sport in Britain but it provides encouragement, guidance and help through
a Minister who has special responsibility for sport; it gives financial aid to
national and local voluntary organisations towards approved expenditure on
the provision of facilities for physical recreation, and to national governing
bodies of sport in Great Britain towards the costs of their administration and
coaching schemes, participation in international events overseas and the
holding in Britain of world championships and events of similar importance.
The Government is advised on matters relating to the development of
amateur sport and physical recreation by the Sports Council, whose members
serve in a voluntary capacity and are appointed for their wide experience of
all aspects of sport and recreation. Nine regional sports councils in England,
a sports council for Scotland and a sports council for Wales, bring together
representatives of local authorities, voluntary sports organisations and the
government departments principally concerned, to consider regional require¬
ments for facilities, to promote regional co-operation on planning and to
advise government departments on regional needs and priorities. In Northern
Ireland the Ministry of Education is advised by the Youth and Sports Council.
The Sports Council works in close co-operation with all organisations con¬
cerned with sport, and provides a forum for the discussion of problems
affecting sport.
In 1969-70 direct government expenditure on sport in Great Britain
totalled some £2-54 million. This covered capital grants to national and local
voluntary organisations towards the provision of facilities, grants to national
voluntary organisations for administration, coaching and participation in
international events and grants for research projects sponsored by the Sports
Council. The greatest provision for sports facilities is made by local authorities;
the expenditure involved is taken into account in determining the aggregate
1 Some sports, for example, athletics, Rugby Union football, hockey and rowing, are
entirely amateur, but in other sports the distinction between professional and amateur
status is becoming less strictly defined and the Sports Council has recommended
ihe progressive elimination of the distinction.
Facilities for
Sport
Composite
National Bodies
The Central
Council of Physical
Recreation
sport 451
amount of Exchequer grant to local authorities under the rate support grant
system (see p. 72).
In Northern Ireland £541,000 in grants was given to public authorities
and voluntary organisations for sports facilities and coaching schemes in
1969-70.
The Secretary of State for Education and Science, the Secretary of State for
Scotland and the Ministry of Education for Northern Ireland require that
all publicly maintained schools shall provide for the physical education
(gymnastics, games, athletics, dancing and swimming) of their pupils. Schools
in the national systems (excepting those solely for infants) must have a
playing field, or the use of one, and most secondary schools have a gymnasium
and other amenities such as swimming pools, sports halls and halls designed
for dance and movement: in an increasing number of areas, physical education
facilities in schools are being expanded to meet the recreational needs of the
whole community. Facilities for, and instruction in, many kinds of sport are
likewise provided at the independent preparatory and public schools and at
the universities (some of which have departments of physical education).
Local authorities also provide playing fields, gymnasia, tennis courts, golf
courses, boating lakes, swimming baths and sports centres on an increasing
scale, and some arrange further education classes in various physical education
subjects. Most of the larger industrial and commercial undertakings provide
sports facilities for their employees.
The national voluntary organisations most closely concerned with the general
development of sport are the Central Council of Physical Recreation, the
Scottish Council of Physical Recreation, and the National Playing Fields
Association. The British Olympic Association, whose main functions are
connected with the participation of British teams and competitors in the
Olympic Games, is also interested in all matters likely to benefit sport or
physical recreation in Britain as a whole. In addition, each sport has its own
governing body with, in many cases, entirely separate autonomous governing
bodies in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.
The Central Council of Physical Recreation (CCPR), whose membership
represents all national bodies in England, Wales and Northern Ireland con¬
cerned with the development of post-school physical recreation, provides the
Sports Council with such services as may be agreed in the administration,
technical and research fields. It receives grants from the Ministry of Housing
and Local Government and from the Ministry of Education for Northern
Ireland. Its General Secretary is also the Director of the Sports Council.
The CCPR consists of about 300 members, over 200 of whom represent
national bodies concerned wholly or in part with the development of some
branch of physical recreation. The Council’s headquarters are in London and
it has nine regional offices in other parts of England. Its activities in Wales
are controlled by a representative Welsh committee, and in Northern Ireland
by a separate section of the Council.
Broadly, the Council’s function is to promote all forms of physical
recreation. Its activities include the organisation of courses for coaches and
instructors, classes in personal performance, lectures, displays and other
publicity events. It runs, on average, about 2,000 courses for more than
40,000 people each year. Its staff give advisory, technical and administrative
help wherever required, but particularly to the headquarters, regional, county
452
The Scottish
Council of Physical
Recreation
The National
Playing Fields
Association
National
Sports
Centres
BRITAIN I97i: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
and local branches of the constituent organisations and to local educational
authorities and industrial concerns. Its regional officers are the secretaries of
the regional sports councils.
The Scottish Council of Physical Recreation (SCPR) is the counterpart in
Scotland of the CCPR, and has 146 affiliated organisations, including the
governing bodies of all the Scottish sports; it receives a grant-in-aid from
the Scottish Education Department.
The main aim of the National Playing Fields Association (NPFA) is to
stimulate the provision of playing fields, playgrounds and sports centres by
publicity and technical and financial assistance. Since its inception in 1925
it has distributed nearly £1-9 million in the form of grants for playing field and
playground schemes and about ^467,000 in the form of loans. It assists more
than 400 schemes a year.
The NPFA council is composed of representatives of the governing bodies
of various sports organisations, of the British Olympic Association and the
CCPR, and of a number of educational bodies, voluntary youth organisations,
physical education associations and local authorities. The national head¬
quarters in London employs a small full-time staff, including a technical and
research department which gives advice on all aspects of recreational
planning including the provision and layout of indoor and outdoor sports
facilities. Advice is also given on matters relating to the play and recreational
needs of children from their earliest years, and the establishment of play¬
grounds and play leadership schemes. The Association derives its funds
mainly from voluntary contributions but it also receives a small contribution
towards administrative costs from the Ministry of Housing and Local
Government.
The NPFA has branches in Scotland and Northern Ireland; there are also
branches in nearly every English and Welsh county; administration is carried
out, in the main, on a voluntary basis—in many cases in association with a
local authority or Rural Community Council.
There are six National Sports Centres in Britain, three in England, one in
Wales and two in Scotland—administered by the CCPR and the SCPR with
the help of government grants. The centres, some of which were established
by voluntary funds, provide a wide range of courses for coaches, instructors
and performers in many games, sports and other physical activities. A
National Sailing Centre at Cowes, Isle of Wight, is also administered by the
CCPR with the help of a Government grant; it provides courses on sailing,
boat handling, cruising, navigation, racing, boat maintenance and boat build¬
ing, for school and youth groups and for adults. A national rowing and
canoeing regatta centre, administered by the CCPR and financed by the
Government and Nottinghamshire County Council, is being built at Holme
Pierrepont. There are national mountaineering centres in Wales and Scotland,
a national equestrian centre and a national indoor sports centre for para¬
plegics.
The Crystal Palace National Sports Centre in London covers 36 acres; it
has a main stadium with seating for 12,000 spectators, a sports hall with
seating for 2,000 spectators, a swimming hall with pools of Olympic dimen¬
sions, a teaching pool and a gallery for 2,000 spectators, an indoor cricket
school, practice rooms suitable for all indoor activities, a hostel for 140
residents, and staff housing. These facilities, which are available for inter¬
national competitions as well as for the training of leaders, coaches and
SPORT
453
Outdoor Games
and Sports
Football
performers, are managed by the CCPR and supported by grants from the
Greater London Council and the Government.
Outdoor games played in Britain include team games such as football,
cricket, and hockey, and games such as lawn tennis and golf, in which
individuals or couples match their skill. Judged by the number of participants
and spectators, the most popular of the team games are football and cricket;
the most popular of the individual games is lawn tennis.
Although football of a kind was played in the Middle Ages or even earlier,
as an organised game it dates from just over a century ago. One type of
football, in which only the feet are used, was adopted at Cambridge in 1848;
the other type, in which the ball is handled as well as kicked, was first played
at Rugby School, whence it derives its name, and was adopted by the
Blackheath football club in 1859.
In England the controlling body of the non-handling game, Association
Football (‘soccer’), is the Football Association (FA) formed in 1863. Its chief
function is to promote the interests of the game and to prevent infringement
of the agreed rules. It also arranges for the instruction of promising young
players (some £50,000 is spent annually on coaching); organises various
matches and competitions, including the international matches played by
England, the Amateur Cup competition, the FA Sunday Cup competition,
two national youth competitions, and the competition for its own leading
trophy, the Football Association Challenge Cup; and chooses and manages
English international teams. Over 360 clubs are registered with the FA, more
than 250 as full members and between no and 120 as associate members.
There are also some 32,000 clubs affiliated to county (that is, district or
regional) associations. The FA derives its main income from subscriptions
and admission charges to international and cup matches, and ploughs back a
large portion of the money into the game. Scotland, Northern Ireland and
Wales have their own controlling bodies: the Scottish Football Association,
the Irish Football Association and the Football Association of Wales.
The principal professional matches in England and Wales (played once or
twice weekly) are controlled by the Football League, which comprises 92
professional clubs in these countries. The funds of the League are derived
largely from contributions paid by member clubs in the form of a levy of
4 per cent of the net gate receipts from league matches, after allowable
expenses have been deducted; from annual payments from football pools
promoters for the use of league fixture lists; and from television rights.
In Scotland the Scottish Football League comprises 37 clubs; Northern
Ireland has its own League. Clubs belonging to the English and Scottish
Leagues are organised in divisions, the members of which compete against one
another for the respective league championships. Their positions in the
divisional tables are decided at the end of the season by the number of points
gained for wins or draws. During the season attendances at Football League
matches total about 30 million and gate receipts amount to about £8 million.
Several million people stake small weekly sums on the results of the league
matches by filling in what are known as ‘pools’ coupons. The odds against
winning anything in the pools are very great, but the prizes are high and
individual payments of £300,000 are occasionally made. The promoters
deduct varying amounts from the stakes for commission and expenses.
The annual competition for the FA Cup is organised on a knock-out basis
and the Cup Final is one of the most important football matches of the year
in England; it is always played at Wembley Stadium, near London, which
454
Cricket
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
can accommodate some 100,000 spectators. The Scottish Cup Final is played
at Hampden Park, Glasgow. The matches between England, Scotland, Wales
and Ireland also excite great interest, as do other international matches.
There are many more amateur association football players than there are
professionals (the comparative figures are nearly 1 million amateurs, including
schoolboys and members of the armed forces, to 7,000 or 8,000 professionals),
but with one or two notable exceptions their teams cannot compete on equal
terms, since professional teams are more systematically and intensively
trained. Amateur teams compete against each other for the Football
Association Amateur Challenge Cup.
Rugby football (‘rugger’) is played according to two different sets of rules.
Rugby Union Football is played (in England) under the auspices of the Rugby
Football Union, established in 1871. There are 15 players in a side. Inter¬
national matches between England, Scotland, Wales, Ireland, and France are
played regularly at the leading rugby football grounds of each country,
including Twickenham, London—the headquarters of the Rugby Football
Union—and there are tours by international teams. Other important rugby
matches are the county championship competitions, the annual match between
the universities of Oxford and Cambridge, the Hospitals’ Cup Final, and the
Inter-Services tournament. Membership of the Rugby Union is strictly
confined to amateur clubs of which there are over 1,600 in membership, with
about 1,000 schools.
Rugby League Football—a 13-a-side game played by professionals as well
as amateurs—is played mostly in the north of England. The game’s governing
body, the Rugby Football League—instituted in 1895—has its headquarters
at Leeds and regularly sends touring teams to Australia and New Zealand.
Annual international games, professional and amateur, are played against
France. The major match of the season—the Rugby League Challenge Cup
Final—has attracted crowds of 100,000 at Wembley Stadium in recent years.
Cricket is often called the English national game. It originated as a rustic
medieval pastime; by 1550 it is known to have been played by boys at
Guildford Grammar School, and after the Restoration it became fashionable
with the nobility, who competed with each other to sponsor matches for very
large sums of money. Among the many clubs founded in the eighteenth
century was the famous Hambledon Club in Flampshire, whose members
were cricket’s elite and supported the most brilliant players of the day. In 1787
the Marylebone Cricket Club (MCC) was founded in London and, assuming
responsibility for reframing the ‘Laws of Cricket’, became the governing body
of the game in Great Britain. Its first headquarters were at a ground on the
site of the present Dorset Square, rented by a Yorkshireman called Thomas
Lord, who gave his name to this and the two succeeding grounds. The second
ground, at which MCC was established from 1811 to 1813, was on the
perimeter of Regent’s Park. The present ground, at St. John’s Wood, was
opened in 1814.
Cricket in Britain is now governed by the Cricket Council, made up of
representatives of MCC, the Test and County Board of Control (representing
first-class cricket) and the National Cricket Association (representing club
and junior cricket). MCC retains world-wide responsibility for the laws of
cricket.
The game is played in schools and universities, and most towns and villages,
as well as industrial sports clubs, have teams which play at least one match a
week from late April to early September. In the London area a large number
SPORT
455
Lawn Tennis
of pitches are provided by local authorities to augment those leased or owned
by clubs. In the Midlands and the north of England there is a network of
League cricket, contested by teams of Saturday afternoon players reinforced
by one or more professionals, often distinguished overseas players.
The focus of the season centres on a series of ‘Test matches’ played between
England and a touring team from overseas (or sometimes two teams). The
first of these matches was played in Melbourne between England and
Australia in 1877. Since then international tours have taken place regularly
between countries of Test status, who now number seven. The matches last
30 playing hours spread over five days and arouse great popular interest.
The principal grounds in England on which Test matches are played are
Lord’s; the Oval, Kennington, London, headquarters of Surrey County
Cricket Club; Old Trafford, Manchester; Trent Bridge, Nottingham;
Headingley, Leeds; and Edgbaston, Birmingham.
In addition to the Test matches a First Class County Championship,
decided on a points system, is played for by 17 counties, each playing 24
three-day matches. The counties not deemed first-class and second elevens of
the first-class counties play in a Minor Counties Championship. The Univer¬
sity Elevens of Oxford and Cambridge rank as first-class and play an annual
match at Lord’s. Since 1963 the counties have also competed in a single
innings knock-out competition for the Gillette Cricket Cup and in 1969 a
Sunday League was inaugurated.
Since 1963, the distinction between amateur and professional players in
county and Test cricket has been abolished. In 1968 the qualification rules
were relaxed to allow a limited number of top-class overseas cricketers to play
in the English county championships.
The forerunner of modern lawn tennis (the game known as jeu de paume) was
introduced into England from France in the fifteenth century and a ‘tennis
court’, built by Henry VIII, is still in use at Hampton Court. The modern
game, first played in England in 1873, quickly became very popular; in 1877
the words ‘and lawn tennis’ were added to the title of the All England Croquet
Club at Wimbledon, near London, and in the same year the first champion¬
ships were played. The Lawn Tennis Association, the controlling body of the
game in Britain, was founded in 1888. The governing body of the game in the
world (the International Lawn Tennis Federation, with headquarters in
London and Paris) was founded in 1913.
The number of people who play lawn tennis has greatly increased during
the present century, particularly since the game has spread to practically
every country in the world. In Britain the game is played in almost all girls’
schools and in very many boys’ schools where the pupils are of secondary
school age. It is also played on private courts, in parks and recreation grounds
and at several thousand tennis clubs.
The annual championships held at Wimbledon for two weeks at the end
of June and beginning of July are the main event of the lawn tennis season
in Britain and, in fact, in the world. These championships, in which men and
women of many nationalities compete, draw large crowds; there is accom¬
modation for over 30,000 spectators in the grounds of the All England Club—
14,000 can be accommodated round the centre court where the finals are
played. Other tournaments which attract a good deal of attention are: the
British Hardcourt Championships, the British Junior Championships, and
the County Championships. There are also competitions for boys’ and girls’
schools on a national basis. The most important international events are the
456
Golf
Hockey
Lacrosse
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Davis Cup (for men) and the Federation Cup competition (for women).
Women players from Britain and the United States of America also compete
annually for the Wightman Cup.
Golf originated in Scotland, where for centuries it has borne the title of the
Royal and Ancient Game, but it did not become really well known in the other
countries of the United Kingdom until towards the end of the nineteenth
century. Since then, however, it has gained steadily in popularity (particularly
since the mid-1950s); nowadays there are golf courses in the vicinity of many
towns and villages in all parts of Britain—some owned by local authorities,
but the majority owned by golf clubs—and the question of the game’s large
land requirements is being studied by the Department of Social and Economic
Research at the University of Glasgow. The headquarters of the Royal and
Ancient Golf Club is St. Andrews, Scotland.
The main event of the golfing year is the British Open Golf Championship,
which was first played in i860; other important matches include the Walker
Cup (for amateurs) and the Ryder Cup (for professionals), both played
between Britain and America; the Amateur Championship; the World
Amateur Team Championship; and the Ladies Championship.
Variants of hockey (as distinct from ice-hockey) have been played in Britain
for at least five centuries, and some, like hurley in Ireland and shinty in
Scotland, are still played extensively. Modern hockey, however, dates from
the formation (in 1886) of the Hockey Association of England. The Inter¬
national Hockey Rules Board, comprising the Associations of England,
Scotland and Wales and the Irish Hockey Union, together with delegates from
the Federation Internationale de Hockey, representing the rest of the world,
controls the rules of the game. There are some 2,000 men’s hockey clubs
throughout Britain with at least 30,000 male adult players; some 600 boys’
schools also play the game. Although there are no professional county teams
and no cup ties in England, a county championship is held annually. In
Scotland there is a Scottish cup competition and six local league competitions
and the Welsh Hockey Association organises a Welsh cup competition.
Regular amateur international matches are also played. Men’s hockey is an
Olympic sport, and the arrangements for the British team are in the hands of
the British Olympic Hockey Board.
The controlling bodies of women’s hockey are: the All England Women’s
Hockey Association (founded 1895) to which are affiliated some 900 clubs and
2,200 schools, representing a total membership of about 72,000 adults and
1-i million schoolgirls; the Irish Ladies Hockey Union; the Scottish Women’s
Hockey Association; and the Welsh Women’s Hockey Association. The first
international women’s hockey match took place in 1896. Nowadays such a
match is played annually at Wembley Stadium (in addition to those played in
other parts of the country), where it attracts some 60,000 spectators.
Lacrosse, adapted from the game played by the Iroquois Indians of North
America, is played mainly by women—in girls’ schools, at lacrosse clubs, and
at universities. International matches, as well as regional matches between
women’s teams representing the East, West, South, North and Midlands of
England, are played under the auspices of the All England Women’s Lacrosse
Association.
The men’s game, for which the controlling body is the English Lacrosse
Union, is played in ten universities, several colleges of education and by clubs
and schools, mainly in the London, Manchester, Leeds, Sheffield and
Nottingham areas. Matches played include county matches, an annual fixture
Netball
Polo
Bowls
Croquet
Mountaineering
sport 457
between the North of England and the South, and international matches
between Australia, America, Canada and England.
Netball is a popular game for girls and women. The controlling body is the
All England Netball Association to which are affiliated the English county
associations, the netball clubs of the three Women’s Services and sections of
the national youth and university organisations for girls and women. Inter¬
county and home international matches are played regularly and inter-
Commonwealth tours are arranged.
Polo, of which the earliest records are Persian, was first played by the British
in India, and brought to England in 1869. The governing body of British
polo is the Hurlingham Polo Association to which many Commonwealth and
several overseas polo associations are affiliated. Polo players are a very
small section of the community, for the cost of keeping polo ponies is high.
However, many of the clubs now own trained ponies which are hired out to
members at moderate cost. There are about 470 players handicapped by the
Hurlingham Polo Association, but many less expert players take part in club
games for which they may be locally handicapped.
Public interest in polo has increased in recent years and large numbers of
spectators attend inter-club tournaments and matches between high-handicap
teams composed of players from several countries.
The game of bowls has been played in Britain since the thirteenth century.
Nowadays the game is regulated, as far as the English Bowling Association
is concerned, by the International Bowling Board (IBB), founded in 1905.
The Bowling Associations of Ireland, Scotland and Wales also come under
and play to the laws laid down by the IBB, but there are other bowling
associations in England—the English Bowling Federation, the Crown Green
Association and the English Women’s Bowling Association—which are not
under the IBB’s control.
During the summer bowls is played on bowling greens in the open; in
winter it is played on indoor greens, which are increasing in number. At one
time regarded as a pastime for the elderly, the game is now played by people
of all ages. Over 2,620 bowling clubs in England are affiliated to the English
Bowling Association alone. International, inter-county matches, and national
championship competitions of singles, pairs, triples and fours are played.
Croquet originated in Britain in the middle of the nineteenth century and has
developed into a game which is played by people of all ages on the lawns of
local croquet clubs and private gardens. Some 70 clubs are registered with the
Croquet Association—formed in 1896—which encourages and promotes the
development of the sport in Britain and maintains links with croquet associa¬
tions in other countries.
The popularity of mountaineering has greatly increased in recent years. The
number of clubs in the British Mountaineering Council (BMC) and the
Mountaineering Council for Scotland, the representative bodies of the sport,
is now over 190, ranging from national clubs, such as the Alpine Club (founded
in 1857, the oldest mountaineering club in the world) and the Scottish
Mountaineering Club, to small regional clubs with 20 to 30 members. A
number of local education authorities, as well as national bodies such as the
Central Council of Physical Recreation and the Outward Bound Trust,
have established mountaineering training centres in the hills. Training
courses are run jointly by the CCPR and BMC, the Youth Hostels Associa¬
tion and other bodies, and many universities and schools have mountaineering
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
sections. Membership of the known clubs is about 15,000 but several times this
number take part in climbing and mountaineering.
British mountaineers have taken a leading part in exploring most of the
great ranges of the world and in climbing their peaks; for example, the first
ascent of the Matterhorn in 1865, of Everest in 1953, and of Kangchenjunga
in 1955. In recent years frequent expeditions have gone to far-off mountains,
to Greenland, Alaska, the Andes, Patagonia, the Caucasus and the Pamirs,
as well as the Himalayas.
Ski-ing in Scotland has become very popular, especially at the winter sports
centres established in the Cairngorms, Deeside, Glencoe and Glenshee,
where ski-runs equal to those in other areas of Europe have been developed,
and ski-lifts, ski-tows and professional instruction are now available. There
are, in addition, 24 artificial ski-slopes in other parts of Britain.
Amateur athletics, which include running (track, road and cross-country),
relay racing, jumping, hurdling, throwing and race-walking, are governed by
the Amateur Athletic Association (AAA), which was founded in 1880 to
encourage amateur athletics, to improve the management of amateur athletic
meetings by the establishment of uniform regulations, and to promote annual
championship meetings. The Association, whose membership increased
rapidly, is now organised from club to national level by honorary officers
and managed by representative members appointed by the Northern, Midland,
Southern and Welsh areas and by affiliated clubs and associations (amateur
athletic clubs, schools and youth organisations), of which there are hundreds
throughout England and Wales. The AAA administers a coaching scheme
under which eight full-time national coaches, working mainly in separate
regions, lecture, demonstrate and coach in schools, youth clubs, evening
institutes, training colleges and universities and at special courses organised
by the national associations, by regional associations or by the Central Council
of Physical Recreation. Some of the work of the national coaches is directly
concerned with coaching young athletes but their main duties are to instruct
men who wish to qualify as AAA coaches, over 1,600 of whom give
voluntary services in the counties and districts of England and Wales. Scotland
and Northern Ireland have their own amateur athletic associations, with
similar functions; there are also separate women’s AAAs for each country.
International athletics and the selection of teams representing the United
Kingdom are dealt with by the British Amateur Athletic Board, which is
composed of representatives of the three national associations for men and
of the Women’s Council, and is affiliated to the International Amateur
Athletic Federation.
Track meetings are held throughout Britain from April to October. The
main events in England and Wales are: the national championships for men
and women and international matches usually held in London; area and county
championships; and the universities, Services, business houses and schools
championship meetings. Clubs usually compete in cross-country running from
October to March, and county, area and national cross-country champion¬
ships are held.
Teams representing Britain compete in the Olympic Games (held every
four years) and separate teams representing England, Wales, Scotland, and
Northern Ireland compete in the Commonwealth Games, held at four-yearly
intervals between the Olympic Games.
SPORT
Highland Games
Country Sports
Hunting
Game Shooting
459
The Highland games are traditional gatherings of local people in the High¬
lands of Scotland, at which sports (including tossing the caber, putting the
weight, and throwing the hammer) and dancing and piping competitions
take place. Among the better known Highland games are the Braemar
Gathering on Deeside (traditionally attended by the royal family), the
Argyllshire Gathering at Oban, and the meeting at Aboyne. The Highland
games are a unique spectacle which attracts large numbers of spectators from
all over the world.
The most popular country sports are hunting, shooting and fishing; these are
old-established sports with a long history, and they still play a considerable
part in the life of the countryside. The organisation which looks after their
interests is the British Field Sports Society.
In Britain hunting means primarily fox hunting on horseback with a pack of
hounds; but it also includes stag hunting, which preceded fox hunting and
still goes on, mainly in Devon and Somerset; hunting the hare, either on foot
with beagles or with harriers when the followers are mounted; and otter
hunting along the banks of rivers. Hunting depends not on right but on the
goodwill of small landowners and farmers, the majority of whom support
their local hunt by allowing it to ride over their property.
Fox hunting originated some 200 years ago. Originally a sport mainly for
the landed gentry and local farmers, it has gradually widened its appeal, in
spite of the fact that it is an expensive pastime for those who ride to hounds.
The sport is not without its critics, but an ever larger number of people,
including many townsmen, take a keen interest in it. Most hunts meet two
or three times a week and it is estimated that between 25,000 and 30,000 people
ride to hounds weekly, and many others follow in cars, on bicycles or on foot.
The fox hunting season starts in early November and lasts until April;
it is preceded by cub hunting, that is, the hunting of young foxes, when
young hounds are trained. At the end of the season most hunts organise
steeplechases, known as point-to-points, which are patronised by large
crowds.
There are 200 packs of hounds in England and Wales, 13 in Northern
Ireland, and 10 in Scotland. The packs range in size from the large establish¬
ments in the Midlands of England (for instance, the Belvoir, the Cottesmore,
the Quorn and the Fernie) to small kennels in the west and north.
Hunts are financed mainly by the subscriptions of their members (£15 or
less to £50 or more), by ‘caps’ (contributions paid by non-subscribers), and
by the proceeds of such annual events as the point-to-point races and the
hunt ball. Sometimes the Master of Fox-hounds (MFH), who is in charge
of the hunt, bears a proportion of the cost.
Game shooting as an organised country sport may be said to date from the
early part of the nineteenth century; nowadays, game consists mainly of
grouse, partridge, pheasant, snipe and woodcock.
There is virtually no free shooting in any part of Britain. A shot gun
certificate, for which a fee is payable, must be obtained from the local police
by anyone who possesses, purchases or acquires a shot gun1; and it is necessary
to have a licence to kill game. Nearly all game birds are to be found on
1 A shot gun is defined in the Criminal Justice Act 1967 as ‘a smooth bore gun having
a barrel not less than 24 inches in length, not being an air-gun’. Shot guns with barrels
less than 24 inches long are subject to control under the Firearms Acts 1937 and 1965,
and a firearm certificate must be obtained from the police by anyone wishing to possess,
purchase or acquire them.
460
Fishing
Aquatic Sports
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
privately owned land, shot over either by the owner and his friends or by
syndicates which have leased the shooting rights. However, in some parts of
the more remote countryside, rough shooting may be enjoyed in a less formal
way. Much of the country’s wild-fowling is controlled by the Wildfowling
Association of Great Britain and Ireland, through its numerous clubs.
Grouse, partridge, pheasant and certain other birds are ‘preserved’: that
is to say, there is a ‘close season’ during which they are protected by law and
allowed to breed in security, often under the care of privately employed
gamekeepers on numerous estates. Grouse shooting takes place mostly
in Scotland, northern England and North Wales; partridge and pheasant
shooting in nearly every county in England, Wales and Scotland, the former
mainly over farm land, and the latter in or near woodland; and wildfowling on
the marshes and fenlands of the coastal areas.
The Game Conservancy formed by landowners, farmers and others
interested in game conservation and research, collects and collates information
on a national scale and makes a detailed study of factors controlling game
population.
Deer stalking, which derives its name from the fact that, in order to get
an effective shot, a very cautious approach is needed (since red deer have a
keen scent, are far-sighted, and take alarm at the slightest sound), is mainly
a sport of the Highlands of Scotland. The deer are preserved in privately
owned ‘deer forests’, ranging in size from 9,000 to over 30,000 acres (3,642
to 12,140 hectares). Deer, too, are protected during close seasons.
Fishing is the most popular of the country sports in that it is within the reach
of everyone in some form or another (from the small boy with his hook and
line to the experienced fly-fisherman), and that many more people fish in
their leisure hours than hunt or shoot.
The outstanding forms of the sport in Britain are salmon and trout fishing.
Trout streams are to be found in most parts of the country, and in Scotland
there are also many hundreds of lochs which provide good sport. Salmon
fishing may be enjoyed in England, North Wales and Northern Ireland,
but the best salmon rivers are to be found in Scotland. In England and
Wales the most widely practised form of fishing is for coarse fish such as
pike, perch, carp, roach, dace, tench, chub and bream, and the National
Federation of Anglers (NFA) has some 450,000 members in over 3,000 clubs
comprising 152 associations. Match angling—competitive fishing for coarse
fish by weight—is a feature of the many angling clubs affiliated to the NFA,
particularly in the Midlands and north of England. A national angling cham¬
pionship, composed of teams of 12 anglers, is organised annually by the
NFA, and the NFA enters a team in the International Angling Competition.
Fishing around the coasts is another popular pastime, while deep-sea
fishing for tuna and shark has gained many adherents during the past 20 years.
Coastal and deep-sea fishing is free to all (except for salmon and sea trout
fishing in Scotland) but, as a rule, freshwater fishing has to be paid for and
local enquiries made about any permit or licence required. Most coarse
fishing is let to angling clubs; trout and salmon fishermen either rent a
stretch of river, join a club, stay at an hotel with its own fishing rights, or
pay for the right to fish by the day, week or month. The cost of salmon
fishing is often high.
Aquatic sports include rowing, sailing, swimming, canoeing, punting and
water ski-ing. The first three are the most commonly practised in Britain
and are included in the Olympic events and the Commonwealth Games.
SPORT
Rowing
Sailing
Swimming
461
Rowing as a pastime is enjoyed by people from all sections of the community,
and as a sport it arouses considerable public interest. The University Boat
Race, which originated in 1820, has been rowed annually on the Thames in
the early spring since 1836. The race is between eight-oared crews from Ox¬
ford and Cambridge over a course of some 4J miles (6-84 km.) between Putney
and Mortlake and is watched by many thousands of rival supporters gathered
on both sides of the river. Interest is also shown in the Head of the River Race
from Mortlake to Putney, in March, in which more than 350 eights row in
procession—the largest assembly of racing craft in the world.
Crews from all over the world compete each July in Oxfordshire at Henley
Regatta, founded in 1839, where various kinds of races are rowed over a
straight course of 1 mile 550 yards (about 2-1 km.); for instance, for the Grand
Challenge Cup, open to eight-oared crews from any nation, the Silver Goblets
for pair oars, the Diamond Sculls for single scullers, the Ladies’ Challenge
Plate open to crews from schools and colleges and the Princess Elizabeth
Challenge Cup for eights open to schools from Britain and overseas. Many
other riverside resorts arrange summer regattas.
The oldest annual event in the English racing calendar is Doggett’s Coat
and Badge, founded in 1716 and organised since by the Worshipful Company
of Fishmongers. Originally for professional watermen and limited to six
entrants, the race is now open to amateurs (who must, however, still be
apprentice watermen); if necessary, it may be rowed in heats. The course
is from London Bridge to Chelsea.
The art of oarsmanship is taught in many schools, universities and rowing
clubs, including women’s rowing clubs, throughout Britain; and women as
well as men compete in the European rowing championships. The Amateur
Rowing Association is the governing body of the sport in England and
Wales and the Scottish Amateur Rowing Association in Scotland.
Yachting has always been a popular leisure time activity on the inland and
coastal waters of Britain, but in recent years the sport, and in particular
small boat sailing, has greatly widened its appeal. The Royal Yachting
Association (RYA), the national governing body for both sail and power
yachting, has over 1,550 clubs and 32,000 personal members. The RYA has
approved sailing schools giving courses for novices, a National Sailing Centre
where instructors are coached and tested, and is responsible for the selection
of Great Britain’s Olympic team. One of the world’s main regattas takes place
from Cowes in the Isle of Wight annually during the first week of August.
Other major events are held throughout the year at such sailing centres as
Poole, Lowestoft, Harwich, Burnham on Crouch, Plymouth, Falmouth and
the Clyde. Racing is subject to the rules of the International Yacht Racing
Union, founded in 1907.
Many children in Britain learn to swim at school, or during holidays at the
seaside, and swimming as a summer pastime is enjoyed by millions of people.
The existence of indoor swimming baths, many of them provided by local
authorities, makes all-the-year swimming possible, and instruction and
coaching is provided in some places by qualified teachers who hold certificates
for elementary or advanced teaching and coaching awarded by the Amateur
Swimming Association (ASA). The objects of the ASA are to promote
the teaching and practice of swimming, diving and water polo and to stimulate
public opinion in favour of providing proper accommodation and facilities
for them; and to draw up, publish and enforce uniform laws for the control
462
Racing
Horse-racing
Greyhound Racing
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
and regulation of amateur swimming, diving and water polo championships
and competitions in England.
Racing is a term which, in Britain, is taken to mean, first and foremost,
horse-racing. Others forms of racing include greyhound racing, coursing,
pony-racing, trotting races and pigeon flying.
Horse-racing has been known in England since Tudor times and even earlier.
The Jockey Club (formed about 1750), which controlled flat racing, and the
National Hunt Committee (founded in 1866), which controlled steeplechasing,
amalgamated as The Jockey Club in 1968. This body exercises control over
all horse-racing in England and indirectly in many other countries, and its
rules are the basis of universal turf procedure. In 1970 The Jockey Club was
granted a royal charter.
Flat racing is carried on from late March till November, and steeplechasing
from August to June.
The classic flat races are: the Two Thousand Guineas for colts and fillies,
and the One Thousand Guineas for fillies only, both run at Newmarket; the
Derby for colts and fillies and the Oakes for fillies only, both run at Epsom;
and the St. Leger for colts and fillies, run at Doncaster. The Derby is the
outstanding event in the racing calendar; it takes place annually in late May
or early June and the scene on Epsom Downs on Derby Day is one of the
most colourful and exciting of the sporting year. The most fashionable race¬
meeting of the season is held at Ascot in Berkshire, in mid-June, and is known
as ‘Royal Ascot’, being traditionally attended by the Sovereign.
The most important steeplechase meeting is the National Hunt Festival
Meeting at Cheltenham in March. The best known single steeplechase is the
Grand National at Aintree, near Liverpool, run annually since 1839.
In England and Wales there is racing on 58 racecourses (excluding point-
to-point courses) and Scotland has six racecourses. There is a total of about
900 days’ racing annually. There are some 11,000 horses in training in Great
Britain, at an average cost of ^20-^24 a week each.
Horse racecourses must be licensed by The Jockey Club. Facilities for cash
and credit betting are available on and off the racecourse, turnover being
subject to a government betting duty. On-course facilities are provided by
bookmakers, who must have personal permits, and by totalisators operated
by the Horserace Totalisator Board, which is empowered to deduct from
money staked with the totalisator such percentage as it may determine.
Facilities for off-the-course betting are provided in licensed betting offices, of
which there are some 15,000 throughout Great Britain. People under 18 years
old are forbidden by law to place bets.
A levy both from bookmakers and the Horserace Totalisator Board is
collected by the Horserace Betting Levy Board, which distributes the revenue
for purposes conducive to the improvement of horse breeding and racing, and
for the advancement and encouragement of veterinary science and education.
The Horserace Betting Levy Board is also responsible for the work of the
National Stud at Newmarket, which concentrates on providing stallions for
British breeders.
The racing of greyhounds after a mechanical hare started in Britain in 1926,
when the first modern greyhound track was opened at Belle Vue, Manchester.
There are now about 130 licensed tracks in operation, nearly all of them near
large towns, and meetings are held two or three times a week. The licensing
Riding
Show Jumping
sport 463
authorities for greyhound racing tracks are the county and county borough
councils. Some 10 million people a year attend greyhound racing.
The main authority for the sport is the National Greyhound Racing Club,
founded in 1928; its functions include drawing up the rules of greyhound
racing and keeping strict discipline over the sport. The 53 greyhound race¬
courses which accept the rules of the Club are the largest in the country and
account for approximately 92 per cent of the total attendance and totalisator
turnover. All are members of the National Greyhound Racing Society which
controls the general policies of greyhound racing, administers the affairs of,
and acts as spokesman for, the sport.
Greyhound racing can be conducted only at a licensed greyhound racecourse
and only on 104 racing days in a licensing year (1st July-30th June). There
are some 10,500 greyhounds in training under the National Greyhound
Racing Club Rules, and the average cost for their upkeep including training
is about £2’5° a week.
Where a totalisator is operated at a greyhound racecourse, up to i2|- per cent
(variable by regulation) of the money invested can be deducted for operational
expenses, and 5 per cent must be paid to the Government in respect of general
betting duty. Bookmakers are allowed to operate at a greyhound racecourse,
but are not permitted to bet on greyhound racing at totalisator odds unless the
consent of the occupiers of the tracks at which the totalisators are operated
is given.
The classic greyhound races are held at various racecourses in London, as
follows: the Gold Collar at Catford; the Greyhound National at the White
City; the Greyhound Derby at the White City; the Greyhound Oaks at
Harringay; the Scurry Gold Cup at Clapton; the Laurels at Wimbledon; the
St. Leger at Wembley; and the Cesarewitch at West Ham.
Interest in the art of horsemanship continues to increase; there are over
2,000 riding schools in Britain, of which nearly 250 are inspected and approved
by the British Horse Society, membership of which has risen to 17,000 (with
an affiliated membership of nearly 100,000). There are 315 riding clubs for
adults, whilst the Pony Club (open to young people up to the age of 21)—with
a world-wide membership of 75,000—has 288 branches in Britain.
The British Horse Society, as the National Equestrian Federation of Great
Britain, is the authority on all matters relating to horses and ponies, including
breeding, training, riding, show jumping, horse trials and dressage, and is
responsible for preparing equestrian teams for the Olympic Games and all
international events. The Society, which runs the National Equestrian
Centre at Stoneleigh, Warwickshire, is also the parent body of the Pony Club
and the riding clubs, and organises and provides tests, lectures, publications,
courses and examinations to promote horsemanship and horsemastership.
Horse trials are held throughout Britain during the spring and summer.
The three-day trials held each year—in April at Badminton, Gloucestershire,
in May at Tidworth, Hampshire, and in September at Burghley House,
Lincolnshire—are among the outstanding equestrian events of the year.
These trials include dressage, cross-country riding and show jumping; some
45 one-day trials on similar lines are held annually.
Show jumping competitions are held each year at over 800 shows. The
main events take place during the Royal International Horse Show (held at
the Wembley Stadium, under the auspices of the British Horse Society
towards the end of July)—the outstanding contest being the individual
464
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Boxing
Wrestling
jumping championship for the King George V Gold Cup. Jumping competi¬
tions are also a feature of the Horse of the Year Show, which takes place in
October at the Empire Pool, Wembley, and is acknowledged to be one of the
finest indoor horse shows in the world. The total membership of the British
Show Jumping Association has risen to over 8,000. The number of horses and
ponies registered is more than 6,000 and over .£150,000 is distributed annually
in prize money.
The selection of British riders and horses taking part in international
competitions (whose successes have materially contributed to the increased
popularity of show jumping) is the responsibility of the executive committee
of the Association.
Boxing as an English sport probably originated in Saxon times. Its modern
form, and the one that has been adopted in many overseas countries, dates
from 1865 when the Marquess of Queensberry drew up a set of rules which
eliminated much of the brutality that had hitherto characterised prize fighting,
and made the basis of the sport a trial of strength and skill.
Nowadays, many boys learn to box at school and in boys’ clubs, and there
are various amateur boxing competitions carried out according to the rules of
the Amateur Boxing Association (ABA), which controls all amateur boxing,
including schoolboy boxing, club and association boxing, and boxing in the
three Services.
Professional boxing is covered by the British Boxing Board of Control,
founded in 1929. The Board has strict medical regulations which provide
for the examination of boxers before each contest, and the appointment of
inspectors to ensure that the regulations are observed and that all contests are
‘vetted’ to safeguard against over-matching and exploitation.
Championships at fixed weights have been the rule in boxing contests since
the presentation of the Championship Challenge Belts by the late Lord
Lonsdale in 1909. Those organised by the ABA are decided at ten weights:
flyweight, bantamweight, featherweight, lightweight, light welterweight,
welterweight, light middleweight, middleweight, light heavyweight and
heavyweight. In professional boxing there are no light welterweight or light
middleweight categories.
Wrestling is one of the oldest sports in the world. The style most commonly
used in Britain is the ‘free’ style, which evolved from the Catch-as-Catch-Can
or Lancashire style, but Cumberland and Westmorland wrestling is still
practised in the north of England and in Scotland, and Cornish style wrestling
(in which the contestants wear rough canvas jackets by which all holds must
be taken) takes place in Cornwall. Wrestling in the free and Graeco-Roman
styles features at the Olympic Games; in the Commonwealth Games only
free style is wrestled.
Amateur wrestling in Britain is governed by the British Amateur Wrestling
Association, which is affiliated to the International Amateur Wrestling
Federation, under the rules of wrhich all wrestling is conducted. Professional
wrestling is usually in the ‘all-in’ or ‘free’ style, which is not the same as the
free style used in amateur wrestling.
Judo, an Olympic sport originating in Japan, has a large and growing follow¬
ing. In Britain it is governed by the British Judo Association, which is affiliated
to the International Judo Federation under the rules of which judo competi¬
tions are conducted. There are some 580 clubs in the Association, which has
Judo
Fencing
Motor Racing
Cycling
SPORT 465
coaching schemes assisted by the Ministry of Housing and Local Government
for some 15,000 registered individual members.
Fencing as a sport has made considerable progress throughout Britain during
the past 20 years. The Amateur Fencing Association (founded 1902) has nearly
700 clubs, and many classes are organised and financed by local authorities.
Fencing is also practised in many schools, and among the annual champion¬
ships held under the auspices of the Association are the National Schoolboys’
and Schoolgirls’ Championships, organised on a regional basis and attracting
a large number of entrants.
Motor racing is one of the most popular spectator sports in Britain; more
racing and sports cars have been built in Britain than in any other country;
and British drivers (including women drivers) have an international reputation
second to none.
British cars and British drivers take part in the international world classic
races which are the main features of the sport. They include the British
classic races—the British Grand Prix and the Tourist Trophy. There are also
many other British race meetings and rallies, as well as many day and night
rallies and trials, endurance tests, hill climbs and other events, arranged by
various driving clubs, of which there are over 1,100 in Great Britain.
The best-known motor racing circuits are those at Silverstone, Northamp¬
tonshire ; Crystal Palace, London; Brands Hatch, Kent; Snetterton, Norfolk;
Mallory Park, Leicestershire; Oulton Park, Cheshire; Thruxton, Hampshire;
Cadwell Park near Louth, Lincolnshire; Croft near Darlington, Co. Durham;
and Ingliston near Edinburgh, Scotland. The controlling body of motor
sport in Britain is the Royal Automobile Club (RAC), founded in 1897; the
RAC is represented on the Federation Internationale de 1’Automobile, which
draws up the regulations for international motor racing. Kart racing also comes
under the jurisdiction of the RAC.
In addition to motor car racing, there are motor cycle races—the most
important contest of the year is for the Isle of Man Tourist Trophy—and
motor cycle speedway racing, introduced into Britain in 1928, and governed
by the Speedway Control Board.
The internationally recognised body for cycle racing in the United Kingdom
is the British Cycling Federation which has 736 affiliated clubs and provides
third party insurance and a legal aid service for its members. It controls
track and massed start road racing in Britain, and is concerned with the cycling
events in the Olympic and Commonwealth Games and the annual world
championship. Time trials are organised by the Road Time Trials Council.
Touring by bicycle is catered for by both the British Cycling Federation
and the Cyclists’ Touring Club (CTC). The CTC is the oldest touring club
in the world and has a membership of some 20,000. Its representatives in all
parts of the United Kingdom give advice and practical help to touring
cyclists; its 50 district associations arrange holiday and week-end tours and
competitions, rallies and rides of all kinds; and its travel department gives
CTC members every facility, both at home and abroad, including the pro¬
vision of itineraries. Other benefits provided are a touring magazine, a
members handbook, legal aid and third party insurance.
Rifle Shooting The Joint Shooting Committee for Great Britain, founded in 1955, represents
its member associations—the National Rifle Association (NRA), the National
466
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Indoor Games
Small-Bore Rifle Association (NSRA) and the Clay Pigeon Shooting Associa¬
tion (CPSA)—in the International Shooting Union and the British Olympic
Association. The Committee sponsors all entries to international competitions.
Full-bore (7*62 mm and -303 in) rifle and pistol (high power) shooting is
organised by the NRA, founded in i860. The Imperial Meeting held
annually at Bisley Camp, Surrey, is attended by some 2,500 competitors from
Britain and other Commonwealth countries, including cadets from schools,
and lasts for just over a fortnight: the first week consists of team and individual
competitions for members of the armed forces, and there are three days for
schools only. The premier award of the meeting is the Queen’s Prize which
attracts about 1,000 entries. The NRA also organises postal matches for
British and overseas teams, and periodically sends rifle teams to shoot in other
Commonwealth countries.
Small-bore (’22) rifle and pistol shooting—carried out either on indoor
ranges of 15 to 25 yards in length or on open ranges up to 200 yards—is also
widely practised in Britain. Some 4,000 clubs throughout the country are
affiliated to the NSRA which arranges inter-club and inter-county competi¬
tions of various kinds for teams and individuals. Clubs also compete in county
and local groups. The NSRA organises a National Bisley Meeting (usually
attended by more than 2,000 competitors), a Scottish meeting (some 600
competitors), and the British Pistol Championships (some 500 competitors)
at Bisley. International small-bore rifle and pistol matches are held with teams
from overseas and British entries for the world championships and the
Olympic Games are made through the Joint Shooting Committee. The NSRA
provides coaching and advisory services.
Clay pigeon shooting clubs are situated in all parts of Great Britain; the
sport is governed by the CPSA (comprising individual shooters and clay
pigeon clubs) which represents Great Britain in major international events.
Indoor games played in Britain include billiards, table tennis and badminton,
which are enjoyed by large numbers of people, and for which facilities are
provided in social clubs of every kind, including youth clubs; and games
such as real tennis (a game which originated in thirteenth-century France),
squash rackets, rackets and fives, which are less national games than games of
the schools, universities and specialised clubs. Annual championships are
held in all these games, the controlling bodies of which are: the Billiards
Association and Control Council; the Badminton Association of England and
the Scottish Badminton Union; the Tennis, Rackets and Fives Association
and the Squash Rackets Association. Basket-ball is played in Britain both in¬
doors and outdoors, primarily by men and boys. In England there are nearly
1,000 senior clubs and the game is played in many schools. The controlling
body, The Amateur Basket Ball Association, organises championships and is
affiliated to the Federation Internationale de Basketball Amateur.
APPENDIX
CURRENCY
From 15th February 1971 a decimal system of currency will be used in Britain.
It will be based on the pound sterling divided into 100 new pence (p). There
will be six denominations: 50p; lOp; 5p; 2p; Ip; and |p. (For fuller details
see p. 370.)
Adoption of
Metric System
Length
Area
Capacity
Weight
(Avoirdupois)
METRIC EQUIVALENTS FOR BRITISH WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
The Metrication Board was set up in 1969 to promote the planning and
publicising of the changeover to the international system of units for weights
and measures throughout the economy and educational system, mainly by 1975.
12 inches
3 feet
1,760 yards
1 inch
1 foot
1 yard
1 mile
144 square inches
9 square feet
4,840 square yards
640 acres
2 pints =
4 quarts =
8 gallons =
8 bushels
1 pint
1 quart
1 gallon
1 bushel
1 quarter
16 oz.
141b.
112 lb.
20 cwt. (2,240 lb.)
2,000 lb.
2-54 centimetres
30-48 centimetres
0-914 metre
1-609 kilometres
= 1
= 1
= 1
1 square inch
1 square foot
square yard
acre
square mile
6-451 square centimetres
929-03 square centimetres
0-836 square metre
0-405 hectare
2-59 square kilometres
0-568 litre
1- 136 litres
4-546 litres
36-37 litres
2- 909 hectolitres
1 ounce (oz.)
1 pound (lb.)
1 stone (st.)
1 hundredweight (cwt.)
1 long ton
1 short ton
28-35 grammes
0-454 kilogramme
6-35 kilogrammes
50-8 kilogrammes
1-016 metric tons
0-907 metric ton
468
Double
Conversion
Tables for
Weights and
Measures
Thermometrical
Table
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
(Note: the central figures represent either of the two columns beside them,
as the case may be, for example, 1 centimetre = 0-394 inch, and 1 inch = 2-540
centimetres.)
Centi¬
metres
Inches
2-540
5-080
7-620
10-160
12-700
15-240
17-780
20-320
22-860
25-400
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0-394
0-787
1-181
1-575
1- 969
2- 362
2- 756
3- 150
3-543
3-937
Metres
Yards
0-914
1- 829
2- 743
3- 658
4- 572
5- 486
6- 401
7- 315
8- 230
9- 144
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1- 094
2- 187
3- 281
4- 374
5- 468
6- 562
7- 655
8- 749
9- 843
10-936
Kilo¬
metres
Miles
1-609
3- 219
4- 828
6-437
8- 047
9- 656
11-266
12-875
14-484
16-094
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0-621
1-243
1- 864
2- 485
3- 107
3- 728
4- 350
4- 971
5- 592
6- 214
Hec¬
tares
Acres
0-404
0-309
1-214
1- 619
2- 023
2-428
2- 833
3- 237
3- 642
4- 047
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
2-471
4-942
7-413
9-884
12-355
14-826
17-298
19-769
22-240
24-711
Kilo¬
grammes
Av.
Pounds
Litres
Pints
Litres
Gallons
Metric Hun-
Quintals dred-
per weight
Hectare per Acre
0-454
0-907
1-361
1- 814
2- 268
2- 722
3- 175
3- 629
4- 082
4-536
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
2-205
4-409
6-614
8-818
11-023
13-228
15-432
17-637
19-842
22-046
0-568
1-136
1- 705
2- 273
2- 841
3- 409
3- 978
4- 546
5- 114
5-682
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1-760
3-520
5-279
7- 039
8- 799
10-559
12-319
14- 078
15- 838
17-598
546
092
638
184
730
276
822
368
914
460
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0-220
0-440
0-660
0-880
1-100
1-320
1-540
1-760
1- 980
2- 200
1- 255
2- 511
3- 766
5- 021
6- 277
7- 532
8- 787
10- 043
11- 298
12- 553
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0-797
1- 593
2- 390
3- 186
3- 983
4- 780
5- 576
6- 373
7- 169
7-966
0° Centigrade = 32° Fahrenheit.
100° Centigrade = 212° Fahrenheit.
To convert “Fahrenheit into “Centigrade: subtract 32, then multiply by -f;
“Centigrade into “Fahrenheit: multiply by §, then add 32.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
This bibliography is in no sense comprehensive: it is only intended to be a guide to
further reading on the subjects covered in this handbook.
Readers are asked to note that in Britain the Central Office of Information
reference documents marked with an asterisk may be obtained, on payment of a
small charge, from the Central Office of Information, Reference Division Distribu¬
tion Unit, Hercules Road, Westminster Bridge Road, London SE1; and overseas
they may be obtained from British Information Offices.
Certain reference pamphlets produced by the Central Office of Information can
be purchased from Her Majesty's Stationery Office and its agents overseas. These
pamphlets are listed here with their respective prices {postage extra).
Acts of Parliament referred to in the text can be obtained at varying prices from
H.M. Stationery Office and its agents overseas.
Physical
Background
Demographic
Background
1. THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE
Bailey, Sir Edward. Geological Survey of Great Britain
Thomas Murby
Best, R. H. and Coppock, J. T. The Changing Use of Land in
Britain Faber
Bowen, David. Britain’s Weather David & Charles
East, W. Gordon, Editor. Regions of the British Isles (series)
Nelson
Fairbrother, N. New Lives, New Landscapes
Architectural Press
Martin, W. Keble. A Concise British Flora in Colour. 2nd edn
Ebury Press
Mitchell, J. B., Editor. Great Britain: Geographical Essays
Cambridge University Press
Mountfort, G., Hollom, P. A. D. and Peterson, R. A Field
Guide to the Birds of Britain and Europe. Rev. edn Collins
Newman, L. Hugh. The Complete British Butterflies in Colour
Michael Joseph
Reader’s Digest. Complete Atlas of the British Isles
The Reader's Digest Association
Stamp, L. Dudley. The Land of Britain: Its Use and Misuse.
3rd edn Longmans
 and Beaver, S. H. The British Isles: A Geographic and
Economic Survey. 5th rev. edn Longmans
British Regional Geology Handbooks HMSO
Meteorological Office Annual Report, 1969
HMSO
Allen, D. Elliston. British Tastes Hutchinson
Howard, Alexander. Endless Cavalcade: A Diary of British
Customs and Traditions Weidenfeld & Nicolson
Johns, E. A. The Social Structure of Modern Britain. Corrected
reprint Pergamon
Marsh, D. C. The Changing Social Structure of England and
Wales, 1871-1961 Routledge
Annual Reports
Registrar General, Northern Ireland For 1968 Belfast, HMSO
Registrar General, Scotland
Part I. Mortality Statistics For 1968 HMSO
Part II. Population and Vital Statistics For 1968 HMSO
1952
1962
1969
1960
onwards
1970
1969
1962
1966
1968
1966
1963
1962
1947
to
1966
1970
1968
1964
1966
1966
1970
1969
1969
£
1- 50
2- 10
2- 75
3- 15
to
5-25
3-75
2-50
2- 70
1-50
1- 75
5-50
5-25
3- 50
0-30
0-65
2- 25
1-50
0-87|
1-75
1-27|
3- 30
0-95
4?o
General Survey
The Monarchy
Parliament
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Annual Reports—contd.
Registrar General’s Statistical Review of England and Wales
Part I. Medical: Tables 1968 HMSO
Part II. Population: Tables 1968 HMSO
Part III. Commentary 1966 HMSO
Census of Northern Ireland 1966. General Report
Belfast, HMSO
Committee on the Age of Majority [Latey Report]
Cmnd 3342 HMSO
External Migration: A Study of the available Statistics 1815-1950,
by N. H. Carrier and J. R. Jeffery HMSO
Family Expenditure Survey 1969 HMSO
Residence in Britain: Notes for the Guidance of Persons from
Overseas Reference Paper R.5589/68 COI
Royal Commission on Population. Report Cmd 7695 HMSO
Sample Census 1966 Great Britain Summary Tables HMSO
Ulster Year Book 1970 Belfast, HMSO
Women in Britain
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.4497/64 HMSO
2. GOVERNMENT
Birch, A. H. The British System of Government Allen & Unwin
Calvert, H. Constitutional Law in Northern Ireland
Sweet & Maxwell
Clarke, John Joseph. Outlines of Central Government (including
the judicial system of England). 14th edn Pitman
Craigton, Lord. Insight into Government Pitman
Cross, J. A. British Public Administration
University Tutorial Press
Jennings, Sir Ivor. The British Constitution. 5th edn
Cambridge University Press
 The Queen’s Government Penguin
Keir, Sir D. Lindsay. The Constitutional History of Modern
Britain since 1485. 9th edn A. & C. Black
Lawrence, R. J. The Government of Northern Ireland: Public
Finance and Public Services Clarendon Press
Stacey, Frank. The Government of Modern Britain
Oxford University Press
Wade, E. C. S. Phillips, G. G. Constitutional Law. New edn.
Longmans
Hardie, F. The Political Influence of the British Monarchy
Batsford
The Monarchy in Britain
Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5526/68 COI
Abraham, L. A. and Hawtrey, S. C. A Parliamentary Dictionary.
2nd edn Butterworth
Butler, David E. and Freeman, Jennie. British Political Facts,
1900-1967. 2nd edn Macmillan
 and Stokes, D. Political Changes in Britain: Forces shaping
Electoral Choice Macmillan
Campion, Lord, Consultant Editor', Fellowes, Sir Edward and
Cocks, T. G. B., Editors. Sir Thomas Erskine May’s Treatise
on the Law, Privileges, Proceedings and Usage of Parliament
Butterworth
Coombes, David. The Member of Parliament and the Adminis¬
tration Allen & Unwin
Fairlie, Henry. The Life of Politics Methuen
Gordon, Strathearn. Our Parliament. 6th edn Cassell
Jennings, Sir Ivor. Party Politics
Vol I. Appeal to the People Cambridge University Press
Vol. II. The Growth of the Parties Cambridge University Press
Vol. III. The Stuff of Politics Cambridge University Press
Laundy, Philip. The Office of Speaker Cassell
 and Wilding, Norman. An Encyclopaedia of Parliament
Cassell
Richards, Peter G. Parliament and Foreign Affairs
Allen & Unwin
Roberts, Geoffrey K. Political Parties and Pressure Groups in
Britain Weidenfeld & Nicolson
£
1970 3-00
1970 1-50
1970 1-35
1968 1-50
1967 0-75
1953 0-42A
1970 1-62|
1968 *
1949 0-75
1967 1-62|
1970 0-75
1964 0 17i
1967 1-05
1968 5 00
1965 1-50
1965 1-05
1970 M0
1966 l-37i
1965 0-17f
1969 1-75
1965 1-75
1968 1-05
1967 2-50
1970 2 10
1968 *
1964 l-37£
1968 3-50
1970 4-50
1964 6-75
1966 1-75
1968 2-10
1964 1-50
1960 2-25
1961 2-50
1962 2-52£
1964 3-75
1968 4-20
1967 1-75
1970 2-50
BIBLIOGRAPHY
The Prime
Minister, The
Privy Council,
Government,
Government
Departments
Local
Government
‘The Times.’ House of Commons 1970 The Time'!
The British Parliament
CO! Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5448/68 HMSO
1 he Growth of Parliamentary Government in Britain
™ _ . . Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5625/66 COI
1 he Organisation of Political Parties in Britain
„ . Reference Paper R.4769/69 CO/
Parliamentary Elections in Britain
Reference Paper R.5513/70 COI
Benemy, F. W. G. The Elected Monarch: The Development of
the Power of the Prime Minister Harrap
Brown, R. G. S. The Administrative Process in Britain Methuen
Pry Geoffrey Kingdom. Statesmen in Disguise. The Changing
Role of the Administrative Class of the Home Civil Service
1853-1966 Macmillan
Gladden, E. N. Civil Services in the United Kingdom
n/r t ^ Frank Cass
Magkintosh, John P. The British Cabinet. 2nd edn Stevens
New Whitehall Series: For the Royal Institute of Public Adminis¬
tration
The Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, by Sir John
Winmfnth Allen & Unwin
The Colonial Office, by Sir Charles Jeffries Allen & Unwin
Her Majesty s Customs and Excise, by Siv James Crombie
rp, p . „ ™ . r , „ Allen & Unwin
Ihe r oreign Office, by Lord Strang and others
rp, TT „ Allen & Unwin
A he Home Office, by Sir Frank Newsam Allen & Unwin
The Ministry of Housing and Local Government, by Evelyn
rpC’k^P , „ Allen & Unwin
I he Inland Revenue, by Sir Alexander Johnston
rp, , p . . Allen & Unwin
ihe Ministry of Pensions and National Insurance, by Sir
Geoffrey King AUen & Unwin
^ cp ‘=lCOtt:is'1 Office and other Scottish Departments, by
Sir David Milne Allen & Unzuin
The Treasury, by Lord Bridges. 2nd edn Allen & Unwin
1 he Ministry of Works, by Sir Harold Emmerson
A.H&ti Unwin
Ogilvy-Webb, Marjorie. The Government Explains
. , „ Allen & Unwin
Annual Reports
Civil Service Department For 1969 HMSO
Her Majesty’s Civil Service Commissioners For 1969 CSC
The British Civil Service Reference Paper R.5599/67 COI
Central Government in Britain
o COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5564/67 HMSO
Ihe Civil Service. Report of the Committee 1966-68 (Fulton
T,ReP0Trt.) , A/r. . Cmnd 3638 HMSO
Hei Majesty s Ministers and Heads of Public Departments
[5 issues a year] HMSO
Parliamentary Commissioner for Administration: Report for
1969-70 HMSO
Clarke, J. J. Outlines of Local Government of the United
Kingdom. 20th rev. edn Pitman
Cross, C. A. Principles of Local Government Law. 3rd edn
p. „ Sweet & Maxwell
Drain, Geoffrey. The Organisation and Practice of Local
Government Heincmcinn
Griffith, J. A. G. Central Departments and Local Authorities
tt ttt „ _ , Allen & Unwin
Hart, William O. Introduction to the Law of Local Government
and Administration. 7th rev. edn Butterworth
Headrick, T. E. The Town Clerk in English Local Government
T t-, x m, iw . Allen & Unwin
Jackson, R. M. The Machinery of Local Government. 3rd edn
t ttt p . . Macmillan
Jackson, W. Eric. Achievement: A Short History of the London
County Council Longmans
1970
1968
1966
1969
1970
1965
1970
1969
1967
1968
1962
1955
1962
1955
1955
1969
1965
1958
1958
1967
1956
1965
1970
1970
1967
1967
1968
1970
1969
1966
1966
1966
1968
1962
1968
1968
471
l
3-50
0-22|
*
*
0-80
3-75
6-00
1- 75
2- 75
1-50
0-90
1-50
1- 05
0-90
2- 00
1-00
1-25
1-25
1-50
1-00
1- 40
O-37-i
free
*
0-17|
0-87i
0-20
0-75
2- 00
3-90
1-75
3-00
3-75
1-40
1-25
0-50
Q
472
BRITAIN I97i: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Fire Service
The Law
Jewell, R. E. C. Central and Local Government Knight
Mapstone, L. and Pearce, P. An Introduction to Local Govern¬
ment in England and Wales. 2nd edn Estates Gazette
Municipal Year Book and Public Utilities Directory
For 1970 Municipal Journal
Schofield, A. N. Local Government Elections. 2nd edn Shaw
Annual Reports
Ministry of Development (Northern Ireland)
For 1968-69 Cmd 537 Belfast, HMSO
Ministry of Housing and Local Government
For 1967 and 1968 Cmnd 4009 HMSO
The Corporation of the City of London
Reference Paper R.4864/66 COI
Local Government in Britain
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5505/68 HMSO
Local Government in Wales Cmnd 3340 HMSO
Local Government Reform [summary of Maud Report]
Cmnd 4039 HMSO
Local Government Reorganisation in Glamorgan and Monmouth¬
shire Cmnd 4310 HMSO
The Management of Local Government
Vol. I. Report of the Committee HMSO
Reform of Local Government in England Cmnd 4276 HMSO
Scotland: Local Government Reform (Summary of Wheatley
Report) Cmnd 4150-1 HMSO
The Staffing of Local Government. Report of the Committee
HMSO
Fire Protection Directory 1970 Benn
Annual Reports
Departmental Report on the Fire Services for Scotland
For 1968 Cmnd 4110 HMSO
Fire Research 1969 HMSO
H.M. Chief Inspector of Fire Services (England and Wales)
For 1969 Cmnd 4397 HMSO
The Fire Services in Britain Reference Paper R.5580/67 COI
Report of the Departmental Committee of the Fire Service
Cmnd 4371 HMSO
3. LAW AND ORDER
Abel-Smith, Brian and Stevens, Rosert. In Search of Justice:
Society and the Legal System The Penguin Press
Black, H. K. and Latham-Brown, D. J. An Outline of English
Law Methuen
Cornish, W. R. The Jury The Penguin Press
Edwards, J. LI. J. Law Officers of the Crown Sweet & Maxwell
Fanner and Latham, Editors. Stone’s Justices’ Manual
Butterworth
Foulkes, David. Introduction to Administrative Law
Butterworth
Gibb, A. D. A Preface to Scots Law. 4th edn William Green
Giles, F. T. The Magistrates’ Courts Stevens
Halsbury, Lord. Laws of England. 3rd edn. Editor-in-Chief
Viscount Simonds. 43 vols Butterworth
Hanbury, H. G. English Courts of Law. 4th edn
Oxford University Press
Harding, Alan. A Social History of English Law Penguin
Holdsworth, Sir William. A History of English Law. 16 vols.
MethuenjSweet & Maxwell
Jackson, R. M. The Machinery of Justice in England. 5th edn
Cambridge University Press
James, Philip S. Introduction of English Law. 7th edn
Butterworth
James, T. E. Children and the Law Pergamon
Jenks, Edward. The Book of English Law. 6th edn
John Murray
L
1966 2 10
1965 2-12£
1970 8-40
1962 5-25
1970 0-25
1969 0-724
1966 *
1968 0-20
1967 0-20
1969 0 17|
1970 0-20
1967 0-75
1970 0-20
1969 0-15
1967 1 05
1970 3-50
1969 0-11
1970 0-75
1970 0-174
1967 *
1970 1 00
1968 2-65
1966 1 05
1968 2-50
1964 4-20
1970 9-00
1968 1-50
1964 1-00
1963 1-25
1954 258-00
to
1964
1967 0-374
1966 0-374
1956 2-70
to to
1968 4-50
1967 2-50
1969 1-75
1966 0-50
1967 1-75
Treatment of
Offenders
The Police
Service
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Radzinowicz, Leon. A History of English Criminal Law and its
Administration from 1750. 4 vols Stevens
Street, Harry. Freedom, the Individual and the Law. 2nd edn
Penguin
Wade, H. W. R. Administrative Law. 2nd edn
Oxford University Press
Walker, D. M. The Scottish Legal System William Green
Yardley, D. C. M. Introduction to British Constitutional Law.
3rd edn Butterworth
Annual Reports
The Law Commission for 1968-69 HMSO
The Law Society on the Legal Aid and Advice Act
For 1968-69 HMSO
The Law Society of Scotland on the Legal Aid Scheme
For 1968-69 HMSO
Council on Tribunals For 1969 HMSO
Criminal Statistics, England and Wales
For 1969 Cmnd 4398 HMSO
Criminal Statistics, Scotland For 1969 Cmnd 4423 HMSO
Scottish Law Commission For 1968-69 HMSO
The English Legal System
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5312/68 HMSO
Justices of the Peace in England and Wales. The appointment and
duties of HMSO
Royal Commission Assizes and Quarter Sessions [Beeching Report]
Cmnd 4153 HMSO
Bishop, G. M. F. They All Come Out Allen & Unwin
Bresler, Fenton. Reprieve: A Study of a System Harrap
McClean, J. D. and Wood, J. C. Criminal Justice and the
Treatment of Offenders Sweet & Maxwell
Morris, Pauline. Prisoners and Their Families Allen Unwin
Rose, Gordon. Schools for Young Offenders Tavistock
Walker, N. D. Crime and Punishment in Britain
Edinburgh University Press
West, D. J. The Young Offender Duckworth
Wolff, Michael. Prison. The Penal Institutions of Britain—
prisons, borstals, detention centres, attendance centres, approved
schools and remand homes Eyre & Spottiswoode
The After-Care and Supervision of Discharged Prisoners. Report
of the Sub-committee of the Advisory Council on the Treatment
of Offenders HMSO
Annual Reports
Parole Board For 1969 HMSO
Parole Board for Scotland For 1969 HMSO
Prisons in Scotland For 1968 Cmnd 4218 HMSO
The Work of the Prison Department 1968 Cmnd 4186 HMSO
Children in Trouble Cmnd 3601 HMSO
Children and Young Persons, Scotland. Report by the Committee
appointed by the Secretary of State for Scotland
Cmnd 2306 HMSO
Compensation for Victims of Crimes of Violence
Cmnd 2323 HMSO
People in Prison Cmnd 4214 HMSO
Report on the Work of the Probation and After-Care Department,
1966-68 Cmnd 4233 HMSO
The Sentence of the Court. A Handbook for Courts on the
Treatment of Offenders HMSO
Social Work and the Community Cmnd 3065 HMSO
The Treatment of Offenders in Britain
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.4414/68 HMSO
Conlin, J. Local and Central Government: Police Adminis¬
tration Cassell
Critchley, T. A. A History of the police in England and
Wales, 900—1966 Constable
Howe, Sir Ronald Martin. The Story of Scotland Yard
Barker
Marshall, Geoffrey. Police and Government: the Status and
Accountability of the English Constable Methuen
Whitaker, Ben. The Police Eyre & Spottiswoode
Q 2
473
l
1948 5-50
to to
1968 7-00
1967 0-30
1967 1-50
1969 3-75
1969 1-60
1969 0-20
1970 0-374-
1970 0-374
1970 0-22|-
1970 1-50
1970 0-32|
1969 0-11
1968 0-224
1967 free
1969 0-874
1965 1-25
1965 1-25
1969 3-15
1965 1-05
1967 2-60
1965 3-50
1967 1-75
1967 2-50
1964 0-15
1970 0-274
1970 0-11“
1970 0-40
1970 0-32-4
1968 0-10
1964 0-35
1964 0-034
1969 0-624
1969 0-424
1966 0-25
1966 0-11
1968 0-20
1967 2-10
1967 2-50
1965 1-25
1965 0-37
1964 1-05
474
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Annual Reports
Commissioner of the Police of the Metropolis
For 1969 Cmnd 4355 HMSO
H.M. Chief Inspector of Constabulary for Scotland
For 1969 Cmnd 4396 HMSO
H.M. Chief Inspector of Constabulary (Counties and
Boroughs in England and Wales) For 1969 HMSO
Police. Choice of Careers. New Series No. 80 HMSO
The Police Service in Britain
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5598/69 HMSO
4. DEFENCE
Barnett, Correlli. Britain and Her Army 1509-1970
Allen Lane
Brassey’s Annual: The Armed Forces Year Book 1969, edited by
Major-General J. L. Moulton and others Clowes
Jane’s All the World’s Aircraft 1970-71, edited by John W. R.
Taylor Sampson, Low, Marston
Jane’s Fighting Ships 1970-71, edited by R. V. B. Blackman
Sampson, Low, Marston
Jane’s Weapons Systems 1970—71, edited by R. T. Pretty and D.
Archer Sampson, Low, Marsion
The Military Balance 1969-70 Institute for Strategic Studies
Supply Estimates 1970-71, Defence HMSO
Statement on the Defence Estimates Cmnd 4290 HMSO
1970
1970
1970
1963
1969
1970
1969
1970
1970
1970
1968
1970
1970
State and
Voluntary
Services
Social Security
Health and
Welfare
5. SOCIAL WELFARE
Brown, M. Introduction to Social Administration in Britain
Hutchinson 1969
Forder, A., Editor. Penelope Hall’s Social Services of England
and Wales Routledge 1969
Hancock, A. and Willmott, P., Editors. The Social Workers
BBC 1965
Tefferys, M. An Anatomy of Social Welfare Services
Michael Joseph 1965
Morris, Mary. Voluntary Work in the Welfare State Routledge 1970
National Council of Social Service. Voluntary Social Services:
Handbook of Information and Directory of Organisations. Rev.
edn NCSS 1970
 Directory of Grant-making Trusts NCSS 1968
 Public Social Services: Handbook of Information. 12th
edn NCSS 1966
Willmott, Phyllis. Consumers’ Guide to the British Social
Services Penguin 1967
Annual Report
Charity Commissioners for England and Wales
For 1969 HMSO 1970
Hobman, David. A Guide to Voluntary Service. Rev. edn^^^^ 1969
Social Services in Britain  
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5595/69 HMSO 1969
George, V. N. Social Security: Beveridge and After Routledge
Gilbert, B. B. The Evolution of National Insurance in Great
Britain Michael Joseph
Gregg, Pauline. The Welfare State Harrap
A Guide to Social Security HMSO
Social Security in Britain  
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5455/70 HMSO
1968
1966
1967
1969
1970
Abel-Smith, B. A History of the Nursing Profession Heinemann 1960
Brockington, C. F. A Short History of Public Health. 2nd edn
J. & A. Churchill 1966
Dainton, Courtney. The Story of England’s Hospitals
Museum Press 1961
Farndale, J., Editor. Trends in the National Health Service
Pergamon 1964
Farndale, J. and Freeman, H., Editors. New Aspects of the
Mental Health Services Pergamon 1967
£
0-47J
015
0-55
009
0-22£
5-00
4-20
10-50
10-50
10-50
0-50
0-55
0-52|
1-25
1- 75
0-42
3- 00
2- 50
0-62£
4- 00
0-80
0-30
0-17£
0-25
0-62£
1-75
4- 20
1- 87|
free
0-22£
2- 10
1-50
1-05
7-00
5- 25
Child Care
Immigration and
Race Relations
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Forsyth, Gordon. Doctors and State Medicine: a study of the
British Health Service Pitman {Medical)
National Old People’s Welfare Council. The Elderly:
handbook on care and services NCSS
National Society for Clean Air. Clean Air Year Book 1970-71
NSCA
Parker, Julia. Local Health and Welfare Services
Allen & Unwin
Timms, N. Psychiatric Social Work in Great Britain Routledge
Townsend, P. and Weddereurn, Dorothy. The Aged in the
Welfare State Bell
Annual Reports
Central Health Services Council For 1969 HMSO
Department of Health and Social Security
For 1969 Cmnd 4462 HMSO
Ministry of Health. On the State of the Public Health
For 1968 HMSO
Ministry of Health and Social Services (Northern Ireland).
Report of the Chief Medical Officer
For 1966 Cmd 510 Belfast, HMSO
Scottish Home and Health Department and Scottish Health
Services Council. Health Services in Scotland
For 1969 Cmnd 4392 HMSO
Care of the Elderly in Britain Reference Paper R. 5858/69 CO I
Plealth and Welfare: The Development of Community Care.
Revision to 1975-76 Cmnd 3022 HMSO
Health Education. Report of a Joint Committee of the Central
and Scottish Health Services Councils HMSO
Health Services in Britain
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5154/68 HMSO
The Hospital Building Programme. A revision of the Hospital
Plan for England and Wales Cmnd 3000 HMSO
Hospital Plan for Northern Ireland 1966-75
Cmd 497 Belfast, HMSO
Rehabilitation and Care of the Disabled in Britain
Reference Pamphlet RF.P.4972/69 COI
The Rehabilitation of Drug Addicts. Report of the Advisory Com¬
mittee on Drug Dependence HMSO
Report of the Committee on Local Authority and Allied Personal
Social Services [Seebohm Report] Cmnd 3703 HMSO
Report of the Royal Commission on Medical Education
Cmnd 3569 HMSO
Review of the Hospital Plan for Scotland Cmnd 2877 HMSO
Rowe, J., Parents, Children and Adoption Routledge
Stroud, John. An introduction to the Child Care Service
Longmans
Annual Reports
Child Care in Scotland, 1968 Cmnd 4069 HMSO
Children in Care in England and Wales, March 1969
Cmnd 4263 HMSO
Children in Britain
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5236/67 HMSO
Children in Trouble Cmnd 3601 HMSO
Banton, Michael. Race Relations Tavistock
Rose, E. J. B. and Associates. Colour and Citizenship. A report
on British race relations
For Institute of Race Relations OUP
Sivanandan, A. Coloured immigrants in Britain. Select biblio¬
graphy. 3rd edn Institute of Race Relations
Annual Reports
Community Relations Commission For 1969-70 HMSO
Race Relations Board For 1969-70 HMSO
Commonwealth Immigrants Acts 1962 and 1968. Statistics 1969
Cmnd 4327 HMSO
6. EDUCATION
Argles, Michael. South Kensington to Robbins: An Account
of Technical and Scientific Education since 1851 Longmans
Association of Commonwealth Universities. Commonwealth
Universities Yearbook, 1970 The Association
475
£
1966 1-50
1968 0-42^
1970 0-50
1965 1-50
1964 1-60
1966 1-05
1970 0-15
1970 2-00
1969 l-27jr
1967 0-22i
1970 0-75
1969 *
1966 1-87|-
1964 0-27%
1968 0-39
1966 0-30
1966 0-121
1969 *
1968 0-20
1968 1-55
1968 t-42i
1966 0-071
1966 1-60
1966 0-62-|
1969 0-12£
1970 0-121
1967 0-32£
1968 0-10
1967 3-15
1969 2-75
1969 1-05
1970 0-22-|
1970 0-35
1970 0-12^
1966 1-05
1970 9-25
476
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Association of Commonwealth Universities United Kingdom
Postgraduate Awards, 1969—71 The Association
Association of Teachers in Colleges and Departments of
Education. Handbook for Colleges and Departments of
Education Lund Humphries
Baron, George. A Bibliographical Guide to the English Educa¬
tional System. 3rd edn Athlone Press
Bennard, C. and Simon, B. Halfway There (Comprehensive
Schools) McGraw-Hill
British Council. Annual Report, 1968-69 British Council
■ and The Association of Commonwealth Universities.
Higher Education in the United Kingdom: A Handbook for
Students from Overseas Biennial Longmans
Burgess, Tyrrell. A Guide to English Schools Penguin
Callender, Patricia. Programmed Learning, its Development
and Structure Longmans
Committee of Vice-chancellors and Principals of the
Universities of the United Kingdom. A Compendium of
Entrance Requirements for First Degree Courses in the
United Kingdom, 1970-72 Annual
Association of Commonwealth Universities
Council for National Academic Awards. Compendium of
Degree Courses 1970 CNAA
 Report for 1968-69 CNAA
Dent, H. C., Editor. Year Book of Technical Education and
Training for Industry, 1970 A. & C. Black
The Educational System of England and Wales
University of London Press
Education Committees Year Book, 1970—71
Councils and Education Press
Gross, Richard E., Editor. British Secondary Education
Oxford University Press
Jackson, Stephen. Special Education in England and Wales
Oxford University Press
Kelly, Thomas. A History of Adult Education
Liverpool University Press
Layard, R., King, J. and Moser, C. The Impact of Robbins
Penguin
Lester-Smith, W. O., Education in Great Britain
Oxford University Press
Maclure, J. Stuart. Educational Documents, England and
Wales, 1816-1967 Chapman & Hall
Mountford, Sir James, British Universities
Oxford University Press
National Institute of Adult Education. Adult Education in
the United Kingdom: A Directory of Organisations Annual
National Institute of Adult Education
Provision for Adult Education
National Institute of Adult Education
Perkin, H. J. New Universities in the United Kingdom OEDC
Robinson, Eric E. The New Polytechnics Penguin
Universities Central Council on Admission. Fifth Report,
1968-69 UCCA
Annual Reports
Department of Education and Science [with other departments].
Education Statistics for the United Kingdom HMSO
[England and Wales] Education and Science in 1969 HMSO
Statistics of Education [6 volumes]
Voi: 1 (1968) Schools HMSO
Vol. 2 (1968) School Leavers, GCE and CSE HMSO
Vol. 3 (1967) Further Education HMSO
Vol. 4 (1968) Teachers HMSO
Vol. 5 (1968) Finance and Awards HMSO
Vol. 6 (1968) Universities HMSO
Blackie, John. Inside the Primary School HMSO
Burgess, Tyrrell. Inside Comprehensive Schools HMSO
Ministry of Education for Northern Ireland
Education in Northern Ireland 1969 Cmd 542
Belfast, HMSO
Education Statistics No. 8 Belfast, HMSO
Scottish Education Department
Education in Scotland in 1969 Cmnd 4312 HMSO
Scottish Educational Statistics 1969 HMSO
1969
1969
1965
1970
1969
1970
1969
1970
1970
1970
1970
1970
1969
1970
1965
1966
1962
1969
1968
1968
1966
1970
1970
1969
1968
1970
1967
1970
1969
1970
1969
1970
1970
1970
1967
1970
1970
1969
1970
1970
£
0-50
0-87|
0-75
2-25
o-m
0-50
0-25
1-75
0-90
free
free
2-50
1- 50
2- 50
1- 50
0-67£
2- 10
0-30
0-32-1
2-50
0-37£
0-65
2-10
2-40
0-30
0-40
1-25
1-00
1-50
1-50
0-87*
1- 55
0-90
2- 40
0-25
0-30
0-30
0-87i
0-47i
1-65
Youth Services
Town and
Country Planning
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Children and their Primary Schools. Report of the Central
Advisory Council for Education (England) [Plowden Report]
Vol. I. Report HMSO 1967
Vol. II. Research and Surveys HMSO 1967
Day Release. Report of a Committee set up by the Minister of
Education [Henniker-Heaton Report] HMSO 1964
Education in Britain Reference Pamphlet RF.P.47S1/66 CO I 1966
Half our Future. Report of the Central Advisory Council for
Education (England) [Newsom Report] HMSO 1963
The Health of the School Child. Report of the Chief Medical
Officer of the Department of Education and Science Biennial
For 1966-68 HMSO 1970
Higher Education [Robbins Report] Cmnd 2154 HMSO 1963
Higher Education. Government Statement on the Robbins Report
Cmnd 2165 HMSO 1963
Higher Education in Northern Ireland [Lockwood Report]
Cmd 475 Belfast, HMSO 1965
Higher Education in Northern Ireland: Government Statement
on the Lockwood Report Cmd 480 Belfast, HMSO 1965
The Open University. Report of the Planning Committee
HMSO 1969
Plan for Polytechnics and Other Colleges: Higher Education in
the Further Education System Cmnd 3006 HMSO 1966
Primary Education in Scotland HMSO 1965
Primary Education in Wales HMSO 1968
Technician Courses and Examinations. Report of the Committee
HMSO 1969
Universities in Britain Reference Paper R.5520/69 COI 1969
University Grants Committee
Annual Survey, Academic Year 1968-69 Cmnd 4261 HMSO 1970
University Development 1962-67 Cmnd 3820 HMSO 1968
477
£
1-25
1-621
0-15
0-421
0-721
1-20
0031
1-00
0-02-1
0-20
0-071
0-521
1-62|
0-621
*
0-20
0-971
Duke of Edinburgh’s Award Scheme: Report for 1969-70
Duke of Edinburgh’s Award Office 1970
Hawes, Derek. Young People Today SCNVYO/NCSS 1966
Hogan, J. M. The Future of the Youth Service
Leeds University Institute of Education 1965
Morse, Mary. The Unattached Penguin 1965
National Council of Social Service. Young People and
Voluntary Service NCSS 1965
Standing Conference of National Voluntary Youth Organi¬
sations. Annual Report and Directory, 1968-69 NCSS 1969
Development of the Youth Service Cmd 424 Belfast, HMSO 1961
Youth and Community Work in the 70s HMSO 1969
Youth Services in Britain Reference Paper R.5506 COI 1963
free
0-30
0-121
0-17}
0-10
0-05
0-06
0-75
*
7. PLANNING AND HOUSING
Annual Reports
Ministry of Housing and Local Government
For 1967 and 1968 Cmnd 4009 HMSO 1969
Northern Ireland Ministry of Development
For 1968-69 Cmd 537 Belfast, HMSO 1970
Scottish Development Department For 1969 Cmnd 4313 HMSO 1970
Bracey, H. E. People and the Countryside Routledge 1970
Fedden, Robin. The Continuing Progress. A History of the
National Trust Longmans 1968
Gibberd, Frederick. Town Design. 5th edn Architectural Press 1967
Heap, Desmond. An Outline of Planning Law. 5th edn
Sweet & Maxwell 1969
Osborn, Sir Frederic and Whittick, Arnold. The New Towns:
The Answer to Megalopolis. 2nd edn Leonard Hill 1969
Schaffer, F. The New Town Story McGibbon & Kee 1970
Tetlow, John, and Goss, Anthony. Homes, Towns and Traffic
Faber 1968
Thomas, Ray. London’s New Towns PEP 1969
Administration of Town and Country Planning in Northern
Ireland Cmd 465 Belfast, HMSO 1964
Annual Reports
Commission for the New Towns For 1968-69 HMSO 1969
Countryside Commission (E & W) For 1968-69 HMSO 1969
0-72|
0-25
0-62J
3- 15
2-10
4- 20
2-50
8-40
2-75
2-50
0-50
0-05
0-474
0-50
4?8
Housing
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Annual Reports—contd.
Countryside Commission for Scotland For 1969 HMSO
Development Corporations of the New Towns
England and Wales For 1968-69 HMSO
Scotland For 1968-69 HMSO
Ulster Countryside Commission For 1968-69 Belfast, HMSO
Bath, Chester, Chichester and York: Studies in Conservation
HMSO
Historic Towns: Preservation and Change HMSO
Leisure in the Countryside Cmnd 2928 HMSO
National Park Guides HMSO
The New Towns of Britain
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.4506/69 HMSO
People and Planning HMSO
Protection of the Environment Cmnd 4373 HMSO
Town and Country Planning Cmnd 3333 HMSO
Town and Country Planning in Britain
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.535S/68 HMSO
Planning Bulletins Nos. 1-8 HMSO
Cullingworth, J. B. English Housing Trends Bell
 Housing and Local Government in England and Wales
Allen & Unwin
Donnison, D. V. The Government of Housing Penguin
Morris, R. N. and Mogey, John. The Sociology of Housing
Routledge
Needleman, Lionel. The Economics of Housing Staples Press
Town and Country Planning Association. Housing in Britain
T and CPA
Council Housing. Purposes, Procedures and Priorities (Culling¬
worth Report) HMSO
Homes for Today and Tomorrow [Parker Morris Report] HMSO
Housing Design Bulletins Nos. 1-20 HMSO
Housing in Britain COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5875/70 HMSO
Housing Statistics Great Britain Quarterly HMSO
Local Housing Statistics England and Wales Quarterly HMSO
Old Blouses into New Homes Cmnd 3602 HMSO
The Older Houses in Scotland, A Plan for Action
Cmnd 3598 HMSO
£
1970 0-40
1969 2-50
1969 M2J
1970 0-20
1969 24-50
1967 1-374
1966 0-074
0-25
1969 0-29
1969 0-75
1970 0-15
1967 0-14
1968 0-29
1962 0-10
to to
1967 0-524
1965 0-50
1966 2-00
1967 0-524
1965 2-10
1965 2-10
1964 5-25
1969 0-75
1961 0-20
1962 0-06
to to
1970 1-00
1970 0-274
0-60
0-65
1968 0-14
1968 0-09
8. THE CHURCHES
Baptist Union of Great Britain and Ireland. Handbook
For 1970 Baptist Union 1970
Catholic Directory, 1970 Burns £? Oates 1970
Church of England. Official Yearbook, 1970. For the Church
Assembly Church Information Office 1970
Church of Scotland. Year Book
For 1970 Church of Scotland Committee of Publications 1970
Congregational Union of England and Wales. Congregational
Year Book for 1970—71 Independent Press 1970
Episcopal Church in Scotland. Year Book and Directory
For 1970-71 Representative Church Council of
the Episcopal Church in Scotland 1970
Mayfield, Guy. The Church of England. 2nd edn
Oxford University Press 1963
Methodist Church. Minutes of the Annual Conference of the
Methodist Church, 1970 Methodist Publishing House 1970
Partners in Ministry. Report of Royal Commission on the
Deployment and Payment of the Clergy
Church Information Office 1967
Paul, Leslie. The Deployment and Payment of the Clergy
Church Information Office 1964
Presbyterian Church of England. Official Handbook
For 1970-71 Presbyterian Church of England 1970
Presbyterian Church of Wales. Year Book
For 1970 Presbyterian Church of Wales 1970
1-25
1- 75
2- 10
0-50
2-10
0-75
0-624
1-50
0-124
0-624
0-524
0-374
BIBLIOGRAPHY
479
Salvation Army. Year Book
For 1970 Salvationist Publishing & Supplies 1970
Unitarian and Free Christian Churches. Handbook (for
1967—70) and Directory (for 1969—70) Lindsey Press 1969
United Free Church of Scotland. Handbook
For 1970-71 United Free Church of Scotland 1970
Wallach, M., Editor. The Jewish Year Book, 1970
Jewish Chronicle Publications 1970
£
0-50
0-75
0-15
1-75
The Sciences
The Arts
9. PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS
Ball, I. D. L., Editor. Industrial Research in Britain. 7th edn
Harrap
British Council. Scientific and Learned Societies of Great
Britain: A Handbook compiled from Official Sources. 61st edn
Allen & Unwin
Lovell, Bernard. The Story of Jodrell Bank
Oxford University Press
Purver, M. The Royal Society: Concept and Creation Routledge
Who’s Who of British Scientists Longmans
Annual Reports
Agricultural Research Council For 1968—69 HMSO
Atomic Energy Authority For 1968—69 HMSO
Council for Scientific Policy. 2nd Report Cmnd 3420 HMSO
Medical Research Council For 1969—70 HMSO
National Research Development Corporation
For 1969-70 HMSO
Natural Environment Research Council For 1969-70 HMSO
Science Research Council For 1969—70 HMSO
Britain and International Scientific Co-operation
Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5814/68 COI
British Winners of Nobel Prizes for Science
Reference Paper R.8791 COI
Council for Scientific Policy. Report of the Working Party on
Liaison between Universities and Government Research
Establishments (Chairman: Sir Gordon Sutherland)
Cmnd 3222 HMSO
Electronics in Automation in Britain: An Outline
Reference Paper R.5833/68 COI
Enquiry into the Flow of Candidates in Science and Technology
into Higher Education. Report Cmnd 3541 HMSO
The Flow into Employment of Scientists, Engineers and Tech¬
nologists Cmnd 3760 HMSO
Going Metric, the First Five Years 1965-69. First Report of the
Metriculation Board HMSO
Industrial Research and Development in Britain
Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5820/68 COI
Notes on Science and Technology in Britain
Reference Paper R.5476/Series COI
Nuclear Energy in Britain
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5151/69 HMSO
The Protection of the Environment Cmnd 4373 HMSO
Report from the Select Committee on Science and Technology.
Session 1966-67. United Kingdom Nuclear Reactor Programme
HMSO
Report on Marine Science and Technology HMSO
Scientific Research in British Universities and Colleges, 1969-70
Vol. I. Physical Sciences HMSO
Vol. II. Biological Sciences HMSO
Vol. III. Social Sciences HMSO
Statistics of Science and Technology 1970 HMSO
Technological Innovation in Britain. Report of the Central
Advisory Council for Science and Technology HMSO
Thirteenth Report from the Estimates Committee. Session
1966-67. Space Research and Development HMSO
Arts Council of Great Britain. Changes and Moves. Twenty-
fourth Annual Report, 1968-69 Arts Council
The Obscenity Laws: Report of the Arts Council Working Party
Deutsch
1968 8-40
1964 2-25
1968 2-25
1967 1-75
1969 15-00
1969 0-62^
1969 0-62|
1967 0-21
1970 0-45
1970 0-37J
1970 0-65
1970 0-42|
1968 *
1966 *
1967 0-72|
1968 *
1968 0-65
1968 0-87J
1970 0-62i
1968 *
1962 *
to
1970
1969 0-30
1970 0-15
1967 2-95
1969 0-271
1970 4-75
1970 4-50
1970 4-25
1970 1-25
1968 0-17£
1967 1-90
1970 0-25
1969 1-50
480
Visual Arts
Literature
Drama
Films
Music
BRITAIN I971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Williams, Raymond. Communications (television, films, theatre,
advertising, books and magazines) Penguin
A Policy for the Arts: The First Steps Cmnd 2601 HMSO
Promotion of the Arts in Britain
Reference Paper R.5647/70 COI
Alley, R. British Painting since 1945 Tate Gallery
Farr, D. British Sculpture since 1945 Tate Gallery
Gaunt, William. A Concise History of English Painting
Thames & Hudson
Historic Houses, Castles and Gardens in Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, 1969 Index Publishers
Hoar, Frank. An Introduction to English Architecture Evans
Morphett, R. British Painting 1910-45 Tate Gallery
Museums and Galleries in Great Britain and Ireland, 1969-70
Index Publishers
Museums Calendar Annual For 1970 Museums Association
Rothenstein, Sir John. British Art since 1900 Phaidon Press
Webb, M. Architecture in Britain Today Country Life
Standing Commission on Museums and Galleries. Eighth Report,
1965-69 HMSO
Atkinson, F. The Public Library Routledge
British National Bibliography Annual
For 1969 The Council of the British National Bibliography
The Concise Cambridge History of English Literature, edited by
George Sampsom. 2nd edn Cambridge University Press
The Oxford Companion to English Literature, edited by Sir Paul
Harvey. 4th edn Oxford University Press
Inter-Library Co-operation in England and Wales HMSO
Report of the National Libraries Committee [Dainton Report]
Cmnd 4028 HMSO
Clunes, Alec. The British Theatre Cassell
Taylor, John Russell. The Penguin Dictionary of the Theatre
Penguin
The Oxford Companion to the Theatre, edited by Phyllis Hartnoll.
3rd edn Oxford University Press
The Stage Year Book, 1969 Annual Carson & Comerford
The Theatre Today in England and Wales. Report of the Arts
Council Theatre Enquiry HMSO
British Film Institute. Annual Report for 1969 BFI
Montagu, Ivor. Film World Penguin
Annual Reports
British Film Fund Agency For 1969-70 HMSO
Cinematograph Films Council For 1969-70 HMSO
National Film Finance Corporation (and Statement of
Accounts) For 1969-70 Cmnd 4402 HMSO
British Federation of Music Festivals Year Book for 1970
British Federation of Music Festivals
Opera and Ballet in the United Kingdom 1966-69 Report of the
Arts Council HMSO
Orchestral Resources in Great Britain 1970. Report of the Arts
Council HMSO
The Oxford Companion to Music, edited by Percy Scholes.
9th edn Oxford University Press
Young, Percy M., A History of British Music Benn
£ ,
1968 0-22^
1965 0-7±
1970 *
1966 0-25
1965 0-25
1964 1-75
1969 0-25
1963 2-10
1967 0-25
1969 0-25
1970 1-25
1962 3-00
1969 3-15
1970 0-72i
1970 0-90
1970 12-10
1961 1-75
1967 2-50
1962 0-15
1969 1-40
1964 1-80
1966 0-25
1967 4-20
1969 1-75
1970 0-50
1970 free
1964 0-37£
1970 006
1970 0-06
1970 0-10
1970 0-50
1969 0-75
1970 0-90
1955 4-20
1967 5-25
10. THE NATIONAL ECONOMY
Aldcroft, D. H. and Fearon, P. Economic Growth in Twentieth-
Century Britain Macmillan
Brittan, S. Steering the Economy—The Role of the Treasury
Seeker & Warburg
Caves, R. E. and Associates. Britain’s Economic Prospects
The Brookings InstitutelAllen & Unwin
Clapham, Sir John. A Concise Economic History of Britain:
From Earliest Times to 1750 Cambridge University Press
 An Economic History of Modern Britain. 3 vols
Cambridge University Press
Deane, Phyllis and Cole, W. A. British Economic Growth,
1688-1959. 2nd edn Cambridge University Press
1969 2-50
1969 5-00
1968 3-60
1949 1-75
1930 1200
1967 2-25
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Dow, J. C. R. The Management of the British Economy, 1945-60
Cambridge University Press 1964
Harrison, Anthony. The Framework of Economic Activity
Macmillan 1967
Lewes, F. M. M. Statistics of the British Economy
Allen Unwin 1967
Mitchell, B. R. and Deane, P. Abstract of British Historical
Statistics Cambridge University Press 1962
Mitchell, Joan. Groundwork to Economic Planning
Seeker & Warburg 1966
Morgan, E. V. The Structure of Property Ownership in Great
Britain Oxford University Press 1960
Revell, J., Hockley, G. and Moyle, J. The Wealth of the
Nation, the National Balance Sheet of the United Kingdom,
1957-61 Cambridge University Press 1967
The British Economy Reference Paper R5612/69 COI 1969
Economic Prospects to 1972. A Revised Assessment HMSO 1970
Economic Trends Monthly HMSO
National Account Statistics: Sources and Methods. Studies in
Official Statistics. No. 13 HMSO 1968
National Institute Economic Review Quarterly
National Institute of Economic and Social Research
Northern Ireland Economic Report on 1969 Belfast, HMSO 1970
Productivity, Prices and Incomes Policy After 1969
Cmnd 4237 HMSO 1969
Statistics
Abstract of Regional Statistics. No. 5. 1969 HMSO 1969
Annual Abstract of Statistics. No. 106. 1969 HMSO 1970
Digest of Scottish Statistics Twice Yearly HMSO
Digest of Statistics: Northern Ireland Twice Yearly
Belfast, HMSO
Digest of Welsh Statistics. No. 15. 1968 HMSO 1969
Monthly Digest of Statistics HMSO
National Income and Expenditure 1970 HMSO 1970
Statistics on Incomes, Prices, Employment and Production
Quarterly HMSO
481
3-00
1-50
1- 90
3-15
2- 25
1-75
5 00
#
0-15
0-40
2-25
0-75
0-27-|
0-20
1-00
l-87i
0-60"
0-55
0-85
0-37i
0-60
1-00
Organisation
and Production
11. INDUSTRY
British Standards Institution. Year Book for 1970 BSI 1970
Dunning, J. H. and Thomas, C. J. British Industry. 3rd edn
Hutchinson 1966
Grove, J. W. Government and Industry in Britain Longmans 1962
Hanson, A. H. Parliament and Public Ownership Cassell 1961
Robson, W. A. Nationalised Industry and Public Ownership.
2nd edn Allen & Unwin 1962
Rowley, Charles K. The British Monopolies Commission
Allen & Unwin 1966
Tivey, Leonard J. Nationalisation in British Industry Cape 1966
Youngson, A. J. Britain’s Economic Growth 1920-66
Allen & Unwin 1968
Annual Reports
Council of Industrial Design For 1969-70 HMSO 1970
Industrial Reorganisation Corporation For 1969-70 HMSO 1970
Area Development in Northern Ireland Belfast, HMSO 1969
National Economic Development Council. Productivity. A
Handbook of Advisory Services HMSO 1967
Nationalised Industries. A Review of Economic and Financial
Objectives Cmnd 3437 HMSO 1967
Nationalised Industries in Britain
Reference Paper R.5629/68 COI 1968
Northern Ireland Development Programme 1970-75
Belfast, HMSO 1970
Productivity in British Industry Factel No. 601 COI 1970
Public Purchasing and Industrial Efficiency Cmnd 3291 HMSO 1967
Regional Development in Britain
Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5804/67 COI 1967
Regional Economic Planning Councils: Reports
Challenge of the Changing North HMSO 1966
East Anglia: A Study HMSO 1968
The East Midlands Study HMSO 1966
1-00
1- 37i
2- 25
1-50
3- 50
3-00
1-50
1-25
0-25
0-17£
0-25
0-57|
0-09
1-00
*
0-05
*
0-92i
2-00
1-50
482
Fuel and Power
Coal
Petroleum
Electricity and
Gas Supply
Water Supply
Construction
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
A Region with a Future: A Draft Strategy for the South-west £
HMSO 1967 1-80
A Review of Yorkshire and Humberside HMSO 1966 l-37^
A Strategy for the South-East HMSO 1967 0-75
The West Midlands: Patterns of Growth HMSO 1967 0-40
The Regulation of Monopolies, Mergers and Restrictive Practices
in Britain Reference Paper R.5830/68 COI 1968
The Scottish Economy 1965 to 1970. A Plan for Expansion
Cmnd 2864 HMSO 1966
Wales: the Way Ahead Cmnd 3334 HMSO 1967
Wales 1969 Cmnd 4293 HMSO 1970
*
0-62i
0-67J
0-87|
Fuel Policy Cmnd 3438 HJMSO
Ministry of Technology Digest of Energy Statistics
For 1970 HMSO
Coal in Britain Today NCB
Corbin, E. G., Editor. Guide to the Coalfields, 1968
Colliery Guardian
Annual Report and Accounts
National Coal Board
Vol. I. Report For 1969-70 HMSO
Vol. II. Accounts and Statistical Tables
For 1969-70 HMSO
The Coal Industry in Britain Reference Paper R.5610/64 COI
Safety in Mines Research 1969 HMSO
Cooper, Brian and Gaskell, T. F. North Sea Oil—The Great
Gamble Heinemann
Statistical Review of the World Oil Industry, 1969
British Petroleum Co.
Electricity Council. Statistical Digest for 1969 The Council
Gas Council. Investment in Natural Gas The Council
Minchin, Leslie T. The Gas Industry Today and Tomorrow
Harrap
Annual Reports and Accounts
Central Electricity Generating Board
Electricity Council
Gas Council
North of Scotland Hydro-Electric Board
South of Scotland Electricity Board
Nuclear Energy in Britain
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5151/69 HMSO
Report from the Select Committee on Nationalised Industries:
The Electricity Supply Industry
Vol. I. Report and Proceedings HMSO
For 1969-70 HMSO
For 1969-70 HMSO
For 1968-69 HMSO
For 1969-70 HMSO
For 1969-70 HMSO
Hartley, Dorothy. Water in England Macdonald
Annual Reports
British Rainfall For 1961 HMSO
Ministry of Housing and Local Government
For 1967 and 1968 Cmnd 4009
Water Pollution Research 1969 HMSO
Water Resources Board For 1968—69 HMSO
Morecambe Bay and Solway Bay Barrages: Report on Desk
Studies HMSO
Report on the Water Resources of Wales Cmnd 1331 HMSO
Surface Water Year Book of Great Britain 1964-65 Annual,
HMSO
The Water Service in Central Scotland HMSO
Water Supplies in South East England HMSO
Bowley, Marian. The British Building Industry
Cambridge University Press
Colclough, J. R. The Construction Industry of Great Britain
Butterworth
Henry, Dorothy and Jerome, J. A. Modern British Bridges
Maclaren
Pannell, J. P. M. An Illustrated History of Civil Engineering
Thames & Hudson
White, R. B. Prefabrication: A History of its Development in
Great Britain HMSO
Annual Reports
Building Research, 1969 HMSO
1967
1970
1969
1968
1970
1970
1964
1970
1966
1970
1970
1968
1966
1970
1970
1969
1970
1970
1969
1963
1964
1968
1969
1970
1970
1966
1961
1968
1963
1966
1966
1965
1965
1964
1965
1970
0-40
2-75
free
2-10
0-42-|-
0-95
*
0-45
1-75
free
free
free
1-25
0-65J
1- 35
0-95
0-45
0-50
0-30
0-57ij
2- 50
8-40
0-72^
0-87^
0-50
0-521
0-37|
2- 871
0-371
3- 15
3-50
0-871
3-15
2-10
2-50
0-75
Manufacturing
Industries
Agriculture
Fisheries
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Annual Reports—contd.
Hydraulics Research, 1969 HMSO 1970
The Construction Industry. National Economic Development
Council HMSO 1964
Allen, G. C. The Structure of Industry in Britain. 3rd edn
Longmans 1970
Gale, W. K. V. The British Iron and Steel Industry: A Technical
History David & Charles 1967
Hardie, D. W. F. and Davidson Pratt, J. A. History of the
Modern British Chemical Industry Pergamon 1966
Keeling, B. S. and Wright, A. E. G. The Development of the
Modern British Steel Industry Longmans 1964
Rainnie, G. F., Editor. The Woollen and Worsted Industry
Oxford University Press 1965
Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders. The Motor
Industry of Great Britain 1970 SMMT 1970
The Textile Council. Cotton and Allied Textiles. A Report on
Present Performances and Future Prospects Textile Council 1969
The British Motor Vehicle Industry
Reference Paper R.5374/68 COI 1968
Annual Report and Accounts
British Steel Corporation For 1969-70 HMSO 1970
The British Steel Industry Reference Paper R. 5727/66 COI 1966
Report of the Committee of Inquiry into the Aircraft Industry
[Plowden Report] Cmnd 2853 HMSO 1965
Shipbuilding Inquiry Committee, 1965-66 [Geddes Report]
Cmnd 2937 HMSO 1966
12. AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
Buchanan, Keith and Sinclair, D. J. Types of Farming in
Britain Association of Agriculture 1967
Coppock, J. T. An Agricultural Atlas of England and Wales
Faber 1964
Donaldson, J. G. S. and F. and Barber, B. Farming in Britain
Today Allen Lane 1969
Economic Assessment to 1972 NEDO 1970
Russell, Sir E. John. A History of Agricultural Science in Great
Britain Allen fe? Unwin 1966
Watson, Sir James Scott and More, J. A. Agriculture: The
Science and Practice of British Farming. 11th edn
Oliver & Boyd 1962
Whitlock, Ralph. A Short History of Farming in Britain Baker 1965
Agricultural Marketing in Britain
Reference Paper R.5779/67 COI 1967
Agricultural Statistics, England and Wales, 1967—68 HMSO 1970
Agricultural Statistics, Scotland, 1968 HMSO 1970
Agriculture in Britain
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5635/69 HMSO 1969
Agriculture’s Import Saving Role. EDC for Agricultural HMSO 1968
Annual Reports
Agricultural Marketing Schemes For 1967-68 HMSO 1969
Animal Health Services in Great Britain For 1968 HMSO 1970
Crofters Commission: Report For 1969 HMSO 1970
Department of Agriculture for Scotland: Agriculture in
Scotland 1969 Cmnd 4302 HMSO 1970
Ministry of Agriculture, Northern Ireland
For 1968-69 Cmd 538 Belfast, HMSO 1970
National Food Survey Committee: Household Food Con¬
sumption and Expenditure 1967 HMSO 1969
Annual Review and Determination of Guarantees
For 1970 Cmnd 4321 HMSO 1970
The Changing Structure of Agriculture, April 1970 HMSO 1970
Examination of the Horticultural Industry, 1967 HMSO 1968
Farm Incomes in England and Wales Annual For 1968 HMSO 1970
Output and Utilisation of Farm Produce in the United Kingdom,
1964-69 HMSO 1970
Fishing Industry Index International 1971 Haymarket Press 1970
Annual Reports
Fisheries of Scotland For 1969 Cmnd 4380 HMSO 1970
Herring Industry Board For 1969 Cmnd 4367 HMSO 1970
White Fish Authority (and Accounts) For 1969-70 HMSO 1970
483
0-621
0-10
1- 50
2- 10
1-05
1-25
1- 50
5-00
2- 25
#
0-45
*
0-50
0-65
0-50
3-15
3-50
free
3-15
1-75
0-90
1-00
0-70
0-271
1-00"
0-674
0-65“
0-30
0-471
0-62|
1-15
0-25
0-324
0-35
0-824
0-11
4-20
0-30
0-20
0-35
484
Forestry
Shipping
Inland Transport
Railways
Roads
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Annual Statistical Tables
Scottish Sea Fisheries For 1969 HMSO
Sea Fisheries For 1969 HMSO
Committee on Salmon and Freshwater Fisheries: Report
Cmnd 2691 HMSO
Edlin, H. L. Forestry in Great Britain: A Review of Progress to
1969 Forestry Commission
Forestry in Scotland Forestry Commission
Latham, Bryan. History of the Timber Trade Federation of the
United Kingdom: The First Seventy Years Benn
Ryle, G. Forest Service, the First 45 Years of the Forestry
Commission David & Charles
Census of Woodlands, 1965-67. A Report on Britain’s Forest
Resources HMSO
Timber! Your Growing Investment HMSO
Annual Reports
Forestry Commissioners For 1967-69 HMSO
Forest Research For 1968-69 HMSO
Britain’s Forests [10 booklets'] HMSO
National Forest Park and Forestry Commission Guides HMSO
1970
1970
1965
1969
1970
1966
1969
1970
1969
1970
1970
1948
to
1965
1954
to
1968
£
0-45
0-40
0-40
free
free
1-75
3-15
0-60
0-32|
0-55
i-m
0-02|
to
0-121
007|
to
0-421
13. TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
Bird, James. The Major Seaports of the United Kingdom
Hutchinson
Blake, G. Lloyd’s Register of Shipping 1760-1960
Lloyd’s Register of Shipping
Chamber of Shipping of the United Kingdom. Annual Report,
1969 CSUK
International Shipping and Shipbuilding Directory, 1970
Shipping World/Benn
National Ports Council. Digest of Port Statistics 1970 NPC
Port of London Authority. Annual Report for 1969 PL A
Annual Reports and Accounts
British Transport Docks Board For 1969 HMSO
National Freight Corporation For 1969 HMSO
National Ports Council For 1969 HMSO
Final Report of the Committee of Inquiry into certain matters
concerning the Port Transport Industry [Devlin Report]
Cmnd 2734 HMSO
Ports in Britain Reference Paper R.5759/67 COI
Report of the Committee of Enquiry into Shipping [Rochdale
Report] Cmnd 4337 HMSO
Report of the Committee on Marine Search and Rescue HMSO
Jackman, W. T. The Development of Transportation in Modern
England. 3rd edn Frank Cass
Proposals for a Fixed Channel Link Cmnd 2137 HMSO
Transport Planning: The Men for the Job [Sharp Report]
HMSO
Ellis, C. Hamilton, British Railway History, 1877-1947
Allen & Unwin
British Railways Board. Annual Report, 1968 HMSO
 The Development of the Major Railway Trunk Routes
The Board
 Report on Organisation HMSO
 The Re-shaping of British Railways (Part 1: Report;
Part 2: Maps) HMSO
Railway Policy Cmnd 3439 HMSO
British Road Federation. Basic Road Statistics 1970 BRF
Buchanan, C. D. Mixed Blessing: The Motor in Britain
Leonard Hill
Elliot, T. D. W. and Street, Harry. Road Accidents. (Law and
Society Series) Penguin
1963 5-25
1960 2-10
1970 free
(limited)
1970 7-00
1970 2-25
1970 free
1970 1-40
1970 0-50
1970 0-37£
1965 0-50
1967 *
1970 3 00
1970 0-20
1966 8-40
1963 0-32£
1970 0-62|
1960 2-00
1970 0-75
1965 0-75
1969 0-20
1963 1-00
1967 0-29
1970 0-50
1958 2-25
1968 0-75
London Transport
Inland Waterways
Civil Aviation
The Post Office
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Annual Report
National Bus Company For 1969 HMSO
Better Use of Town Roads HMSO
Cars for Cities HMSO
The Highway Code, including Motorway rules HMSO
Highway Statistics 1968 HMSO
Public Transport and Traffic Cmnd 3481 HMSO
Road Accidents 1968 HMSO
Road Pricing: the Economic and Technical Possibilities [Smeed
Report] HMSO
Road Research Laboratory. Research on Road Traffic HMSO
 Road Research 1968 HMSO
Road Safety—A Fresh Approach Cmnd 3339 HMSO
Roads for the Future: A New Inter-Urban Plan for England
Cmnd 4369 HMSO
Roads in England HMSO
Roads in Urban Areas HMSO
Road Track Costs HMSO
Survey of Road Goods Transport, 1962. Final Results, Part I
^ HMSO
Town Traffic in Britain Reference Paper R.5860/69 COI
Traffic in Towns [Buchanan and Crowther Reports] HMSO
 (Shortened edition) Penguin
The Transport of Freight Cmnd 3470 HMSO
Barker, T. C. and Robbins, M. A History of London Transport.
Vol. I. The Nineteenth Century Allen & Unwin
Day, John R. The Story of London’s Underground
London Transport
Jackson, A. A. and Croome, D. F. Rails through the Clay: A
History of London Tube Railways Allen & Unwin
Annual Report
London Transport Board For 1969 HMSO
Transport in London (Ministry of Transport)
Cmnd 3686 HMSO
Edwards, L. A. The Inland Waterways of Great Britain and
Ireland. 2nd edn Imray, Laurie, Norie & Wilson
Hadfield, Charles. British Canals David & Charles
British Waterways: Recreation and Amenity Cmnd 3401 HMSO
British Waterways Board. Report for 1969 HMSO
 Facts about the Waterways HMSO
 The Future of the Waterways HMSO
 Leisure and the Waterways HMSO
Flight Directory 1971
Annual Reports
Air Transport Licensing Board. For year ended 31st March
„ 1970 HMSO
British Airports Authority For 1969-70 HMSO
British European Airways Corporation (and Accounts)
For 1969-70 HMSO
British Overseas Airways Corporation (and Accounts)
„ . . For 1969-70 HMSO
British Air Transport in the Seventies Cmnd 4018 HMSO
Martin, Nancy. The Post Office Dent
Annual Reports and Accounts
Cable and Wireless Ltd. For 1969-70 HMSO
Post Office For April-September 1969 HMSO
Britain and Commonwealth Telecommunications
Reference Paper R.5525 COI
Reorganisation of the Post Office Cmnd 3233 HMSO
Report of the Select Committee for Nationalised Industries—The
Post Office HMSO
1970
1967
1967
1969
1969
1967
1969
1964
1965
1969
1967
1970
1969
1966
1968
1964
1969
1963
1964
1967
1963
1969
1963
1970
1968
1962
1966
1967
1970
1965
1964
1967
1970
1970
1970
1970
1969
1969
1970
1970
1963
1967
1967
485
£
0-374
0*37*
1- 05
0-06
0-624
0-19
0-55
0-224
2- 10
1-374
0-09
0-174
0-75
1- 05
0-55
0-35
*
2- 50
0-524
0-14
3-00
0-25
2-50
0-45
0-374
2-25
2-50
0-05
0-55
0-75
0-374
0-30
Annual Kelly's Directories Ltd. 1970 5-25
0-15
1-15
0-75
0-50
1-75
1-50
0-174
0-45
0-09
0-824
14. FINANCE
Artis, M. J. Foundations of British Monetary Policy Blackwell
Brittain, Sir Herbert. The British Budgetary System
Allen & Unwin
Chubb, B. The Control of Public Expenditure: Financial Com¬
mittees of the House of Commons Oxford University Press
1965
1960
1962
1-50
1-25
1-75
486
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Clarke, W. M. The City in the World Economy Penguin
Cleary, E. J. The Building Society Movement Elek
Dacey, W. Manning. The British Banking Mechanism. 5th edn
Hutchinson
Gaskin, Maxwell. The Scottish Banks Allen & Unwin
Gibb, D. E. W. Lloyd’s of London Macmilla?i
Giuseppi, J. A. The Bank of England Evans
Hicks, Ursula K. British Public Finances: Their Structure and
Development, 1880-1952 Oxford University Press
Hobson, Sir Oscar. How the City Works. 8th edn Dickens Press
Kellett, Richard. The Merchant Banking Arena Macmillan
Macrae, Norman. London Capital Market. 2nd edn
Staples Press
Morgan, E. V. and Thomas, W. A. The Stock Exchange: Its
History and Functions Elek
Prest, A. R. Public Finance. 3rd edn Weidenfeld & Nicolson
Reid, Gordon. The Politics of Financial Control: the role of the
House of Commons Hutchinson
Roseveare, H. The Evolution of a British Institution: The Treasury
Allen Lane
Sayers, R. S. Modern Banking. 7th edn Oxford University Press
Bank of England: Quarterly Bulletin Bank of England
Annual Reports
Commissioners of Customs and Excise
For 1968—69 Cmnd 4256 HMSO
Commissioners of Inland Revenue
For 1968-69 Cmnd 4262 HMSO
Decimal Currency Board For 1969 HMSO
Deputy Master and Comptroller of the Royal Mint
For 1969 HMSO
The British Banking System
CO I Reference Pamphlet RF.P. 565 5/68 HMSO
British Financial Institutions
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5162/69 HMSO
Consolidated Fund and National Loans Fund Accounts. Sup¬
plementary statements For 1968—69 HMSO
Estimates 1970-71: Memorandum by the Chief Secretary to the
Treasury Cmnd 4331 HMSO
Estimates for Northern Ireland 1969—70 Belfast, HMSO
Financial Statement and Budget Report 1970-71 HMSO
Financial Statistics Monthly HMSO
Loans from the National Loans Fund 1970—71
Cmnd 4333 HMSO
Northern Ireland Financial Statement Annual
For 1970-71 Belfast, HMSO
Public Expenditure: A new Presentation Cmnd 4017 HMSO
Public Expenditure in 1968—69 to 1973—74 Cmnd 4234 HMSO
1967 0-30
1965 3-50
1967 1-25
1965 1-80
1957 1-25
1966 3-15
1954 0-621
1966 0-521
1967 1-50
1957 1-50
1962 4-20
1967 2-50
1966 1-371
1969 4-20
1967 1-75
free
1970 0-821
1970 0-521
1970 0-321
1970 0-65
1968 0-30
1969 0-30
1969 0-121
1970 0-621
1969 1-75
1970 0-32-1
0-621
1970 0-15
1970 0-11
1969 0-171
1969 0-421
Overseas Trade
and Payments
15. TRADE AND PAYMENTS
British Tourist Authority For January-March 1970 BTA 1970
Camps, Miriam. Britain and the European Community, 1955-63
Oxford University Press 1964
Cooper, John. Suitable Case for Treatment (What to do about
the Balance of Payments) Penguin 1968
Little, I. M. D. and Clifford, J. M. International Aid
Allen & Unwin 1965
Overseas Development Institute. British Development Policies,
Needs and Prospects 1969 ODI 1969
Scott, M. FG. A Study of United Kingdom Imports
Cambridge University Press 1963
Reddaway, W. B. and Others. Effects of UK Direct Investment
Overseas
Interim Report Cambridge University Press 1967
Final Report Cambridge University Press 1968
An Account of the British Aid Programme: Text of United
Kingdom Memorandum to the Development Assistance
Committee of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development HMSO 1969
0-25
3-15
0-30
2- 25
0-621
3- 00
1-25
1-25
0-121
Internal Trade
bibliography
Wells, S. J. British Export Performance
Cambridge University Press
Annual Report
Commonwealth Development Corporation For 1969 HMSO
Britain as a Market for Developing Countries
Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5667/67 COI
Britain’s Invisible Exports
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P. 5852/69 HMSO
British Aid. Statistics of Economic Aid to Developing Countries
HMSO
Overseas Development. The Work in Hand Cmnd 3180 HMSO
Overseas Trade Accounts of the United Kingdom Monthly
nr, . HMSO
The Pattern of British Exports
Reference Paper R. 5 760/79 COI
Report on Overseas Trade Monthly HMSO
United Kingdom Balance of Payments 1970 HMSO
Borrie, G. and Diamond, A. L. The Consumer, Society and
the Law. 2nd edn. Penguin
Consumer Council. Information for Consumer Education
The Council
Davis, Dorothy. A History of Shopping
Routledge & Kegan Paul
Hill, S. R. The Distributive System Pergamon
Mathias, P. The Retailing Revolution Longmans
Annual Report
Consumer Council For 1969-70 HMSO
Census of Distribution, 1961. In 14 vols HMSO
Consumer Protection and Guidance in Britain
Reference Paper R.4031/67 COI
The Co-operative Movement in Britain
Reference Paper R.5434/70 COI
The Distributive Trades in Britain
Reference Paper R.5495/66 COI
Family Expenditure Survey. Report for 1969 HMSO
1964
1970
1967
1970
1969
1967
1970
1970
1968
1965
1966
1966
1967
1970
1964
1967
1970
1966
1970
487
£
2-75
0-52|-
#
0-371
l-87i
0-50“
1-50
*
0-30
0-75
0-32|-
0-10
2-00
0-871
2-10
0-30
various
*
*
*
1-621
16. LABOUR
Armstrong, E. G. A. Industrial Relations. An Introduction
^ ^ Harrap
Bain, G. S. The Growth of White Collar Unionism
Oxford University Press
Bayliss, F. J. British Wages Councils Blackwell
Birch, Lionel, Editor. The History of the T.U.C. 1868-1968
TUC/Hamlyn
Clegg, H. A. The System of Industrial Relations in Great Britain
Blackwell
Greenfield, Cyril. Trade Unions and the Individual in English
Law Institute of Personnel Management
Hare, A. E. C. First Principles of Industrial Relations. 2nd edn
Macmillan
Lovell, John and Roberts, B. C. A Short History of the TUC
Macmillan
Wedderburn, K. The Worker and the Law Penguin
Wigham, Eric L. Trade Unions. 2nd edn
t Oxford University Press
Young, A. F. Social Services in British Industry
Routledge & Kegan Paul
Annual Reports
Chief Inspector of Factories For 1969 Cmnd 4461 HMSO
Chief Inspector of Mines and Quarries For 1968 HMSO
Safety, Health, Welfare and Wages in Agriculture
^ , For 1968 HMSO
Employment and Productivity Gazette Monthly HMSO
In Place of Strife Cmnd 3888 HMSO
Industrial Training in Britain
Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5717/67 COI
Labour Relations and Conditions of Work in Britain
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5120/67 HMSO
Rehabilitation and Care of the Disabled in Britain
Reference Pamphlet RF.P.4972/69 COI
1969
1970
1963
1968
1970
1965
1965
1968
1965
1968
1968
1970
1970
1969
1969
1967
1967
1969
1- 75
2- 75
1-25
0-62^
3- 25
0-621-
1- 25
2- 10
0-371-
0-371-
2-00
0-65
0-321-
0-11
0-30
0-17£
#
0-22i
488
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Report of the Royal Commission on Trade Unions and Employers’
Associations Cmnd 3623 HMSO 1968
Time Rates of Wages and Hours of Work 1st April 1969
HMSO 1969
Trade Unions in Britain Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5682/69 COI 1969
100
l-87-|
17. SOUND AND TELEVISION BROADCASTING
Briggs, Asa. The History of Broadcasting in the United Kingdom:
Vol. I. The Birth of Broadcasting Oxford University Press
Vol. II. The Golden Age of Wireless Oxford University Press
British Broadcasting Corporation. BBC Handbook 1970 BBC
Broadcasting in the Seventies BBC
Greene, Sir Hugh. The Conscience of the Programme Director
BBC
Independent Television Authority. ITV, 1970. A Guide to
Independent Television IT A
Wedell, E. G. Broadcasting and Public Policy Michael Joseph
 Structures of Broadcasting: a symposium
Manchester University Press
Wilson, David. Broadcasting: Vision and Sound Pergamon
Annual Reports and Accounts
British Broadcasting Corporation
For 1968—69 Cmnd 4216 HMSO
Independent Television Authority For 1968-69 HMSO
Educational Television in Britain
Reference Paper R.5781/67 COI
Sound and Television Broadcasting in Britain
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5531/69 HMSO
1961
1965
1970
1969
1965
1970
1968
1970
1968
1969
1970
1967
1969
2- 50
3- 75
0-50
free
free
0-52i
2-50“
1-50
0-47J
M2f
0-62|
#
0-32|-
18. THE PRESS
Goulden, John. Newspaper Management Heinernann
Hall, Bernard J. Basic Training in Journalism Pergamon
Levy, H. Phillip. The Press Council Macmillan
McNae, L. C. J., Editor. Essential Law for Journalism. 3rd edn
Staples
Newspaper Press Directory, 1969 Annual Benn
Press Council. The Press and the People: Sixteenth Annual
Report 1969-70 _ The Council
Rule, Leonard G. Our Contributor. District Men, Specialists
and Freelances Pergamon
Scott, George. Reporter Anonymous: the First Hundred Years
of the Press Association Hutchinson
Seymour-Ure, Colin. The Press, Politics and the Public
Methuen
Turnstall, Jeremy. The Westminster Correspondent Routledge
White, Cynthia. Women’s Magazines 1963—68 Michael Joseph
Willing’s Press Guide 1970 Annual HutchinsonIWilling
Writers’ and Artists’ Year Book 1970 Annual A. & C. Black
The British Press Reference Pamphlet RF.P.5572/68 COI
Report of the Royal Commission on the Press (1961-62) [Shaw-
cross Report] Cmnd 1811 HMSO
1967
1968
1967
1967
1970
1970
1968
1968
1970
1970
1970
1970
1970
1968
1962
1- 25
0-52|
5-25
1-80
8-00
0-25
0-47|
2- 10
2- 25
1-60
3- 25
3-15
0-80
0-65
19. SPORT
Achilles Club. Modern Athletics, edited by H. A. Meyer. 2nd
e(jn Oxford University Press
Altham, H. S. and Swanton, E. W. A History of Cricket. 2 vols.
Allen & Unwin
Official Rules of Sports and Games 1970-71
Rothmans. Football Yearbook
The Sports Council. A Review for 1966-69
Report of the Committee on Football
Sport in Britain
Kaye & Ward
Queen Anne Press
The Sports Council
HMSO
Reference Paper R.4296 70 COI
1964
1968
1970
1970
1969
1968
1970
1-25
1- 75
2- 10
0-90
free
0-55
Most of the organisations concerned ivith sport publish year books covering results and
records of the previous season and future prospects; many weekly or monthly periodicals
on sport are also published. In addition some newspapers issue annual surveys of sport.
INDEX
Bold type in a sequence of figures indicates main references.
As the main purpose of this book is to inform readers overseas about Britain, organisa¬
tions and societies are generally indexed under their subject matter rather than under
Association of, British, National, Royal, etc. (that is, Accidents, Royal Society for the
Prevention of; Archives, National Register of). In cases where the first word is not
separable, however (for example, Royal Air Force, Royal Society), entries will be found
appropriately.
Items are indexed under England, Northern Ireland, Scotland or Wales only where
they are matters peculiar to these countries; otherwise they are indexed under the
relevant subject headings.
A Aslib see Libraries
Abbotsinch (airport)
Aberdeen:
industry
newspapers
population..
port
University . .
Abingdon
Page
•• 35i
. . 246
•• 444
.. 246
3i9, 333
159, 160
.. 260
Academic Awards, Council for
National .. .. .. .. 161
Accession Council .. .. .. 27
Accidents:
industrial . . .. 422, 423, 424
road users .. .. 23, 342, 343
Royal Society for the Prevention
of.    343, 423
Administrative Staff College .. 251
Administrative tribunals . . .. 89
Admiralty:
Board .. .. .. . . 110
Court .. .. .. .. 84
Division of High Court .. 84, 88, 91
tankers .. .. .. .. 328
See also Research, defence
Adoption see Children
Adult Education see Education
Advertising .. . . .. 174, 408
Association .. .. .. 408
broadcasting .. • • 435, 438-9
Institute of Practitioners in .. 408
Standards Authority .. .. 408
Advisory:
bodies (to government depart¬
ments) .. .. .. 47, 234
Commission on Noise .. .. 23
Committees and Councils see
relevant subject matter
Advocates .. .. .. 90, 92, 93
Aerodromes .. .. .. 35o_i
Aero-engines see Aircraft
After-care:
prisoners .. .. .. 99-100
young offenders .. .. 101-3
Age distribution see Population
Agricultural:
Advisory Service, National (naas)
317,3*8
and Horticulture Co-operation,
Central Council for .. 315-6
colleges and institutes .. .. *55,
. 3*6, 317, 318-9
Development and Advisory Service 318
Page
Agricultural—contd.
engineering colleges .. ..318
Engineering, National Institute of 308
improvement schemes 310, 311, 312
Land Service .. .. 3*7-8
Land Tribunal .. .. ..315
Loans Fund (Northern Ireland).. 313
machinery industry 243, 277, 308
Mortgage Corporation .. 312,3x3
Research Council.. .. .. 50,
191, 195, 199, 200, 205
Research in Progress, Index of .. 205
Royal Agricultural College .. 319
Securities Corporation,
Scottish.. .. .. 312,313
wages boards .. .. .. 427
workers:
earnings .. .. 307, 308, 309, 419
numbers .. 225, 299-300, 410
protective legislation 308, 314, 422
Agriculture . . .. 227, 243, 299-319
advisory services .. 301, 309, 317-8
animal disease control .. .. 49,
301, 305, 316
annual reviews . . .. 309-10
area available for .. .. 299, 306
artificial insemination (ai) .. 302,
304, 305
chemicals, toxic .. .. ..317
credit facilities for .. .. 307
crofts and crofters .. 309, 313
crops .. 299, 300, 301, 302
dairying .. 300, 302, 304, 307, 308
economics service and advice . . 199-
200, 318
education and training .. 318-9
expenses and income .. 307-8
exports .. .. .. .. 305
farms, number, size and types .. 5,
299-301, 314
farm tenure .. 299, 300, 314
feedingstuffs .. . . 300, 301,
302, 307, 320-1
fertilisers 288, 306, 307, 310, 311, 321
Fisheries and Food, Ministry of 49,
5*. *33, *93, *99, 200, 247, 309,
3*2, 3*7, 3*8, 321, 322, 323
food supplies, home grown 301-6,
309, 3*5
fruit growing .. .. .. 306
glasshouse crops .. .. .. 306
government support for .. .. 301,
307, 308, 3*o, 3**
49©
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Agriculture—contd.
grants see subsidies
grassland .. .. 5, 299, 300-1, 304
hill farming .. 299, 305, 308, 311
horticulture .. 20, 300, 306, 307,
308,312-3,315,316,318
infestation control .. ..313
land drainage .. 299, 311, 313, 314
livestock .. . .300, 301, 305, 307,
310, 311, 313, 315
machinery syndicates .. .. 308
manpower see Agricultural workers
market gardening . . .. .. 306
marketing boards and schemes 302,
311,315-6
mechanisation .. 277, 307, 308, 312
milk production and distribution 300,
302, 307, 308, 310, 315
Northern Pennines Rural Develop¬
ment Board .. .. ..313
pest clearance .. 199, 301, 316-7
plant health service .. 49, 316
policy of Government .. 308-13
price guarantees .. 302, 309, 310-1
production.. .. 301, 306, 307, 311
research see Research
rough grazing .. 299, 300-1, 308
smallholdings .. 300, 306, 312, 313
soils  5, 299, 323
subsidies and grants .. 307, 308,
309,310,3x1-2,314
veterinary services 199, 305, 316
Aid to overseas countries see Finance
Air:
Force see Defence and Royal Air
Force
freight traffic .. 334, 350, 351
operators’certificate .. •• 351
pollution, prevention of .. .. 5,
23, 70, 133, 174
Registration Board .. 351, 423
safety .. .. .. 351, 423
traffic control services .. 57, 352
Training, College of .. .. 352
Transport see Civil Aviation
Transport Licensing Board .. 347
Aircraft:
and aero-engines industry 227, 239,
243, 283, 284-5
aerospace industry .. 284-5
Armed Forces 113, 114, 115, 116,
284, 352
carriers .. .. .. .. 116
civil .. 284,348,349,350,351
Establishments, Royal .. 285,351
landing systems .. .. ..352
research .. .. 57,119,285,351
Airmail services see Civil Aviation
Airports see Civil Aviation
Albert Hall, Royal .. .. 21,211
Aldergrove (airport). . .. ..351
Aldermen .. .. .. 27, 68
Aliens.. .. 11-12,52,108,416
Almoners see Medical Social Workers
Ambergate (electronic exchange) .. 355
Ambulance services .. .. 70, 141
Amenities preservation societies 174-5
Ancient Monuments 56, 174, 207, 220
Angle Bay .. .. .. 260, 334
Anglican Communion .. 185, 189
See also Church of England
Angling .. .. .. .. 460
Animal Health .. .. 49,316
Animals, import of .. .. 316, 389
Page
Antibiotics .. .. .. .. 205
Anti-Locust Research Centre 206
Appellate courts .. 42, 84, 88, 90, 95
Apprenticeship .. .. 272, 418
Aquatic sports .. .. 460-2
Arbitration boards and tribunals 43°,
43i
Archbishops 32, 44, 182, 183, 185, 187
Architects .. .. .. .. 220
associations and societies.. .. 220
Institute of British, Royal (riba) 220
Architecture .. .. .. 219-20
education .. .. .. 161, 220
Archives, National Register of .. 221
Area Boards:
electricity .. 58, 241, 261, 265, 266
gas .. .. 241, 266, 267, 268
Area Colleges see Colleges, technical
Area Consultative Councils:
electricity .. .. .. 256, 261
gas 256, 267
Armagh .. .. .. .. 217
Armed Forces see Defence
Arms and ammunition import con¬
trols .. .. .. .. 389
Army.. .. 110,111,112,113,114,
115, 116, 1x7, 120
Board .. .. .. ..no
Reserve Forces .. .. .. 112
Staff College .. .. 111, 112
See also Defence
Arrest, law relating to .. . .81-2
Art:
and artists’ societies .. 208, 217-9
collections and exhibitions .. 21,
216-8, 222
colleges and schools . . • • I55>
215, 218, 219, 220
Commissions, Royal Fine 216, 219
Exhibitions Bureau .. . . 218
festivals .. .. 208, 212, 216
galleries .. .. 59, 70, 216-7
National Exhibition of Children’s 218
National Galleries .. 216, 217
Royal College of .. .. 159, 218
Society for Education through .. 219
Arts:
Council of Great Britain .. 207, 208,
209, 211, 213, 216, 220
Council of Northern Ireland . . 207,
208, 209, 213, 216, 220
promotion of .. .. 207-24
Royal Academy of .. ..218
Royal Society of .. 193, 194, 250
Ashmolean Museum .. .. 217
Ashridge College of Management .. 251
Assay Offices.. .. .. .. 286
Assizes .. 80, 81, 84, 92, 94, 95
Associated Press .. .. .. 446
Association football see Football
Associations see relevant subjects
Astronomy .. .. .. .. 202
Athletics .. .. .. 450, 458
Athlone Fellowship Scheme .. 164
Atlas computer .. .. .. 196
Atomic energy see Nuclear energy
Atomic Energy Authority (UK) 57, 120,
191, 192, 200-1, 204, 205
238, 265, 280
Attendance centres (young offenders) 96,
101, 103
Attorney-General .. .. 44,53,81
Auditor General see Comptroller
Authors, Society of .. .. .. 223
INDEX
Page
Automatic Data Exchange .. .. 446
Automation 248, 250, 282, 353, 354,
4°S
Automobile Club, Royal (rac) .. 465
Automobiles see Motor
Aviation see Civil Aviation
Avonmouth ..
Ayrshire
491
Page
243, 277
.. 304
B BBC see British Broadcasting
Corporation
Bacon curing.. . . 294, 305, 309
Bacteriological laboratory services .. 138
Bail 81-2, 86
Balance of Payments 226, 227, 233,
235, 327, 363, 393-402
Ballet and ballet companies 21, 211, 212
Ballet for All
schools
Ballylumford..
Baltic Exchange
Bank Holidays
Banking system
Bank:
notes
of England
159
rate..
Barnsley
Barristers
Barrow
Basket-ball
Bath ..
Batley..
Bedford and Bedfordshire
Belfast:
airport (Aldergrove)
art, drama and music
Corporation
electricity supply
Fire Brigade
industries .. 246,
motorway ..
museums ..
newspapers
population..
port
public libraries
Queen’s University
.. 213
.. 213
.. 262
329, 392
421-2
359, 369-75
369, 370
55, 225, 359, 369-70,
372, 389, 392
369, 370, 37i
.. 245
9i, 92, 93, 94
.. 244
.. 466
174, 208, 2X2, 243
.. 245
285, 295, 306
•• 351
208, 209, 212
75, 78, 262
.. 262
.. 78
260, 285, 295
.. 346
.. 217
.. 444
15, 246
.. 286
.. 223
157, 159, 162
163, 223
.. 88
.. 316
.. 266
Recorder of
research (veterinary)
Berkeley Laboratories
Betting .. 21, 365, 407, 462, 463
Beverages industries 243, 293, 294-5
Bicycle industry see Cycle industry
Billingham-on-Tees .. .. .. 260
Bills, parliamentary see Parliament
Bingo .. .. .. .. .. 21
Biological Research Board .. .. 198
Biology .. .. 198, 199, 202
Birds
Birkenhead ..
Birmingham:
airport
art, drama, music
Assay Office
housing
6, 20, 459-60
.. 244
••355
210, 211, 2x3,
217, 218
.. 286
146, 172, 181
Industrial Safety Training Centre 423
industries .. .. .. 244, 286
newspapers .. .. .. 444
population 15, 16, 146, 172, 173, 243
radio tower .. .. .. 355
universities .. .. 159,221
Birth rate
Births, registration of
Biscuit industry
Bishops
Blackburn
Blackpool
Black wall (London) tunnel.
Blind:
employment and training
7-9, 10
7
• • 293
32, 44, 183, 187
.. 244
•• 245
•• 340
welfare services
Blood laboratories ..
Blood Transfusion Service
141, 221,
4i5
123, 141
• • 138
135, 137-8
.. 461
.. 221
• • 279
209, 244
223,
222
297
. . 224
221, 223
.. 224
297
Board of Customs and Excise see
Customs and Excise
Board of Inland Revenue see Inland
Revenue
Board of Trade see Trade
Boat races
Bodleian Library
Boilers and boilerhouse plant
Bolton
Book:
Centre, British National
Development Council
exhibitions..
League, National ..
Society
Books .. .. 220, 221, 222, 223
See also Libraries
Booksellers’ Association .. .. 223
Borough Councils see Local Govern¬
ment, councils
Borstal institutions and training 96-7, 100
Botany .. .. .. .. 193
Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew .. 193
Bothamsell .. .. .. .. 259
Boundary Commissions .. .. 33
Bournemouth .. .. 211,243
Bowls .. .. .. .. .. 457
Boxing .. .. .. .. 464
Boys’ Brigade .. .. .. 168
Boys’ Clubs, National Association of
168
Bracknell .. .. 112, 172, 192
Bradford .. .. 15, 16, 159, 245
Bradwell .. .. .. .. 264
Bread and flour confectionery in¬
dustry .. .. .. .. 293
Brewing industry 239, 244, 246, 294
Brickmaking
Bridges and tunnels
• • 295
70, 273, 388,
339-40
. .. 176
Bridleways
Brighton
Bristol:
art and drama
industries .. .. 243,251;
museum and art gallery ..
population .. .. .. 14, 15.
port of
telephones..
University.. .. .. 159,
Britannia Royal Naval College
British:
Academy ..
243
2X0
295
217
243
332
355
2X0
III
223
R
492
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
British—contd.
Airports Authority .. 241, 350
Army of the Rhine (baor) 113, H4> I I^
Association for the Advancement
of Science . . . • i93> I94
Broadcasting Corporation 158, 211
433, 434, 436, 437, 438, 439, 44°
Calibration Service . . • • 250
orchestras .. •• .. 211
Radio and Television Enterprises 434
See also Broadcasting
Council .. 34, 164, 165, 166, 206,
208-9, 211, 214, 216, 223
European Airways (bea) . . 347, 348,
349
Isles  
area .. . . • • ■ • *
climate .. . . • • ■ • 3_6
definition of .. . . • • 1
fauna .. • • • • • • 5-6
flora . . - • • • • • 5
geology and topography .. 2-3
languages .. •• •• 7
soil and vegetation .. 5, 299
See also Population
Museum .. .. 217,221,223
Natural History 203, 217, 221
National Export Council (bnec). . 391
Overseas Airways Corporation
(boac) .. .. 347, 348, 349
Railways Board see Railways
Savings Bonds .. .. • • 373
Standards Institution 57, 19 L 249,
250 409
Tourist Authority .. 215,385
For other organisations with British
as first word of their title see-
relevant subject
Broadcasting: television and radio . . 20,
55, 158, 356, 433-40
advertising in . . 434, 435, 433-9
advisory councils and committees 434,
435, 439
colour transmission 433, 43 6, 438
Councils, National .. • • 434
educational .. 158, i59> 434
435, 436, 437, 44°
Educational Development Over¬
seas: Centre for (cedo) 166, 440
Eurovision.. .. • • • • 439
films . • • • • • i58, 214
international relations . . 439-4°
licences see Licences
line definition .. 436, 438, 439
local stations .. • • . 434, 437
monitoring .. • • 438, 439
political . . . • • • • • 439
press and .. .. • • • • 441
Page
Broadcasting—contd.
programme companies .. 435-6, 438
publications .. • • • • 434
receivers industry.. .. •• 282
relations with government depart¬
ments .. . . 55, 433, 434, 437,
438, 439, 44°
religious .. .. • • • • 434
research .. • • 202, 436, 439
Services .. .. • • 435—8
Domestic Television & Radio 435-6,
437
External. . .. • • 437_8
studios .. • • • • 437-8
Television .. • • 43^, 438
topical tapes •. . • • • 437
transcription .. . • • • 438
transmitting stations . . • • 438
See also British Broadcasting
Corporation and Independent
Television
Brush industry .. • • • • 298
Buchanan report .. • • i73, 335
Buckingham Palace (Art Gallery) . . 217
Buddhists
Budget
Building:
Agency, National . .
and civil engineering
contractors’ plant..
employment in
industrialised
by local authorities
new towms, progress in
offices
overseas
preservation notices
private
production
189
362-7
178, 219, 272
178, 192, 239,
271-3
.. 278
239, 272
.. 178
178, 179, 181,
272
171-3
171,247
.•273
• •174
179, 180, 271-4
271-4
reconstruction 174, I78, 181, 271—4
Research Station . . 178, 192, 273
societies . . i79> 229> 375, 376, 379
standards .. . • • • _ 178-9
National House Builders’ Regis¬
tration Council .. • • *79
Parker Morris report .. • • 179
Burghs see Local Government
courts .. 85
Burnley . . • • • • • • 244
Burton-on-Trent .. .. • • 244
Bury .. .. • • • • • • 244
Bus and coach services 334, 335, 336,
340, 341-2, 345, 346
Business Statistical Office .. .. 248
By-elections .. .. • • 33, 34
By-laws .. • • • • .. 52
C CERN see European Organisation
for Nuclear Research
CO I see Information, Central Office of
Cabinet . . 25, 26, 29, 41, 44, 45, 46
48, 109
Office  47-8, 248
Cable & Wireless Ltd. . . 354, 356
Cables see Post Office
Cables and wires (insulated) industry
243, 282-3
Cambridge:
Institute of Criminology .. .. i°3
Cambridge—contd.
Library
museums ..
Observatory
Opera Group
population ..
sport
University
Press
research at
Canals
.. 221
.. 217
. . 202
.. 213
• • 243
453, 454, 455, 461
42, 103, 159, 160, 202,
3i9, 453, 454, 455, 461
 223
.. .. .. 202
244, 327, 334, 335, 343-4
INDEX
493
Page
Cancer research .. .. 132, 144
British Empire Cancer
Campaign .. .. 144, 198
Canning industry .. . . 243, 293-4
Canteens .. .. .. .. 426
Canterbury, Province of 183, 185, 189
Canvey Island (gas terminal) . . 268
Capenhurst (research centre) . . 266
Capital gains tax see Taxation
Capital punishment (Northern
Ireland) .. .. .. .. 96
Cardiff .. 246, 330, 444, 447
museums .. .. . . .. 217
newspapers . . . . . . /j^/)
population.. .. .. .. 15
^ P,ort   330, 333
Carlisle . . . . . . 52, 245
Carnegie United Kingdom Trust
163, 212
Carpets industry 244, 247, 249, 289, 292
Carrington .. . . . . . . 260
‘Cash and carry’ .. .. .. 406
Catering trades . . .. 407, 416
Catholic:
Child Welfare Council .. .. 145
Church, Roman . . 34, 99, 182, 183,
187-8, 189
schools .. .. 149,151,188
Marriage Advisory Council .. 123
Overseas Appointments Bureau .. 166
Youth organisations .. .. 168
Cats .. .. . . .. . . 20
Celtic language . . .. 7, 12
Cement industry . . 243, 295, 296
Censorship:
films .. . . . . .. 215
British Board of Film Censors 215
plays  209
Census of:
Distribution 402, 403, 404, 405, 406
Population .. 7, 8, 13, 14, 17, 55
Production .. .. .. 238
Central:
Criminal Court . . .. 80, 81
Statistical Office .. 48, 249
Treaty Organisation (cento) . . 109,
114, 164
Chamber of Shipping .. 328, 329
Chambers of Commerce .. .. 242
Association of British .. 242, 249
Association of Northern Ireland. . 242
Council of Scottish .. . . 242
Chancellor see Lord Chancellor
Chancellor of the:
Duchy of Lancaster .. 43, 92
Exchequer .. 43, 48, 49, 53, 56, 360,
0 , ^ _ 362, 365
See also finance, Exchequer
Chancery Division (High Court) 84, 88
Channel Islands:
airports
area..
bailiwicks
language
legislature
population
press
•• 350
. . 1
• • 3i
• • 13
25, 3i
7, 13, 14
445
relationship with UK and Crown
25,27,31,42,51
war pensioners .. .. .. 51
See also Guernsey and Jersey
Channel Tunnel .. .. .. 338
Charitable Societies see Voluntary
Organisations
Page
Charter services (aircraft) .. 347, 349
Cheltenham .. 208, 212, 224, 243
Chemical:
industries .. 57, 229, 243, 244, 245,
247, 248, 287, 412
245, 279
. . 112
244, 292
.. 244
.. 138
.. no
.. no
•• 145
142
plant industry
See also Engineering
Chesham
Cheshire
Chesterfield ..
Chest Radiological Service .
Chief of the Defence Staff .
Chiefs of Staff Committee .
Child Care Inspectorate
Children:
adoption of . . 80, 145, 146
allowances for 51, 128, 129, 130, 131
art, drama, films and music 210-11,
213, 216, 218, 219
child guidance centres . . .. 151
cinema attendance and clubs .. 216
deprived of home life, care of .. 144
employment .. .. 52, 424
foster homes . . .. .. 145
handicapped .. 50, 140, 141, 153
Mentally Handicapped, National
Society for . . .. 123,
National Society for the Preven¬
tion of Cruelty to .. 122, 146
nurseries .. .. .. 70, 140
orphans .. .. 128, 131, 144, 145
school transport .. .. .. 151
voluntary child care organisations 140,
146
Children’s Film Foundation .. 216
China manufacture .. . . 244, 295-6
Chiropodists .. .. 139, 140, 144
Chocolate and Confectionery 245, 293
Chorley .. .. . . 172 244
Church:
Assembly . . .. .. 183-4
Commissioners .. .. .. 185
in Ireland (Presbyterian) 99, 186, 187
in Scotland, Episcopal (Anglican)
99, 185
in Wales (Anglican) .. .. 185
Lads’ Brigade .. .. ..168
Moravian .. .. .. .. 187
of England.. 32, 34, 44, 99, 182-5
appointment of senior clergy . . 29
44, ^3
archbishops
bishops ..
Children’s Society
clergy . . . . 32
colleges ..
Convocations
dioceses ..
ecclesiastical committee
ecclesiastical courts
finance ..
General Synod ..
Laity, House of
Lambeth Conference .
parishes ..
parochial councils. .
relations with Monarchy
relations with State
schools ..
social work
Youth Council ..
of Ireland (Anglican)
32, 44, 183
32, 44, 183
123, 145
34, 44, 183
.. 184
• • 183
183, 184
• • 183
.. 184
184-5
183-4
.. 183
• • 185
.. 184
.. 184
29, 182,
183, 184, 185
182, 183
122, 182, 184
,. 99, 122-3
.. 168
34, 99, 183,
185
494
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Church—contd.
of Scotland (Presbyterian) 34, 99,
183, 185-6
General Assembly .. .. 44
social work . . .. 123, 145
of Wales (Presbyterian) . . .. 186
Roman Catholic . . 34, 99, 182, 183,
187-8, 189
schools ..
Churches
British Council of
co-operation between
149, 151, 188
182-9
. . 189
.. 189
Council of Christians and Jews .. 189
Free (non-conformist) .. 186—7, 189
Baptist .. .. . . ..186
Christian Scientists . . .. 187
Congregational . . .. .. 186
Methodist .. .. 99> x86
of England .. .. 182-3
Presbyterian . . .. 99, 186-7
Salvation Army 123, 186, 187
Society of Friends (Quakers) . . 123,
186, 187
of Christ .. .. .. . . 187
welfare work .. 99, 122, 145
World Council of.. .. .. 189
Churchill Travel Scholarships .. 165
Cinemas .. .. .. 21,213-6
Cinematograph Films Council .. 215
Citizens’ Advice Bureaux .. .. 123
Citizenship .. .. .. 12, 52
Civic Trust i75> 219
Civil Aviation .. 56, 57, 347-53
aircrew qualifications .. • • 353
airmail services .. .. 347, 353
airports .. .. .. SS0-1
British Airports Authority 241, 350
British European Airways 241, 347,
348,349
British Overseas Airways
• 241,
Corporation
charter operations
earnings
Eurocontrol
helicopter service ..
independent airline companies
licences
ministerial responsibility for
347, 348-9
347, 348-9
384
352
Classes ..
College ..
Commission
conditions of service
Department
Duncan Report..
earnings. .
Fulton Committee
staff associations
training ..
Clearways
48
Page
. 80
• 33
• 32
3-5
35i
349
347
56, 57,
347, 35i
navigational aids .. . . • • 352
private flying .. . • • • 35°
Business Aircraft Users Associa¬
tion .. .. .• •• 35°
Research and Development Board 192
safety measures .. .. 351> 423
traffic control .. .. • • 352
training colleges and schools .. 352
See also Aircraft and Research
Civil:
Courts .. . . 83-5, 87-8, 90
Defence see Home Defence
Service .. . . 46, 47, 61-7, 112
Arbitration Tribunal .. •• 431
..62-3
62, 65
48, 61, 64
..65-6
62, 65, 431
.. 64
65, 66, 421
62
65, 43i
64, 65
• • 343
Clerk:
of the Court
of the House of Commons
of the Parliaments
Climate
Climbers’ Clubs .. .. 457-8
Clinical Research Board and Centre
198, 199
Clinics .. 138, 139, 140, 151
Clock and watch industry .. .. 281
Clothing:
Export Council . . . . .. 292
industry .. . . 243, 245, 246, 292
Clubs:
social .. .. .. .. 22
youth .. .. .. 157, 167
Clyde and Clydeside 2, 15, 16, 246, 261,
273, 285, 286, 319, 332,
333, 334, 339, 461
bridge  339
Coal:
Board, National 238, 239, 241, 256,
258, 268, 424
coalfields and mines 2, 245, 246, 254,
256-8
consumers’ councils .. .. 256
consumption .. 254, 256, 257
exports and imports 256, 257, 382
industry 56, 244, 245, 246, 254, 256-8
mechanisation .. .. 257, 258
production and manpower 56, 238,
245, 256, 257
research .. .. .. 192, 258
associations .. .. .. 258
establishments .. .. 255, 258
Utilisation Council .. .. 268
See also Gas and Mines and quarries
Coalminers:
earnings .. .. .. .. 420
numbers employed .. 257, 411
Coastguard Service .. .. .. 330
Cockenzie .. .. . . .. 263
Co-education see Education, schools,
types of
Coinage .. .. . . 370, 467
Coke consumption and production 267
Colleges:
advanced technology .. 155, 159,
195-6, 274
central institutions (Scotland).. 155
university status 159, 195-6
agricultural .. 155, 318-9
Air Training .. . . .. 352
art . . 70, 155, 157, 159, 210, 218-9
of education 149, 157, 158, 161,
162, 166, 167, 184
residential (adult education) 156, 157
Services .. .. .. .. 112
technical . . 70, 155, 156, 158,
159, 161, 166, 196
theological. . .. .. .. 184
Village .. .. .. ..157
See also Education
Colombo Plan .. .. .. 164
Colonial Development and Welfare
Acts (cd & w) .. .. .. 401
Combine harvesters.. .. 302, 308
Commercial:
banks .. .. 369,370,371
Education see Education
premises, health and welfare in 424-5
Radio .. .. .. .. 437
Commissioners:
of Irish Lights .. .. .. 330
INDEX
495
Page
330
106
Commissioners—contd.
of Northern Lighthouses
of Police
Committees see relevant subjects
Commodity markets .. .. 392
Common Market see European
Economic Community
Commonwealth:
Agricultural Bureaux and
Institutes
205, 206
399-402
.. 166
.. 164
n-12
146, 416
•• 439
115, 119
163-5, 4oi
375-6, 384,
aid to
Awards, Special
Bursary Scheme
citizens
employment of
co-operation:
broadcasting
defence ..
education
financial and trade
387, 393, 399, 400-1
research 197, 199, 202, 204, 205-6
social service agreements . . 146
technical .. .. 54, 401
Development Corporation (cdc) 54,
400, 401
Development Finance Company
Limited 375, 376
Education Conference .. .. 165
Education Liaison Committee .. 164
Forestry Institute.. . . 200, 325
Games .. 457, 458, 460, 464, 465
immigration .. 11-12,52,416
member nations .. . . . . 26
Office, Foreign and see Foreign
Press Union . . .. .. 447
Queen as Head of . . 26, 27
Scholarship and Fellowship Plan 164,
i65
Scientific Committee (esc) 205-6
Study and Serve Scheme .. 165
Sugar Agreement. . . . .. 311
Universities, Association of 164, 166
Communications see Post Office,
Research and Telecommunications
Community:
Associations, National Federation
°f  I57
Centres .. . . .. .. 157
Relations Commission .. 146, 147
Comptroller and Auditor General.. 160,
360, 361
Computers . . 196, 205, 227, 239, 247,
251, 280, 282, 357, 446
See also Data and Post Office
Computing Centre, National .. 250
Concert halls.. .. .. 21,211
Confectionery industries see Food
Confederation of British Industry
(cbi)
Conservative Party
Consolidated Fund
191, 242, 249, 423,
425, 427, 428, 432
34, 39
358, 359, 361,
365, 367, 368
Constabulary, Inspectors of 105, 107
Construction:
equipment.. .. .. 277, 278
industries .. .. 56, 271-4, 278
Industry Research Association . . 274
Consumer:
Council .. .. .. 19, 409
expenditure see Expenditure
goods industries see individual
industries
•• 409
408-9
• • 409
.. 406
Page
Consumer—contd.
Groups, Federation of
protection ..
research
sales promotion
Consumers:
Association .. .. 19, 409
councils and committees 241, 255, 256
Contractors’ plant .. .. .. 278
Conurbations .. .. 14, 15, 16
Convalescent homes.. 136, 143, 425
Conversion tables .. .. .. 467
Coolkeeragh .. .. .. .. 262
Co-operative:
banks ..  375
marketing (agricultural) . . 315-6
societies .. .. 375, 402, 403-4
Wholesale Society 238, 375, 402
Corby.. .. .. .. 172,244
Cornwall .. 2, 7, 243, 252, 295
Coronation .. .. .. 27, 183
Coroners’ Courts .. .. 88, 93
Corporation tax see Taxation
Correspondence courses .. 156, 159
Coryton .. .. . . 260, 334
Cost of living see Price, relation to
income
Cotton:
Exchange, Liverpool .. . . 392
industry . . . . 227, 244, 289-90
Silk and Man-made Fibres
Research Association .. . . 289
Councils of counties, boroughs, etc.,
see Local Government
Councils, Other, see relevant subject
Counsel see Law, legal profession
Counsellors of State.. .. . . 30
Country:
Landowners’Association.. .. 325
planning see Planning
Countryside Commissions . . 52, 175
County:
Agricultural Executive Committees 308
Court R.ule Committee .. .. 90
courts .. 83, 84, 87, 88, 92, 94, 95
Court of:
Appeal .. 42, 43, 81, 83, 84, 86,
88, 92, 94, 95
Common Council.. .. 104, 105
Inner House .. .. .. 87
Outer House .. . . .. 87
Session 86, 87, 89, 91, 92, 94, 103
Courts-martial . . . . 54, 90
Appeals Court .. .. 90, 94
Courts of Inquiry (Labour) .. 431
Courts of Law see Law
Covent Garden Market .. 315, 402
Covent Garden Opera .. .. 212
Coventry . . . . 15, 209, 217, 246
Crafts Council and Centres . . 250
Craigavon .. .. . . 172, 273
Credit Cards .. .. .. .. 406
Cricket .. .. 151,356,454-5
Criminal:
Courts 80-3, 85-7, 88, 90, 91, 94-5
Injuries Compensation Board . . 90
investigation departments .. 105
Law Revision Committee .. 91
records .. .. .. 92, 107
Criminals, treatment of . . 95, 102
Crofters’ Commission .. 309, 313
Crown:
Agents for Overseas Governments
and Administrations .. .. 64
496
AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
BRITAIN 1971:
Page
Crown—contd.
Courts .. .. . . 8o, 81
Dependencies . . 1, 25, 27, 64
Office, Edinburgh. . .. .. 59
Crown, The see Monarchy
Crystal Palace Recreation Centre .. 452,
465
Culham research centre .. .. 196
Currency .. .. 225, 370, 467
Page
Currency—contd.
decimal .. .. .. 370, 467
transactions 388, 392, 393, 394, 396
Customs and Excise:
Board of 46, 49, 54, 233, 350, 363, 365
duties see Taxation
Cutlery and flatware industry 245, 286
Cycle and motor cycle industry 244, 284
Cycling .. .. .. .. 465
D Dagenham .. .. .. .. 243
Dancing .. .. .. 21, 212
English Folk Dance and Song
Society .. .. .. ..212
Royal Ballet and School .. . . 213
Daresbury (nuclear physics) 196, 201
Darlington . . .. .. 245, 444
Dartford .. .. .. 296, 340
Data:
Exchange, Automatic .. .. 446
Processing .. .. 56,250,357
Service, National .. 250, 357
See also Computers and Post Office
Deaf .. . . .. 123, 139, 141
Deans.. .. .. .. 44, 183
Death:
causes of .. .. 9, 23, 132, 342
duty see Taxation, estate duty
grant and allowances 126, 129, 130
rate .. .. .. .. .. 8, 9
sentence (Northern Ireland) .. 96
Deaths, registration of .. .. 7
Decimal currency .. .. 370, 467
Deer stalking.. .. .. .. 460
Defence .. .. .. 109-21
Academy, Royal .. .. .. 111
Boards . . . . . . . . 110
Cadet forces .. .. 111,168
Chief of Staffs Committee . . 110
Civil see Home Defence
collective .. .. .. .. 109
Colleges .. . . .. .. 112
combat forces .. 109, 113, 115-8,
120
Commands .. 110,111, 113, 117
commissioned ranks .. in, 112
Committee on, and Overseas Policy no
Council .. . . .. 54, 110
deployment of forces .. 113-5
expenditure no, 112, 113, 117,
118, 119-20, 229, 359
Forces’ vote .. .. .. 34
manpower.. .. 110-5, 120-1
Ministers of .. .. ..no
Ministry of and Secretary of State
for .. 44, 49, 54, 75, 104, no,
119, 120, 192, 200, 201, 414
National Defence Industries
Council .. .. .. ..119
nuclear power 109, 113, 115, 116,
117, 118, 119, 120, 200
Operational Analysis Establish¬
ment .. .. .. .. 119
Ordnance Factories, Royal . . 119
organisation (corps, branches, etc.)
no-11
overseas commitments .. 109, no,
113-5, 116, 117, 120
planning and control .. 110-13
policy and commitments 109, no, 113
pre-Service organisations in, 112, 168
Defence—contd.
research and development .. 57,
119-20, 190
Reserve and auxiliary forces 112, 121
Resettlement service .. 417-8
Secretary of State for see Ministry
of
Service management .. ..no
Scientific Advisory Council .. 119
Staff colleges .. .. 111,112
Strategic Command, Army .. 117
Strategic forces in, 114, 115, 116,
117, 121
training .. .. .. in, 120
US co-operation .. .. ..119
warning systems .. .. 113, 118
weapons and equipment .. 57, no,
114-8, 119-20, 200, 238
export controls .. . .. 389
Weapons Development Com¬
mittee .. .. .. .. 119
Women’s services.. .. in, 120
See also Army, Royal Navy,
Royal Air Force and Research
Delegated legislation .. .. 39
Demography .. .. .. .. 6-24
Dental services 135, 136, 143, 151
British Dental Association . . 143
Dentists .. .. 135, 136, 143
General Dental Council .. 135, 143
Departments, see Government,
departments of, Northern Ireland,
Scotland and individual titles
Derby and Derbyshire 4, 16, 217,
244, 257, 258
Design:
and Industries Association (dia) 250
awards for .. .. .. .. 250
Centres .. .. .. 20, 250
Council of Industrial 207, 249-50
Detention centres .. 96, 101, 103
Detergents .. . . .. 287, 289
Devaluation see Sterling
Development:
areas and districts.. .. 236, 251-4
Commission .. .. 68, 254
Corporation for Wales .. 253, 389
councils . . .. .. .. 253
See also Economic and Research
Ministry of see Northern Ireland
Organisation see Industry
plans (towns) 170, 171, 172, 173, 174
Devizes .. .. .. .. 343
Devon 2, 5, 243, 252, 295, 3°6, 459
Dewsbury .. .. .. 245, 292
Diesel traction .. .. . . 243
Dietitians .. .. .. .. 144
Dioceses see Church of England
Diphtheria .. .. .. 132,139
Diplomatic Service .. 62, 63, 205, 390
Director of Public Prosecutions 53, 81
INDEX
497
Page
Disabled:
employment of 141, 238, 410, 414-5
rehabilitation of .. 136, 137, 141,415
welfare services for 123, 131, 138-9
Disablement:
benefit .. . . .. 130, 141
pensions .. .. .. 130, 131
Resettlement Service .. . . 137,
414-5, 416, 417
Disarmament .. .. .. 109
Conference of the committee on . . 109
Discount market and houses 370, 371,
372, 39i
Distributive trades .. .. 402-9,411
District councils (Scotland) 67, 68,
69, 71, 74
Divorce Court .. .. 83, 84, 87
Divorce rate .. . . .. .. 10
Dock workers .. .. .. 333
National Dock Labour Board . . 333
Docks see Ports
Dockyards, naval .. .. 117, 119
Doctors:
appointed factory .. .. .. 425
British Medical Association 143, 425
general practitioner services 135, 136,
138, 143
in industry.. .. .. ..425
in National Health Service 135, 143, 196
Page
Doggett’s Coat and Badge .. .. 461
Dogs .. .. . . .. 20-1, 363
Domestic:
electrical appliances industry .. 283
help . . .. 18, 70, 139, 416
utensils industry .. .. 244, 286
Doncaster .. .. 217, 245, 263
Dorset .. . . .. .. 259
Dover.. .. . . 3, 243, 336
Dracones .. .. . . .. 205
Drainage authorities. . . . 313-4
Drama .. .. .. 208-11
schools and colleges . . . . 210
Dramatic Art, Royal Academy of . . 210
Drax .. .. .. . . .. 263
Drinks industries 229, 243, 293, 294,
411
Drugs.. .. .. .. 137, 138
Committee on Safety .. . . 138
Dry cleaning .. .. .. .. 407
Duchy of Lancaster . . .. 43, 92
Duke of Edinburgh’s:
Award Scheme . . . . 169, 250
Prize for Elegant Design . . . . 250
Dumbarton .. . . . . . . 261
Dundee 159, 160, 246, 278, 291, 444
Dunstable .. .. .... 243
Durham .. 103, 159, 217, 245, 257
Dyestuffs .. .. .. 244, 287
E Earnings 18, 65, 71, 231-2, 419-21
Easington .. .. .. .. 268
East Anglia 5, 14, 159, 243, 300, 302,
332
Economic:
Affairs, Department of 191, 235, 247
boards and councils, regional 236-7
Development Committees 235, 247,
250, 309
Development Council, National
(nedc)  234-5, 247
Development Office, National
(nedo) ..  235
integration with Europe see Euro¬
pean Free Trade Association
policy and planning 48, 58, 233-7,
247, 251-2, 308-9
Economy, national .. .. 225-37
gross national product .. 227, 228,
231, 235, 327
Group .. .. .. .. 48
investment.. .. .. 228-9
personal incomes and expenditure
231-3
prices and incomes . . 235-6
structure .. .. .. 227-33
See also Balance of Payments,
Finance, Industry and Trade
Edinburgh   355
administrative departments in .. 58
art, drama and music .. 208, 212
Assay Office .. .. .. 287
Botanic Garden, Royal .. .. 193
Court of Session .. .. 86, 87
International Festival 208, 212, 216
newspapers . . .. .. 444
population .. .. .. 15, 246
Royal Observatory .. .. 202
universities 103, 104, 159, 221
Education .. 18, 19, 64, 70, 148-69
administration .. . . 148-50
Education—contd.
adult . . 50, 70, 154, 156-7, 221
National Institute of . . ..157
agricultural .. . . 155, 318-9
and Science, Department of and
Secretary of State for .. 50, 98,
148, 149, 153, 154, 157, 159, 162,
163, 167, 190, 191, 198, 199, 200,
201, 204, 205, 206, 208, 218, 219,
222, 247, 325, 4i4, 45°, 451
architectural .. .. 161, 220
art . . .. 150, 160, 208, 218-9
broadcasting to schools 158, 434, 437
building programme . . ..154
Certificate of Secondary see exami¬
nations, below
colleges see Colleges
commercial and management . . 155,
IS6, 159, 162, 250-1
curricula and courses 149, 150, 151,
152, 155, 156, 158, 166, 219,
220-1, 250-1
block release .. .. ..155
sandwich .. 155, 156, 162
secretarial .. .. ..156
day release.. .. .. .. 155
dramatic .. .. .. 150,211
evening institutes .. 155, 156, 157
examinations .. 150, 152, 153-4,
155, 156, 213, 220
finance of 73, 146, 148, 149, 151,
153, 155, 156, 157, 159, 162
forestry .. .. .. 318,325
‘further’ .. 148, 154-7, I58, 161,
162, 195, 207
advanced courses .. 155, 190
General Certificate of see examina¬
tions, above
grants see finance of, above
higher 148, 154-5, 158-63, 166
Inspectorate . . 63, 148, 150, 153
498
BRITAIN I97i: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Education—contd.
local education authorities 70, 98,
141, 148, 149, 150, 151, 153, 154,
. 155, 156, 157, 158, 161, 163, 167
music .. .. .. 210,213
National Certificates and Diplomas
155, 156
physical .. .. 150,151,451
prisoners .. .. .. 98-9, 103
religious .. 149, 150-1, 184, 188
research on .. 150, 154, 163
scholarships 70, 150, 155, 162, 164
schools .. 148, 149-56, 166, 207
building.. _ .. 149, 153, 154
comprehensive.. .. .. 152
Council for Curriculum Exami¬
nations .. .. 150, 154
denominational 149, 150-1, 182, 188
fees  150, x53
health and welfare .. 132, 146,
151, 152, 153
independent (public) .. 148, 149,
r , ISO, 153
Tribunal .. .. .. 153
leaving age 149, 150, 152, 153
management .. .. .. 149
meals service .. 148, 132, 151
middle .. .. .. 151, 152
nursery .. .. .. .. 151
preparatoiy .. .. .. 153
primary 148, 149, 150, 151-2,
161
pupil numbers 148, 149, 153, 157
secondary .. .. 148, 150,
151, IS2, 154, 157, 161
special .. 151,152-3
voluntary 149, 150, 151, 153, 182
Special Commonwealth Awards 166
special educational treatment 152-3
teachers .. .. 146, 149, 150,
152, 153, 157, 160, 161, 163, 166
Inter-University Council on
Higher Education. . ..166
Overseas, National Council for
the Supply and Training of 166
training 149, 152, 157, 161, 163
Teaching Council, General .. 161
technical and technological .. 148,
152, 155, 156, 158, 159, 161, 163,
195, 196
See also Industry, education
and training for
trade unions and .. .. 430
Urban Aid Programme 122-3, XS1
visual aids in .. .. .. 158
Educational Foundation for 158
National Extension College.. 158
Overseas Visual Aids Centre 167
vocational 154, 155, 415, 417-8
See also Universities
Educational:
Commission, US/UK .. .. 165
Development Overseas; Centre
for .. . . .. 166, 440
Research, National Foundation for 163
Scientific and Cultural Organisa¬
tion (unesco) .. 54, 162, 164, 205
Technology, National Council for 158
Egg Marketing Board, British . . 311
Egmanton .. .. .. .. 259
Eisteddfodau .. .. .. 212, 224
Elections:
local government .. .. 52, 68-9
parliamentary .. 31,33-4,35
Page
Electrical:
and Allied Manufacturers’ Associa¬
tion, British .. .. .. 281
appliances industries 17, 18, 283
engineering see Engineering
machinery industry 244, 245, 281-2
Research Association .. .. 281
Electricity .. .. .. 57, 261-6
area boards and councils .. 58, 256,
261-2, 263-4, 265, 266
Authority, Northern Ireland Joint 262
Board for Northern Ireland .. 262
Board, South of Scotland 261, 262,
263, 265, 266
consumption .. .. .. 265
Council .. .. .. 261, 266
Generating Board, Central 261, 263,
265, 266
generation .. .. .. 262-4
manpower .. .. .. .. 261
power stations .. 262, 263-5, 273
hydro-electric .. .. 263-4
nuclear .. 200, 245, 264-5, 273
production.. .. .. 227, 248
research .. .. .. 192, 266
Supply Research Council .. 266
Electronic equipment:
defence 57,116,117,118,119, 120,192
industry 243, 246, 247, 279, 280, 282
post office .. 353, 354, 355, 356, 357
Ellesmere Port .. .. .. 244
Emigration .. .. .. n-12
Employers’ organisations .. 242, 249,
419, 423, 427-8, 432
Employment 61, 62, 63, 226, 227, 238,
. 239, 248, 252, 333
exchanges and services 410, 413-21
foreigners .. .. .. 416-7
‘fringe’ benefits .. .. .. 422
Manpower and Productivity
Service 234, 250, 416, 426, 427, 430
Manpower Research Unit .. 412
National Joint Advisory Council 234
Occupational Guidance Services 414
older workers .. 410, 413, 4x4
permits .. .. .. .. 416
premiums, regional 237, 252, 366
redundancy 126, 127, 419, 422
safety in .. .. .. 422-3
selective employment tax 51, 126,
127, 365-6
sheltered .. .. .. .. 415
statistics (industrial) 248, 257, 261, 266,
271-3, 274-98, 327, 331, 333, 410-32
training .. .. .. 412, 417
boards .. . . .. .. 412
centres .. .. .. 414, 416
and productivity services 413-8
vocational guidance and training
414-5, 4i7
women 18, 410, 411, 420, 421, 424
Youth, Service .. .. .. 414
See also individual industries,
Labour, Unemployment and
Work, hours of
Employment and Productivity,
Department of 46, 50, 137, 147, 234,
238, 247, 250, 252, 410, 412, 4x3,
414, 415, 416, 417, 418, 421, 422,
423, 424, 426, 427, 430, 432, 442
Secretary of State for 414,415,417,
423, 425, 427, 430, 43i, 432
Engineering .. 229, 243, 244, 245, 246,
247, 248, 271-2, 273, 277-81
INDEX
Page
Engineering—contd.
aeronautical .. .. 284-15
^ivil . ,  239, 273
electrical .. 57, 197, 205, 239, 244,
247, 248, 281
Institutions, Council of .. •. 195
marine 244-5, 246, 283, 285, 286
mechanical.. .. 205, 247, 277-81
Engines, industrial .. .. .. 278
England:
area and counties .. .. .. 1
Council for the Protection of Rural 175
population, figures 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13-16
See also Regions and individual
towns
English:
Association
Opera Group
Environmental:
pollution ..
Protection ..
Studies: Centre for
Equal pay
Equity see Law
Erskine bridge
Essex ..
Estate duty see Taxation
Estimates (Exchequer) 359-6i, 367
Committee.. .. 39, 360, 361—2
Eurocontrol . . .. . . .. 352
European:
Atomic Energy Community
(Euratom) .. .. .. 205
Broadcasting Union (ebu) .. 439
Conservation Year 1970 . . .. 23
Economic Community 382, 387, 388
. . 223
.. 212
174, 192
70, 174
174, 193
.. 420
159,
339
306
499
Page
European—contd.
Free Trade Association (efta) .. 382,
387-8
Industrial Federations, Council of 242
Nuclear Energy Agency . . 201, 205
Organisation for Nuclear Research
(cern) .. .. .. 196, 205
Space Research Organisation
(esro) .. .. 196, 201, 205
Space Vehicle Launcher Develop¬
ment Organisation (eldo) .. 201
Evidence (rules) .. .. .. 82
Examining justices .. .. .. 80
Exchange control 49, 226, 369, 388-9, 392
Exchange Equalisation Account 368, 369
Exchange Telegraph Company Ltd. 446
Exchequer see Finance
Excise duties see Taxation
Expectation of life .. .. 8, 9, 10
Expenditure:
consumer .. .. .. 228, 231-3
public authorities 123, 229-30, 358-69
See also Defence, Finance, Re¬
search, Agriculture, subsidies,
and Housing, subsidies
Export 225, 226, 227, 233, 234, 274,
276, 380, 381-2, 388, 395
controls .. .. 247, 389-91, 392
Council, British National 234, 391
councils .. .. .. 391-2
Credits Guarantee Department
(ecgd) 234, 390
re-exports .. .. .. .. 384
Queen’s Award to Industry .. 391
See also Trade and individual
industries
Factories:
building .. .. .. 251-3
Inspectorate 63, 410, 422, 423, 425, 426
legislative provisions .. 410, 421
See also Employment and indi¬
vidual industries
Families:
average size of
welfare services for
Family Allowances
Family Service Units
Farming see Agriculture
Farm schools (Scotland)
Farnborough
Fashion
. . 10, 17, 18
122, 124, 138, 139
51, 122, 124, 129,
L3o, 131, 354
122, 146
Fauna.
Fawley
Felixstowe
Fen district
Fencing
Ferrybridge
Fertilisers
318-9
•• 285,351
.. .. 19
5-6, 176-7, 202-3
260, 262
332,333
5, 3°o
..465
.. 263
„ ... , 287, 288, 307, 311, 321
r ertihty trends see Population
Festival Hall, Royal.. .. 208, 211
Field Sports Society, British .. 459
Film:
and Television Arts, Society of .. 216
Archive, National.. .. .. 2x5
British Picture Corporation, Asso¬
ciated .. .. .. .. 214
Censors, British Board of .. 215
festivals .. .. .. .. 216
Finance Corporation, National .. 214
Film—contd.
Fund Agency, British .. . . 216
Industrial and Scientific Film As¬
sociation, British . . .. 214
industry .. .. 213,214,215
Institute, British .. .. 207, 215
Library, Central .. .. .. 215
production.. .. .. 213-4,243
Rank Organisation .. .. 214
Theatre, National.. .. .. 215
Visnews Ltd. .. .. .. 440
Films:
distribution .. .. .. 214
documentary . . .. .. 214
educational .. . . . . 158
feature .. .. . . . . 214
foreign  214
licensing 215,216
of Scotland Committee .. .. 215
sponsorship .. .. .. 214
trade associations .. .. .. 214
Finance   358-79
aid to overseas countries . . 54, 392,
, , . 399-402
banking  369-75
capital issues .. 368, 370, 372
capital payments and receipts .. 368
corporations .. .. 375-6, 391
currency reserves .. .. 394, 396
Exchequer 48,49, 55, 59, 73, 74, 77, 94,
108, 125, 135, 145, 180, 223, 240,
258, 290, 311, 312, 346, 348, 358,
359, 362, 365, 368, 369, 435, 451
oee also Treasury
5 00
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Finance—contd.
financial institutions (other than
banks) .. .. •. 370, 375-9
financing of international trade . . 372,
386-7, 391-2, 393
inflation, counter-measures .. 226
local government .. 72-5, I8o, 228,
229, 230, 358-9
parliamentary control finance .. 36,
37, 38, 39, 358-62
public corporations 197, 229-31
Special Drawing Rights (sons) 394, 396
See also Balance of payments,
Budget, Estimates, Exchange
control, Expenditure, Income,
Investment, National Debt,
Revenue, Sterling, Taxation and
Trade
Fines (penalties) .. 95, IOI> io3
Finnart . . .. 260, 332, 334
Fire:
Brigade Councils .. .. 75, 76
Officers’ Committee .. .. 77
prevention research .. .. 77
Protection Association .. .. 77
Research Group . . • ■ ■ • 77
Research Organisation, Joint . . 77
Service Staff College . . . . 77
Service Technical College . . 77
Services .. .. .. 7°, 75-8
Fishing:
fleets .. •. • • • • 320
freshwater .. .. I99> 3I4, 32i
grounds .. .. •• 3\9~zo
Herring Industry Advisory Council 321
Herring Industry Board . . . • 321
industry .. 227,243,245,319-22
processing .. .. 320, 321
subsidies .. .. 321,322
ports .. 243,245,319,322,333
research .. .. i99> 202, 203
sport  321, 460
White Fish Authority .. .. 322
White Fish Industry Advisory
Council .. . . . • • • 322
Fleet see Royal Navy
Fleet Air Arm .. .. .. 110
Fleetwood .. .. 260,319-20
Flintshire . . .. • • ■ • 246
Float glass .. .. .. • • 296
Fog 5
Folkestone .. .. .. 243, 333
Food:
biscuits .. .. • • • • 293
bread .. .. .. •• 293
chocolate and confectionery 245, 293
consumption .. 19, 232, 293, 301
exports .. .. 293, 320, 382
home grown supplies 301, 308, 309
imports .. 225, 299, 310, 320, 380
industries .. 228, 243, 245, 293-4
ministerial responsibility for 49, 133,
199-200, 308-9
purity . . . • • • • • J33
research . . .. • • • • 200
Advisory Committee . . .. 200
sales . . 402, 403, 404, 405, 406
Page
Food—contd.
See also Education: School Meals
Service arid Welfare Foods Ser¬
vice
Food and Agriculture Organisation
(fao) .. .. 49, 54, 205
Football .. .. 22, 449, 453-4
pools . . . . 21, 365, 453
Rugby . . .. . • 453, 454
Footpaths and Bridleways .. .. 176
Footwear industry 244, 247, 292-3, 407
Shoe and Allied Trades Research
Association .. .. . • 293
Ford Foundation .. .. .. 163
Foreign:
Affairs, Secretary of State for .. 50
and Commonwealth Office 44, 50-1,
63, 325
Exchange Market.. .. 372, 392
Service see Diplomatic Service
Foreigners:
employment of .. .. .. 416
naturalisation of .. .. .. 12
visitors .. .. .. .. 385
See also Overseas Students
Forensic Science .. .. ..107
Forest:
area.. 5, 176, 177, 299, 322, 323, 324
nature reserves .. .. 176, 323
parks .. .. 176, 323, 326
Products Research Laboratory .. 325
Research Station .. .. .. 325
Forestry .. .. 317,322-6
Commission 5, 51, 176, i77> 200,
203, 323, 324, 325
committees and societies .. .. 324
education, training and research 199-
200, 324, 325
Fund  227, 324
Institute, Commonwealth 200, 325
Societies, Royal .. .. .. 324
Forth:
bridge . . . . .. • • 339
river and firth .. 2, 246, 332, 334
Fort William.. .. .. .. 296
Fox hunting .. .. .. .. 459
Fraud Squad.. .. .. ..108
Freezing (food) 243, 294, 320, 321
Freight:
Corporation, National 336,337,338, 341
Integration Council .. • • 338
Friendly Societies, Registrar of . . 379
Fruit and Vegetable products and
preserves .. .. .. 293-4
Fruit, production and distribution. . 306,
3i5, 402
Fuel and Power .. 192, 254-69
Advisory Councils .. . . 256
consumption .. 256, 259, 268
efficiency .. .. 241,248,268-9
sources of .. .. .. .• 254
See also Coal, Electricity, Gas,
Plydro-electric, Petroleum and
Research
Furniture Development Council . . 298
Furniture industry .. .. 243, 298
Research Association .. .. 298
G GATT see General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade
Gaelic..
13
Gaelic—contd.
Mod, National
Gainsborough
212
259
INDEX
501
Gambling see Betting
Game Conservancy . .
Games:
Indoor
Outdoor
Game Shooting
Gardens see Horticulture
Garston (port)
Gas ..
Area Boards
by-products
Consultative Councils
consumption
Council
Page
.. 460
.. 466
453-7
459-6o
••333
56, 266-8
266, 267, 268
.. 267
.. 256
267, 268
266, 267, 268
natural .. 243, 254, 259, 267, 268
pipeline system .. .. .. 268
production.. .. 227, 248, 267
research .. .. 192, 267, 268
turbines .. .. .. .. 263
Gateshead .. . . . . .. 245
Gatwick (airport) .. . . 350, 351
Gauges industry . . .. .. 279
General:
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
(gatt) . . 49, 234, 386, 387, 389
Post Office see Post Office
Register Division, Northern Ire¬
land .. .. .. .. 7
Register Office (Scotland) 7, 59
Registrar .. .. .. • • 55
Geological Museum and Survey .. 203
Geology .. .. .. 2-3, 202
Geophysics . . .. .. 192, 202
Gin industry .. .. .. . . 294
Girls’ youth organisations .. 168, 169
Glamorgan .. .. .. .. 245
Glasgow:
airport and air services .. ••351
art, drama and music .. .. 210
burgh court .. .. .. 85
design centre .. .. .. 250
fire service .. .. .. • • 75
housing and rebuilding 172, 173, 181
industry .. 246, 251, 278, 292, 295
newspapers .. .. 442, 444
population.. .. 15, 16, 172, 246
port of (Clydeport) .. .. 332
transport 337, 343
universities 104, 159, 160, 221, 456
See also Clydeside
Glass industry 227, 244, 245, 295, 296
Research Association, British 296
Gloucester and Gloucestershire . . 212,
243, 325, 344
Glyndebourne (opera) .. .. 213
Gold and convertible currency
reserves .. 371, 388, 392, 393, 394
Gold and silver ware industry 286-7
Page
Gold Market (London) . . .. 392
Golf .. .. .. . . 22, 456
Goods and services see Industry
production
Goods transport see Road haulage
Goonhilly .. .. . . 202, 356
Government .. . . .. 25-78
Actuary, Department of . . .. 46
composition of .. .. .. 43-4
departments of .. . . 26, 46-61
Employment, Training and Pro¬
ductivity Services .. 131, 413-8
Loans Fund (NI) .. .. 74, 180,
358, 359, 360
relations with industry .. 56, 57,
196-7, 242, 247-54, 43i
relations with overseas countries 50, 51
Training Centres . . .. 415, 417-8
See also Civil Service, Expendi¬
ture, Finance, Local Govern¬
ment Ministers, Monarchy,
Parliament, Privy Council and
Research
Gramophone records . . . . 20, 222
Grangemouth 260, 332, 333, 334
Grants see Education, finance,
Housing, finance, and Local
Government, finance
Gravesend .. .. . . .. 296
Great Britain:
area..
definition
population ..
Greater London Council see London
7, 18
Great Seal
Green Belts ..
Greenfield
Greenock
Greenwich
Greyhound racing
Grid, electricity
Grimsby
Grocery trade
Group medical schemes (factories)
Guardian’s allowance
Guernsey:
language
national insurance benefits
newspapers
population ..
States of ..
See also Channel Islands
Guided weapons .. 114, 115, 116,
117, 118
Early Warning Stations .. 113, 118
Establishment . . . . .. 119
Guildford civic theatre . . .. 209
Gulbenkian Trust .. .. 163, 217
29, 31, 32, 53
.. 174
.. 290
332, 333, 444
1,112
462-3
.. 265
245, 290, 319-20, 333
402, 404, 405
425
128
13
125
445
13
3i
H HMSO see Stationery Office
Habeas Corpus . . .. 82, 86
Hairdressing establishments .. 407
Halifax .. . . .. 245, 292
Hall-mark (gold and silver) .. 286
Hams Hall .. .. .. .. 263
Handicapped persons see Welfare
Hand tools industry .. . . 286
‘Hansard’ .. .. . . • • 37
Harbours see Ports
Harrogate 208, 343
Hartlepool 245, 332
Harwich . . 332, 333, 337, 338, 461
Hatfield .. .. .. 172, 243
Health .. .. .. 132-46
Advisory Committee, Industrial 425
and welfare services 51, 135, 138-42
centres .. .. 136, 139, 140, 141
control of infectious diseases 133,
Councils
dangers
education ..
home nursing
136, 139
135, Hi
• • 23
.. 141
70, 138, 139, 140
5°2
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Health—contd.
in industry .. .. 422-5
in prisons .. .. • • • • 99
laboratories .. .. .. 138
public .. .. 70, 132-3, 138
research .. 132,135,138,198
school children .. . . 135, 151
Service, National . . 51, 70, 99, 126,
132, 133-7, 138, 139, H3, 144
administration .. .. 51, I34
charges .. .. •• i34-7,I39
finance .. .. 135, 137, 198
general practitioner services 134,
135, 136, 144
hospital services 134, 135, 136-7,
138, 142, 144
local services . . .. 138-42
mental services 136, 137, 140
Northern Ireland .. 60, 141—2
organisation . . .. .. 134
specialist services 51, 134, 136, 137,
138, 140, 142, 144
visiting . . .. 139, 14°, x43
and Social Security, Department
of 51, 89, 124, 131, 132, 138, 144,
145, 219, 247, 363
Heathrow (airport) .. .. 260,351
Heating and Ventilating Research
Association .. .. • • 274
Heating appliances .. . . 274, 280
Hebrides see Highlands and Islands
Helicopters .. 116, 117, 118, 119, 351
Henley on Thames
Herbarium (Kew) ..
Hereford (festival) ..
Hewitt
Heysham
High Court of Justice
251, 461
• •193
.. .. 212
..259
260, 333, 334
80, 81, 82, 83,
84, 86, 87, 89, 91
High Court of Justice (Northern
Ireland) .. . . .. .. 88
High Court of Justiciary (Scotland)
85-6, 91, 92, 95
Highland Games . . . . • • 459
Highlands and Islands, Scotland 1, 2, 3, 4,
5, 7, 246, 306, 309, 323, 349,459, 461
Development Board .. . • 253
Highway Code .. .. • • 343
Highway construction 70, 337, 338,
339, 34°
High Wycombe .. . . .. 298
Hire purchase 375, 404, 408, 409
finance companies .. .. 408
HP Information Ltd. .. .. 409
Historical Manuscripts Commission 221
Historic buildings 52, 56, 174, 175,
207, 220
building preservation notices .. 175
Council .. .. . • • • 174
Hobbies . . .. . . • • 20-1
Hockey .. .. •• 151, 456
Holidays . . .. 18, 22, 421-2
HollowT-ware industry . . .. 286
Home Defence .. . . .. 113
Civil Defence Training Establish¬
ment . . .. .. .. 113
Royal Observer Corps .. . . 113
Warning and Monitoring Organ¬
isation .. .. .. ..i*3
Home-Grown Cereals Authority .. 315
Home Office and Home Secretary 31,
44, 51-2, 67, 69, 75, 76, 77, 90, 91, 95,
96, 97, 98, lot, 103, 104-5, 106, 145,
146, 203, 309, 321, 322
Page
Homicide see Murder
Honours .. .. 29, 44, 52
Hop growing.. .. .. 3°6, 3*5
Horsemanship .. .. 463-4
Horserace Betting Levy Board .. 462
race courses .. . • • • 462
Horse racing .. .. 21, 462
Horticultural Co-operation, Central
Council for Agricultural and .. 315
Horticulture 20, 300, 306, 307, 308,
312-3, 316, 318
Hosiery:
and Allied Trades Research Asso¬
ciation .. .. .• •• 291
and Knitwear Export Group,
British .. .. .. .. 291
and knitwear industry .. 289, 291
Hospital:
Boards, Regional . . 134, 135, *99
Car Service .. .. •• 141
Schools *35, *53
Hospitals . . 134, *35, *36-7, *42
maternity services .. 122, 136
Northern Ireland .. .. .. 142
number of .. .. • • *37
psychiatric .. *34, *36, *37
Scotland .. .. .. ..136
staff  *35-6, *37
teaching . . .. .. *35, *37
voluntary .. .. . • • • *37
voluntary help in .. 123, 142, 143
Hotels and Restaurants .. 407, 423
Households .. .. .. • • 17-8
House of Commons 27, 30, 31, 32, 33,
34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 4°, 4*, 43,
44,45,46,53,81, 91,92, 183, 184,
193, 241, 358, 359, 360, 361, 362
disqualification (clergy) .. 34, 183
election to . . .. .. • • 33_4
financial control 36, 37, 38, 39, 360
officers .. .. •. 33, 35“6
party composition .. . . 34_5
privileges .. .. . . • • 34
See also Parliament and Speaker
House of Lords 27, 30, 32-3, 34, 35,
36, 37, 38, 39, 4°, 43, 46, 49, 81, 83,
84, 90, 94, 95, 359
as Court of Appeal 81, 83, 84, 86,
87, 90, 91, 94, 95
eligibility .. .. .. ..32
officers .. .. . • • • 32-3
privileges .. .. .. • • 34
Housework .. .. .. • • *7
Housing .. 7°, *24, 177-81, 272
Advisory Committee, Central . . 179
and Local Government, Ministry
of 44, 46, 52, 68, 69, 75, 132, 170,
171, 172, 173, *74, *75, 176, 178, *92,
207, 219, 269, 270, 272-3, 452, 465
associations . . *77, *79-8o
authorities ..
Corporation
finance
furnished ..
investment
178, 179-81
. . 180
72, 179-81
.. 181
228, 229
Local authorities’ responsibilities
70-1, 72-4, *7*> *77-9, *8o
ministerial responsibilities for 52,
170, 219
new building 172, 173, *77, 178, 272
number of dwellings 17-8, 177-8, 272
privately owned 17, *77, 179-80, 272
progress in building *7*» *77, *78
purchase loans .. .. • • *79
INDEX
503
Page
Housing—contd.
rent control .. . . 180-1
slum clearance .. .. .. 181
standardised .. .. .. 179
subsidies and grants 179, 180-1, 452
town development schemes .. 173
Hovercraft 118, 205, 251, 285, 334, 336
British Rail Hovercraft Ltd. .. 336
Huddersfield .. .. 211, 245
Hull 15, 159, 217, 245. 319-20, 332, 333
Page
Human relations in industry .. 426
Humber and Humberside 14, 245, 260,
300, 334, 344
Hunt Committee, National .. 462
Hunting .. . . .. .. 459
Hydraulics Research Station .. 271
Hydro-electric power 246, 262, 263-4
Board, North of Scotland 261, 263, 264
See also Electricity
Hydrological research .. 202, 271
ITA see Independent Television
Authority
Immigration 7, 11-12, 122, 124, 146
Community Relations Commission 146
Immingham .. 245, 332, 333, 334
Immunisation .. .. 70, 139
Imperial Chemical Industries Ltd. 238,
239
Imports .. 225, 226, 233, 3S0-1
licensing and restrictions 247, 389, 390
See also individual industries and
Trade
Improvement grants:
agricultural .. .. .. 311
housing .. .. 178, 179, 181
Income:
distribution of .. .. ..231
Government .. . . 358-62
personal .. .. .. 18,231-3
source of .. .. .. ..231
See also Earnings
Incomes:
National Board for Prices and 235, 236
policy .. . . . . 235-6, 247
Income Tax see Taxation
Special Commissioners of . . 89
Independent Television:
Authority 158, 241, 433, 434, 435,
436, 439, 440, 442
Companies Association .. 435, 439
Educational Development Over¬
seas, Centre for (cedo) 166, 440
newspapers: relations with .. 435
News Ltd. .. . . 435, 440
programme companies . . 158, 435
Indictable offences .. 81, 85, 86, 91
Industrial:
and Commercial Finance Corpora¬
tion Ltd. .. .. .. 376
and trade fairs . . .. 234, 391
Artists and Designers, Society of 250
associations . . .; .. 242
building 171-2, 179, 237, 247, 252-3,
271-4
Councils, Joint
Court
design
Award Schemes
Council of
disputes
efficiency ..
engines manufacture
.. 427, 432
430, 43L 432
249-50, 390
.. 250
207, 249-50, 409
419, 430, 431
.. 234
278
Estates Management Corporations 252
Federations, Council of European 242
films .. .. .. .. 214
Fuel Efficiency Service, National 268
Health Advisory Committee .. 425
information .. .. .. 390
injuries insurance 51, 61, 124, 129-30
negotiating machinery .. .. 430
Industrial—contc?.
plant and steelworks manufacture 279
relations 50, 234, 247, 248, 249,
250, 251, 426-32
Division for . . .. .. 430
Reorganisation Corporation 234, 239,
282
Safety Advisory Council .. .. 423
Training Boards 155, 234, 412, 417,
423, 446
Industry .. . .225, 227-8, 238-98
advisory councils and committees
234, 249-50, 39°, 391
association .. .. .. 242
Central Training Council .. 417
Confederation of British (cbi) 242,
249, 423, 425, 427, 428, 432
development areas and districts 251-3
development organisations 251-3, 389
distribution policy .. 171, 251-3
education and training for 155, 156,
249, 250, 415, 417-8
National Council for Educa¬
tional Technology .. ..158
Finance Corporation for .. .. 375
grants and loans to 240, 250-3
health and welfare services 424-6
human relations in .. .. 418
investment in see Investment
location .. 171,242-7,251-3
management 162, 234, 249, 250-1
British Institute of .. .. 250
Industrial Society .. ..251
Institute of Marketing .. 251
Institute of Office .. ..251
Institute of Personnel .. .. 251
Institution of Works Managers 251
studies, diploma .. 162,251
manufacturing 227, 228, 238-9, 251,
274-88, 411
National Joint Advisory Council 427
organisation .. .. 238-54
ownership .. .. .. 238-42
production and productivity in 238,
247, 248-50, 274
British Productivity Council 215,
249, 250
Production Engineering Advis¬
ory Service .. . . .. 234
Queen’s Award to . . .. 391
relations with Government 56, 57,
196,247-54,431
restrictive practices, control of
239-40, 247
safety measures .. .. 422-4
structure .. .. .. 238-41
training for .. 250-1, 417, 423
See also Employment, Exports, in¬
dividual industries, Public cor¬
porations, Research and Trade
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Infectious diseases:
control of ..
mortality from
Inflation see Finance
Information:
and advice to exporters
Central Office of ..
services (telephone)
services overseas
Page
70. 133, 138
9
Page
• • 390
• ■ 46, 53, 214
• •355
63-4, 206, 390
Injury benefit (industrial injuries)
129-3°, 131
Inland Revenue:
Board of 53, 54, 73, 89, 363, 364, 368
sources of see Taxation
Inland transport . . 327, 334~46
Inland waterways 202, 244, 327, 334,
335, 343-4
development .. • • • • 344
Inn of Court of Northern Ireland 93
Inns see Public Houses
Inns of Court .. • • • • 93
Inquests .. .. • • 88, 93
Insecticides .. .. • • 205, 289
Inspectorates:
agricultural .. • • • • 422
constabulary .. • • i°5, io7
factory .. • • 63, 422, 423, 425
mines and quarries .. 63, 422
railway employment .. • • 422
schools .. • • • • 63, 148
Institutes and Institutions see relevant
subjects
Instrument Landing System (ils) . . 352
Insurance .. 77, 244, 299, 375, 377-9
brokers .. • • • • •• 379
export credit .. • • 39°—1
international services .. • • 379
marine .. •. • • • • 379
See also National Insurance
Intelsat .. • • • • 201, 356
Inter-Governmental Maritime Con¬
sultative Organisation .. . • 33°
Internal Trade see Trade
International:
Agency for Research on Cancer .. 205
Atomic Energy Agency .. 201, 205
Biological Programme .. • • 194
Convention for Prevention of
Pollution of Sea by Oil . • 33°
Council of Scientific Unions (icsu)
194, 201
Criminal Police Organisation
(Interpol) • • • •
Development Association
Festival of University Theatre .
Labour Organisation (ilo) 50
108
400
210
418,
428
278
Machine Tools Exhibition
Monetary Fund 233, 386, 389, 394,
395, 396
Music Council .. •. . • 211
Telecommunication Union (itu) 440
Television Federation (Intertel) 44°
Telex Exchange, London .. 354
Theatre Institute .. .. .. 210
Intimate Opera Company .. .. 213
Invention, National Reference
Library for Science and 204, 221
Invergorden .. • • • • 246, 277
Inverkip . • • • • • 262, 263
Investment .. • • • • 228-9
in fuel and power industries 255, 258,
265-6, 267
grants «. •• 237, 251, 3^9
226, 228, 233, 398
.. 228, 397-8
. . 228, 397-8
.. 228
.. 216
368-9
60, 64
..88-9
.. 91
237, 253
17 L 237-8
Investment—contd.
overseas
in Britain
private
public
trusts .. . . 375, 377, 379
See also individual industries and
Savings
Invisible transactions see Trade
Ipswich .. .. •• 243, 332
Ireland, Northern {see also subject
headings)
area and counties ..
art galleries and museums
Budget
Civil Service
Courts of Law
reserved powers
Economic Council
economic development . .
education 148, 149, 150, 151, 152,
153, 154, US, 156, 157, 158, 159,
162-3, 207
Fire Authority and Services 75, 78
forest parks . . . . . . 176
Forestry .. • • • • • • 325
General Health Services Board . . 142
Government 25, 41, 60, 61, 64, 162,
247, 309
Exchequer and Audit Depart¬
ment . . 60, 108, 368, 369
Ministry of Agriculture 60, 199,
309, 311, 312, 314, 321, 325
Ministry of Commerce
253,
Ministry of Development
75, 171, 172, 178, 192, 219, 269, 271
Ministry of Education 60, 148, 149,
150, 157, 163, 207, 4x4, 450, 451
Ministry of Finance 60, 73-4, 220,
368, 369, 373
Ministry of Health and Social
Services 61, 124, 132, 133, 142,
410, 413, 416, 432
Ministry of Home Affairs 60, 69,
75, 88, 91, 94, 97, 98, 99, i°i, 102,
104, 108, 145, 146
Prime Minister’s Department 60
Supplementary Benefits Com¬
mission .. •• 60, 124
Governor .. 27, 41, 60, 91, 108
health and welfare services 51, 61,
135, 141-2
holidays, statutory .. 421-2
Hospitals Authority 138, 141, 142
Housing Trust .. .. 178, 180
industrial safety . .. • ■ 426
industry 172, 246-7, 253, 278, 282,
285, 286, 288, 290, 291, 292, 295
Irish Ballet Company in . . • • 213
Joint Nursing and Midwives
Council .. • • • • • • 143
60, 247,
389, 4i3
60, 68,
Land Registry
language
law courts ..
libraries
local government
61
7, 12, 13
88, 89
•. 223
67, 68, 69, 70, 72,
75
Lyric Players Theatre .. .. 209
music, opera and ballet .. . . 213
national insurance 124, 125, 369
new towns .. • • • • U2
Newspapers, Associated .. 447“8
Parliament .. 25, 41, 60, 247
INDEX
Page
505
Page
Ireland, Northern—contd.
Parliamentary Draftsmen, Office of 61
planning .. .. .. i7i> 172
police .. .. .. .. 108
population 7, 13, 14, 16, 410, 413
press .. .. 444, 445> 44^
public finance .. .. 368, 369
Public Record Office .. .. 61
Registers .. .. .. 7,61,146
relations with UK Government 31,
41, 52, 60
representation in UK Parliament 25,
Road Fund
roads
Tourist Board
transport ..
Transport Holding Company
unemployment
universities and colleges . .
4i
•• 346
.. 346
•• 385
• ■ 346
• • 346
227, 413
149, 157,
159, 162-3
water supply .. .. . . 271
‘Workers’ . . .. . . .. 4X6
Young Farmers’ Clubs . . . . 168
See also Belfast and Ulster
Ireland, Republic of .. 1 > 25
census .. .• .. . • 7
citizens’ employment in UK .. 416
citizens’ status in UK . . .. 12
citizens’ voting rights in UK 33> 69
Ireland, Republic of—contd.
insurance reciprocity .. . . 124
population: migration .. 11, 12
relations with UK Government 25, 51
trade wTith UK .. .. .. 388
war pensioners .. .. .. 51
Iron and Steel:
industry 57, 244, 245, 246, 274-6,
279
Steel Corporation, British 192, 276,
333
Iron Castings .. .. 274, 276
Isaac Newton optical telescope . . 202
Islamic Centres .. . . ..189
Isle of Grain
Isle of Man:
airport
area
fisheries
language
legislature
national insurance
newspapers
population ..
races (tt)
260, 263, 334
•• 35°
1
• • 3i9
• -7, i3
25, 3i
124, 125
•• 445
13, 14
465
relationship with UK Govern¬
ment and Crown 25, 26, 31, 42, 51
Tynwald Court .. .. . . 31
war pensions .. .. .. 51
Isle of Wight .. .. 1, 3, 4, 452
J Jams and marmalades industry .. 293
Jarrow . . .. .. 245, 340
Jersey:
language .. .. .. .. 13
national insurance benefits . . 125
newspapers .. .. .. 445
population .. .. .. • . 13
States of .. . . •. . • 31
See also Channel Islands
Jewellery industry .. .. 244, 286
287
Jewish:
schools .. .. .. ..188
Welfare Board .. . . .. 123
Youth, Association for .. .. 168
Jewry .. . • ■ • 182, 188
Council of Christians and Jews .. 189
Jockey Club .. .. . . 462
Jodrell Bank radio telescope . . 220
Jodrell Laboratory . . .. • • 193
Joint Services Staff College . . 112
Journalists:
Institute of .. .. . • 448
K Kennedy scholarships . . . . 165
Kent . . . . • • 159, 30°, 306
Kew, Royal Botanic Gardens . . 193
Kidderminster . . .. 244, 292
Kilmarnock .. . . . . .. 292
Kimmeridge . . . . .. . . 259
L Labour .. . . 333, 4IO-32
arbitration and conciliation 430-1
deployment of .. .. 411-2
industrial relations 422, 426-32
Journalists—contd.
National Council for the Training
of .. .. .. 446-7
National Union of .. .. 448
See also Press
Judge Advocate General’s Depart¬
ment .. .. .. 54, 90
Judge Advocate of the Fleet .. 90
Judges 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88,
90, 91-2
Judicial Committee of the Privy
Council .. . . .. 42-3, 54
Judicial procedure 80, 83-4, 85-6, 87,
88-9, 90-1, 359
Judiciary see Law
Judo  464-5
Jury see Law
Justices of the Peace 53, 80, 85, 86, 87,
92, 96
Jute industry .. .. 246, 291
Juvenile Courts 80, 88, 95, 101, 102, 144
Juvenile delinquency see Young
Offenders
King George’s Jubilee Trust . . 169
King’s Lynn .. . . . . 208
Kingsnorth . . . . . . . . 263
Kingston upon Hull see Hull
Kirkintilloch . . . . .. 265
Knitwear .. 244, 246, 289, 291
Labour—contd.
Ministry of .. .. 334, 410
Department of Employment and
Productivity see Employment
5°6
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Labour—contd.
mobility of . . . . .. 416
protective legislation 333-4, 419, 420,
421, 424
unemployment . . 227, 251, 412
working conditions . . 419-23
See also Employment, Trade
Unions, Wages and Work,
hours of
Labour Party .. • • 35> 39> 43°
Lace industry .. .. 244, 291
Lacrosse .. .. .. 151,456-7
Lancashire 14, 15, 16, 92, 172, 244, 257,
258, 278, 286, 290, 292, 300, 306
See also coalfields, cotton, Liver¬
pool and Manchester
Lancaster .. .. .. .. 159
Duchy of . . .. . . 43, 92
Land:
acquisition and disposal . . .. 52
Registry  52, 54, 61
use s, 170, 171, 172, 177, 178, 192,
247, 299
See also Agriculture
Lands:
Improvement Company . . ..313
Tribunals  73, 89
Valuation Appeal Court . . 73, 94
Language 7, 12-13, 22, 150, 151, 158,
160
Larne . . . . . . . . 282
Laundries and launderettes. . . . 407
Law  79-95
arrest, law of . . . . 81-2, 86
Burgh courts . . . . 85, 86
Prosecutor . . .. .. 86
civil proceedings 84-5, 87-8, 92, 94
Commission . . . . 54, 91
Common . . . . . . 31, 79
courts (criminal and civil) 80-90, 92,
94
criminal appeals . . . . 81, 84, 86
Criminal Injuries Compensation
Board . . .. . . . . 90
criminal proceedings 81-3, 85-7, 92,
94, 95
equity system . . . . . . 79
evidence, rules of 82-3, 87, 92
General Council of the Bar . . 93
Habeas Corpus .. .. 82, 86
Judges’ Rules . . . . 82, 86
judiciary 26, 29, 54, 83, 86, 90-2
jury 82-3, 85, 87, 88, 91, 92-3
legal aid and advice . . 82, 94-5
legal profession .. . . • • 93
Council of Legal Education . . 93
legislation see Parliament
Officers’ Departments . . 53, 59
Officers of the Crown 44, 53, 59
penalties . . . . . . . . 95-6
press (legal requirements) 448-9
prosecutions 81, 82, 84-5, 86, 87, 88,
89
Reform Committee . . . . 91
Society . . . . 88, 93, 94, 95
Society of Northern Ireland,
Incorporated . . . . 93, 94
Society of Scotland . . 93, 94, 95
Supreme Court Committee of the 95
sources of . . . . . . . . 79
Statute    55, 78
trials and verdicts see prosecutions
above
Lawn Tennis .. . . 455-6
Lawyers
Learned societies
190, 193, i9S:
Page
94
204,
220
266
292
Leatherhead (laboratories) . .
Leather industry
British Leather Manufacturers’
Research Association .. . . 292
Lee Conservancy Catchment Board 270
Lee Navigation . . .. . . 344
Lee Valley 175, 3°6
Leeds 16, 159, 173, 217, 221, 245, 292,
293, 444
Legal aid see Law
Legal system .. . . 79-91
Legislation see Parliament
Leicester and Leicestershire 15, 16, 157,
159, 209, 217, 244, 259, 278, 293
Leisure activities . . . . 18-23
See also Arts, promotion of,
Recreation and Sports
Leith (port) . . . . . . . . 322
Leman Bank . . . . . . 259
Letters patent . . 29, 30, 38, 43
Leverhulme Trusts and Fellowships 163
Leyland . . . . . . 172, 244
Liberal Party . . . . . . 35
Libraries 59, 193, 195, 204, 207, 211,
221-4
Aslib  204, 223
private collections .. .. 221
public .. 20, 207, 221, 222
school . . . . . . .. 222
SCONUL  223
university .. . . 221, 222, 223
Library:
Advisory Councils . . .. 222
Associations . . . . . . 223
co-operation . . .. 204, 222-3
National Central . . . . 222, 223
National:
of Scotland .. .. 221, 223
of Wales .. 58, 221, 222
Licences:
aircrews and aircraft . . . . 347
animals .. .. . . 354, 389
broadcast receiving 354, 433, 434
broadcast transmitting .. • • 433
cinemas and films. . .. ..215
driving   345, 354
export .. .. .. 389, 390
gun and game .. .. . . 459
import .. . . . . 389, 39°
issue of, by Post Office .. • • 354
motor vehicles 23, 334, 340-1, 342, 365
plants .. .. .. .. 389
race courses . . .. 462, 463
telephone systems (local).. • • 355
Life:
assurance .. .. .. .. 377
expectation of .. .. 9, IO
imprisonment .. .. 96, 97
peerages .. .. .. . . 32
Lifeboats . . . •• 331
Royal National Life-boat Institu¬
tion  33i
Lighthouses .. .. .. •• 331
Lincolnshire .. 5, 259, 300, 302, 306
Linen industry .. 246, 289, 291
Literary societies and prizes 223—4
Literature .. .. .. 220-4
associations and societies.. .. 220
Royal Society of .. .. .. 223
Liverpool:
Corn Exchange .. .. .. 392
INDEX
Page
. . 392
..84
80, 81
172, 181
244, 290, 295
.. 217
209, 211, 244
15, 16
332, 333, 334
•■332
••334
.. 81
159,221
260, 334
• • 329
329, 378-9
26, 67-75
.. 68
Liverpool—contd.
Cotton Exchange
Court of Passage
Crown Court
housing
industries ..
museum and art gallery
music and drama 172
population
port of .. 244, 290
container terminal
tanker terminal
Recorder of
University
Livestock see Agriculture
Llandarcy
Lloyd’s Register of Shipping
Lloyd’s, Society of ..
Local Government . .
authorities, types of
Councils:
borough . . 68, 69, 71, 72, 74, 178
burgh .. .. 68,69,71,74
county and county borough 68, 69,
70, 74, 170, 178, 339, 365
London see London
parish, rural and urban district 68,
69, 7°, 7i, 74, 178
town . . . . . . 68, 70, 71
education authorities see Education
elections 52, 68-9
employment in .. . . 71, 72
finance 71-4, 179, 180-1, 229, 358
functions and services . . 69—71
Fants • • • • 72, 252, 358
internal organisation . . . . 71
labour relations . . . . -.431
National Joint Councils . . 72, 432
relations with central Government
52, 67-8,146, 251
responsibility for:
amenities . . .. 69-71, 174
arts, promotion of 70, 207-8, 211,
216
blind and handicapped 70, 122, 141
child care 70, 139, 140, 144-6
education see Education
fire services . . .. 70, 75-8
health 70, 132, 133, 138, 139, 140,
424
housing and planning 70, 71, 133,
140, 170, 171, 172, 173, 174, 177-8,
181
licensing of films . . 215, 216
mentally ill . . 70, 122, 140
public libraries . . . . 70, 222
roads . . . . 7°, 133, 339
sport .. . . .. 450-1
water supply, purity of 70, 71, 132,
ir „ 133, 269
welfare 70, 138, 139, 140, 146, 424
youth services . . . . 166-8
urban programme . . 123-4, 146
See also Housing and Local
Government, Ministry of
Locomotives:
industry . . .. 238, 283, 284
types in use .. .. .. 337
Locust research .. . . . . 206
London:
airports .. . . 260, 350, 352
art, drama, music 208, 209, 210, 211,
212, 213, 214
schools and colleges .. 158, 210
507
Page
London—contd.
Assay Office . . . . . . 286
borough councils . . 68, 70, 170, 178
Bridge  34o
City of 27, 68, 70, 72, 74, 80, 132,
177, 208, 370
area .. . . . . . . 70
Common Council of the 104, 178
Corporation . . . . . . 70
Mayor’s Court . . . . . . 84
commodity exchanges . . . . 392
courts of law .. 80, 83, 84
financial and trading centre 371, 372,
^ . , 376, 377, 378, 392-3
hire Brigade . . . . • . 74
fish market . . . . 321, 401
food markets . . . . . . 401
Gold Market . . . . . . 392
Graduate School of Business Studies
I59, 251
Greater London 16, 67, 68, 70, 73,
80, 171, 172, 243, 345, 444
Greater London Council 67, 68, 69,
7i, 73, 74, 146, 208, 209, 218,
345,453
helicopter terminal .. -.351
industries 214, 243, 277, 278, 283,
286, 292, 294, 295
libraries . . . . . . . . 204
Metal Exchange . . . . . . 392
Metropolitan Water Board . . 269
museums and art galleries 215, 216,
217
newspapers . . . . 442, 444
police . . 104, 105, 106, 108
population 15, 16, 146, 173, 345
port of and docks . . 243, 332, 333
School of Economics see Univer¬
sities, below
Stock Exchange . . . . 376-7
tanker terminals . . . . . . 334
taxicabs . . . . . . ., 333
telephone information service . . 356
traffic   340, 343
transport 334, 335, 340, 342, 345-6
Transport Board . . 335, 340, 345
Universities 104, 159, 160, 219, 221
libraries . . .. . . . . 221
water supply . . . . . . 269
Zoo . . .. . . . . 203
Londonderry 78, 162, 172, 217, 262
Recorder of . . .. . . 88
‘London Gazette’ .. . . . . 42
Longannet . . . . . . .. 263
Long Term Reserve (Army) .. 112
Lord:
Advocate .. .. 44, 59, 86, 91
Advocate’s Department . . 49, 59
Chamberlain . . . . . . 209
Chancellor 28, 32, 33, 43, 44, 53, 84,
89, 90-1, 92, 93, 94, 182, 184
as Speaker of the House of
Lords . . . . 32, 34, 53
Chancellor’s Departments 44, 53—4
Chief Justice (England) 44, 81*, 84,
91, 97
Chief Justice (Northern Ireland) 88
High Commissioner . . 44, 185
Justice Clerk . . 86, 87, 92
Justice General . . 85, 92, 97
Lieutenants of Counties . . 44, 92
President of the Council 42, 43
President of the Court of Session
85, 87, 89, 92
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Lords:
Privy Seal . . .... .. 43
Commissioner of Justiciary . . 86
Commissioners (Treasury) . . 48
House of see House of Lords
Justices of Appeal 44, 81, 84, 88, 91
of Appeal .. .. 32, 43, 44, 84, 91
Lords—contd.
Spiritual ..
Temporal ..
Lowestoft .. .. 243,
Luncheon voucher schemes
Lutheran churches . .
Luton. .
Page
21, 32
27, 32
319, 461
.. 426
.. 188
• • 243
M Machine tools industry see Tools
Machine Tool Trades Association 278
Magazines see Periodicals
Magistrates and Magistrates’ courts 8o,
81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86, 88, 91, 92, 94,
Mail order sales
Malting industry
Man see Isle of Man
Management see Industry
Manchester:
airport (Ringway)
Business School . .
Crown Court
design centre
housing
industries
95,
. . 406
.. 294
35L 352
159, 251
80, 81
. • 250
171, 181
244, 260, 282, 290, 292,
295
Science and Tech-
159, 160
15,
103,
442
16, 172, 244
• • 333
. . 81
44, 332
• • 337
59, 202,221
202
Synthetic fibres
248, 257, 4io-3
Institute of
Markets:
coconut oil futures
commodity
discount
exchange . .
fish and fish meal
food (London)
Institute of
nology ..
music
newspapers
population
port of
Recorder of
Ship Canal
transport . .
University
research at
Man-made fibres see
Manpower
and Productivity Service 234, 250,
416, 426, 427, 430
Qualified . . • • • • • • I96
Research Unit . . • • .. 412
See also Employment
Mansfield . . • • • • • • 244
Manslaughter . . • • o°> 9°, 96
Manufacturers’ associations 242, 249-50
Manufacturing establishments, size
of . . • • •• •• 238-9
Manufacturing industries see Industry
and individual industries
Marchwood (laboratories) . . . . 266
Marine engineering see Engineering
and Shipbuilding
Marine safety and welfare . . • • 329
Marine Survey and Merchant
Marine .. • • • • • • 33°
Maritime Board, National . . 329, 331
Market and street traders . . . . 402
Market gardening see Agriculture
Marketing: .
Boards, agricultural see Agriculture
Corporation, Overseas . . . • 39°
Markets—contd.
gold .. .• •• •• 392
insurance .. .. . • 377_8
soya bean oil futures . . . . 392
Marriage:
guidance centres . . . . 122-3
rates .. . . • • . . 10
registration . . . . • • 7
Marshall Scholarships . . . . 164
Master of Rolls .. .. 84, 89, 91
Maternity allowance . . 126, 129
Maternity services . . 122, 136, 139
Matrimonial Causes Rule Committee 90
Mayor’s and City of London Court 84
Mayors and Lord Mayors . . 27, 41, 68
Meals, provision of:
for old people .. .. 123, 140
for school children 132, 148, 151
Meat and fish products .. 294, 305
Meat and Livestock Commission 306, 315
Mechanical engineering 197, 277-81
handling equipment . . 278, 332
Medical:
Association, British . . i43> 425
Council, General . . . . 89, 143
Practices Committee . . . . 136
private insurance schemes . . 143
profession see Doctors
publications .. . • • • 207
Research . . 132, I44> I98, 199
Council 50, 138, 144, 191, 195,
198-9, 205, 425, 426
National Institute for . . . • 199
services:
in industry
in prisons
for ships
social workers
424-6
.. 99
• • 357
123, 137, 140
.. 251
• • 392
• • 392
• •372
329, 372, 392
.. 321, 402
.. .. 402
supplies see Pharmaceuticals
Medway . . . . 243, 332, 339
Mental health services 123, 140, 142
National Association for Mental
Health . . . . .. 123, 142
Merchant:
banks .. . . •• 369, 372
Fleet . . . . . . • • 328
Navy .. .. 1X7,329,331-2
Established Service Scheme 329, 331
Training Board. . .. •• 331
Merseyside 15, 16, 172, 244, 252, 260,
283, 334, 34i, 413
tunnel . . . . . • 273, 340
Merthyr Tydfil . . . . • • 246
Metal manufacture 197, 243, 244, 245,
246, 274-7, 286
Meteorological Office 50, 192, 203, 271
Meteorology .. .. • • 192, 203
Methodist Association of Youth
Clubs  168
Metric system .. 191, i99> 4^7
Metrication Board . . .. .. 191
Metropolitan Police Force 104, 105,
106, 108
INDEX
Page
Metropolitan Water Board . . . . 269
Microbiological Establishment . . 198
Middlesbrough . . . . . . 332
Midlands 146, 171, 243, 244, 251, 252,
253, 257, 258, 260, 277, 278, 283, 286,
291, 292, 300, 305
population .. 14, 15, 16, 146
See also Regions
Midwifery . . .. 70, 137, 139, 143
Midwives:
Board, Central . . . . . . 143
Royal College of . . . . . . 143
Migration . . . . 7, 11-12, 15
Milford Haven 246, 260, 319, 331, 332,
.334
Military Courts see Courts-martial
Milk:
for children and mothers . . 139
marketing . . . . . . 302, 310
production.. . . . . . . 302
in schools . . . . . . . . 151
Mineral oil refining equipment . . 279
Mines and quarries:
employment in 238, 239, 257, 258,
411, 412
industry 174, 239, 251, 256-8, 276
Inspectorate . . .. . . 422
legislation .. . . . . . . 422
research .. . . 192, 197, 258
safety measures . . . . 197, 422
See also Coal
Mining Research Establishment . . 258
Ministers (of the Crown) 26, 29, 38, 39,
43, 44, 45, 46, 68, 421
ministerial responsibility 29, 45-6,
60-1, 241, 248
of State . . . . . . . . 44
See also Prime Minister and indivi¬
dual government departments
Ministries see Government, depart¬
ments of
Missiles see Defence, weapons
Monarchy . . . . . . 25, 26-30
accession . . . . .. . . 27
ceremonial . . . . . . 30
coronation . . . . . . 27
Privy Council 27, 29, 31, 41-3
relations with:
armed forces . . .. .. 29
churches .. 26, 29, 182, 183,
184
Commonwealth 26, 27, 30, 42, 43
Home Office . . . . . . 52
judiciary 25, 26, 29, 89, 90-1
509
Page
Monarchy—contd.
relations with—contd.
Parliament 27, 29-30, 31, 32, 33,
36, 38, 41, 43, 44, 45, 52
Royal Prerogatives 29, 36, 41, 52
Royal Proclamations . . 29, 31, 42
Royal title . . . . 26, 27
succession . . . . 26, 27, 30, 41
See also Royal Family
Monmouthshire 1, 5, 13, 39, 157, 245, 434
Monopolies . . . . .. 233, 442
Commission 234, 239-40, 247, 442
Morley
Mortality see Death, causes of
Motor:
Industry Research Association
Manufacturers and Traders,
Society of (smmt)
racing
shows
vehicles:
industry 197, 237, 243, 244, 246,
247, 283-4, 407
numbers licensed 23, 334, 340-1
245
283
283
465
39i
106, 173
363, 365
242-3
57, 339
457-8
2, 3
parking . .
taxation . .
tests
See also Roads, transport
Motorways . .
Mountaineering
Mountains
Murder . . 86, 88, 90, 95-6
Museums 59, 70, 193, 203, 207, 216-7,
218, 221
and Galleries, Standing Commis¬
sion on .. . . . . 216, 217
Association . . . . . . 217
private . . .. . . .. 217
Music. . . . . . . . 2x1-3
Amateur Standing Conference for 212
choral societies .. .. 211-2
colleges and schools . . . . 213
concerts .. . . 21, 211, 213
Council, National .. .. 211
County, Committees . . . . 2x2
festivals .. .. .. 211,212
folk . . . . . . . . 212
libraries . . . . . . 211, 222
orchestras .. .. .. .. 211
‘pop’ . . . . . . . . 21
Schools Association, Rural . . 212
Societies, National Federation of 212
Musicians’ societies . . . . . . 212
Muslims . . . . . . . . 189
Natal care see Welfare: children,
mothers
National:
Debt .. . . 359, 360, 368
Commissioners . . • • 375
Office .. .. .. 46, 375
Northern Ireland . . . . 369
Economy see Economy and Finance
Gallery .. . . . . . . 217
Giro . . . . . . . . 372
grid . . . . . . . . 265
Insurance 51, 122, 124, 125-32, 127
benefits .. .. 51, 127-30
contributions 125-6, 127, 134, 231
Fund .. .. 358, 359,368
graduated pension scheme xa6, 127,
National—contd.
Insurance—contd.
reciprocal agreements . . 124, 125
stamps . . . . . . . . 126
supplementary benefits 51, 122,
124, 128, 130-1
Commission 124, 130, 131, 135
Joint Advisory Council . . .. 234
Loans Fund 358, 359, 360, 361, 367,
368
product, gross 227, 228, 231, 235, 327,
380
Savings 46, 354, 365, 368, 373-5
See relevant subject matter for
organisations, etc., having National
as first word of their title
510
BRITAIN I971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Nationalised industries 26, 197, 228,
235, 241, 249, 360, 361, 362
labour relations of .. 368, 432
Select Committee on the. . 39, 241
See also individual industries
Nationality .. .. .. 12-13
Natural:
beauty, areas of . . . . i75~6
Environment Research Council
(nerc) .. ..50,176,191, 202-3
History, British Museum of 203, 217,
Naturalisation
Nature:
Conservancy
conservation
Council for
Reserves
Navigational Aids , , „ ,
Navy see Defence, Ministry of,
Merchant Navy and Royal Navy
221
12, 52
I7S. 177, 202
174-7, 202
23, 177
176-7
192,230,282, 352,357
Netball  457
Newburgh . . . . . . . . 261
Newcastle upon Tyne 15, 16, 159, 210,
217, 219, 245, 295, 438, 444
See also Tynside
New Forest 176, 325
Newhaven .. .. . . . . 243
New Opera Company . . . . 213
Newport (Mon.) 246, 276, 332, 333, 444
News agencies . . . . . . 446
Newspaper:
Editors, Guild of British . . 448
owners . . . . . . 44I_2
Press Directory . . . . • • 441
Publishers Association . . 446, 447
Society . . . . . . . . 447
Newspapers . . . . 296, 297, 442-5
Newsprint, supply of . . 296, 441
New towns . . . . .. 170, 171-3
Commission for . . . . 52, 172
Development Corporations 172, 368
Noise:
abatement of . . . . 133, 192
Abatement Society of . . . . 23
Advisory Commission on .. 23
Page
Noise—contd.
control of 35°, 352-3
Non-ferrous metals:
industry . . 57, 243, 276-7, 279
Research Association . . . . 277
Norfolk  3°6
Northampton . . . . 172, 244
North Atlantic Treaty Organisation
(nato) 109, in, 113, 114, 115, 117
Northern Ireland see Ireland,
Northern
North of Scotland Hydro-Electric
Board (nsheb) 261, 263, 264, 265, 266
Northumberland . . 175, 245, 257
Norwich . . 16, 208, 212, 243, 293,
438
Nottingham and Nottinghamshire 15,
158, 209, 218, 244, 250, 257, 278, 284,
295, 456
Nuclear energy:
establishments .. .. 200-1
international agencies . . 201, 205
for marine propulsion .. 117,192
power stations 200, 245, 254, 262,
264-5, 273, 280
reactors . . .. 200, 246, 264-5
research . . . . . . 200, 266
responsibility for . . . . .. 200
weapons and equipment see Defence
See also Atomic Energy Authority
Nuclear test ban treaty . . . . 109
Nuffield Foundation 142, 144, 163, 198
Nurseries .. . . . . . . 14°
Nursing and nurses . . 137, 139, 143
in armed forces . . . . . . 111
associations . . . . 142, 143
General Nursing Council 143
home    137. *39
Princes Mary’s Royal Air Force
Nursing Service . . . . 111
Queen Alexandra’s Royal Army
Nursing Corps . . . . . . 111
Queen Alexandra’s Royal Naval
Nursing Service . . . . 111
Royal College of Nursing 143, 425
Nylon industry . . . . 245, 290
o
Observatory:
Royal Edinburgh . .
Royal Greenwich . .
Obstetricians
Occupational therapists
Oceanography
Offenders, treatment of
See also After-Care
Office:
building
machinery industry
Management, Institute of
Officer cadet schools
Oil:
mineral see Petroleum
prevention of sea pollution by 271, 330
Old Bailey  80, 81
Oldham . . . . . . . . 244
Old people:
National Corporation for the Care of 142
proportion in population 10, 11
welfare .. . . 7°, 140. 142
in work .. . . . . 410, 414
See also Pensions
196, 202
1, 196
..139
137, i4b 144
. . . . 202
95-io4
247, 253
227, 246, 279
• • 251
. . 112
Old People’s Welfare Council,
National . . . . . . . . 142
Olympic Games 451, 458, 460, 463, 464,
465, 466
British Olympic Association 451,
452, 466
Open University .. .. .. 159
Opera and opera companies 21, 212-3
Opera for All . . . . .. 213
Royal Opera House . . 212, 213
training . . . . . . . . 213
Ophthalmic services 135, 136, 142, 144
Opposition, parliamentary 35, 36, 40,
360
Opticians . . . . 136, 142, 144
General Optical Council 135, 143
Orders in Council . . . . 29, 42, 80
Ordnance Survey . . . . . . 52
Organisation for Economic Co¬
operation and Development (oecd)
49, 205, 386, 400, 417
Orkney Islands . . . . 1, 3I3
Output see Industry, production
Outward Bound Trust . . 169, 457
INDEX
Overseas:
Appointment Bureaux
banks
constructional work
dependent territories, public
vices
Development, Ministry of
166, 198,
Marketing Corporation . .
scientific relations. .
Service Aid Scheme (osas)
students
Affairs, UK Council for
London Conference
Page
.. 166
37i, 372
•• 273
ser-
50, 64
54, 64,
199, 206,
418, 440
•• 390
• • 205
. . 401
163-5
• • 165
• • 165
Overseas—contd.
students—contd.
welfare . .
Trade see Trade
Oxford
Air Training School
art schools
Bodleian Library . .
Page
• • 165
16, 217, 243
•• 352
. . 219
. . 221
Commonwealth Forestry Institute
199, 256
museums . . . . . . 203, 174
sport _ .. 454,455,312
University 42, 103, 159, 160, 164,
219, 221, 325, 454, 455
Press (and Clarendon Press) . . 223
PAYE (income tax scheme) 127, 364
Packaging . . . . . . 296, 407
Paint industry . . 245, 287, 288
Paper and board industry 57, 243, 248,
^ , 296-7, 323
Parks:
Countryside Commissions 52, 175
Forest . . . . . . 176, 323
National .. . . .. 175-6, 325
Northern Ireland . . . . . . 176
Scotland . . . . . . . . 176
Parliament 25, 26, 29, 30-41, 42, 45,
46, 79, 82, 92, no, 183, 184, 193,
240, 241, 358, 359, 360, 361, 362,
368, 421, 433, 434, 439
Bills, parliamentary 30, 36-8, 49, 55,
359
Money Bills . . . . 38, 359
Private Bills . . .. 37, 38, 69
procedure . . . . 36-7, 49
Public Bills . . . . 37, 38
Royal Assent to 29, 33, 38, 359, 362
committees 38-40, 183-4, 193, 241, 360
control of:
armed forces . . . . 109-10
finance . . 36, 37, 38, 39, 40
Government in power
local authorities
public corporations
dissolution of
duration of
elections
functions . .
legislation . .
Northern Ireland
Opposition
party system
private members
privileges . .
procedure . .
prorogation of
questions to ministers
relations with Monarchy
34-6, 39
67, 68
240-1
29, 30, 31
• • 31
3i, 33-4- 35
• • 36
30-1, 37-40, 46, 49
25,41
35, 36, 40, 360
3i,34-5
• • 37
• • 34
36-40
29, 31-2
40, 46
30, 3i, 34,
38, 39, 4i, 42
relationship with the Church 182,
183, 184
sessions . . . . . . 31, 32
standing orders . . . . 36, 39
State opening of .. .. . . 30
Statutory Instruments . . 39, 40
Whips . . . . 36, 44, 48
See also House of Commons and
House of Lords
Parliamentary:
and Scientific Committee .. 193
Parliamentary—contd.
Commissioner . . . . .. 40-1
Counsel, Office of . . .. 49
Secretaries . . . . 44, 46, 48
Parole Board . . . . . . 97
Patent Office Library . . . . 204
Paymaster General . . . . 55, 207
Paymaster General’s Office 43, 54-5
Pegwell Bay . . . . . . . . 334
Peers . . . . 29, 30, 32, 34, 37, 84
Pembroke and Pembrokeshire 1, 176,
260, 262
Penal system . . .. 80, 95-104
Advisory Council . . . . 95
Pennine Way . . .. . . 176
Pensions:
appeal tribunals . . . . . . 89
graduated pension scheme 125, 126,
127, 128
old age . . 122, 124, 125, 126
payment of, by Post Office . . 354
public service . . . . 55, 66
retirement 124, 125, 126, 127, 128,
129
war . . 51, 55, 89, 124, 131, 135
widows 125, 126, 127-8, 129, 131
Periodical Publishers Association . . 448
Periodicals . . 20, 239, 441, 445
Permanent Boundary Commissions 33
Personnel management . . 251, 426
Pesticides and Other Toxic Chemi¬
cals, Advisory Committee on .. 317
Pesticides Safety Precautions Scheme 317
Peterborough 157, 172, 173, 243, 295
Petroleum and petroleum products 238,
243, 244, 246, 254, 259-60, 279, 289,
332, 334, 365
chemicals industry . . . . 287
equipment industry . . 247, 279
imports and consumption 254, 259,
260,381
indigenous production 255, 259, 381
pipelines . . . . .. . . 260
refineries and refining 197, 239, 243,
244, 246, 260, 287, 334
research .. . . .. 197, 260
tankers .. .. 259, 285, 328, 334
terminals . . . . . . 332, 334
Pharmaceuticals 143, 198, 244, 288-9
Pharmaceutical Society of Britain . . 143
Pharmacists . . .. 135, 136, 143
Photographic equipment . . . . 281
Physical recreation see Recreation
Physiotherapists . . . . 137, 144
Pig industry . . 300, 301, 305, 308, 315
512
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
330-1
.. 268
260, 334
265, 325
Pilotage
Pipelines:
gas 
oil . .
Pitlochry
Planning:
development areas and schemes 170
171, 251-3
regional . . . . . . i?1* 25l
town and country 52, 70, 170-4, 192
See also Economic Planning
Plant health . . 49, 193, 199. 3*6. 3^9
Pathology Laboratory . . . . 316
Plastics . . 246, 287-8, 407
Playing fields . . . • 152, *73
Association, National 169, 45 L 452
Plimsoll line . . . . . . • • 329
Plungar .. . . . . • • 259
Plymouth . . . . . . 438, 461
Poetry festivals and societies 220, 224
Polaris vessels .. ■■ 114,115
Police . . . . 7°) 81, 104—8
Authorities . . . . 104-5
cadets . . . . . • • • 106
Council for Great Britain . . 105
Courts .. . . . . . . 85
Gazettes . . . . • . • ■ 108
Planning Organisation, Home
Office . . . . . . 105, 107
Women . . . . . . 105-6
Poliomyelitis . . . . 132, 139
Political:
and Economic Planning (pep) . . 242
party broadcasts . . .. .. 439
party system . . . . . • 34~6
Pollution, prevention of:
air . . 5, 69, 70, 133, 174, 192, 200
rivers .. . . . . 7°> I74
sea (by oil) . . . . 271, 330
water supply 70, 202, 270, 271, 313-4
Polo
Polytechnics . .
Pomeroy Forestry School . .
Poole ..
‘Pop’ music . .
Population . . 7, 24, 172
age distribution
birth and death rates
censuses . . 7, 8, 13, 14, 15, i7>
and surveys, Office of . . 7> 55
density 7, 8, 14, 15, 16, 170, 172-3,
225
expectation of life.
fertility trends
households
increase in . . 8,
leisure
migration . . 8,
mortality, causes of
nationalities
regional distribution
Royal Commission on
sex ratio
social organisation
trends
urbanisation
vital statistics
working 14, 16, 225, 238
Port of London Authority .
Portrait Galleries, National.
Ports:
and Docks 57, 133, 243, 244, 245,
246, 3i9, 332-4- 335
authorities . . . . .. 333, 362
Ports—contd.
Council, National
container facilities
development
Dock Labour Board, National
ownership . .
457
154, 161
• • 326
243, 461
20, 21, 436
, 225, 243-7
9, 10-11
..8-10
8, 9, 10
8, 10
17- 18
9, 14-16, 17
18- 23
12, 146, 411
9
12
3-16, 243-6
8
..9-10
17-24
8-9, 11-17
14-16
..7-11
, 252, 410-3
271, 332
.. 217
Page
•• 333
333, 337
•• 333
•• 333
• • 333
Portsmouth .. . . .. 16, 17, 243
Port Talbot 276, 332
Postal Services . . . . 353-4
Postmaster General . . 353, 354, 355
Post Office 193, 202, 229, 283, 353-7,
370, 449
broadcasting responsibilities 433,
438, 439
cable and wireless services 354, 356
counter services .. . . • • 354
Data Processing Service, National
250, 353, 357
Datel Services . . . . 354-5
finance .. .. .. •. 353
mail services . . . . 353“4
mechanisation . . 353, 354, 355
National Giro . . 354, 37L 372
organisation . . . . • • 353
Postal Consulting Service . . 354
private circuits . . . . . . 356
radio tower, London . . • • 355
research . . 193, 202, 353, 357
satellites . . . . . . 202, 356
specialised telephone services 355"6
Telegraph Services . . • • 354
vehicles . . . . . . • . 353
See also Telecommunications
Posts and Telecommunications,
Minister of and Ministry of 55, 201,
202, 331, 353, 433, 434, 437, 438, 439,
442
Potato marketing 199, 302, 310, 311, 315
Pottery industry . . 244, 295-6
Poultry industry .. 301, 305, 308
Power, Ministry of . . 191, 247, 258
See also Technology; Ministry of
Power stations
Premium Savings Bonds
Preservation:
councils and societies
of buldings
of rural amenities
Press ..
Association Ltd. .
Council
institutions
legal requirements
‘National’ . .
ownership . .
Royal Commissions
television and
training for journalism
Thomson Foundation
Preston
Prestwick (airport)
Preventive detention
Price:
guarantees (agricultural)
200
54, 373
23,
175, 207
23, 174
• • 175
441-9
441, 446
442, 448
447-8
442, 448-9
.. 442
441-2, 443
• • 442
.. 442
446-7
44i, 447
172, 244, 290, 352
350, 35L 352
..103
302, 309,
310-1
. • 236
.. 240
235-6
235, 236,
247
Prime Minister 27, 29, 32, 35, 42, 43,
44, 48, 65, 67, 90, 92, no, 183, 235
Printing:
and Kindred Trades Federation 448
relation to income
restrictions by traders
Prices and Incomes . .
National Board for (nbpi)
INDEX
513
Page
Printing—contd.
industry 56, 238, 243, 244, 246, 248,
297
Industrial Training Board 446
Prisons .. .. .. 96, 97-100
chaplains .. . . .. . . 99
education . . .. . . . . 98-9
medical service .. . . . . 99
National Association of Prison
Visitors . . . . . . . . 99
privileges and discipline . . . . 99
training . . . . . . . . 98
welfare and after-care . . 99-100
Privy Council 27, 29, 31, 41-3, 45
Committees . . 41, 42, 54
Counsellors . . .. 41, 42, 44
Prize Courts . . . . . . . . 42
Probate, Divorce and Admiralty
Division (High Court) . . 84, 91
Probation 95, 96, 99, 100, 101, 103
and After-Care Council . . . . 101
officers .. . . 99, 100, iox
Procurator General . . . . . . 55
Department of .. .. ••55-6
Procurators Fiscal .. . . 86, 88
Production and productivity see
Industry
Production Engineering Advisory
Service .. .. .. .. 204
Page
Professional and Executive Register 413
Psychiatric social work 123, 137, 144
prison . . . . . . . . 99
Public:
Accounts Committee 39, 360, 361,
362
Authorities . . . . 229, 431
Building and Works, Ministry of 56,
174, 178, 192, 208, 219, 220, 239, 247,
272, 273
corporations 190, 197, 230, 238, 239,
241, 360, 361, 362, 432
See also Nationalisation and
individual corporations
libraries . . 20, 207, 220, 222
Prosecutions, Director of 53, 81, 86
Record Office . . 45, 54, 217, 221
Services of Overseas Dependent
Territories . . . . . . 64
Trustee Office . . . . . . 54
utilities see Gas, Electricity and
Water
Works Loans Board 46, 74, 180, 368
Publishers’ Association . . . . 223
Publishing . . . . 56, 248, 297
Puisne judges . . . . 84, 92
Pumps and industrial valves . . 280
Purchase tax see Taxation
Purfleet .. .. . . . . 340
Quakers see Churches
Quarries see Mines and quarries
Quarrying industry . . . . 239
Quarter Sessions 80, 81, 84, 92, 94, 95, 96
Queen see Monarchy
Queen Elizabeth Hall . . . . 211
Queen’s:
Award to Industry . . • • 391
Q ueen’s—contd.
Bench Division (England and
Wales) . . . . . . 81, 84
Bench Division (Northern Ireland) 88
Counsel .. . . . . • • 93
Courts . . . . . . . . 91
Printer . . . . . . . . 56
Proctor . . . . . . 53, 56
RAC see Automobile Club, Royal
RIBA see Architects
Race Relations . . . . 146-7
Board .. . . . . 83, 147
Racing see relevant subjects
Radar . . 118, 119, 282, 352
Establishment, Royal . . . . 202
Radcliffe Observatory . . . . 202
Radio:
and Space Research Station 196, 202
astronomy . . . . . . .. 202
communications . . • • i, 202, 357
See also Broadcasting, Naviga¬
tional aids and Satellites
industry . . . . 282, 407, 439
Interference, UK Committee of
the International Special Com¬
mittee on (cispr) .. .. 440
telegraphy.. .. .. ..331
telescopes .. . . . . . . 202
‘Radioactive Substances Advisory
Committee . . . . . . 202
Radiochemical Centre . . .. 200
Radiography .. . . . . 138, 144
Radioisotopes . . .. .. 281
Radiological Protection Service . . 200
Railways . . 238, 334, 336-8, 341
Board, British 284, 333, 334, 335, 336
337, 338
development .. .. ' 337-8
Railways—contd.
diesel traction
electrili cation
freight services
grants
hotels
motorail
National Freight Corporation
••337
• • 337
333, 334, 337, 338
• • 336
•• 335
•• 337
• • 336,
337, 338
• • 346
• • 336
• • 336
336,337
422, 423
336, 337, 338
• • 338
273, 345
346
243, 245, 283, 284
. . 5, 269, 270
180, 181, 231, 358,
363
water . . . . . . 269, 270
Raw materials, trade in 225, 380, 384,
402
Rayon industry . . . . . . 290
Reactors see Nuclear Energy
Reading .. .. 103,159,219
Reciprocity (social services) 124-5
Recorders (law) .. .. 81, 88, 92
Northern Ireland
operations . .
organisation
passenger service
safety measures
statistics
Technical Centre
underground (London)
vehicles industry
Rainfall
Rates . . 73-4
5H
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Recreation .. . . 18-23, I73> I75
Physical . . .. .. ..451
Central Council of 169, 451-2,
457, 458
Scottish Council of 169, 450,451,452
See also Clubs and Sports
Red Cross Society, British 123, 141,
142, 169
Red Deer Commission . . . . 309
Reference Library for Science and
Invention, National . . 204, 221
Refineries see Petroleum
Refractory goods . . . . . . 295
Refrigeration machinery 17, 246, 280
Regent, appointment of . . . . 30
Regional development . . 236-7, 247
Regional Newspapers . . 442-4
Regions .. .. .. 14, 242-7
administration . . . . 14-15, 16
area and population . . 14, 15, 16
Registrar:
General of Shipping and Seamen 330
of Restrictive Trading Agreements 240
Registrars:
General . . . . 7, 55, 59, 146
of births, deaths and marriages . . 7
Rehabilitation see Disablement
Religion see Churches and also Broad¬
casting and Education
Religious communities . . . . 188
Religious freedom . . . . 182, 183
Remand homes and centres 96, 103
Remploy Ltd. . . . . 238, 415
Rent control . . . . . . 180-1
Rent tribunals . . . . 89, 181
Repertory theatre companies 209, 210
Resale price maintenance .. 240, 409
Rescue services, sea and air 116, 330-1,
357
Research, scientific . . .. 190-207
advisory councils and committees 190,
192, 193, 194, 200, 204
agricultural 195, 199, 203, 308, 315,
3i7, 318
aircraft . . 119, 192, 197, 285, 351
application of results 203-4, 205, 206
associations . . . . 197, 280
Conference of Industrial Re¬
search .. .. .. 197
astronomy . . . . . . . . 202
biological . . . . 193, 198, 202
botanical . . . . . . . . 193
building and civil engineering 178,
192, 219, 273-4
chemical . . . . .. . . 197
Commonwealth 197, 198, 202, 205, 206
communications . . . . 192, 193
Construction Industry Research
Association . . . . .. 274
councils 162, 190, 191, 195, 196, 197,
202, 203, 206
Council, Science 50, 191, 196, 201,
203
criminology . . . . 103, 107
defence . . . . 119, 192, 200
Development Corporation,
National.. .. 57,191,205
ecological . . . . . . 175-6, 202
electronics .. 119, 192, 197
engineering . . 197, 200, 203
establishments . . . . . . 196
expenditure on 190, 197-8, 202
fellowships and studentships 163,
194, 198, 203, 206
Research—contd.
fire prevention
fisheries
food
forestry
fuel and power
furniture . .
geological
Page
 77
199, 202, 322
. . . 197, 200
200, 202, 203, 325
192, 255, 258, 260,
266, 268
.. 298
192, 202, 203
Government responsibility for 57,
190-207
industry 193, 196, 197, 203, 205, 250
See also individual industries
inventions . . . . . . . . 205
land use and planning .. . . 192
lectureships and awards . . 194, 195
medical 132, 144, 198, 199, 200, 204,
205
meteorological . . 50, 192, 202, 203
mining .. .. 192, 203, 258
Natural Environment Research
Council .. . . 176, 191, 202-3
nuclear . . .. 192, 196, 200
pest control . . .. . . 199
petroleum .. . . . . . . 260
plant . . .. .. 193, 199
private institutes for .. I97_8
radio aids .. . . . . . . 192
radio-astronomy see Astronomy
results, information on 204, 205, 206
roads .. . . .. 192, 203
seismological .. . . . . 203
social . . . . .. 192, 203
space . . . . . . 197, 201-2
technological . . 190, 191, 196
telecommunications .. .. 193
television and radio . . . . 439
textiles . . . . . . 197, 289
tropical products . . . . . . 206
in universities and technical col¬
leges 160, 163, 192, 196, 199, 203
veterinary . . . . . . i99> 3°5
water supplies . . .. 270, 271
zoological . . . . . . .. 203
Restrictive practices 233, 239-40, 247
334, 409
court . . . . . . . . 233
Retail trade . . . . .. 403-7, 408
Reuters Ltd. . . . . 440, 446
Revenue 231, 359, 362, 363-7, 368,
369, 386
Rhodes Scholarships . . . . 164
Rhondda
Riding
Rifle shooting
Rights of way
Ringway (airport)
. . 246
• • 463
465-6
. . 176
35L 352
River authorities 269-70, 271, 3i3-4> 321
Road:
haulage . . . . 334, 335, 34i~3
National Freight Corporation 336,
338, 34i
passenger transport 334, 340, 341-2
authorities (ptas) . . • • 336
Research Laboratory . . 192, 340
Services, British . . . . 335, 34*
Roads 57, 58, 172, 254, 338-43, 346
classification . . .. 338, 346
development and construction 70,
192, 339-40
motorways .. .. 57, 339
Northern Ireland . . . . . . 346
safety . . 50, 70, 192, 342-3
transport . . 334, 340~3, 345, 346
INDEX
Page
Rochdale .. .. .. .. 244
Rockefeller Foundation . . . . 163
Roman Catholic Church see Church
Rope-making . . 245, 246, 291
Rotherham .. .. . . . . 276
Rowing  46r
Royal:
Air Force no, in, 112, 113, 114,
116, 118, 120, 121
College  
Nuclear Strategic Forces .. n6
Regiment  II4
Reserve and Auxiliary Forces. . 113
Staff Colleges . . .. ..112
Volunteer Reserve .. ..113
See also Defence
Commissions:
Assizes and Quarter Sessions 80
appointment and functions of 47, 67
Environmental Pollution 23, 174, 192
Fine Art .. .. 216, 219
Historical Monuments.. .. 174.
Industrial relations . . . . 427
Population . . .. . . 7
Press  .’.’442
Dockyards .. .. 117,119
Family:
ceremonial . . . . ..
genealogy and succession 27, 28
Fleet Auxiliary Service .. .. 117
Household political officers . . 36
Institution . . i93> ^94, 195
Marines .. .. .. I10’
Reserve . . .. . . .. 112
Medals (science) . . . . . . 194
Military Academy .. . . 111
Sr5
Page
46, 370
. . 112
. . in
. . 112
. . 112
Royal—contd.
Mint
Naval Auxiliary Service
College ..
Reserve ..
Staff College
Navy no, in, 112, 113, 114, 115,
116-7, rzo, 121, 331
Fleet . . . . 114, 115, 116
See also Defence
Observer Corps . . . . ..113
Prerogatives see Monarchy
Proclamations see Monarchy
Society 190, 191, 193-4, *95, 205, 206
of Arts . . . . 193, i94) 250
See relevant subject matter for
organisations, etc., having Royal
as first word of their title
Rubber industry
Rugby
football
Rules Committees
Rules of Court
Runcorn
Rural:
amenities, preservation of
Community Councils
Councils
districts:
councils . .
population
industries . .
Music Schools Association
Preservation Societies
Rutherford High Energy
Laboratory
243, 244, 297-8
244, 282
••454
54. 90
. . 90
172, 244, 260
174-5
254, 452
•• 254
68, 70
15, 16
•■ 254
.. 212
•• i75
196, 201
SECAM see Broadcasting, colour
transmission
Sadler’s Wells Theatre . . .. 21
Safety:
Council, British . . . . . . 42
in Mines Research Establishment
(SMRE)  2 58, 42.
measures . . . . 422-4, 42'
training centres . . . . . . 42
See also Agricultural, workers,
Civil Aviation, Mines and
quarries, Railways and Roads
Sailing  452, 46:
St. Andrew’s Scottish Ambulance
Sendee . . . . . . . . 14
St. Fagan’s Castle (Museum) . . 21'
St. Helens . . . . . . . . 24^
St. John Ambulance Association and
Hi, 143, 16
84, 15
Brigade . . 123,
Salford
Hundred Court . . . .
Salmon fishing . . 199, 321, 46
Salt industry . . . . . . 24
Salvation Army 123, 168, 186, 18
Samaritans .. . . .. . . 12
Satellites . . 200, 201, 202, 439, 44
Save as You Earn (save) . . 54, 37
Savings .. .. 54,231,37
Banks
National..
Trustee ..
Contractual
Department for, National
54, 373-
373, 37
373, 374-
•• 37
54, 35‘
373, 37
S a vings—con td.
Director of
and Investment
National 46,
Bonds
Premium
Certificates
Committee
Register . .
Stamps . .
Scarborough . .
Scholarships see Education
Schools see Education
Science:
54, 354
54
• • 54
• • 230
, 368, 373-4
373, 374
•• 374
, 365, 372-3
•• 373
•• 374
•• 374
• • 259
and Invention, National Reference
Library for . . . . 204, 221
and Technology:
Central Advisory Council for 190
Council of, Institutes . . . . 195
Imperial College of . . 159, 160
Institute of . . . . 159, 160
National Lending Library for 204,221
Select Committee on . . . . 193
Department of Education and see
Education
Museum . . . . .. 217, 218
promotion of . . . . 190—207
publications 194, 195, 204, 207
Research Council (src) 50, 162, 191,
0 ^ ^95, 201, 202
See also Research and Universities
Scientific:
and industrial instruments industry
197, 247, 280
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Page
214
218
191
197
Scientific—contd.
and Technical Information, Office
for (osri) .. • • tQi. 2°4
co-operation:
between industry and univer¬
sities .. . . i9°> t92> J95
Commonwealth Scientific Com¬
mittee. . .. •• 205-6
Commonwealth Scientific Liai¬
son Offices .. . . • • 2°6
government and industry i9°> I94>
195, 196
with overseas countries 191, 196,
197, 199, 201, 205
Film Association, British indus¬
trial and
museums .. . . • • 2°3:
Policy, Council for 50, 190.
research see Research
Scientists:
number employed . . • •
training of 160, 190, 195, 196, 206
Scilly, Isles of . • • • 1, 68
Scooters see Cycle and motor cycle
industry
Scotland {see also subject headings):
area and counties . . • • 1
broadcasting councils . . • • 434
economic planning . . 58, 253
education 1481 i49> tS0* tSL I52>
154, 155, 156, 157, 159, 161, 162
Government departments • • 58“9
Agriculture and Fisheries 58, i93>
199, 309, 3i8, 321
Development 58, 68, 178, 219, 342
Education 58-9, 98, 162, 163, 207,
210, 218, 2x9, 452
Home and Health 59, 77, i03, i32,
138, 192
Information Office . . . • 59
Lord Advocate’s . . 44, 49, 59
Record Office . . . . • • 59
Registers of Scotland . . . . 59
industry 241, 246, 252, 258, 260, 275,
276, 277, 281, 283, 290
language . . . . • • 7, 12
Minister of State for . . 44, 58
museums and art galleries 59, 217, 218
music, opera . . 211, 212, 2x3
National Library of . . 59, 221
Parliamentary Draftsmen for . . 59
population 7, II, I3, I4, *6, 246
press . . 442, 444, 445, 447
Secretary of State for 25, 51, 58, 69,
73, 74, 89, 90, 91, 92, 97, io4, io5>
106, 134, 135, I45, *48, 17°, I7I,
172, 173, 174, 178, 201, 208, 256,
261, 269, 270, 273, 309, 312, 321,
322, 323, 338, 339, 341, 451
unemployment . . . . • • 227
Scotland Yard . . • • . . 108
Scottish:
Academy, Royal . .
Academy of Music, Royal
art galleries and museums
447
58
335
271
178
39
385
73
168
330
330
259
39
.. 218
. . 2X0
59, 207,
208, 217, 218
Central Library .. . . • • 223
Community Drama Association 210
Council (Development and In¬
dustry) .. • • • • 253, 389
Council for Small Industries in
Rural Areas . . . • • • 254
Criminal Record Office . . . . 108
Daily Newspaper Society .. 447
Scottish—contd.
Grand Committee (parliamentary) 39
Health Services Council . . • • 135
Land Court v ..87,94,314
Newspaper Proprietors Associa¬
tion
Office, definition of
Omnibus Group . • • •
River Purification Advisory Com¬
mittee . . • •
Special Housing Association
Standing Committee (parliament¬
ary) • •  
Tourist Board .. • • • •
Transport Group 33^, 337, 341, 342
Univex-sities . • • • 159, 221
Valuation Advisory Council
Scouts . . • • • • I42>
Scunthorpe . . •• •• 217, 245
Seamen:
conditions of employment
number and qxxalifications . .
Secretaries of State see relevant
Ministries
Seismic prospecting
Select Committees see Parliament,
committees
Selection, Committee of (parlia¬
mentary) . . • • • • ■ • -
Selective Employment Tax 51, 126, 237,
252, 254, 362, 363, 365-6, 369
 407
 339
3, 344
• • 260
57, 60, 70, 132, 133, I73,
270, 271
15, 16, 159, 245, 276,
286, 287, 296,339
• • 260
Sheriffs and Sheriff Courts 85, 86, 87,
9L 94, 95, io3
Shetland Islands .. 1, 4, StS, 3X9
Shipbuilding . .
British Ship Research Association 285
Enquiry Committee . . . . 285
Industry Board . . . • • • 286
and Marine Engineering . . 243, 244,
245, 246, 251, 283, 285, 327-8
Shipowners . . . ■ • • 328, 329
Shippers’ Council, British . . . • 329
Shipping .. • • • • 327-34
and Seamen, Registrar-General of 330
Chamber of . . • • 328, 329
chartering . . .. • • • • 329
coastal . . • • 328, 330, 334
companies and lines . . • • 328
conferences • • • • 329, 33°
cross-channel services . . 334, 336
earnings of . . y 327> 384
employers’ and employees’ organi¬
sations .. .• • • • • 329
employment of .. • • 327, 328
exports . . • • • • • • 285
Federation, British . . • • 329
fishing vessels .. • • .. 320
on inland waterways .. 343~4
insurance . . • • 329, 377, 378
liners, passenger . . .. 328, 329
Lloyd’s Register of . . • • 328
medical advice, service for • • 357
merchant fleet, composition 327, 328
Service trades
Severn bridge
Severn, river
Severnside
Sewerage 52,
Sheffield
Shellhaven
merchant navy
Navy see Royal Navy
117, 329, 331-2
INDEX
517
Page
Shipping—contd.
ore terminals . . . . .. 332
organisations . . . . 328, 329
ports . . . . 243, 244, 332-4
radio communications . . • • 357
relations with Government 329-30
safety . . .. 329, 330, 422
tankers and terminals 259, 285, 327,
328, 329
tonnage . . 285, 327, 328, 329
40
125,
ry
-• 33°
328, 329
• • 357
459, 465-6
6, 422, 423
404, 405
.. 406
403-5, 406
404, 405
.. 406
405, 407
• • 405
402, 403
• • 332
27, 128, 129
• • 311
286-7
•• 457
52, 70, 181
• • 139
133, 174
244, 289
traffic control
tramps
weather reports for
Shooting
Shops
independent
mobile
multiple stores
number of
‘out of town’
self-service
supermarkets
turnover
Shoreham
Sickness benefit
Silos subsidy
Silver ware . .
Silviculture see Forest
Ski-ing
Slum clearance
Smallholdings see Agriculture
Smallpox
Smoke control
Soap production
Soccer see Football
Social:
Science Research Council 50, 163,
191, 203, 426
Security . . . . . . 124-32
Department of Health and Social
Security see Health
expenditure on . . . . . . 122
reciprocal agreements with other
countries . . . . 124-5
Services 122, 124-30, 135, 146
Service . . .. . . 122-3, *38
National Councils of . . 123, 138
Secretary of State for 51, 89, 134,
135, 201, 358
training of social workers . . 123
Council for Training in Social
Work . . .. . . 123
voluntary organisations 122-3, I32
Welfare . . . . .. 122-47
See also National Health Service
and National Insurance
Soft drinks industry. . . . 294-5
Solicitor General . . . . 44, 53
Solicitor General for Scotland 44, 59
Solicitors
Sonar equipment
Southampton
9i, 92, 93, 94, 95
.. 117
103, 159, 243, 331,
332
. . 176
South Downs Way ..
South-East Asia Treaty
Organisation (seato) .. 109, 115
South of Scotland Electricity Board
see Electricity
South Shields .. . . . . 245
Sovereign see Monarchy
Space Research:
Committee on (cospar) .. .. 201
Management Unit . . .. 201
Station, Radio and . . . . 202
Space Technology Programme,
National
See also Research
Speaker:
House of Commons
Page
32, 33, 34, 35,
36, 37, 40, 359
32, 34, 36, 53
. . 106
394, 396
. . 40
. . 144
.. 342
.. 245
21-2, 450-66
.. 452
US, 450, 45i
. .. 298
House of Lords
Special constables
Special Drawing Rights (sdrs)
Special Orders Committee . .
Speech therapists
Speed limits ..
Spenborough
Sports
Centres: National
Council
equipment industry
See also Recreation
Staff colleges (armed forces) 111-2
Stafford and Staffordshire 243, 257, 282
Stag hunting . . . . . . 459
Staines . . . . . . . . 260
Stamp duty see Taxation
Stamp trading .. . . . . 406
Standard of living . . 18-20, 225, 226
Standing Committees see Parliament,
committees
Standing Conference of National
Voluntary Youth Organisations 167-8
Stanlow . . .. . . 260, 334
Stansted (airport) .. . . • • 35°
State see Monarchy and Parliament
State Management Districts (liquor)
52, 59
Stationery Office, Her Majesty’s 46,
56, 238
Statistical Tables:
Agriculture and Food 303, 304, 307
Aid to overseas countries
Balance of Payments
Birth and Death . .
Defence
Earnings
Elections . .
Employment
Expenditure
Exports
Fuel and Power
Imports
Industrial Production
Insurance . .
Investment
Invisible Overseas Transactions.
Newspaper circulations
•• 399
394,395
.. 8, 9
120, 121
. . 420
• • 35
248, 275, 411, 412
227, 231, 232, 275
227, 381, 383
254, 255, 257, 263
381, 383
249, 275
•• 378
229, 230
385
443
Population .. 13, 14, 15, 16
Retail Trade . . . . 404, 405
Revenue . . . . 231, 366, 367
Savings . . . . . . . . 230
Scientific research costs . . . . 190
Social Insurance Contributions . . 127
Statistics:
abstracts and digests of . . .. 248
application of data . . . . 1
See also subject matter
Statutory boards . . . . . . 26
Statutory bodies . . . . . . 240
Statutory Instruments . . 39, 40
Statutory Publications Office . . 55
Steel see Iron and steel industry
Steelwork plant industry . . . . 279
Sterling and sterling area 225, 226, 233,
383, 384, 388, 389, 392-3, 397
devaluation .. .. 226-7, 233
Stock Exchanges 74, 375, 376-7, 379, 391
Page
518
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Stockport . . . . . . . . 244
Stoke-on-Trent . . 15, 244, 276, 295
Stormont Laboratory .. ..316
Stranraer . . . . .. . . 333
Strategic Reserve .. .. 112, 1x6
Strathclyde University (Glasgow) 104,
159, 160
Street traders . . .. .. 403
Strikes and lock-outs . . ..431
Students 18, 155, 158, 160, 161, 165, 184
from overseas . . . . 163-5, 401
travel grants . . . . . . 165
See also Education and Universities
Submarines 114, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119
Subpoena see Law
Subsidies, see Agriculture, Housing
and Transport
Sugar .. .. 244,293,311
Agreement, Commonwealth . . 311
Sugar—contd.
Beet .. .. 302,310,311
British Sugar Corporation 302, 311
Sunbury-on-Thames . . . . 260
Sunday Mirror Children’s Exhibition 218
Sunderland . . . . . . 217, 245
Supply Services . . 359, 360, 367, 368
Supreme Court of Judicature 84, 88,
90, 94
Supreme Court of Judicature
(Northern Ireland) . . 88, 89, 94
Surtax see Taxation
Sussex University .. .. ..159
Swansea . . 246, 332, 333, 334
Swimming . . . . . . 461-2
Swindon . . . . . . 173, 243
Synthetic fibres 197, 244, 245, 246, 274,
289, 290-1
Synthetic rubber 243, 247, 287, 288, 297
X Tankers and terminals see Shipping
Tanning . . .. . . . . 292
Tariff policy . . .. . . 387-8
Tate Gallery . . . . 217, 218
Taxation 38, 49, 53, 124, 125, 126, 127,
231, 232, 358, 359, 363-6
betting duties . . . . • • 365
capital gains tax . . 53, 363, 364. 365
corporation tax 53, 362, 363, 364, 365
customs and excise duties 49, 362,
363, 365, 386
double taxation agreements . . 364
estate duty. . . . 53, 363, 364
expenditui-e, taxes on 231, 232, 363
for non-residents .. . . . . 364
income tax 53, 231, 362, 363-4, 365
Special Commissioners of . . 89
indirect, and subsidies . . . . 232
local see Rates
motor vehicles .. . . 363, 365
Northern Ireland . . . . .. 368
PAYE  127, 364
purchase tax 362, 363, 365, 386
selective employment tax 51, 126,
237, 252, 254, 362, 363, 365-6, 369
short-term gains . . . . 363, 365
stamp duties . . . . 53, 363
surtax . . 53, 232, 363, 364, 365
Taxicabs (London) . . .. . . 348
Tayside . . . . . . . . 261
bridge . . . . . . . . 339
Teachers see Education
Technical:
Assistance . . . . 54, 163-4, 401
assistance programmes, British 54, 164
British Volunteer Programme . . 401
Education see Education
Technology:
Advisory Council on .. 190, 191
Ministry of 44, 56-7, 77, 119, 190,
191, 192, 196, 197, 200, 201, 202, 204,
205, 234, 247, 250, 252, 255, 256, 258,
261, 266, 268, 271, 277, 423, 424
See also Education, Research,
Science, Universities and rele¬
vant industries
Tees-side . . .. 15, 245, 332
Telecommunications:
equipment industry . . 247, 281-2
Posts and, Minister of see Posts
private .. .. .. . • 356
Telecommunications—contd.
satellites . . . . 202, 201, 356
submarine cables . . . . • • 356
telegraphs .. .. . . • • 354
telephones .. . . • • 355
specialised services . . 355-6
Telex .. .. .. .. 354
Telegraph and telephone equipment
industry . . . . . . . . 283
Television see Broadcasting, Inde¬
pendent Television and Licences
Tennis .. .. 151, 455-6, 466
See also Lawn Tennis
Territorial and Army Volunteer
Reserve (t & avr) .. .. 112
Textile Council . . . . .. 289
Textile industries 57, 225, 229, 239,
244, 245, 246, 289-92
machinery industry . . 246, 278
research . . .. .. . . 289
Thames:
Conservancy
Haven
river
tunnels
Theatres
amateur
English Stage Company
for young people . .
National Theatre . .
professional associations
repertory ..
Research, Society for
Shakespeare Theatre Company,
Royal .. . . . . • • 209
See also Drama
Thermonuclear research see Nuclear
energy
Thomas Cook and Son
Thornton
Thorpe Marsh
Tilbury
Tilling Bus Group . .
Timber:
Advisory Committee on Utilisa¬
tion of Home Grown .. • • 325
Growers’ Organisation .. 324, 325
Home Grown, Advisory Com¬
mittee on (hgtac) . . 324-5
Home Grown, Marketing Cor¬
poration .. .. •• 324
. . 270
••334
2, 3, 243, 260, 300
..340
.. 21, 208-11
. . 2X0
. . 209
2X0—11
208, 209
209, 2X0
209, 2X0
2X0
• •335
.. .. 260
. . 263
332, 333, 334
••335
INDEX
r . Page
rimber—contd.
industry . . . . 245, 298, 322-3
Tinplate industry . . . . 246, 275
Tinsley Viaduct . . . . . 339
Tobacco 19, 229, 243, 244, 246, 295,411
revenue duty . . 295, 365, 386
Toilet preparations industry 287, 289
Tools industries:
hand
machine
small (engineers) .
‘Top Ten’ (Twenty)
Totalisators ..
Tourist:
Authority, British,
information
trade
Town and country
Planning
Townswomen’s Guilds
..286
244, 245, 247, 277
..279
. . . . 20
.. 462, 463
215,385
355-6
• •. 243, 385
planning see
Toy industry.
Tractors
Trade
associations
Board of
247, 298
245, 277, 278, 308
225-6, 380-409
. . 242
43, 44, 53, 57, 191, 192,
214, 215, 234, 237, 247, 248, 253,
32i, 329, 33i, 347, 348, 350, 351,
377, 381, 389, 390, 391, 398, 408,
423
internal . . . . . . 402—9
overseas . . . . . . 380-93
airborne .. . . . . .. 350
area distribution .. . . 382-4
balance of payments 226, 227, 233,
235, 327
composition . . . . 380-2
exports 225, 226, 234, 380, 381-2,
384, 386, 389-90
financing of .. .. 391-2
Government assistance to . . 389
imports 225, 226, 380-1, 384, 386,
. . ., , . 388, 389
invisible transactions . . 384-5
marketing organisations .. 390
tariffs . . . . 386, 387, 390
value and volume of . . .. 380
re-exports . . . . . . .. 384
restrictive practices, control of 233,
239-40
retail  402, 403-9
wholesale .. .. .. 402-3
See also individual industries and
Investment
Trade fairs . . .. 53, 234, 391
‘British Weeks’ .. 53, 234, 391
Trades Union Congress 235, 249, 423,
425, 427, 429-30, 43i
Scottish .. .. .. .. 430
Trade Unions 106, 410, 419, 427, 428-9,
. 43i
affiliations . .
Civil Service
educational facilities
musicians ..
political fund
press
theatre
Trading Agreements:
Registrar of Restrictive . .
with the Republic of Ireland
Traffic:
Advisory Unit
429, 430
65-6, 43i
•• 430
. . 212
•• 430
.. 448
.. 210
240
388
244,
Traffic—contd.
canals
congestion
control
London
Northern Ireland
ports
rail and road
5J9
Page
327, 334, 335, 343-4
•. 192
•• 343
345-6
.. 346
332-3
192, 335, 336, 337,
338-9, 340, 34i
sea • • • • 327, 328, 330, 331, 332
wardens io6, 343
Training schemes for industry 155,
249, 413-8
Central Training Council .. 417
Industrial Training Service . . 417
Training Within Industry (twi) 418, 423
Tranmere . . . . . . 26o, 334
Transport . . . . .. 327-57
administrative reorganisation . . 335
air . .
Authorities, Passenger
Boards
Commission, British
347-53
336, 34i
336, 340
336, 337,
343, 345
57, 333, 335
335, 336
335
335,
34i
Docks Board, British
Government policy . .
Holding Company 57, 335, 336,341,346
Northern Ireland . . . . 346
Hotels, British . . . . 335, 336
hovercraft . . . . . . 334, 336
inland waterways . . 327, 334, 343-4
London . . . . . . 345-6
Ministry of 57, 171, ^ 192, 333,
335, 33.8, 339, 34L 342, 343, 345, 423
nationalised .. 57, 334, 335
National Bus Company 57, 336,
_ _ . , ^ . 34L 342
National Freight Corporation 57,
0 . , ^ 336, 338, 34i
Scottish Transport Group . . 336,
,T , T , , 337, 34i
Northern Ireland . . . . . . 346
planning . . . . . . . . 1^2
police . . . . . . . . X04
Private   23, 345
rail • • 334, 335, 336-8, 345-6
research . . . . .. . . xg2
road • • • • 334, 335, 338-43
safety measures 57, 192, 330-1, 342,
422, 423
sea . .   327-8
subsidies . . . . . . 336, 342
Tribunal . . .. . . . . 89
See also Civil Aviation and
Shipping
Travel see Tourist trade
Treasure trove .. . . . . 93
Treasury 36, 43, 46, 47, 48, 53, 175,
235, 241, 247, 254, 261, 347,
360,361,362,368,369,389
bills .. 368, 369, 372, 397
343
348, 349, 35°, 35i, 352
Chief Secretary to
Counsel
Solicitor’s Department
Treatment of Offenders
Trent navigation
Tribunals:
administrative
Civil Service Arbitration
Council on
Industrial Court . .
lands
mental health
48
.. 81
46, 55
95-104
•• 344
89-90
•• 43i
• • 54, 89-90
43°, 43L 432
73, 89, 3x4
.. .. 140
520
BRITAIN 1971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Scottish Land Court . . 87, 94, 314
transport . . . . .. . . 89
Trinity House, Corporation of . . 331
Tropical Medicine Research Board 198
Tropical Products Institute . . 206
Trustee Savings Banks .. . . 373>
374
Trusts, National . . . • I75> 2I7
Page
Tuberculosis:
eradication of bovine . . 302, 316
prevention and treatment of 132, 139
Turnhouse (airport) .. •• 351
Tyneside and Tyne ports 16, 227, 245,
282, 285, 331, 341
tunnel .. . • • • • • 34°
See also Newcastle upon Tyne
u UHF (ultra high frequency) broad¬
casting •. .• •• •• 436
UKAEA see Atomic Energy
Authority (UK)
UNESCO see Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organisation
Ulster:
colleges . . . - 162, 163, 219
Constabulary . . . . . . 108
Group Theatre (Belfast) . . . . 209
museums and art galleries 217, 218
Orchestra
Savings
Transport Holding Company
University (Coleraine)
Ulsterbus Ltd.
Underground railways
Unemployment
benefit (insurance)
United Kingdom:
area and composition
211
61
346
162
346
• 273, 345-6
227, 412
126, 128, 129
159,
14, i5. 16,
25, 26
12
.. 1-6
citizenship
geography . . . . •-
United Nations organisations:
Conference on Trade and Develop¬
ment (unctad) 54, 386, 387, 399
contributions to . . . . 51, 401
Educational, Scientific and Cul¬
tural Organisation (unesco) 54, 162,
164. 201;
Food and Agriculture Organisation
(fao) .. . . 48, 54, 164, 205
Inter-Governmental Maritime
Consultative Organisation . . 330
International Telecommunication
Union (itu) . . . . • • 44°
relations with 49, 51, 54, io9> x64,
205, 330, 399, 440
Technical Assistance 54, 164, 400
World Health Organisation (who)
51, 164, 199, 205
United Press International . . 440, 446
United States:
defence co-operation .. 113,119
educational and research co¬
operation 164, 165, 20x, 204, 205
financial aid from 226, 381, 384, 396
United States—contd.
private investment in UK . . 398
Unit Trusts .. . . . . 37*, 377
Universities 44, 103-4, 148, 149, 157,
158, 159-60, 161, 162, 163, 165, 190,
195-6, 198, 2X0, 251, 319, 325
agricultural degree courses . . 318
building programme . . 159, 162
Central Council on Admission . . 160
degrees, diplomas and certificates
103-4, 153-4, I55, 159, *6o, 161,
162,219, 318
departments of education 156, 161, 163
drama clubs and societies . . 210
extra-mural courses 156, 157, 161, 195
Film Council, British . . . . 215
finance .. 148, 159-60, 162, 163
forestry courses .. . . . . 325
halls of residence . . . . . . 160
medical and dental schools 135,
143-4, 160
museums and libraries 204, 217, 221
new . . . . • • 159, x6o
Open . . . . • • 159, x6o
presses . . .. •■ • • 223
Privy Council committees for . . 42
research 160, 190, 195, 196, 198,
203, 274
scholarships and research fellow¬
ships . . 162, 164, 194, 198, 203
Special Commonwealth Awards 166
sport . . . . 455, 456, 461
staff  157, 161
students . . 19, 160, 163-4, J65
technological education in 159, 160,
161, 196
See also individual universities
University:
colleges .. .. .. 158, 159
Grants Committee 50, 144, 149, 160,
163, 191, 195-6, 198
Interchange Schemes . . 166, 206
Officer Training Corps .. 111,112
Unmarried mothers 122, 139, 142
Urban:
district councils . . .. . . 68
population . . . . *5-16
Programme . . 123-4, 146, 151
V
V'HF (very high frequency) broad¬
casting . . • • 436, 438, 439
VTOL (vertical take-off and landing) 285
Vaccination
Valuation for rating
Valves, industrial
Vegetable oil processing
Vegetables:
crops
processing ..
Vegetation
3°°:
7°, 139
53, 73-4
.. 280
.. 245
301, 306
293-4
5, x77
Vehicles industries 243, 246, 247, 283
Vending machines, automatic . . 405
Ventilation equipment . . . . 280
Veterinary:
Laboratory, Central .. 199, 3X6
Products Safety Precautions
Scheme . . • - • • • • 317
Service and research 199, 305, 316
surgeons . . .. .. •• 3X6
Victoria and Albert Museum 207, 217,
218, 221
INDEX
Page
■ ■ 447
• • 446
•• 157
• • 138
• • 440
2x6-20
7-12
Vocational guidance and training 50, 98,
100, 414, 415, 417-8
Voluntary organisations:
child care . . . . . . S4> I4S
521
Page
Voluntary organisations—contd.
education . . 148, 149, 154, 156, 165
prisoners’ aid . . . . 99, 100
welfare 120-3, 132, 138, 140, 141,
142, 143, 145, 146
youth services .. .. 168-9, 452
Voting:
in House of Commons 33--4) 36-7
in House of Lords . . . . 37
in local government elections 68-9
in parliamentary elections 33-4
Videomaster . .
Videoscan
Village Colleges
Virological laboratories
Visnews Ltd.
Visual Arts . .
Vital statistics
W Wages and salaries 18, 65-6, 231-2,
33L 334, 419-21
equal pay . . . . 18, 420, 421
negotiations . . 427, 428, 432
statutory regulations . . .. 421
Wages Board and Councils . . 427
Wakefield . . . . . . . • 245
Wales {see also subject headings)
administration . . 25, 44, 46, 57-8
area and counties . . . . .. 1
broadcasting councils . . . . 434
Development Corporation for 252,
389
holidays, statutory . . . . 421
industry 245-6, 252, 257, 258, 275,
277, 283, 286, 290
language .. .. .. 7, 12, 151
Minister of State for 25, 44, 57, 58
National Library of .. 58, 221
National Museum of . . 58, 217
National Youth Orchestra . . 213
population 7, 8, 13, 14> 16, 245
press . . . . . . 444, 445
Secretary of State for 25, 44, 49, 57,
147, 170, 171, 172, 174, 176, 178,
179, 208, 269, 309, 321, 322, 323,
Tourist Board
unemployment
University of
Wallsend
Walton-on-Thames
War pensioners
339, 34i
 385
. . 227
158,219
• • 245, 34°
. . 260
5L 55, 89, 122, 124,
131-2, 135
Warrington .. .. . . 172, 244
Warwickshire . . . . 243, 257
Warwick University . . 159, 447
Watch committees (police) . . . . 104
Water:
Boards and authorities . . 269-71
Committee, Central Advisory . . 269
Scottish, Advisory . . .. 270
Conservancies, Thames and Lee 269
Development Board, Central Scot¬
land  270
Fluoridation . . . . .. 133
Metropolitan Water Board .. 269
pollution . . . . 270, 271, 314
power see Electricity, hydro-electric
rate .. . . .. 269-70
Research . . .. . . 270, 271
Association .. . . .. 271
Laboratory, Pollution . . . . 271
Resources Board . . 52, 270-71
sources of .. .. 227, 269-71
supply 17, 70, 133, 173, 248, 269-71
Waterways Board, British 57, 335, 343,
344
Weapons see Defence
Weather
bulletins for ships
forecast services . .
Weaver Navigation . .
Weedkillers ..
Weights and measures
Welfare:
blind, deaf and disabled
I91:
• • 3-5
•• 357
50, 357
•• 344
. . 289
272, 408,
467-8
5L
7°, 123,
137, 139
centres . . . . 131, 139, 140
children . . 135, 138, 139, 153
family 122, 124, 125, 138, 139, 140
foods service .. 123, 139-40
immigrants . . 122, 124, 146
industrial .. . . .. 424-6
mentally ill 51, 70, 137, 138, 139, 140
mothers . . . . 135, 138, 139
old people 70, 137, 138, 139, 140, 142
overseas students .. . . .. 165
prisoners and probationers 99-100, 126
services . . . . 51, 138-42
war pensioners 51, 55, 130, 131-2
See also National Insurance and
Health
Welsh:
Council
Folk Museum
Grand Committee
language
League of Youth ..
National Opera Company . . 213
Office 25, 44, 57, 68, 132, 192, 342
See also Wales, Secretary of
State for
Planning Board . . . . .. 58
Wembley Stadium 453, 456, 463, 464
Wesleyan Reform Union . . . . 186
West Drayton . . . . . . 352
West Sole .. .. .. .. 259
Weybridge .. .. .. 199, 243
Whisky industry . . . . 246, 294
Whitechapel Art Gallery . . . . 218
White City .. . . . . .. 463
Whitley Councils . . 65, 72, 431
Whole House, Committee of . . 38
Wholesale trade see Trade
Widnes . . . . . . . . 244
Widows’ benefits and pensions 124,
125, 126, 128, 129, 130, 131
..58
. . 2x7
• • 39
7, 12, 151, 433
..168
Wigan
Wires and cables
industry
Wolfson Foundation
Wolverhampton
Women:
in Armed Forces ..
.. 244
(insulated)
. . 243, 282-3
. . 162
243, 290
in, 120
522
BRITAIN I971: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Women—contd.
employment 18, 410, 411, 419, 420-1,
equal pay for . . .. 420, 421
in Fire Service . . . . . . 76
housewives .. 18, 410, 411
periodicals for . . . . . . 445
in police force .. .. . . 105
in the Church .. . . . . 186
proportion in population 9-10, 11, 13
Women’s:
Institutes .. .. .. 22, 156
pre-Service organisations . . 168
Royal Air Force .. .. .. m
Royal Army Corps . . . . 111
Royal Naval Service .. .. 111
Royal Voluntary Service 123, 141, 143
Rural Institutes .. .. .. 22
Woodland owners’ associations .. 324
Woodlands .. .. 5, 174, 322-3, 324
Approved, Scheme . . . . 324
Dedication Scheme . . .. 324
Woodstock (Kent) .. . . . . 260
Page
Wool . . . . 245, 390, 305, 315
Exchange, London .. .. 392
Industries Research Association.. 290
Marketing Board, British .. 311
See also Knitwear and Textile
industries
Worcester and Worcestershire 212,
243, 306
Work, hours of .. . . 18, 421
See also Employment and Labour
Workers:
manual 18, 19, 251, 333, 419-20, 421
professional, managerial and
clerical 251, 413, 420-21
Workers’Educational Association 156,157
Working Men’s Clubs and Institutes 22
Works councils . . . . 429, 430
World Data Centres . . . . 202
World Health Organisation (who) 51,
164, 199, 205
Worsteds see Textiles industries
Wrestling .. . . .. .. 464
Wrexham .. . . . . .. 246
Y Yachting   . . 461
Yarmouth .. .. . . . . 243
York . . . . 159, 174, 208, 212, 245
Province of .. . . . . 183
Yorkshire 14, 15, 16, 208, 247, 257,
259, 260, 278, 286, 292, 344
East Riding .. 245, 300, 306
North Riding .. . . . . 245
West Riding . . . . 245, 290
See also individual industries and
towns
Young Christian Workers . . . . 168
Young Farmers’ Clubs . . . . 168
Young Men’s Christian Association
(ymca) .. .. 123, 156, 168
Young offenders 24, 80, 96, 101-3
Young Volunteer Force Foundation
142, 168
Young Women’s Christian Associa¬
tion (ywca) .. .. 123, 168
Youth:
and Sports Council (Northern
Ireland) .. .. .. 167, 450
Clubs .. .. .. 157, 167
Employment:
Executive, Central . . . . 414
Service and Committees 50, 414
Hostels Associations .. 169, 457
leaders .. .. .. 157,167
orchestras . . . . . . . . 213
organisations:
pre-service . . .. .. 168
voluntary .. 166, 167-9, 45°
Service . . . . . . 166, 167
services . . . . . . 166-9
Standing Consultative Council
on Youth and Community
(Scotland) .. . . .. 167
State and voluntary partnership. . 167
Theatre, National.. .. .. 209
Z Zebra crossings
Zoological Gardens
342
203
Zoological Society
Zoos ..
203
203
Printed in Scotland for Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
by R. & R. Clark Ltd., Edinburgh
Dd 716310 K168
SBN 11 700094 9’
f ^ORKNEY
Blyth B' m
FUEL AND POWER
Coalfields
Natural Gasfields A ]
Natural Gas Pipelines:
In operation Hi**’*'
Under construction .
Proposed
Imported Gas Terminal CHH
Oil Refineries (over 1 million tons annual capacity);
In operation
Under construction EHI
Crude Oil Pipelines ^ “3-.-
Conventional Power Stns (over iooomwcapacity):
In operation CHI
Under construction EHI
Nuclear Power Stations
In operation CHI
Under construction
AEA Power Producing Reactors EHI
Hydro-Electric Power Stations EHI
(over 45 MW capacity):
Pumped Storage Schemes CHI
0 20 40 60 80 100 MILES
0
-i—1—
40
80 120 KILOMETRES
^Hartlepool
Teesport
Billingham
-Lockton
NORTH SEA
Ferrybridge'C
Eggborough
Rough
A West Sole
[asington
(illingholme Vikingi
Indefatigable A
^Theddlethorpe /
Hewett i jt
Leman Bank
Trawsfynydd ;
Ratcliffe-opon-Soar
Rugeley B
,♦ ironbridge
[Sizewell
Milford Havi
Angle BayN
Llandarcy
Tilbory 'B
Shellha\(£i\
Pembroke*
)
• Berkeley Didcot
* Oldbury n
'Bradwell
JrCoryton
Tanvey I.
'A' Hmkley Point
W. Thurrock of Giaio
Kingsncrth
O*
B
I
ungeness'A'
ENGLISH CHANNEL
ORKNEY
IS.
Great Yarmouth
Dover
Folkestone
ENGLISH C H A N N
BRITAIN 1971 — published by Her Majesty's Stationery Office—is the twenty-
second official handbook in the series prepared and revised each year by the
Reference Division of the Central Office of Information with the co-operation
of other government departments and of many national organisations. It is
designed to answer questions about Britain which are continually being asked
both abroad and at home. This edition covers events up to September 1970.
