GII.II.
Henley’s design for an ‘Aerial
Steam Carriage’, 1842-43
Ol
British cyclist,
c. 1874
The de Havilland
DH 4a transport, 1919
‘The Routemaster’, London Transport’s latest bus
A British racin
vONA'
. fT-'T i_
O
'A,
A) _
B RITAIN
AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN AND
H.R.H. THE DUKE OF EDINBURGH
BRITAIN
AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
PREPARED BY THE CENTRAL OFFICE OF INFORMATION
1962 EDITION
London: Her Majesty's Stationery Office
© Crown copyright 1962
Published by
Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
To be purchased from
York House, Kingsway, London, w.c.z
423 Oxford Street, London w.i
13A Castle Street, Edinburgh 2
109 St. Mary Street, Cardiff
39 King Street, Manchester 2
50 Fairfax Street, Bristol 1
2 Edmund Street, Birmingham 3
80 Chichester Street, Belfast 1
or through any bookseller
Obtainable in the United States of America
from the British Information Services,
45 Rockefeller Plaza, New York 20, n.y.
Price £1 5s. od. net
Printed in England
o.
-A
~ r to
o 1962 6?
CONTENTS
Page
INTRODUCTION
I. THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE
The Physical Background i
The Demographic Background 7
II. GOVERNMENT
General Survey 26
The Monarchy 27
Parliament 31
The Privy Council 43
Her Majesty’s Government 44
Government Departments 48
The Civil Service 65
Local Government 71
The Fire Service 80
III. LAW AND ORDER
The Law 84
Treatment of Offenders 100
The Police Service no
IV. DEFENCE
The Defence System 115
The Fighting Services 122
Home Defence 134
V. SOCIAL WELFARE
State and Voluntary Services 138
National Insurance and Related Services 140
Health 151
Education 163
Youth Service 181
VI. HOUSING AND PLANNING
Problems and Administration 185
Housing 185
Town and Country Planning 191
VII. THE CHURCHES 200
v
VIII. PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS
The Promotion of the Sciences 208
The Promotion of the Arts 228
IX. THE NATIONAL ECONOMY
Background
The Structure of the Economy
X. INDUSTRY
Organisation and Production
Fuel and Power
Water Supply
Construction
Manufacturing Industries
XL AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
Agriculture
Fisheries
Forestry
•1
XII. TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
Shipping
Inland Transport
Civil Aviation
The Post Office
XIII. FINANCE
Public Finance
Banking and Private Finance
. I ■ . '■
XIV. TRADE AND PAYMENTS
Overseas Trade
The Balance of Payments
Internal Trade
XV. LABOUR
Manpower
Government Employment and Training Services
Terms of Employment, Conditions of Work and
Labour Relations
XVI. SOUND AND TELEVISION BROADCASTING
XVII. THE PRESS
XVIII. SPORT
APPENDIX
Notes for Visitors to the United Kingdom
British Weights and Measures and their Metric
Equivalents
. ' \,.r ;.1
BIBLIOGRAPHY
247
249
258
275
290
294
297
326
352
357
363
372
386
394
401
412
422
436
445
451
455
460
483
492
501
518
521
523
INDEX
554
DIAGRAMS
Page
Percentage Change in Population since 1901 by Age Group 10
Birth Rates and Death Rates x 1
Expectation of Life at Birth in England and Wales 11
The Royal Family: Genealogical Tree 28
Changes in National Expenditure 250
Production and National Income Trends 1900-60 250
Public and Private Fixed Investment 1954 and i960 252
Personal Income and Expenditure i960 255
The United Kingdom Budget 1961-62 409
Commodity Composition of Imports and Exports in i960 424
Invisible Overseas Transactions, 1959 and i960 427
Earnings, Wage Rates and Retail Prices 463
The sources of the pre-war figures for the graph of Production and National Income
Trends are: Production Index, T. S. Ridley in Economica, February 1955; National
Income Index, A. R. Prest in Economic Journal, March 1948.
MAPS
United Kingdom: Physical 3
Universities and Major Technical Colleges 17
Industrial Employment 259
Motorways and Trunk Roads 378
The United Kingdom fold-in map
PHOTOGRAPHS
Her Majesty the Queen and H.R.H. The Duke of Edinburgh frontispiece
facing page
Springtime in the Vale of Evesham, Worcestershire 54
Heights of Trotternish, Isle of Skye, Scotland 54
A Welsh Seaside Resort: Aberystwyth, Cardiganshire 55
An English Village: Winslow, Buckinghamshire 55
Some British Breeds of Dogs 86
H.M. the Queen in Procession to the Order of the Garter Service,
Windsor 87
Stormont Castle, Belfast, Seat of Northern Ireland Government 150
St. James’s Park, London 150
Blue Steel Stand-off Bomb 151
Civil Defence Operations Room 151
vii
facing page
HMS Dreadnought, Nuclear Submarine 151
Malkara Anti-tank Guided Missile 151
Reading Aids for the Blind 182
The St. John and Red Cross Hospital Library Service 182
Trinity Comprehensive School for Girls, Southwark, London 183
School-to-School Television: A Science Lesson 183
Llandalf Technical College, Cardiff, Wales 183
St. Andrew’s Cross, Plymouth, Devon 278
Birmingham City Council’s Lyndhurst Estate, Erdington 278
Model of High Altar of the New Coventry Cathedral 279
Mullard Radio Astronomy Observatory, Cambridge 310
Windscale Advanced Gas-cooled Reactor 310
Britten’s A Midsummer Night's Dream at Covent Garden 311
Young Farmers’ Club Members Judging Pigs 390
Seed Testing at National Institute of Agricultural Botany,
Cambridge 390
Automatic Machinery and Plant between pages 390 and 391
The Design Centre, London 391
The Chance Calypto British Glassware 391
A Worker in a Stowbridge Crystal Glass Factory 391
Liverpool, Britain’s Second Largest Port 470
Some New Bridges 471
A Self-service Shop, London 502
Automatic Vending Machine in a Canteen 502
The Oxford v. Cambridge Boat Race 503
The Grand National Steeplechase Course at Aintree: Becher’s Brook 503
The County Cricket Ground at Worcester 503
Acknowledgment for photographs is made to the following: Radio Times Hulton
Picture Library for the pictures in the end papers of the Great Eastern and the first
London omnibus; the A.P.V. Company for the photograph of plant at the Park Roval
Brewery of Arthur Guinness, Son & Co., between pages 390 and 391; and Messrs. John
Howard & Co. for the artist’s impression of the new Forth Road Bridge, facing page 47 x.
viii
INTRODUCTION
BRITAIN: AN official handbook, 1962, is the thirteenth in the series
prepared and extensively revised each year by the Reference Division of the
Central Office of Information with the co-operation of other Government
departments and of many national organisations.
The handbook, which is the mainstay of the reference facilities provided
by the British Information Services in many countries, was at first only
available overseas in a limited free edition. In 1954 it was placed on sale
throughout the world and it has since become widely known as an established
work of reference.
Britain : an official handbook, 1962, which covers events up to
September 1961, gives, like its predecessors, a factual account of the admini¬
stration and the national economy of the United Kingdom. It describes the
activities of many of the national institutions, both official and unofficial, and
shows the part played by the Government in the life of the community.
The handbook does not claim to be comprehensive, nor does it attempt to
cover Britain’s participation in Commonwealth or world affairs. The factual
and statistical information it contains is compiled from official and other
authoritative sources, and, while most sections of the book relate to the
United Kingdom as a whole, facts and figures for England, Wales, Scotland,
and Northern Ireland are also given separately when these are available.
Readers who require more detailed information should consult the
Annual Abstract of Statistics and the Monthly Digest of Statistics, issued by
the Central Statistical Office, and also other Government publications and
standard works of reference, some of which are listed in the bibliography
at the end of the handbook. Readers are asked to note that the Central
Office of Information reference documents listed in the bibliography as free
and marked with an asterisk are available free of charge only at British
Information Offices overseas; they can, however, be obtained in the
United Kingdom from the Reference Division, Central Office of
Information, on payment of a small charge.
REFERENCE DIVISION
CENTRAL OFFICE OF INFORMATION, LONDON
September 1961
ix
I. THE LAND AND THE
PEOPLE
THE PHYSICAL BACKGROUND
The British Isles form a group lying off the north-west coast of Europe with a total
(the Lizard Peninsula) and latitude 6o° North passes through the Shetland Islands.
The northernmost point of the Scottish mainland, Dunnet Head, near John o’ Groats,
is in latitude 58° 40'. The prime meridian of o° passes through the old Observatory
of Greenwich (London), while the easternmost point of England is nearly i° 45' East
and the westernmost point of Ireland is approximately io° 30' West. It is just under
600 miles in a straight line from the south coast of Britain to the extreme north and
rather over 300 miles across in the widest part. Owing to the numerous bays and
inlets no point in the British Isles is as much as 75 miles from tidal water.
1
ADDENDUM (Chapter II, page 44)
MINISTERIAL CHANGES, OCTOBER 1961
The following are the ministerial changes brought about by the Prime Minister’s
reconstruction of his administration on 9th October, 1961:
1 The Paymaster-General is also Chief Secretary to the Treasury (see p. 49)—an
appointment made for the first time. In this capacity he has authority, under
the general policy direction of the Chancellor of the Exchequer and subject to
the Cabinet of which he is a member, over the whole range of public expendi¬
ture, both current and prospective.
2 The Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster is also Leader of the House of
Commons (see p. 37). He is no longer responsible for the co-ordination of the
Government Information Services, which have been transferred, as regards
the home services to the Minister of Housing and Local Government, and as
regai ds the overseas services to the Secretary for Technical Co-operation (see
p. 60).
3 There are now two Ministers of State at the Foreign Office instead of one as
heretofore.
I. THE LAND AND THE
PEOPLE
THE PHYSICAL BACKGROUND
The British Isles form a group lying off the north-west coast of Europe with a total
area of about 121,600 square miles. The largest islands are Great Britain proper
(comprising the mainlands of England, Wales and Scotland) and Ireland (comprising
Northern Ireland and the Irish Republic). Off the southern coast of England is the
Isle of Wight and off the extreme south-west are the Isles of Scilly; off North Wales is
Anglesey. Western Scotland is fringed by numerous islands and to the far north are
the important groups of the Orkneys and Shetlands. All these form administrative
counties or parts of counties of the mainland, but the Isle of Man in the Irish Sea
and the Channel Islands between Great Britain and France have a large measure of
administrative autonomy and are not part of England, Wales, Scotland or Northern
Ireland.
England (excluding the county of Monmouth on the Welsh border), has a total
area (including inland water) of 50,327 square miles and is divided into 40 geographical
or 49 administrative counties; Wales (including Monmouthshire), with a total area of
8,017 square miles, has 13 counties; Scotland, including its 186 inhabited islands, has
a total area of 30,411 square miles and is divided into 33 counties; and Northern Ireland,
consisting of six counties, has a total area of 5,459 square miles. Together, these
countries constitute the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland with a
total area of 94,214 square miles. The total land area of the United Kingdom (excluding
inland water) is 93,018 square miles: England, 50,051; Wales and Monmouthshire,
7,966; Scotland, 29,795; and Northern Ireland, 5,206 square miles.
Care must be taken when studying British statistics to note whether they refer to
England as defined above, to England and Wales (considered together for many
administrative and other purposes), to Great Britain, which comprises England,
Wales and Scotland, or to the United Kingdom as a whole. The position is further
complicated by the fact that the county of Monmouth is sometimes included with
England. United Kingdom statistics and other data sometimes include the Isle of
Man, 227 square miles, and the Channel Islands, 75 square miles, which are strictly
not part of the United Kingdom, but are dependencies of the Crown. Since southern
Ireland became independent, official statistics do not normally refer to the British Isles
as a whole.
The latitude of 50° North cuts across the southernmost part of the British mainland
(the Lizard Peninsula) and latitude 6o° North passes through the Shetland Islands.
The northernmost point of the Scottish mainland, Dunnet Head, near John o’ Groats,
is in latitude 58° 40'. The prime meridian of o° passes through the old Observatory
of Greenwich (London), while the easternmost point of England is nearly i° 45' East
and the westernmost point of Ireland is approximately io° 30' West. It is just under
600 miles in a straight line from the south coast of Britain to the extreme north and
rather over 300 miles across in the widest part. Owing to the numerous bays and
inlets no point in the British Isles is as much as 75 miles from tidal water.
1
2
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The seas surrounding the British Isles are everywhere shallow—usually less than
50 fathoms (300 feet)—because the islands lie on the continental shelf. To the north¬
west along the edge of the shelf the sea floor plunges abruptly from 600 feet to 3,000
feet. These shallow waters are important because they provide excellent fishing
grounds as well as breeding grounds for the fish. The North Atlantic Current, the
drift of warm water which reaches the islands from across the Atlantic, spreads out
over the shelf and its ameliorating effect on the air is thus magnified. The effect of tidal
movement is also increased by the shallowness of the water.
Geology and Topography
Despite their small area, the British Isles contain rocks of all the main geological
periods. In Great Britain the newer rocks, which are less resistant to weather, and
have thus been worn down to form low land, lie to the south and east, and the island
can therefore be divided roughly into two main regions, Lowland Britain and Highland
Britain.
In Lowland Britain the newer and softer rocks of southern and eastern England
have been eroded into a rich plain, more often rolling than flat and rising to chalk
and limestone hills, but hardly ever reaching a thousand feet above sea level. The
boundaries of this region run roughly from the mouth of the Tyne in the north-east
of England to the mouth of the Exe in the south-west.
Highland Britain comprises the whole of Scotland (including the hills and moors
of southern Scotland as well as the mountains of the Scottish Highlands, which
extend from the Forth-Clyde valley to the extreme north-west), the Lake District
in north-west England, the broad central upland known as the Pennines, almost the
whole of Wales, and the south-western peninsula of England coinciding approximately
with the counties of Devon and Cornwall. Highland Britain contains all the mountain¬
ous parts1 of Great Britain and extensive uplands lying above one thousand feet. This
high ground, however, is not continuous but is interspersed with valleys and plains.
Geologically the mountains and hills consist mainly of outcrops of very old rocks
(archaean and palaeozoic), while the top strata in the valleys and plains are mainly
more recent (carboniferous age) and similar to those in the northern and western
parts of Lowland Britain.
These carboniferous strata are rich in minerals and include the coal measures which
have been the foundation of Britain’s industrial expansion. The outcrops and shallow
seams of coal which have now largely been exhausted were found on the edge of the
plains and up the valleys leading to the high land. Most of the present deep coal
workings underlie the fertile lowlands.
Towards the end of Britain’s long geological history, when the ancestors of present-
day man had already settled in the country, came the great Ice Age, and at one period
or another during this time the whole of Britain north of a line joining the river Thames
and the Bristol Channel was covered by ice caps and ice sheets. The ice naturally
accumulated on the higher ground and swept from the mountains of Scotland, northern
England and Wales any loose rock or soil which had previously been formed, so that,
when the ice eventually disappeared, the hills stood out as barren rocky areas, while a
thick mantle of glacial debris boulders, boulder-clay, sands and gravels—lay dis¬
tributed widely over the lower ground. The ice had blocked up previous drainage
1 The highest peaks are: in Scotland, Ben Nevis, 4,406 feet; in Wales, Snowdon 3 560 feet-
and in England, Scafell Pike (in the Lake District, Cumberland), 3,210 feet. The highest peak
in Northern Ireland is Slieve Donard, 2,796 feet.
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE
3
A"
ORKNEYS >£3 ~
UNITED KINGDOM
Physical
Atlantic
Ocean
J Land over
3 600 ft.
A Peaks
A Ben Nevis 4,406 ft.
B Snowdon 3,560 ft.
C Scafell 3,210 ft.
D Slieve Donard 2,796 ft.
North Sea
River Thames
o 20 40 60 80 100
KM.
ISLES OVy Land’s
S C 1 L L Y End The Lizard
ISLE^OF WIGHT
English Channel
4
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
channels and left large lakes, which have since gradually dried up, leaving deposits of
sand, silt and mud, often affording soils of great fertility.
In Ireland, where the solid rocks are covered deeply by the debris left by the ice
sheets, the great central plain has large boggy areas, due to interruption of the previous
natural drainage. The mountains and hill masses of Ireland are irregularly placed
around central lowlands; in the higher parts the moorland vegetation resembles that
of the higher parts of Highland Britain.
Britain’s complex geology is one of the main reasons for its rich variety of scenery
and the stimulating contrasts found within short distances, particularly on the coasts.
The ancient rocks of Highland Britain often reach the coast in towering cliffs; else¬
where the sea may penetrate in deep lochs, as along much of the west coast of Scotland.
Bold outstanding headlands are notable features in other parts of the varied coastline:
the granite cliffs of Land’s End; the limestone masses and slates of the Pembrokeshire
coast in South Wales; the red sandstone of St. Bees Head on the Cumberland coast;
and the vertically jointed lavas of Skye and the island of Staffa in the Inner Hebrides.
Even around Lowland Britain there are striking contrasts. In some parts the soft, white
limestone—the chalk—forms the world-famous white cliffs of Dover or the Needles
off the Isle of Wight; while other parts of the south and south-east coastline have
beaches of sand or shingle. The eastern coast of England between the Humber and the
Thames estuary is for the most part low-lying, and for hundreds of years some stretches
of it have been protected against the sea by embankments. These have occasionally
been breached, as in the flood disaster of January 1953, which was caused by the
abnormal concurrence of violent gales and exceptionally high tides.
The marked tidal movement around the British Isles sweeps away much of the sand
and mud brought down by the rivers and makes the estuaries of the short British rivers1
valuable as natural harbours.
Climate
Britain has a temperate and equable climate. It lies in middle latitudes to the north¬
west of the great continental land mass of Eurasia, but as the prevailing winds are south¬
westerly the climate is largely determined by that of the eastern Atlantic, although
occasionally during the winter months easterly winds may bring a cold, dry, continental
type of weather which, once established, may persist for many days or even weeks.
The weather from day to day is controlled mainly by a succession of depressions from
the Atlantic which, moving in a generally easterly or north-easterly direction, pass over
or near the British Isles. During the summer months the Azores high pressure system
usually extends its influence north-eastwards towards north-west Europe, and the
depressions take a more northerly course, often passing entirely to the north of the
British Isles.
Winds. In Britain, south-westerly winds are the most frequent, and those from an
easterly quarter the least; such winds occur about one-third as often as south-westerly
ones although easterly winds are appreciably more frequent in the spring than at any
other time of the year. In hilly country, wind direction may differ markedly from the
general direction owing to local topography. Winds are generally stronger in the north
than in the south of the British Isles, stronger on the coasts than inland, and stronger
in the west than in the east. The strongest winds usually occur in the winter; the
average speed at Lerwick, Shetland Islands, varies from about 22 m.p.h. in January
1 The longest rivers in England—the Severn and the Thames—are only 210 and 200 miles
long respectively.
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE
5
to about 14 m.p.h. in August, while at Kew Observatory, on the western outskirts of
London, the average speed varies from about 10 m.p.h. in January to about 7 m.p.h.
in August. The stormiest region of the British Isles is along the north-west coast with
over 30 gales a year; south-east England and the east Midlands are the least stormy,
with gales occurring on about 2 days a year inland and on some 15 to 20 days on the
Channel coast.
Temperature. Near sea level the mean annual temperature ranges from 470 F. in the
Hebrides to 520 F. in the extreme south-west of England; it is slightly lower in the
eastern part of the country in the same latitude. The mean monthly temperature in
the extreme north, at Lerwick (Shetlands), ranges from 390 F. during the winter
(December, January and February) to 530 F. during the summer (June, July and
August): the corresponding figures for Jersey (Channel Islands), in the extreme south,
are 430 F. and 63° F. The average range of temperature between winter and summer
varies from 150 F. to 230 F., being greatest inland in the eastern part of the country.
During a normal summer, the temperature occasionally rises above 8o° F. in the south,
but temperatures of 90° F. and above are infrequent. Extreme minimum temperatures
depend to a large extent on local conditions, but 20° F. may occur on a still, clear
winter’s night, io° F. is rare, and o° F. or below has been recorded only during
exceptionally severe winter periods.
Rainfall. The British Isles as a whole have an annual rainfall of over 40 inches, while
England alone has about 34 inches. The geographical distribution of annual rainfall
is largely governed by topography and exposure to the Atlantic, the mountainous areas
of the west and north having far more rain than the plains of the south and east.
Between 150 and 200 inches of rain fall on the summits of Snowdon and Ben Nevis
during the average year, whereas some places in the south-east of England record less
than 20 inches. Rain is fairly well distributed throughout the year, but, on the average,
March to June are the driest months and October to January the wettest, the former
period of four months having about 60 per cent of the rainfall of the latter. A period
of as long as three weeks without rain is exceptional, and is usually confined to limited
areas. In successive years, however, remarkably contrasting weather conditions are
sometimes experienced. In England and Wales the summer of 1959 was memorable
as one of the driest and sunniest on record; the following year, i960, was one of the
wettest ever known in England and Wales, with rainfall especially heavy in the period
from June to November, bringing severe flooding in some areas. In Scotland, on the
other hand, rainfall in i960 was slightly below average.
Sunshine. The distribution of sunshine over the British Isles shows a general
decrease from south to north, a decrease from the coast inland, and a decrease with
altitude. During May, June and July—the months of longest daylight—the mean daily
duration of sunshine varies from five and a half hours in western Scotland to seven
and a half hours in the extreme south-east of England; during the months of shortest
daylight—November, December and January—sunshine is at a minimum, with an
average of half an hour a day in the Highlands of Scotland and in the Peak District
(Derbyshire) and two hours a day on the south coast of England.
Soil and Vegetation
Many parts of the surface of Highland Britain have only thin, poor soils, with the
result that large stretches of moorland are found over the Highlands of Scotland, the
Pennines, the Lake District, the mountains of Wales and in parts of north-east and
south-west England. In most areas the farmer has cultivated only the valley lands and
6
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
the plains where soils are deeper and richer; villages and towns are often separated
by uplands with few if any habitations.
With the exception of a few patches of poor soil or rocky land, almost the whole of
Lowland Britain has been cultivated, and farmland covers the area except where there
are urban and industrial settlements. Elaborate land drainage systems have been
developed through the centuries to bring under cultivation the fertile soil of the
low-lying fenland of Lincolnshire and similar areas in East Anglia.
With its mild climate and varied soils, Britain has a diverse pattern of natural
vegetation. When the islands were first settled, oak forest probably covered the greater
part of the lowland, giving place to extensive marshlands, forests of Scots pine on
higher or sandy ground and perhaps some open moorland. In the course of the
centuries the forest area was progressively diminished and, in spite of planting by estate
owners in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, and the establishment of large
forests by the Forestry Commission in the past forty years, woodlands now occupy
only about 7 per cent of the surface of the country. The greatest density of woodland
occurs in the north and east of Scotland, in some parts of south-east England and in
Monmouthshire on the Welsh border. Midland Britain appears to be well wooded
because of the numerous hedgerows and isolated trees. The most common trees are
oak, beech, ash and elm and, in Scotland, pine and birch.
There are various types of wild vegetation, including the natural flora of woods, fens
and marshes, foreshores and cliff's, chalk downs and the higher slopes of mountains;
the most widespread is that of the hilly moorland country, which consists mainly of
heather, grasses, gorse and bracken, with cotton grass in the wetter parts. Most of
Britain, however, is agricultural land, of which about a third is arable and the rest
pasture and meadow, a varied semi-natural vegetation composed of indigenous grasses
and flowering plants.
Farming land is divided into fields by hedges or stone walls and, especially in the
mixed farms which cover most of the country, presents a pattern of contrasting colour.
The cool temperate climate of Britain and the even distribution of rainfall ensure a
long growing season; streams rarely dry up, grassland is green throughout the year and
full of wild flowers from spring to autumn; there is scarcely a month in which some
flowers may not be found in hedgerows and sheltered woodland glades.
Fauna
The fauna of the British Isles is, in general, similar to that of north-western Europe,
though there are fewer species. Some of the larger mammals, including the wolf, the
bear, the boar and the Irish elk, have become extinct; but red deer, protected for
sporting reasons, flourish in the Scottish Highlands and on Exmoor in the counties
of Devon and Somerset, roe deer are found in Scotland and in the wooded areas of
southern England, and fallow deer (which are probably not indigenous) have been
introduced into parks and are wild in some districts. The badger, a nocturnal animal, is
rarely seen; there are foxes in most rural areas, and otters are found along many rivers
and streams. Both common and grey seals may be seen on various parts of the coast,
though not usually in the same localities. Smaller mammals include mice, rats, voles,
shrews, hedgehogs, moles, squirrels (the imported grey more numerous than the
native red), hares, rabbits (a serious farming pest before their decimation by myxo¬
matosis in the years 1954 and 1955), weasels and stoats.
There are about 430 species of birds, including many song-birds. About 230 species
are resident and the rest are regular visitors to Britain. The chaffinch and the blackbird
are probably the most numerous and are widely and evenly distributed, but sparrows
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE
7
usually predominate near houses, and huge flocks of starlings, which gather at certain
seasons, sometimes congregate in London and other large towns. In general, the
number of small birds has been on the increase for several decades owing to their success
in adapting themselves to a man-made environment and also to their more considerate
treatment by the public. The number of large birds, on the other hand, has tended to
decline, except for game birds which are specially preserved, such as pheasants and
partridges, and the red grouse which is found in moorland areas.
The many species of gulls and other sea-birds which nest round the coast often fly
far inland in search of food or shelter in rough weather. The drainage and reclamation
of marsh lands have diminished the natural habitat of duck, geese and other aquatic
birds. Such birds, however, now frequent reservoirs, gravel pits and sewage farms
in addition to the nature reserves and bird sanctuaries which the Government is
establishing on an increasing scale. Many of the rarer species of birds are protected
by law.
Reptiles and amphibians are few. The former are represented by three species of
snakes, of which only the adder is venomous, and three species of lizards, including
the snake-like slow-worm. The amphibians are represented by three species of newts
and five species of frogs and toads. Of these, only one species of newt and the common
viviparous lizard are indigenous; the other species of reptiles and amphibians that are
now firmly established came to Britain from Europe. There are no snakes in Ireland.
River and lake fish include salmon, trout, sea-trout, perch, roach, dace, grayling
and pike.
There are more than 21,000 different kinds of insects, most of them small, in the
British Isles. Among the largest are the rare swallowtail butterfly (3 to 4 inches) and
the stag beetle (zj inches). The insect fauna in Britain is less varied than that of
continental Europe and lacks a number of common European species. With modern
methods of pest control, extensive insect damage to crops or timber and serious
outbreaks of diseases commonly spread by insect vectors are exceptional in Britain.
THE DEMOGRAPHIC BACKGROUND
The people who now inhabit the British Isles are descended mainly from the
people who inhabited them nearly nine centuries ago. The last of a long succession of
invaders and colonisers from Scandinavia and the continent of Europe were the
Normans, a branch of the Norsemen or Scandinavian Vikings who, after settling in
northern France, intermarrying with the French, and assimilating the French language
and customs, crossed to England and conquered it in 1066.
It is neither possible nor suitable to attempt in this chapter to estimate the relative
importance of various early peoples—pre-Celts, Celts, Romans, Anglo-Saxons and
the Norsemen, including the Danes—in the ancestry of the present English, Scots,
Welsh and Irish. It is significant, however, that over most of England and the Lowlands
of Scotland the language which soon came to predominate was English, mainly a
marriage of Anglo-Saxon and Norman-French, while the use of Celtic languages
persisted in Wales, Cornwall, the Isle of Man, the Highlands of Scotland and in
Ireland (see p. 19).
The available records do not permit of any precise estimates of the size of population
or of the extent or direction of population movement until the beginning of the
nineteenth century. It is believed, however, that at the end of the eleventh century the
population of Great Britain was about two million, while at the end of the seventeenth
century a reasonable contemporary estimate put the population of England and Wales
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
at 5! million and that of Scotland at about one million. The main factor in this gradual
growth of population was a slow natural increase, the rate of which was retarded in
Britain, as in all countries before the development of medical science, by high death
rates and, in particular, by very high infant and maternal mortality. Immigration
from the continent of Europe was an influence at certain times, for example, that of
Flemish weavers in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries.
From the beginning of the nineteenth century, information about the British people
—their number, sex, age, geographical distribution, births, deaths, marriages, occupa¬
tions, language and family structure—is relatively plentiful and reliable. Most of it
is derived from two main sources: the regular flow of vital statistics, i.e. statistical
information based on statutory registration of births, marriages and deaths, and the
periodic census of population which gives a national snapshot at a particular moment
of time.
The Compilation of Vital Statistics
The compilation of complete records of births, marriages and deaths is carried out
by registrars of births and deaths, some of whom also act as registrars of marriages.
In England and Wales, there are about five hundred superintendent registrars in charge
of registration districts and about twelve hundred registrars in charge of sub-districts.
Registrars and superintendent registrars are appointed by the county, county borough
and metropolitan borough councils but they act under the instruction of the Registrar
General for England and Wales, who is in charge of a central Government department,
the General Register Office, concerned with regulating the registration of births,
deaths and marriages, with planning and carrying out population censuses, and with
the compilation and analysis of population and vital statistics. There are corresponding
authorities1 and similar arrangements (differing only in detail) in Scotland, Northern
Ireland, the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man.
In general, the legal obligations in connection with the registration of births,
marriages and deaths are as follows. The responsibility for giving information to a
local registrar about a birth is placed first on the parents of the child (the mother
where the child is illegitimate), then on the occupier of the house and any person
present at the birth, on the person in charge of the child or on any person finding a
new-born child. Similarly, information for the registration of a death must be given
by a relative present at the death or in attendance during the last illness or, in their
absence, by any other relative residing or being in the sub-district where the death
occurred, by the occupier or an inmate of the house or by any person finding or taking
charge of the body or arranging for its disposal. The doctor who attended the deceased
during his last illness must issue a certificate giving the cause of death and deliver it at
once to the registrar. Deaths of persons not receiving medical attention, deaths the
cause of which is unknown and unnatural, and accidental or violent deaths must be
reported to a coroner (a procurator-fiscal in Scotland).
Marriages are registered immediately after the ceremony. In general, marriages
according to religious rites are entered in registers held by the officiating clergyman or
some other person appointed by the religious body concerned. Some religious marriages,
and all civil marriages, are attended and registered by registrars of marriages. In
England and Wales, civil marriages are solemnised in superintendent registrars’
1 The various authorities are: the General Register Office, Somerset House, London; the
General Registry Office, Edinburgh; the General Register Division of the Ministry of Finance
of the Government of Northern Ireland; the Governments of Jersey, of Guernsey and its
associated islands, and of the Isle of Man.
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE
9
offices. Certified copies of all entries of births, deaths and marriages are sent quarterly
to the General Register Office.
In Scotland there are no superintendent registrars but for each of nearly 1,000
registration districts there is a registrar of births, deaths and marriages. Some 300 of
these registrars may conduct civil marriages in their offices. Duplicate registers are
transmitted annually to the Registrar for Scotland after inspection by district examiners.
In the 184 registration districts of Northern Ireland, only live births are registered
(whereas both live and still births are registered in Great Britain) and certain supple¬
mentary information (collected in Great Britain primarily for fertility studies) is not
required. Roman Catholic marriages in Northern Ireland are registered on the authority
of a certificate completed at the time of the ceremony, instead of being recorded in a
bound register immediately the ceremony is over.
The Census
Censuses of the people of Great Britain were taken regularly every ten years from
1801 to 1931. There was no census in 1941 because of the war. In 1951 and 1961
censuses were taken simultaneously by the appropriate authorities in England and
Wales, Scotland, Northern Ireland, the islands of the British seas and the Irish
Republic. The co-operation of the Irish Republic in arranging a simultaneous census
was of particular value, owing to considerable sea and land traffic and the movement
of population between that country and the United Kingdom. All the reports based
on the 1951 censuses have now been published. The preliminary reports—straight¬
forward counts of males and females by area—of the 1961 censuses are now available.
The short demographic account of the United Kingdom given in this chapter is
based mainly on census reports and on the regular returns of births, marriages and
deaths, though some use has been made of other special investigations, including the
Reports of the Royal Commission on Population.1
Total Population
The enumerated population of the United Kingdom at the censuses taken on
23rd April, 1961, was 52,673,221, excluding persons in the Isle of Man and the Channel
Islands, which are not strictly parts of the United Kingdom.
The population had increased by nearly 2^ million since 1951, by about 6^ million
since 1931, by about 8| million since 1921 and by about 45J million—or about seven
fold—since 1700. The main causes of this increase were a progressive reduction in
death rates and a continuance of high birth rates into the beginning of the twentieth
century.
The population density of the United Kingdom is one of the highest in the world.
It was approximately 571 persons per square mile at the time of the 1961 censuses.
Birth and Death Rates. For most of the nineteenth century the annual birth rate
was about 35 per thousand of the population, and the annual death rate was just over
20 per thousand. Both birth and death rates fell over the last 30 years of the century,
but the natural increase of the population changed but little. It rose from 12 per
thousand in 1851 to 15 per thousand in 1881, and fell to n per thousand in 1901.
These fertile years, with their comparatively high death rates in all age groups,
produced a population of low average age. At each successive census the population
of any age group exceeded the corresponding figure at the preceding census, while the
short expectation of life further reduced the ratio of older to younger persons. When,
1 This commission was appointed in March 1944; its main report was published in March 1949-
10
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
therefore, death rates in all age groups fell by an average of about 33 per cent, as
they did between 1880 and 1910, the results were a very low general death rate, which
helped to maintain the population increase in spite of a fall in the birth rate, and a
gradual increase in the average age of the population.
After the first world war the birth rate fell to less than half the nineteenth century
rate. Even so, the population continued to increase slowly, though its average age
rose more rapidly (see diagram below).
Owing to the changing age composition, the general death rate has remained nearly
stationary at around 12 per thousand of the population though death rates have
continued to fall heavily in every age group, particularly among pre-school children,
school children, and adults in their thirties and forties, with a consequent lengthening
of the expectation of life from about 50 years at birth in 1900 to 1910 to about 70
years at birth in 1955 to 1957. Since 1933 the steady fall in the number of births has
ceased. During the second world war the birth rate began to rise and reached a
temporary post-war peak of 207 per thousand population in 1947. It then receded
PERCENTAGE CHANGE IN POPULATION SINCE 1901
BY AGE GROUP
1901 = 0
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE
II
again to slightly above the pre-war level in the early 1950s, but since 1955 it has
risen slowly and was 177 per thousand in i960.
Mortality Causes. The causes of the decline in mortality include better nutrition,
rising standards of living, the advance of medical science, the growth of medical
facilities, improved health measures, better working conditions, education in personal
hygiene, public and private schemes to make the health services generally available,
and the smaller size of the family, which has reduced the strain on mothers and
enabled them to take greater care of their children.
Mortality from acute infectious diseases and from tuberculosis, and infant and
EXPECTATION OF LIFE AT BIRTH YEARb
maternal mortality have declined very sharply. Mortality from the main acute infectious
diseases of childhood is less than one-hundredth and mortality from tuberculosis is
less than one-thirtieth of the rate prevailing in the mid-nineteenth century. Infant
mortality (i.e. deaths of infants under one year old per thousand live births) has fallen
by about 80 per cent since 1900. Between 1934 and 1942 maternal mortality was nearly
halved, and is now only about one-seventh of the 1934 rate. The reported mortality
from many of the chronic diseases of middle and old age, such as cancer of the lung and
12
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
coronary thrombosis, has risen during the twentieth century, and this rise, though
exaggerated by the improvement in diagnosis, is at least partly real. Medicine has not
yet discovered effective measures to combat some of these diseases, and improvement
in positive health does not always bring increased immunity or resistance to them.
Fertility Trends. The fall in birth rates in the latter part of the nineteenth and
the early part of the twentieth centuries was due mainly to a decline in the size of
the family (i.e. the number of children born per married couple) caused by the spread
of deliberate family limitation. Couples married a hundred years ago produced on
the average rather more than six liveborn children. The decline seems to have set in
with those married in the 1860s, and continued steadily until, with the couples married
in the late 1920s, the average family size had been reduced to between 2-2 and 2-i.
The decline then stopped, and the figure has remained stable in spite of the disturbance
of the war years; the latest data suggest a slight increase.
The generation of girls born about 1840, and married mostly between 20 and 30
years later, had about 40 per cent more children than were needed to replace the original
generation, while those born at the beginning of the present century had only about
70 per cent of the number of children needed for replacement. Since then the figure
has been rising again and may reach full replacement with the generation born during
the second world war. But the rise has been due more to the increased proportion of
children surviving to adult life and of women getting married than to the small
increase in family size.
At first the decline in family size was most marked among the professional and
salaried classes. Among couples married between 1900 and 1930 the families of
manual workers were about 40 per cent larger than those of non-manual workers, but
this class difference appears to have been diminishing. The decline in family size has
been slower in Scotland and Northern Ireland than in England and Wales.
Age Distribution. The first effect of the fall in the birth rate was to reduce the
number of children, and therefore the ratio of dependent population to working
population. This ratio was at a minimum in the 1930s. After 1936 the number of
children leaving school for work fell sharply owing to the drop in the birth rate after
1921, while the population aged over 40 continued to increase and the population
aged over 64, born during an era of high fertility and representing successive genera¬
tions of steeply rising numbers, increased very rapidly. The higher birth rates after
1942 have arrested the compensating fall in the number of dependent children and
have further reduced the ratio of working to dependent population.
At mid-1960 the age distribution of the United Kingdom was estimated as follows:
Under 15 .. .. .. 23-3 per cent
151064 .. .. .. 65-1 per cent
65 and over .. .. 11 *6 per cent
An unusually large proportion of the population of the United Kingdom (about
14 per cent) is now between 45 and 55 years of age. Assuming a continued fall in
death rates and net emigration of 27,000 people a year from the usual age groups, it
can be estimated that between i960 and 1975:
(1) the number of young people aged 15 to 29 will increase by nearly 16 per cent
to about 11-8 million;
(2) the population of working age will increase slowly;
(3) the number of old people (over 65) will increase by more than million.
Sex Ratio. Total births of boys naturally exceed those of girls by about 6 per cent,
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE
13
but stillbirth rates and mortality rates at almost all ages are higher for males, so that
in nearly all countries—and in Britain since records began—women preponderate
among the elderly and outnumber men in the total population. Until recently indeed
women outnumbered men in the United Kingdom in every age group from adolescents
onwards. Actually, however, the reduction in stillbirths and infant mortality has made
the influence of these factors on sex ratio relatively unimportant so that the age at
which women begin to outnumber men has been advanced and is now about 30.
On the other hand, the lengthening of the expectation of life, which has been rather
more marked for women than for men, has increased the preponderance of women
among the elderly—there are now some five women over seventy years old to every
three men—and made it a weightier factor in the sex ratio of the whole population.
This increase in the number of elderly women, however, does not quite counter¬
balance the increase in the number of boys and young men so that the ratio of females
to males has fallen from 108 : too in 1951 to 107 : 100 in 1961.
Migration. Since the beginning of the nineteenth century, net migration has been
markedly outward. In that period, about 25 million persons born in the British Isles
are estimated to have emigrated to the United States and Commonwealth countries
overseas. On the other hand, large numbers of Europeans, mainly Russians, Poles,
Germans and Hungarians, have entered the British Isles during the last 80 years.
The net loss by migration since 1871 from the present area of the United Kingdom is
about 31 million. During the inter-censal period 1931-51 the balance of migration to
and from the United Kingdom was inward for the first time in the past century. The
net gain to the United Kingdom from civilian migration was about half a million, a
net gain of three-quarters of a million to England and Wales being offset by net
losses from Scotland and Northern Ireland. This net gain was the balance between a
large outward movement mainly of British subjects emigrating to Canada, Australia,
New Zealand and South Africa, and a larger inward movement consisting chiefly of
British subjects returning home during the 1930s and of aliens from Europe, including
about a quarter of a million refugees1 seeking sanctuary in Britain. There was also
considerable net immigration from the Irish Republic. Taking only the period 1946-51
the balance of migration by sea (figures for air transport are not available) was outward
owing to the high net outflow (some 65,000 a year) to Commonwealth countries over¬
seas. In the intercensal period 1951-61 the net balance of migration was again inward
but by a smaller margin (97,000), though the gross migration flows were almost
certainly higher than ever before. In 1952 net outflow to Commonwealth countries
reached a peak of 87,000 but it was subsequently reduced, chiefly owing to increased
immigration into Britain from other parts of the Commonwealth, particularly the
West Indies, and the total balance of migration to and from all countries for the years
1952 to 1956 was certainly small. Exceptionally high migration began towards the end
of 1956, partly due to a sudden surge in the flow of emigration to Canada, and also to
an influx of British repatriates from Egypt, and of some 21,000 Hungarian refugees,1
of whom over 14,000 have remained in Britain. Total gross emigration in 1957 was
estimated at about 230,000 and immigration was probably at least as high. Emigration
fell to about 142,000 in 1958 and about 130,000 in 1959 and continued at a low level in
i960. Immigration has continued at a high level though lower than in 1957.
Birthplace and Nationality. At the 1951 census, some 17 million persons in the
United Kingdom were reported as having been born outside it. About a fifth of them
1 The total number of refugees who had come to Britain in the past twenty-five years was
timated in 1959 at about 330,000, of w'hom 80,000 came before the second world war.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
H
had been born in other independent Commonwealth countries or in United Kingdom
dependencies, about a third in the 26 counties of southern Ireland (now the Irish
Republic), and nearly half in foreign countries, notably Poland, Germany, Russia
and the United States. The number born in the overseas Commonwealth and in the
Irish Republic had increased by about one-third and two-thirds, respectively, since
1931, and the number born in foreign countries had approximately doubled. In view
of the high levels of immigration, it is probable that the number of persons living in
the United Kingdom, but born elsewhere, has increased further since 1951. An
important factor in recent years has been immigration from the West Indies and the
Indian sub-continent. Immigrants from those countries at present living in Britain
are estimated to number some 200,000.
Less than one per cent of persons were of alien nationality at the time of the 1951
census; the remainder were either citizens of the United Kingdom and Colonies or
of other Commonwealth countries or were British protected persons or citizens of
the Irish Republic.
Under the British Nationality Act, 1948, with insignificant exceptions, persons who
are born, or whose fathers were born, in the United Kingdom or in a territory which
was a colony of the United Kingdom on 1st January, 1949, or at the date of birth if
later, or in a United Kingdom registered ship or aircraft, are citizens of the United
Kingdom and Colonies. Citizenship may also be acquired: by descent (subject to
certain requirements) from a paternal grandfather born in the United Kingdom or
Colonies or from a more remote paternal ancestor in the male line; by registration,
for citizens of Commonwealth member countries or of the Irish Republic,1 for minor
children and for women married to citizens of the United Kingdom and Colonies;
in consequence of an adoption order; and by naturalisation. The requirements for
the grant of a certificate of naturalisation include five years’ residence in the United
Kingdom or Colonies or five years’ Crown service, good character, a sufficient
knowledge of English and the intention to reside in the United Kingdom or a colony
or to remain in Crown service.
A citizen of the United Kingdom and Colonies does not forfeit his citizenship by
acquiring or possessing the nationality or citizenship of another country; nor does a
woman who is a citizen of the United Kingdom and Colonies lose her citizenship by
marriage to an alien. Indeed, a citizen cannot be deprived of his citizenship against his
will except in very exceptional circumstances (for example, if he has obtained naturalisa¬
tion or registration as a citizen by fraud). Any man or woman who is a citizen is, how¬
ever, at liberty to renounce citizenship if he or she possesses or acquires the nationality
or citizenship of another country.
Citizens of the other independent Commonwealth countries are, in United
Kingdom law, British subjects or Commonwealth citizens. They are free to
enter and remain in the United Kingdom without restrictions of any kind. Similar
treatment is extended to citizens of the Irish Republic who, in the United Kingdom,
are not aliens.
Regional Distribution and Trends
The distribution of the population of the British Isles by country and major adminis¬
trative region as enumerated at the 1961 and 1951 censuses, and at certain previous
censuses back to 1841 is shown in Tables 1 and 2.
The populations of England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland and of each of
1 Though South Africa left the Commonwealth in May 1961 the laws governing its relation¬
ship with the United Kingdom are remaining unchanged for a year from that date.
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE
!5
the principal regions of England were in every case greater in 1961 than in 1951 and
in 1951 than in 1931, whereas in the period 1921-31 the populations of Wales, Scotland
and Northern Ireland had declined. Between 1931 and 1951, the greatest increases
were in the eastern, southern, midland and south-western regions of England, and in
Northern Ireland. The smallest increase was in Wales. Since 1951 the main increases
have been in the eastern, southern and north midland regions of England.
The population of the United Kingdom taken as a whole is predominantly urban
and suburban. During the nineteenth century, when the labour demands of newly
developing industry drew great numbers from the countryside to the towns, the urban
element continuously and rapidly outgrew the rural element. At the end of the nine¬
teenth century, 75 per cent of the British population was living within the boundaries
of urban administrative areas and the large conurbation1 was already the dominant
type of British community. By 19n, the economic and social limits of these conurba¬
tions extended far beyond the administrative boundaries of the cities which formed
their core, owing to the building of outer suburbs which linked up neighbouring towns.
Since 1921, nearly 40 per cent of the population has lived in the seven great conurba¬
tions whose centres are the cities of London, Manchester (South-East Lancashire),
Birmingham and Wolverhampton (West Midlands), Glasgow (Central Clydeside),
Leeds and Bradford (West Yorkshire), Liverpool (Merseyside), and Newcastle upon
Tyne (see Table 2).
The second world war halted suburban building and for a time reduced the popula¬
tion of conurbations and large cities, but by the end of the war many people had
returned to the neighbourhood of their pre-war homes. At the 1951 census many
large cities and towns had larger populations than in 1939, but the population of others
was smaller. Table 2 shows the distribution of the population by urban and rural
districts and the populations of the standard administrative regions, of the seven
major conurbations and the 17 large cities, some of which are the principal cities
included in the conurbations. It should be borne in mind, however, that the statistics
of cities, relating to administrative areas, do not necessarily include all the con¬
tinuously built-up area of the city; in the case of large towns, development commonly
extends without a break across administrative boundaries. The statistics for conurba¬
tions, which consist of continuously built up and economically inter-dependent
areas and include developing suburbs of large cities, are in some cases more
illuminating.
The greatest concentration of population in Britain is in the London area. The
precise definition of Greater London is a matter of opinion, but it certainly covers an
area much larger than the County of London (population about 3 million). The con¬
tinuously built-up area extends into the counties of Middlesex, Hertfordshire, Surrey,
Essex and Kent, and the area socially and economically dependent on the capital is
still wider. As in other urban concentrations, there is a long-established tendency for
decreases in the number of people who actually have their homes in the inner parts
of the area—especially the centre itself—to be balanced by increases of population in
and beyond the outer suburban fringes. The war accelerated the pre-war fall of
population in the inner areas and retarded the rapid pre-war expansion of some of the
outer areas. Between 1939 and 1951 the County of London lost about two-thirds
of a million people and the official conurbation, which roughly corresponds to the
continuously built-up area, fell by some 380,000 to 8,350,000 in 1951.
1 An area of urban development where a number of separate towns have grown into each other
or become linked by such factors as a common industrial or business interest or a common
centre for shopping or education.
i6
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
TABLE 1
Populations 1841-1961“
England
(excluding
Monmouth¬
shire)
Wales and
Monmouth-
SCOTLAND
(Persons
I Males
| Females
I Persons
i Males
I Females
I Persons
Males
I Females
14,867,882
7,259,028
7,608,854
1,046,266
518,558
527,708
2,620,184
1,241,862
1,378,322
Great
Britain
Persons
Males
Females
18,534,332
9,019,448
9,514,884
Northern
Ireland
Persons
Males
Females
Totals Great (Persons
Britain and I Males
Northern j Females
Ireland V
Isle of Man
Jersey
Guernsey
and
Associated
Islands
Irish
Republic
I Persons
I Males
{ Females
/ Persons
J Males
1 Females
(Persons
Males
Females
{Persons
Males
Females
Totals
British
Isles
Persons
Males
Females
1841
21,299,771
10,352,934
10,946,837
1,412,495
706,000
706,495
3,360,018
1,603,143
1,756,875
1,648,945
799,711
849,234
20,183,277
9,819,159
10,364,118
1871
30,514,967
14,717,155
15,797,812
2,012,876
1,011,458
1,001,418
4,472,103
2,173,755
2,298,348
26,072,284
12,662,077
13,410,207
36,999,946
17,902,368
19,097,578
1,359,190
647,285
711,905
27,431,474
13,309,362
14,122,112
47,975
23,011
24,964
47,544
21,602
25.942
28,521
12.943
15,578
6,528,799c
3,222,485c
3,306,314
26,836,116
13,099,200
13,736,916
54,042
25,914
28,128
56,627
24,875
31,752
33,969
15,433
18,536
4,053,187
1,992,468
2,060,719
1901
37,359,045
17,839,205
19,519,840
2,593,332
1,293,805
1,299,527
4,842,980
2,325,523
2,517,457
44,795,357
21,458,533
23,336,824
1,236,952
589,955
646,997
38,236,898
18,492,323
19,744,575
54,752
25,496
29,256
52,576
23,940
28,636
43,042
21,140
21,902
3,221,823
1,610,085
1,611,738
1931
41,159,213
19,745,530
21,413,683
2,598,675
1,270,103
1,328,572
5,096,415
2,434,358
2,662,057
48,854,303
23,449,991
25,404,312
1,243,000*
601,000*
642,000*
46,038,357
22,059,533
23,978,824
31,629,299
15,368,052
16,261,247
41,609,091
20,172,984
21,436,107
49,308
22,443
26,865
50,462
23,424
27,038
42,743
20,675
22,068
2,933,000d
1,497,000^
1,436,000^
1951
43,430,972
21,008,142
22,422,830
2,640,632
1,290,757
1,349,875
5,178,490
2,484,170
2,694,320
1,370,921
667,819
703,102
50,225,224
24,117,810
26,107,414
49,113,870
23,623,075
25,490,795
55,253
25,774
29,479
57,310
27,291
30,019
45,496
22,091
23,405
2,960,593
1,506,597
1,453,996
1961
51,250,094
24,783,069
26,467,025
1,423,127
693,978
729,149
52,673,221
25,477,047
27,196,174
53,343,876
25,699,563
27,644,313
48,151
22,060
26,091
63,345
30,555
32,790
47,178
22,890
24,288
2,814,703
1,415,100
1,399,603
55,646,598
26,967,652
28,678,946
Source: Census Reports and Estimates by Population Authorities.
(a) The figures (with the exception of those indicated in (b) and (d) below) are for populations
enumerated in censuses.
(b) Estimate (censuses were taken in 1926 and 1937, but not in 1931).
(c) Military and Naval personnel are not included in these figures.
(d) Estimate (censuses were taken in 1926 and 1936, but not in 1931).
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE
J7
TABLE 2
Distribution of the PopuLATiON(a)
Thousands
Urban and rural districts
England and Wales:
Urban districts
Rural districts
Scotland:
Cities and burghs
Landward areas
Northern Ireland:
Urban districts
Rural districts
Standard regions of England
and Wales:
Northern .. ..
East and West Ridings
North-Western
North Midland
Midland
Eastern
London and South Eastern
Southern
South-Western
Wales ..
Conurbations:
Greater London
South-East Lancashire
West Midlands
Central Clydeside
West Yorkshire
Merseyside
Tyneside
Cities :
Belfast..
Birmingham
Bradford
Bristol..
Cardiff..
Coventry
Edinburgh
Glasgow
Kingston upon Hull
Area in
square
miles(6)
8,240-5
50,104-5
441-6
29,353-3
78-5
5,159-5
7,470-7
3,962-7
3,083-0
6,407-6
5,024-8
7,264-4
4,190-6
4,872-4
9,113-9
8,015-8
724-2
379-5
268-8
324-4
484-6
150-0
90-2
24-0
79-9
39-9
41-2
23-6
29-9
52-0
60-4
22-2
1921
30,035
7,851
3,311
1,572
638(c)
619(c)
3,020
3,731
6,023
2,746
3,503
2,224
9,486
1,954
2,544
2,656
7,488
2,361
1,773
1,638
1,614
1,263
816
415(c)
919
286
377
221
128
420
1,034
287
1931
31,952
8,000
3,362
1,481
678(c)
602(c)
3,038
3,929
6,197
2,939
3,743
2,433
10,330
2,135
2,615
2,593
8,216
2,427
1,933
1,690
1,655
1,347
827
438(c)
1,003
298
397
227
167
439
1,088
314
1951
35,336
8,422
3,592
1,504
750
621
3,141
4,097
6,447
3,378
4.423
3,098
10,906
2,649
3,021
2,599
8,348
2.423
2,237
1,760
1,693
1,382
836
444
1,113
292
443
244
258
467
1,090
299
1961
36,838
9,223
3,646
1,533
764
654
3,252
4,168
6,568
3,634
4,754
3,736
11,043
2,819
3,408
2,641
8,172
2,427
2,344
1,802
1,703
1,386
852
415
1,106
296
436
256
305
468
1,055
303
Continued overleaf
i8
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
TABLE 2 (contd.)
Distribution of the Population^)
Thousands
Cities—contd.
Leeds ..
Leicester
Liverpool
Manchester ..
Newcastle upon Tyne
Nottingham ..
Sheffield
Stoke on Trent
Area in
square
miles(i)
63-5
26-5
434
42-6
17-3
28-5
61-9
33-1
1921
458
234
803
730
275
263
491
240
1931
483
239
856
766
283
269
512
277
1951
505
285
789
703
292
306
513
275
1961
511
273
747
661
269
312
494
266
Source: Census Reports and Estimates by Population Authorities.
(a) The boundaries of some of the administrative areas have been altered from time to time.
The population figures given relate in general to the areas as these were defined in the year noted
at the head of each column. The figures for conurbations, however, relate in general as nearly
as possible to areas as constituted in 1961.
(ft) Area at the date of the 1961 census of population.
(c) 1926 and 1937 census figures.
During the 1950s, the population of the inner areas has continued to fall; and this
has been accompanied by significant increases throughout a wide area beyond the
official conurbation. A broad belt of almost continuous population increase now
surrounds the conurbation and is estimated to contain about 20 per cent more people
than in 1951. It completely encircles London, includes and passes beyond all the
London new towns and extends along every major road and rail route from London.
The contemporary London Region can be defined as a roughly circular area with a
radius of 40 to 50 miles from central London and a population in 1961 of some
12,000,000. The population of the region has grown by only about half a million, or
4 per cent, since 1951. This rise is mainly due to natural increase (excess of births over
deaths) and the changes in population are essentially attributable to redistribution
rather than to a net immigration from beyond the region. This redistribution has
resulted both from voluntary or private moves and from planned transfers of population.
The increased population of the outer areas includes both commuters who have moved
their homes but continue to travel to work in inner London, and inhabitants of new
towns and expanded existing towns who have changed both their home and their
workplace.
These changes, particularly the spread of commuter populations, have been facili¬
tated and encouraged by progress in transport—electrification and diesel developments
on the railways and the greatly increased number of private cars.
The characteristic of urban dispersal, which has reached its largest scale in the London
area, has been a feature of post-war change also in many provincial cities and towns.
It has been most marked where the local economy has been prosperous, population
increase rapid, and land for development in short supply. Outward movement and
fringe development for one or more of these reasons has been noticeably large in outer
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE
J9
areas of the West Midlands and Merseyside conurbations and on the edges of Bristol,
Derby, Leicester, Norwich, Oxford, Portsmouth and Sheffield.
Apart from the feature of urban dispersal, the 1950s have seen widely different
rates of population growth in various parts of the country. The general picture is that
many places in the Midlands and south-east England, some south coast retirement
areas and some economically prosperous parts of the north and west have experienced
increase above the national rate; they include in particular the London, Birmingham
and Southampton-Portsmouth areas, Coventry, Oxford, Gloucester-Cheltenham,
Bournemouth, Middlesbrough, Doncaster and York. There was comparatively little
increase or no change in the South-East Lancashire, West Yorkshire, and Tyneside
conurbations. Few places had any decrease of population; it was generally small in
amount and affected mainly some old industrial areas in Lancashire and south Wales
and a number of seaside towns. Rural districts, in total, had a high rate of increase,
but this was due largely to expansion on town peripheries.
Language
In England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland, English is the language pre¬
dominantly spoken. In Wales, however, Welsh, a form of British Celtic, is the first
language of the majority of the population in most of the western counties and was
spoken by 29 per cent of the population at the time of the 1951 census. In Scotland,
in 1961, some 77,000 persons, mainly in Ross and Cromarty, Inverness, Argyll,
and Lanark, spoke the Scottish form of Gaelic,1 while a few families in Northern
Ireland spoke the Irish form of Gaelic. The Manx and Cornish varieties of Celtic
are no longer effectively living languages, although, in the Isle of Man, Manx is
spoken by a few people, and is used in addition to English for certain official
prono uncements.
English is spoken throughout the Channel Islands, but a Norman-French patois is
still also spoken there by some people. French is still the official language of Jersey,
used for ceremonial and official procedure; both French and English are used in the
courts. In Guernsey, however, English is now used for almost all official proceedings.
SOCIAL PATTERNS
A general summary of trends in social organisation, similar in scope to the fore¬
going summary of population trends, is not practicable. It may be useful, however,
to review some of the evidence relating to the structure of British households and
the extent and use of leisure in Britain in order to provide a background to the informa¬
tion given in later chapters on such matters as town planning, housing, and transport.
Number and Composition of Households
In Great Britain, as in other countries, most people live as members of private
households (usually families). Less than 5 per cent of the population was enumerated
by the censuses of 1911, 1921, 1931 and 1951 in institutions such as hotels, schools,
and hospitals.
In 1911 there were about nine million private households2 in Great Britain. By
1951, according to the censuses of England and Wales and of Scotland, there were
1 Most of the islands off the west coast of Scotland where Gaelic is spoken are included in the
counties of Ross and Cromarty, Inverness and Argyll.
2 Counting persons living alone as one-person households.
20
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
about 14! million households, an increase of about 60 per cent. This expansion was
much more rapid than the 19 per cent increase in the total population during the same
period because falling birth rates and a lengthened expectation of life meant more but
smaller families. The average size of households in Great Britain fell from 4-5 persons
in 1911 to 3-2 in 1951. In England and Wales the number of persons living in house¬
holds of one or two persons almost trebled between 1911 and 1951. At the end of this
period such households constituted about 40 per cent of private households and com¬
prised about 20 per cent of the population in private households. In 43 per cent of
families of two persons, the head of the household was 60 years of age or over.
It has been difficult to increase the number of separate dwelling-places (houses
or flats) sufficiently rapidly to overtake the increasing number of private households,
and this difficulty was aggravated by the suspension of house-building and the
destruction of property during the second world war. In 1951, there were only some
137 million structurally separate dwelling-places in Great Britain, and about 2 million
households shared a home. About 70 per cent of the dwellings were houses of four to
six rooms (mainly terraced or semi-detached houses), while 20 per cent were of three
rooms or less (mainly flats). The proportion of small dwellings was greatly above
average in Scotland, where there were many slum tenements, and considerably above
average in London.
Since 1951 about 3 million new dwellings have been built in the United Kingdom
while the proportionate increase in the number of dwellings in England and Wales,
after allowing both for demolitions and the division of old houses into two or more
structurally separate dwellings, was estimated before the 1961 census at approximately
14 per cent. The preliminary results of the census indicate a larger increase—about
20 per cent.
Of the 14! million private households in Great Britain in 1951, n -|- million were
estimated, according to the 1951 census one per cent sample tables (based on an analysis
of a representative one per cent sample of census returns in Great Britain), to be of the
simplest type, comprising married couples or widowed persons with their children,
if any, or persons living alone. More specifically, they comprised 3-2 million married
couples with no children, 900,000 widowed persons living alone, 6-9 million married
couples or widowed persons with children of any age and 600,000 single persons living
alone. Over a third of all married couples living alone were 60 years old or over; less
than a quarter of the married couples under 40 years of age in these simplest types of
household had no children. Some three-quarters of the single persons living alone and
almost all widowed and divorced persons living alone were over 40 years old, and
about two-thirds of all persons living alone were 60 years of age or over.
Only 2 million households contained persons less closely related to the head than
parent or brother or sister, or contained non-relatives. In nearly half of these house¬
holds, a second family—a married couple or a woman with children—was living with
the first family, usually the parents. Of the remaining i-i million households which
contained some unrelated or distantly related persons (numbering 1-24 million),
300,000 households consisted of only two persons.
Over 8 million households (57 per cent of all households) were estimated in the
1951 census sample tables to be without children under 16, while another 3-1 million
contained only one child.
It was estimated that in 1951 there were 180,000 households in Great Britain
employing a total of 205,000 resident domestic servants, of whom 178,000 were in
England and Wales. This compares with an estimate of 706,800 resident domestic
servants in England and Wales in 1931.
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE
21
Over half of the resident domestic servants in 1951 worked in small households
(of not more than three persons including the servant), while more than a quarter
were acting as the sole servant and household companion to one person of over 40
years of age. Already in 1951, a large proportion of resident domestic servants—and
possibly the majority of those working for families with children—were girls from
Ireland or from continental Europe, many of whom were attracted by the opportunity
to see Britain or to learn English. Since 1951, the number of girls from overseas coming
to take resident domestic posts has increased.
In the years since 195 ^ considerable changes in the numbers, size and composition
of households have taken place. According to the preliminary results of the 1961 census
of England and Wales, the intercensal increase in the number of households was about
12 per cent, compared with a 5 per cent increase in population and about 20 per cent
in number of dwellings. This further decrease in the average size of households is
consistent with the increase in the number of elderly people who tend to live alone
or in pairs and with the splitting of some households. Owing to the more rapid increase
in the number of dwellings there are now, however, fewer shared dwellings. Indeed
the total number of dwellings, including vacant dwellings, falls short of the number of
households by less than 0-4 per cent.
The small average size of households does not imply that wider family and kinship
ties are without strength and social significance. Indeed, a study, published in 1957,1
stressed the importance of the mutual help of relatives and neighbours in the long-
established and balanced communities living in the more crowded parts of East
London. The survey, which also covered a suburban area of Greater London, noted
the dangers of weakening such ties when households are moved out to more congenial
suburban surroundings.
Work and Leisure
The great majority of British males over 15 years of age are in full-time gainful
employment, and the majority of females are either housewives or in full-time gainful
employment. In many cases housewives also undertake part-time or even full¬
time employment. Nearly a third of married women have a paid job, and half the
women working for pay are married.
Agreed hours of full-time work for the majority of occupations are usually from
42 to 46 hours a week. Actual weekly hours worked by men average a little longer owing
to overtime working, and actual hours worked by women and girls average a little less.
In addition, the journey to and from work is often long. The 1951 census showed that
three-quarters of the i| million persons working in central London lived outside it
and that many travelled in from the fringes of Greater London and some from farther
away. A sample survey of travel in Greater London, made in 1954, showed that 89
per cent of workers in Greater London made regular journeys to work and that 56
per cent used public transport. The average time taken by such persons was 39 minutes
each way, though for workers in central London it was 47 minutes each way. Both the
number of persons travelling daily to work in central London and the average length
of such journeys are tending to increase (see pp. 15 and 18).
There is also often a long journey for housewives to the main shopping centre in
both urban and rural areas. In most areas there are, of course, a few shops much closer
at hand.
1 Family and Kinship in East London, by Michael Young and Peter Willmott. Routledge.
22
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Probably less than five per cent of housewives employ any paid help an<* almost
certainly kss than one per cent have a resident servant. The statistical evidence on
matter is rather fragmentary, but suggests a continuing reduction in ^ number ^
households with paid help, and confirms what can in any case be readily deduced from
everyday experience, that housewives have less leisure and considerably fewer periods
of continuous leisure of over one hour than other persons in Britain in spite of
the growth of the habit of eating some meals away from home and the spread
labour-saving devices. Two households in every three now have a vacuum cleaner,
one in three a washing machine and about one in four a refrigerator.
Compared with earlier generations, however, most people today have more leisure.
In many industries and services, hours of work are usually arranged to give a five-
day week, and most employees are entitled to two weeks’ continuous holiday a year in
addition to the statutory public holidays. Over half the population take at least a
week’s holiday away from home every year, mostly in July and August. Traditionally
most families have spent their holiday by the sea in Britain, lodging at a seaside
boarding house or hotel, or staying with relatives or friends. Latterly, other forms of
holiday have been gaining in popularity, including holiday camps, caravanning and
touring in a car or coach. A relatively small but rapidly increasing number of holiday¬
makers go abroad; over three million in i960, including travellers to the Channel
Islands and to the Irish Republic; in the same year 1,669,300 overseas tourists (including
426,500 from the United States) visited Britain.
At least a quarter of the adult population is interested in playing or going to watch
outdoor sports.1 2 Sporting interests are becoming increasingly varied (see Chapter
XVIII) but Association football and cricket are still the most popular. Much of the
gambling with small stakes, which is practised at least occasionally by three adults
out of four, is-on the results of sporting events, mainly horse and greyhound racing
and football matches (through the football pools, see Ch. XVIII).
The spread of television has added a vast new audience of indoor spectators to the
crowds who go to watch sporting events and great national occasions. By mid-1961,
about 70 per cent of the families in Britain (and a somewhat higher proportion of the
large families) had a television set; viewers are fairly evenly distributed among all
sections of the population, irrespective of income or occupation. The number of tele¬
vision receiving licences has increased since 1953 from 2 million to over ii‘4 million
(in mid-1961) and is still increasing rapidly (see Ch. XVI).
Rising standards of living and, in particular, the widely distributed ownership of
television sets and motor vehicles, have affected leisure habits in many ways, both
good and bad, and have provided new and varied opportunities for recreation and
entertainment.
There were some 9-2 million licensed motor vehicles in the summer of i960, of
which over 5-4 million were private cars and i-8 million were motor cycles (including
motor scooters). Many cars and some motor cycles are used partly, if not primarily,
for business purposes. During the summer, however, roads to the sea and the country
and to sporting events are usually thronged (and sometimes jammed) with cars,
especially on fine Saturdays and Sundays. The spread of car ownership, making many
1 It is estimated that approximately half of all school children and of all adults at work take
their midday meal away from home on working days.
2 A social survey of Derby made in 1953 showed that half the adult population in that town,
including two-thirds of the men, were at least occasional spectators of sporting events, and that
over one-fifth, including over half those under 25 years of age, actually participated, most of
them regularly.
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE
23
people more independent of public transport, is leading to a new and more scattered
distribution of houses, and is changing the siting requirements of factories, shops and
offices, as well as the whole pattern of leisure activities.
During the past twenty years, the real incomes of manual workers, and particularly
of unskilled workers and young workers under eighteen years of age, have risen
rapidly both in absolute terms and in relation to the incomes of non-manual workers.
At the same time, opportunities for education and promotion, already considerable,
have widened. An investigation of occupational and social mobility made eleven years
ago found that, if occupations were classified by social status into seven groups, only
one man in three had the same social status as his father. More than half the people
in the two top groups (‘professional and administrative’ and ‘managerial and executive’)
were the sons of men who had held less important positions, while only a quarter of
the sons of unskilled workers were themselves in occupations in that category. In
consequence, social distinctions based on occupation have become less clear cut, and
differences in the ways of life of manual and non-manual workers are much less
pronounced. Many manual workers’ families have acquired habits and tastes which
were formerly regarded as ‘middle-class’.
Such social changes often call for difficult adjustments. Many families of unskilled
and semi-skilled workers, for example, suddenly find themselves with more money
to spend when their children leave school for work at fifteen years of age; while the
families of most non-manual and many skilled manual workers forgo the extra income
in order to continue their children’s education. The increased earnings of young
workers, however, have influenced the status and outlook of adolescents generally.
‘Teenage’ society with sufficient coherence, independence and spending power to
establish its own customs, tastes and fashions is a feature of present-day Britain; and,
as in many other countries, the activities of groups of teenagers without adequate
parental control attract more attention than formerly and are a serious social problem
in certain areas.
The chief long-term effects of television, according to recent investigations, are
to widen tastes and stimulate new interests. Another result has been a fall in attendances
at cinemas and, to a lesser extent, at football matches, formerly the main entertainments
of large sections of the community. Cinema attendances are at barely a third of the rate
of ten years ago, but the cinema remains the most popular form of indoor entertainment
outside the home. To young men and women and older children, cinema-going is a
social occasion; about two-thirds of the unmarried aged 15 to 24 go at least once a week.
Attendances at theatres are much smaller, though most people visit them occasion¬
ally. There are only some 500 theatres in the country compared with some 3,290
cinemas. Nevertheless, there is an enthusiastic and growing public not only for plays
but for ballet, opera and concerts.
Dancing is popular, especially with those under twenty-five years of age, and it is
thought that about five million people go dancing every week. There are estimated to
be some 3,000 to 4,000 regular dance halls, including public dance halls and halls
operated by the major dance schools, which are open at least three times a week, and
about 4,000 other schools of ballroom dancing. Public dances are also often held in
other halls, while many of the clubs and societies which abound in Britain hold dances
from time to time in their own or hired premises. In addition, Scottish and English
traditional dances have their own wide and increasing following, while, since the war,
there has been a very large increase in attendance at ballet and other stage dancing
classes (mainly by young girls).
Clubs and societies, which may be primarily social or devoted to some particular
24
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
purpose, range from small informal groups to great national and international organi¬
sations with branches throughout the country. Organisations of national importance
in social life and in the promotion of social gatherings include, in addition to those
connected with religious denominations, the Working Men’s Clubs and Institutes,
the Townswomen’s Guilds and the Women’s Institutes. There are some 3,500 clubs,
with over two million members (mainly but not entirely men), affiliated to the Working
Men’s Club and Institute Union. These clubs are primarily social and recreational,
though they also arrange lectures and classes. Nearly 2,300 Townswomen’s Guilds
with a total membership of about 200,000, are affiliated to the National Union of
Townswomen’s Guilds. The guilds are both educational and social in purpose, and
they co-operate in many public welfare activities. The declared objective of the
National Federation of Women’s Institutes is to improve rural life and amenities; the
institutes make an important contribution to rural life by providing meeting places for
countrywomen and by organising social gatherings. There are in villages throughout
England and Wales some 8,500 institutes with over 440,000 members, while in Scot¬
land and Northern Ireland there are Women’s Rural Institutes with similar aims and
interests. _ _
In spite of the growth of social clubs, one traditional social rendezvous, the public
house, has maintained and even increased its popularity both in towns and in villages,
although there has been a marked decrease in drunkenness and in consumption of
alcohol per head since the nineteenth century; the recent rise in drunkenness among
adolescents, though serious, is on a relatively small scale. The public house attracts a
very wide circle of casual customers (both men and women) as well as many ‘ regulars ’
who meet for a drink and a chat, and perhaps to play some traditional public house
game or to watch television. A rival feature of urban life is the coffee bar. A charac¬
teristic of many of these coffee bars, which stay open until late at night and are popular
as rendezvous for young people, is their modern decor. On the other hand, many
people, especially the married and the elderly, spend much of their leisure at home—
reading, listening to the radio or gramophone, viewing television, entertaining their
friends,1 looking after pets2 and pursuing hobbies. Hobbies are, of course, innumer¬
able in their variety, but many are practical and contribute to the improvement of the
home. About four out of five families do most of their own decorating, while the sales
of hand-tools and the rapidly increasing sales of small power-tools and powered garden
implements testify to the extent and range of home carpentry and joinery and to the
interest and initiative that maintain Britain’s homes and gardens. Even in the towns
many houses have some garden, and the standard of both town and country gardens is
high. Some 4,000 local horticultural societies are affiliated to the National Allotment
and Gardens Society and there are a large number of unaffiliated societies; altogether
there are probably some 19 million spare-time gardeners. The numerous flower and
vegetable shows held in town and country are very popular, and there is a large
attendance at those held in London, particularly at the annual Chelsea Flower Show.
A number of people, young and old, find their main free-time interest in some form
of sustained group activity connected, for example, with the churches, trade unionism,
1 Indications of the rise in the scale and standard of home entertaining are provided by the
increasing sales of table wines (double those of the 1930s) and of expensive foods, and by the
frequent newspaper and periodical features and broadcast programmes devoted to cooking
recipes.
2 A sample survey in 1959 suggested that about a quarter of all homes had a caged bird, slightly
over a fifth a cat, and slightly under a fifth a dog; there are probably some 4 million dogs in
Britain, over 6 million cats and 8 or 9 million pet birds (mainly budgerigars).
THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE
25
politics, social welfare and reform, or with cultural pursuits, especially amateur
dramatics and music-making (see the Arts section of Chapter VIII). People with such
interests are still in a minority,1 but they constitute an important and characteristic
feature of British life and, indeed, an essential ingredient in the working of British
democracy.
.The figures from the Derby Survey showed that eight per cent of adults in that town belonged
to intellectual or cultural clubs or societies, eleven per cent were members of some political
party, thirteen per cent went to church every week (9 out of 10 homes had a Bible), and three
per cent held some church office.
II. GOVERNMENT
GENERAL SURVEY
The United Kingdom is a monarchical State, whose origins and traditions are to be
found in the history of each of its four component parts: England, Wales, Northern
Ireland and Scotland. England was unified under a Saxon king in the ninth century;
Wales became part of that kingdom and Ireland was joined with it under the same king
before the end of the thirteenth century; and the English and Scottish thrones were
dynastically united in the person of James I and VI in 1603. In 1707, the Treaty for
the Union of England and Scotland provided that the two countries ‘should be forever
united into one kingdom’, and one Parliament (the Parliament of Great Britain)
became the supreme authority in both countries. In 1801, the Act for the Union of
Great Britain and Ireland, 1800, which joined the Irish Parliament to the Parliament
of Great Britain, established the United Kingdom. In 1922, the 26 counties of Southern
Ireland (now the Irish Republic) became a completely independent country, outside
the United Kingdom. Meantime, the Government of Ireland Act, 1920, had enacted
a constitution for Northern Ireland which perpetuated Northern Ireland representa¬
tion in the United Kingdom Parliament as the supreme authority and, at the same time,
provided that country with its own legislature and executive, to deal with domestic
affairs.
The United Kingdom is a unitary, not a federal, State but methods of government are
flexible and, to some extent, adapted to the needs of the constituent countries. Thus
there is some measure of devolution in the administration of Welsh affairs under a
Cabinet Minister (who is Minister for Welsh Affairs) assisted by a Minister of State,
and advised by a Council for Wales as broadly representative as possible of all the
main aspects of Welsh life and thought. England and Wales on the one hand, and
Scotland on the other, continue as before the Union to have different systems of law,
a different judiciary, different educational systems, different systems of local govern¬
ment, national churches on a different footing, and, for most domestic matters, different
Government departments. The main Scottish departments are grouped under the
direction of the Secretary of State for Scotland, who is a member of the United King¬
dom Cabinet. In Northern Ireland, the law is derived from and similar to the law of
England but the judiciary is separate; the Northern Ireland Government departments
are responsible to the Northern Ireland Parliament. The Channel Islands and the Isle
of Man (which are Crown dependencies, not part of the United Kingdom) have their
own legislative assemblies and systems of local administration and of law, and their
own courts. At the same time, they have a special relationship with the United King¬
dom because of their proximity to the mainland and the antiquity of their connection
with the Crown. They are treated as part of the mainland for purposes of trade and
postal communication and are ‘territories for whose international relations Her Majesty’s
Government is responsible’. They are also formally subject to the United Kingdom
Parliament.
The United Kingdom Parliament has the ultimate responsibility for the good govern¬
ment of a number of overseas dependencies within the Commonwealth, all of which
are administered by territorial governments and are at various stages of development
towards full self-government. The United Kingdom is also one of the independent
member nations of the Commonwealth, which all acknowledge the Queen as the
26
GOVERNMENT
27
symb°l of their free association and, as such, the head of the Commonwealth; several
of these independent countries owe allegiance to the Crown.
The United Kingdom constitution is formed partly by statute, partly by common
law and partly by precepts and practices, known as conventions, which are not part
of the law of the land in that violation of them may lead to proceedings in a court
of law, but which are nevertheless indispensable to the machinery of government. The
rules of the constitution have never been codified; principles and practice are both
alterable, and the rules of the constitution can be adapted to changing conditions at
any time by the passing of an Act of Parliament or by the general acceptance of a new
convention, without serious disturbance to existing organs and forms.
The organs of government in the United Kingdom constitution are readily
distinguishable, although their functions often intermingle and overlap. They are:
(1) the legislature, which consists of the Queen in Parliament, and is the supreme
authority in the realm;
(2) the executive, which consists of: (a) the Cabinet and other Ministers of the
Crown, who are responsible for initiating and directing national policy;
(b) Government departments, most of them under the control of ministers
and all staffed by civil servants, who are responsible for administration at
the national level, (c) local authorities, who administer and manage many
services at the local level; and (d) statutory boards, which are severally
responsible for the operation of particular nationalised industries or public
services, and which are subject to ministerial control in varying degrees; and
(3) the judiciary, which determines common law and interprets statutes, and is
independent of both the legislature and the executive.
The following pages will describe these three organs of government in some detail in
order to show how the constitution of the United Kingdom works.
THE MONARCHY
The monarchy is the most ancient secular institution in the United Kingdom.
Its continuity has been broken only once in over a thousand years; and in spite of
interruptions in the direct line of succession, the hereditary principle upon which
it was founded has never been abandoned. Queen Elizabeth II is a descendant of the
Saxon king, Egbert, who united all England in the year 829, and of Malcolm II, whose
reign in Scotland (1005-34) was correspondingly important in that part of the realm.
According to the Royal Titles Act, 1953, the royal title in the United Kingdom is:
Elizabeth the Second, by the Grace of God of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland and of Her other Realms and Territories Queen, Head of the
Commonwealth, Defender of the Faith5. The form of the royal title is varied for the
other member nations of the Commonwealth which owe allegiance to the Crown, to
suit the particular circumstances of each.
The seat of the monarchy is in the United Kingdom, the Queen being represented
y a Governor in Northern Ireland. For the performance of royal functions in the
Channel Islands and the Isle of Man the Queen is represented by a Lieutenant-
Governor. In the-other member nations of the Commonwealth which owe allegiance
to the Crown, the Queen s representative is the Governor-General, who is appointed
by the Crown on the advice of the ministers of the country concerned and is wholly
independent of the United Kingdom Government. In the United Kingdom depen¬
dencies, the Queen is usually represented by Governors (but in some cases by High
28
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
-cyvZ
§1
< x..
□<3
« C
z eS
5 p
GOVERNMENT
29
Commissioners, Administrators or Residents), who are appointed by the Crown, have
varying executive and legislative powers, and are responsible to the United Kingdom
Government for the good government of the countries concerned.
Succession
The title to the Crown derives from the Act of Settlement, 1701, which provided
that ‘the Crown . . . shall remain and continue to the said most excellent Princess
Sophia1 and the heirs of her body being Protestants’. Subsequent Succession to the
Crown Acts have confirmed this declaration; and although succession is not bound to
continue in its present line, it cannot now be altered (under a provision of the Statute
of Westminster, 1931) except by common consent of the member nations of the
Commonwealth which owe allegiance to the Crown.
The inheritance of the Crown is governed by rules of descent, which provide that
the sons of the Sovereign are in Order of Succession to the Throne according to their
seniority, or, if there are no sons, the daughters in order of their seniority. When a
daughter succeeds, she becomes Queen-Regnant, and the powers of the Crown are
vested in her as fully and effectively as though she were a king. By convention the
consort of a king takes the rank and style of her husband; but the converse does not
apply, and the constitution has never attached any special rank or privileges to the
husband of the Queen-Regnant.
Accession
There is no interregnum between the death of one Sovereign and the accession of
another. Immediately on the death of his or her predecessor the new Sovereign is
proclaimed at an Accession Council to which all members of the Privy Council are
summoned. The Lords Spiritual and Temporal, the Lord Mayor, aldermen and other
ea mg citizens of the City of London, and the Pligh Commissioners in London of
the member nations of the Commonwealth are also invited to attend.
Coronation
The coronation of the Sovereign follows the accession after an interval which
may last for a year or more. The ceremony has remained much the same in substance
tor nearly a thousand years, although the details have frequently been modified to
brmg it into conformity with the customs of the time. The service used at the coronation
ot Queen Elizabeth II in 1953 was derived from that used at the coronation of King
Edgar at Bath in the year 973.
The coronation service is held at Westminster Abbey in the presence of repre¬
sentatives of the Lords, the Commons and all the great public interests in the United
ingdom, of the Prime Ministers and leading members of the other Commonwealth
countries, and of representatives of foreign States.
Acts of Government
The Queen is the personification of the State. In law, she is the head of the executive
an integral part of the legislature, the head of the judiciary in England and Wales’
JNorthern Ireland, and Scotland, the commander-in-chief of all the armed forces of
the Crown and the temporal head of the established Church of England. In practice,
as a result of a long evolutionary process during which the absolute power of the
monarchy has been progressively reduced, the Queen acts only on the advice of her
1 The Electress of Hanover, grand-daughter of James I.
3D BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
ministers which she cannot constitutionally ignore. She reigns, but she does not rule
The United Kingdom is governed by Her Majesty’s Government in the name of
Within this framework, and in spite of the fact that the trend of legislation during
the past hundred years has been to assign powers directly to ministers without any
necessity for royal intervention, there are still important acts of government which
require the participation of the Queen. _
The Queen summons, prorogues and dissolves Parliament; as a general rule she
opens the new session with a speech from the throne (although this may be read by
the Lord Chancellor if the Queen is unable to be present); and she must give Royal
Assent before a Bill which has passed all its stages in both Houses of Parliament
becomes a legal enactment. The Queen is ‘the fountain of justice’, and as such, can
remit all or part of the penalties imposed on people convicted of crime. As ‘the fountain
of honour’, the Queen confers peerages, baronetcies, knighthoods and other honours,1
and makes appointment to all important State offices, including those of judges,
officers in the armed forces, governors, and diplomats, and to all leading positions in
the established Church of England. The Queen’s consent and approval are required
before a minister can take up office or a Cabinet be formed. In the realm of international
affairs, by virtue of her pre-eminence as head of the State, the Queen has the power to
conclude treaties, to cede or accept territory, to declare war and to make peace.
These and similar acts of government involve the use of the royal prerogative2
which has been defined as ‘the residue of discretionary authority legally left in the
hands of the Crown’. Ministerial responsibility for the exercise of this authority is
shown in the three constitutional ways in which the royal will can be expressed: by
Order in Council made ‘by and with the advice of the Privy Council’; by Order,
Commission or Warrant signed personally by the Queen and generally bearing the
signature of one or more responsible ministers; or by Proclamation, Writs, Letters
Patent, or other documents under the Great Seal affixed by the Lord Chancellor in
obedience to a Royal Warrant countersigned by a minister.
Ministerial responsibility for the exercise of powers by the Crown does not detract
from the importance of the participation of the Sovereign in the smooth working of
government; for although the Queen has no personal authority and must show
complete impartiality in every field, she must be informed and consulted on
every aspect of the national life. The Queen holds meetings of the Privy Council,
gives audiences to her ministers and other holders of office at home and overseas,
receives accounts of Cabinet decisions, reads dispatches and signs innumerable State
papers.
Such is the significance attached to these royal functions that provision has been
made by Acts of Parliament for a Regent to be appointed to fulfil them if the Sovereign
is totally incapacitated, or is under the age of eighteen on accession to the throne.
The latest of these Acts—the Regency Act, 1953—laid down that the first potential
Regent should be the Duke of Edinburgh and thereafter the Princess Margaret and
1 Most honours are conferred by the Sovereign on the advice of the Prime Minister; a few,
i.e. the Order of Merit, the Order of Companions of Honour, the Royal Victorian Order, the Most
Noble Order of the Garter, and the Most Noble and Most Ancient Order of the Thistle, are
in the Sovereign’s personal gift.
2 Other powers of the Crown relate to the creation of corporations by Royal Charter; the
construction and supervision of harbours; the guardianship of infants; the administration of
charities; coinage; the grant of franchises, e.g., markets, ferries and fisheries; the right to treasure
trove; and the right of printing or licensing others to print the Bible, the Book of Common
Prayer and State papers.
GOVERNMENT
31
then those in succession to the throne who are of age. In the event of the Sovereign’s
partial incapacity or absence abroad, provision is made for the appointment of Coun¬
sellors of State (generally speaking, the wife or husband of the Sovereign, and the four
adult persons next in succession to the Crown'*') to whom the Sovereign may delegate
by Letters Patent certain royal functions. But Counsellors of State may not, for
instance, dissolve Parliament (except on the express instructions of the Sovereign),
nor create peers.
Ceremonial and Royal Visits
Ceremonial has always been associated with the kings and queens of the British
Isles, and in spite of the changes that have taken place with the altered outlook of
both the Sovereign and the people, certain customs and usages are the same today
as they were many centuries ago. Royal marriages, the birth of royal children and
royal funerals are still marked by ancient ceremonial, although to a lesser degree than
in former days; and the birthday of the Sovereign, formerly the occasion of many
royal and public functions, is today officially celebrated early in June by Trooping
the Colour on the Horse Guards Parade. State banquets still take place when a foreign
monarch or head of State visits the United Kingdom; investitures are still held at
Buckingham Palace, and royal processions continue to grace such social occasions
as the Ascot Race Meeting, known as Royal Ascot, and to add significance to the
opening of Parliament, when the Queen drives in state from Buckingham Palace.
The Sovereign is the leader of society by order of general precedence dating from
the fourteentn century and sustained until the present day by royal ordinances, ancient
usage, established custom and the public will. The Queen and other members of the
royal family visit many parts of the United Kingdom every year, and their presence at
the inauguration of scientific, artistic, industrial, and charitable works of national
importance ensures nation-wide interest and support. They also pay State visits to
foreign Governments and undertake lengthy tours in other countries of the
Commonwealth.
PARLIAMENT
The supreme legislative authority in the United Kingdom is the Queen in
Parliament, that is to say the Queen and the two Houses of Parliament—the House
of Lords and the elected House of Commons.
The three elements of Parliament are outwardly separate: they are constituted on
different principles; they do different work in different places and they meet together
only on occasions of symbolic significance such as the coronation, or the opening of
Parliament by the Queen in person, when the Commons are summoned by the Queen
to the House of Lords. As a law-making organ of State, however, Parliament is a
corporate body and cannot legislate without the concurrence of all its parts (except
in the case of measures passed under the Parliament Acts, 1911 and 1949).
The Parliament at Westminster is representative of all the countries of the United
Kingdom. It can legislate for the United Kingdom as a whole, for any of the constituent
countries separately, or for any combination of them. It can also legislate for the
Channel Islands and the Isle of Man, but in these islands and in Northern Ireland it is
not the only legislature, for the Northern Ireland Parliament has power to legislate for
1 The Regency Act, 1953, provided that Queen Elizabeth the Queen Mother should be
added to the persons to whom royal functions may be delegated as Counsellors of State.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
32
Northern Ireland on most domestic subjects (see p. 42), and the ancient legislatures
of the two Channel Island Bailiwicks (the States of Jersey and the States of Guernsey)
and of the Isle of Man (the Tynwald Court) legislate on domestic matters.1 Never¬
theless, the Parliament at Westminster retains supreme authority, and within practical
limits there is nothing that it cannot legally do.
By the passing of the Parliament Act, 1911, the life of a United Kingdom Parliament
was fixed at five years (although it is usually dissolved and a general election held
before the expiry of the legal term); and since one Parliament cannot bind its successor
(for otherwise the succeeding Parliament would not be sovereign or supreme), each
assembly has a period of time of up to five years during which it may legislate exactly
as it chooses. During its life, it can make or unmake any law; it can destroy by statute
the most firmly established convention or turn a convention into binding law; it can
legalise past illegalities and thus reverse the decisions of the courts; and it even has
power to prolong its own life by legislative means beyond the normal period of five
years without consulting the electorate.
In law, therefore, the supremacy of Parliament is absolute. In practice, Parliament
does not exercise its supremacy in this way. In the first place, pressure of business
in recent decades has resulted in a large and increasing amount of delegation of legis¬
lative authority to ministers and of specific powers to local authorities and to public
corporations of various kinds; powers delegated in this way could, of course, be
withdrawn by Parliament, but existing demands on parliamentary time make such
a development extremely unlikely. Secondly, the system of party government in the
United Kingdom effectively discourages Parliament from acting in too arbitrary a
fashion; any parliamentary majority which abused its powers would almost certainly
lose electoral support.
The Meeting of Parliament
A Parliament, in the sense of a parliamentary period, begins and ends with a pro¬
clamation made by the Sovereign on the advice of the Privy Council. Such a proclama¬
tion, on the one hand dissolves an existing Parliament and, on the other, orders
the issue of writs for the election of a new one and appoints the day and place of
its meeting.
The resignation of a government usually entails the dissolution of Parliament.
Formerly the death of a Sovereign also involved dissolution, but since 1867 the duration
of Parliament has been independent of the demise of the Crown; both Houses stand
adjourned on such an occasion only until their members have taken the oath of
allegiance to the new Sovereign, which they do immediately after the Accession Council
has made the order for proclamation.
The time between the meeting of a Parliament and its prorogation or dissolution
is called a session. Parliament is usually prorogued by a commission under the Great
Seal (see p. 30), which appoints the day and place of its meeting in a new session.
The date so appointed may be brought forward or deferred by a subsequent proclama¬
tion. The effect of a prorogation is at once to terminate all business until Parliament
is summoned again. A measure not completed in one session must be reintroduced in
the next, unless it is to be abandoned.
1 The legislatures of the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man consist of the Queen, the Privy
Council and the local assemblies. It is the duty of the Home Secretary, as the member of the
Privy Council primarily concerned with island affairs, to scrutinise each legislative measure
before it is submitted to the Queen in Council
GOVERNMENT
33
During a session, either House may adjourn itself on its own motion to such
date as it pleases. An adjournment does not affect uncompleted business. A reassembly
of the House can be accelerated either by proclamation or by virtue of powers specially
conferred by each House on its Speaker.
The average number of sitting days for the House of Commons is about 160,
divided by custom into the following periods: one from November until Christmas
lasting 30-40 sitting days, one from January to Easter of 40-50 sitting days, one from
Easter until Whitsun of about 30 sitting days, and one from Whitsun until the end of
July lasting about 40 sitting days. Nowadays, the session is sometimes concluded
with a short period of about 10 sitting days in October, after the long summer recess.
The House of Lords sits, on average, for about no days.
The House of Lords
The House of Lords consists of just over 900 peers, as follows1:
(1) The Lords Temporal, sub-divided into (i) all hereditary peers of the realm,2
except Scottish and Irish peers, (ii) all life peers created by the Crown under
the Life Peerages Act, 1958,3 (iii) sixteen representative peers of Scotland,
who are elected for each Parliament by all the holders of Scottish peerages in
accordance with the provisions of the Treaty of Union, 1707, and (iv) nine
Lords of Appeal in Ordinary ( Law Lords’), who are appointed under the
terms of the Appellate Jurisdiction Act, 1876, to assist the House in the
performance of its judicial duties and who remain members of the House
after their retirement from office.
(2) The Lords Spiritual, who are the Archbishops of Canterbury and York, the
Bishops of London, Durham and Winchester, and the 21 most senior other
diocesan bishops of tne Church of England, according to seniority of appoint¬
ment.
Temporal peerages (both hereditary and life) are conferred by the Sovereign on the
advice of the Prime Minister. Hereditary peerages carry with them, for men over
21 years of age, a right to a seat in the House of Lords,4 but, according to standing
orders promulgated by that House in 1958, holders are asked at the beginning of each
Parliament whether they will attend the sittings of the House as often as they reason¬
ably can or whether they desire to be relieved of the obligation to attend. If they do so
desire, they are requested to apply for leave of absence, either for the duration of the
Parliament or for a shorter period, during which time they are not expected to attend
the House.
Peers in constant attendance at the House of Lords are generally elder statesmen
and others who have spent their lives in public service. They receive no salary for their
parliamentary work, but they are entitled to travelling expenses from their homes to
■a seLct committee, representing both Houses of Parliament, has been set up to con¬
sider the composition of the House of Lords.
2 Including peerages of Great Britain (those created between the Treaty for the Union of
England and Scotland m 1707, and 1800), and of the United Kingdom (those created after the
Act tor the Union of Great Britain and Ireland, 1800). By the Act for the Union of Great Britain
ana Ireland, the Irish peers were entitled to elect 28 representative peers as life members of the
tiouse ot Lords, but no elections have been held since the creation of the Irish Free State (now
tne Irish Republic) in 1922, and no Irish peers now remain.
In August 1961 there were 33 such life peers, of whom 6 were women.
4 Except for a peer who is disqualified as an alien, a person convicted of treason and felony
no has not yet served his sentence or been pardoned, a member expelled by the House sitting
as a court of law, unless pardoned, or a bankrupt.
2^ BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
the Palace of Westminster (provided they attend at least one-third of the number
of sittings), and (with the exception of the Lord Chancellor, the Loid Chairman of
Committees and any member in receipt of a salary as the holder of a ministerial office)
they may claim payment for expenses incurred for the purpose of attendance at the
House (except for judicial sittings) within a maximum of three guineas a day.
The House of Lords is presided over by the Lord Chancellor, who sits on the wool¬
sack and is ex officio Speaker of the House. The Crown, by commission under the Great
Seal, appoints several peers to take their place on the woolsack in order of precedence
as deputy speakers in the absence of the Lord Chancellor. The first of the deputy
speakers is the Lord Chairman of Committees, who is appointed each session and takes
the chair in all committees, unless the House otherwise directs. The permanent
officers include the Clerk of the Parliaments, who is charged with keeping the records
of proceedings and judgments and who pronounces the words of the Royal Assent
to Bills; the Gentleman Usher of the Black Rod, who enforces the orders of the House;
and the Serjeant-at-Arms, who attends the Lord Chancellor.
The House of Commons
The House of Commons is a representative assembly elected by almost universal
adult suffrage and consists of men and women from all sections of the community.
There are at present 630 members of the House of Commons (511 for England,
36 for Wales, 71 for Scotland, 12 for Northern Ireland).
Members of the House of Commons receive a salary for their parliamentary work
and hold their seats during the life of a Parliament. They are elected either at a genera
election, which takes place after a Parliament has been dissolved and a new one
summoned by the Sovereign, or at a by-election, which is held when a vacancy occurs
in the House as a result of the death or resignation of a member or as a result of the
elevation of a member of the House of Commons to the House of Lords.
The chief officer of the House of Commons is the Speaker, who is elected by the
members as president of the House immediately after a new Parliament is formed.
Other parliamentary officers of the House are the Chairman of Ways and Means, and
the Deputy-Chairman, both of whom may act as Deputy Speaker; these officers are
elected by the House. Non-parliamentary or permanent officers of the House, i.e. those
who are not members of Parliament, include the Clerk of the House of Commons, who
is charged with such matters as keeping the records, endorsing Bills and signing orders;
the Serjeant-at-Arms, who attends the Speaker in the House; and the Chaplain to the
Speaker.
Parliamentai-y Electoral System
For electoral purposes, the United Kingdom is divided into constituencies, each
of which returns one member to Parliament. Permanent Boundary Commissions for
England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland keep constituencies constantly under
review and may recommend changes in the boundaries of any particular constituency
or constituencies if, for instance, movement of the population has made this necessary.
Changes in the boundaries of constituencies which came into effect for the 1955
general election increased the number of seats in the House of Commons from 625 to
the present figure of 630.
The law relating to parliamentary elections is contained principally in the Represen¬
tation of the People Act, i949> which repeals and re-enacts in a single statute previous
legislation relating to the franchise, the conduct of elections and corrupt and illegal
electoral practices. Under the provisions of this Act, election to the House of Commons
GOVERNMENT
35
is decided by secret ballot in which British subjects (except members of the House of
Lords) and citizens of the Irish Republic are entitled to vote (although voting is not
compulsory), provided that they are 21 years old or over, and are not subject to any
legal incapacity to vote. Those eligible to vote in any constituency are those who are
on the register1 of electors for the constituency and are resident there on a date fixed
by statute. Electors normally vote in person at polling stations especially established
for the purpose, although members of the armed forces, Crown servants of the United
Kingdom employed overseas, and the wives of such persons if resident overseas with
their husbands may vote by proxy. Voting by post, or in certain cases by proxy, may
also be allowed if the voter cannot attend in person for such reasons as physical
incapacity or the nature of his work. Any person, male or female, who is a British
subject of 21 years of age or over and is not otherwise disqualified, may be elected to
the House of Commons. Categories of persons disqualified for election include peers
(other than certain Irish peers), clergy of the Church of England, the Church of
Scotland, the Church of Ireland, and the Roman Catholic Church, undischarged
bankrupts, and those expressly precluded under the House of Commons Disqualifi¬
cation Act, 1957 (f°r instance, holders of judicial offices, civil servants, members of
the regular armed forces and the police forces, members of the legislature of any
country or territory outside the Commonwealth, and holders of other public offices
listed in the Act).
Parliamentary Privilege
Each House of Parliament enjoys certain privileges and immunities designed to
protect the House from unnecessary obstruction in carrying out its duties. These
privileges apply collectively to each House and individually to each member.
In the House of Commons, the Speaker formally claims from the Crown for the
Commons ‘their ancient and undoubted rights and privileges’ at the beginning of
each Parliament. These include freedom from arrest in civil proceedings for a period
from forty days before to forty days after a session of Parliament; freedom of speech in
debate, and the right of access to the Crown, which is a collective privilege of the
House. Further privileges include the right of the House to control its own proceedings
(so that it is able, for example, to exclude strangers if it so wishes); the right to pro¬
nounce upon legal disqualifications for membership and to declare a seat vacant on
such grounds; and the right to penalise those who commit a breach of its privileges.
The privileges of the House of Lords are: freedom from civil arrest; freedom of
speech in debate, freedom of access to the Sovereign for each peer individually; and
the right to commit for contempt. These privileges are not formally claimed by the
Speaker as in the House of Commons; they exist independently without grant.
The Party System
The party system has existed in one form or another since the seventeenth century,
and has now become an essential element in the working of the constitution.
The present system is based upon the existence of organised political parties,
each laying rival policies before the electorate. Whenever there is a general election
or a by-election, the parties put up candidates for election; any other citizen who wishes
may also stand.2 The electorate then indicates, by its choice of candidate at the poll
1 ^ register containing the names of all electors, prepared for each constituency and published
yearly by registration officers, who in England and Wales are usually the clerks of local councils
ana in bcotland are the land valuation assessors.
the gen<rral Section of October 1959, nearly all constituencies were contested by Labour
and Conservative candidates; Liberal candidates numbered 216. The number of Independents
ana ot candidates representing other political parties was very small.
^6 BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
on election day, which of the opposing policies it would like to see put into effect.
The party which wins the majority of seats (although not necessarily tne majority
of votes) at a general election, or which is able to command a majority of supporters
in the House of Commons, forms the Government. By tradition, the leader of the
majority party is appointed as Prime Minister by the Sovereign, usually on the
advice of the retiring Prime Minister; and its most outstanding members in the House
of Lords and the House of Commons receive ministerial appointments on tne advice
of the Prime Minister. The largest minority party becomes the official Opposition
with its own leader and its own council of discussion or ‘shadow Cabinet’; while
the members of any other parties or any Independents who have been elected may
support the Government or the Opposition according to their party’s or their own
view of the policy being debated at any given time.
In the general election held in October 1959, 787 per cent of the electorate voted,
compared with 83*6 per cent in i95°> 8*’9 per cent in 1951 and 7^'^ per cent in i955‘
The number of votes cast for the principal parties is shown in Table 3.
TABLE 3
Votes cast at General Elections 1950-59
Party
Conservative and
supporters
Labour (and
Co-operative)
Liberal
Communist
Others(c) ..
1950 (a)
12,501,983
13,295,736
2,621,489
91,815
258,454
1951 (a)
13,724,418
13,948,385
730,551
21,640
177,329
1955
13,310,891
12,405,254(6)
722,402
33,144
288,038
1959
13,750,965
12,216,166
1,640,761
30,897
223,949
(a) Figures for 1950 and 1951 exclude those few constituencies for which candidates were
returned unopposed. All seats were contested in 1955 and 1959.
(b) Includes Northern Ireland Labour (35,614).
(c) ‘Others’ include Welsh and Scottish Nationalists, Independent Labour, other Indepen¬
dents, Irish Labour, Irish Nationalist, Irish Anti-Partitionist, and Sinn Fein.
The distribution of seats in the House of Commons resulting from the general
elections of 1955 and 1959 is shown in Table 4.
TABLE 4
Seats Gained at General Elections in 1955 and 1959
1955
Conservative and supporters 347
Labour .. .. .. 277
Liberal .. .. .. 6
630
1959
Conservative and supporters 365(a)
Labour .. .. .. 258
Liberal .. .. .. 6
Independent .. .. 1
630
(a) A majority of 100 over all other parties. This was the first time since the establishment of
the modern party system in Britain in the nineteenth century that a party had increased its
parliamentary strength in four successive general elections and the first time that a party had
retained office after being in power for the duration of two full Parliaments.
GOVERNMENT
37
1 he effectiveness of the party system in Parliament rests to a considerable extent
upon the fact that Government and Opposition alike are carried on by agreement:
that is to say, the minority agrees that the majority must govern and therefore accepts
its decisions; and the majority agrees that the minority should criticise and therefore
sets time aside for that criticism to be heard. The detailed arrangements of Government
business are settled, under the Prime Minister and the Leader of the House (who may
be the Prime Minister or some other minister), by the Government Chief Whip in
consultation with the Opposition Chief Whip. The Chief Whips together form the
usual channels often referred to in the House of Commons when the question of the
possibility of finding time for debating some particular issue is being discussed. The
direction of the business of the House is primarily the responsibility of the Leader of
the House, and it is his duty to provide all reasonable facilities for the House to debate
matters about which it is concerned.
Outside Parliament, party control is exercised by the national and local organisations.
Inside Parliament, it is exercised by the Whips (the Chief Whips and their assistants
chosen within the party or by the Prime Minister for the Government party), whose
duties include maintaining the voting strength of their parties by ensuring the atten¬
dance of members at important debates. The Opposition Whips have no official
position, but the Government Chief Whip in the House of Commons is the Parlia¬
mentary Secretary to the Treasury and the other Government Whips hold titular
posts as Junior Lords of the Treasury or members of the Royal Household. There are
also Government and Opposition Whips in the House of Lords. The former, who
hold offices in the Royal Household, sometimes act as spokesmen for the Government
in debates.
The Functions of Parliament
The main functions of Parliament are (i) to make laws regulating the life of the
community, (2) to take formal action, cast in legislative form, to make available finance
for the needs of the community and to appropriate the funds necessary for the services
0 the State, and (3) to criticise and control the Government. By custom, Parliament
is also consulted before the ratification of certain international treaties and agreements
(in spite of the fact that the making of treaties is a royal prerogative exercised on the
advice of the Government and, in theory, is not subject to parliamentary approval).
Parliamentary Procedure
Both Houses of Parliament have their own standing orders, but procedure is based
on custom and precedent (much of which dates back to the beginning of the sixteenth
century and even earlier) rather than on the written orders, which merely supplement
the practice in each House. The system of debate is much the same in the two Houses
except that in the House of Commons the Speaker has a far greater measure of control.
In the House of Lords the office of Speaker could be held by a commoner, since the
woolsack on which the Lord Chancellor sits as Speaker is technically outside the
precincts of the House,1 but in fact, the holder of the office is always created a peer.
The office carries with it no inherent authority to check or curtail debate, such matters
being decided by the general sense of the House and not by rulings of its Speaker.
In the Commons, the Speaker presides over the House, enforces the rules of debate
and decides questions of order. He must carefully guard against abuse of procedure or
1 When the Lord Chancellor takes part in the debates of the House of Lords (as he frequently
does), he moves away from the woolsack.
38
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
any infringement of minority rights, and it is his duty to allow or disallow any closure
motion (i.e. a motion to curtail or end discussion so that the matter may be put to the
vote). He has certain powers to check irrelevance and repetition in debate, and to save
the time of the House in various other respects. In cases of grave disorder, he has
power to adjourn the House or suspend the sitting on his own initiative.
Voting in the House of Commons is carried out under the direction of the Speaker,
and it is his duty to pronounce the final result. If an equal number of votes is cast, the
Speaker must give the decisive vote; he does this (if possible) in such a way as to avoid
change and leave the question to be debated on another occasion. The procedure on
voting in the House of Lords is similar to that in the House of Commons, but the
Speaker or chairman has no casting vote. With the exception of questions relating
to Bills and delegated legislation, the House of Lords is governed by the principle that
unless there is a majority in favour, the question is decided in the negative. When the
House is sitting judicially (see pp. 91 and 93) question is put in such a way that, if
the votes were equal, there would be no interference with the order under appeal.
The Speaker of the House of Commons has the responsibility of deciding whether
a Bill is a Money Bill (i.e. a Bill dealing only with national taxation and finance); and
who, in case of doubt, is the Leader of the Opposition. He is also responsible for such
matters as the decision whether a prima facie case has been made against persons
accused of breach of privilege; the issue of warrants for elections to fill vacancies in
the House; and the appointment of the chairmen of the standing committees.
As a rule, all proceedings of either House are public (the right to debate in secret is
exercised only rarely), and a verbatim record is published daily in the official reports,
Parliamentary Debates [Hansard).
Legislation
Legislation can be initiated from either side of the House; but no Bill involving
taxation or the spending of public money can proceed very far unless the Government
agrees to introduce a ‘financial resolution’ to cover it. This has the effect of giving the
Government exclusive rights over a wide field of legislation, and as a result most
Public Bills are presented by the Government. However, private members (i.e.
members of the House who are neither office holders in the Government nor Opposi¬
tion leaders) can introduce Public Bills on their own initiative, and such Bills can be
debated on certain days expressly set aside for the purpose in each session.1 Peers can
introduce Public Bills in the House of Lords at any time during a session without
notice. In addition, persons and bodies outside Parliament can introduce Private Bills
relating solely to matters of individual, corporate or local interest.
Bills may originate in either House, unless they deal with finance or representation
when they are always introduced in the Commons. As a rule, however, Bills likely to
raise political controversy go through the Commons before the Lords, while those of
an intricate but uncontroversial nature are frequently introduced and fully discussed
in the Lords before being sent to the Commons.
The process of passing a Public Bill is basically the same in the House of Lords as
in the House of Commons. The Bill receives a formal First Reading on introduction;
it is then printed; and after a period of time (which varies between one and several
weeks depending on the nature of the Bill) it may be given a Second Reading as the
1 Private members also have the right of moving for leave to introduce Bills after question
time (see p. 41) on certain days under the ‘Ten Minute Rule’, i.e. the Standing Order which
allows a brief speech proposing and another opposing the introduction of the Bill, before the House
decides whether or not to grant leave.
GOVERNMENT
39
result of a debate on its general merits or principles. It is then referred for detailed
examination (m the Commons) either to a standing committee or, if the House so
decides to the whole House sitting in committee; and, in the Lords, to a committee
of the whole House. When the committee stage is finished, the Bill is reported to the
House, and a further stage takes place during which the committee’s amendments
may be altered, additional amendments may be suggested and incorporated, and
if necessary, the Bill may be recommitted to committee. Finally, it is submitted for a
Third Reading and, if passed, it is sent on from the Commons to the Lords or from
the Lords to the Commons (depending on its place of origin), where it enters on
the same course again. Any amendments which the second House makes to the
i must be agreed to by the first House, or a compromise reached, before the Bill
becomes law.
An exception to this procedure is made in the case of some financial Bills, such as
the Finance Bill, which authorises annual taxation and amends existing taxation
and the Appropriation Bill, which authorises expenditure on the Supply Services
from the Consolidated Fund. As a general rule, these Bills are introduced upon resolu-
tions in a committee of the whole House of Commons and they may be initiated only
by a Minister of the Crown.
When Bills have passed through their various parliamentary stages, they are sent
to the Sovereign for Royal Assent, now usually given by commission. The Sovereign’s
power to refuse assent has not been exercised since the early eighteenth century.
The majority of Bills introduced in the House of Lords pass through the Commons
without difficulty because of their non-controversial nature; they are then returned
to the Lords to be brought forward for Royal Assent. However, should any Lords
Bill be unacceptable to the Commons, it would never reach the Statute Book, for no
e ating time would be allotted to it at any rate until a new government came into
power, when it might be revived. The Lords, on the other hand, are unlikely to be
a le to prevent a Bill insisted upon by the Commons from finally becoming law. In
the normal course of events, they either accept a Bill from the Commons and return
it unchanged; or they revise and improve it by amendments and return it for the
consideration of members of the other House, who frequently agree to the amend¬
ments made. The Lords cannot require the Commons to agree to amendments-
nor can they delay a Bill indefinitely. They have no powers in respect of Money Bills;
and since the passing of the Parliament Act, 1949, any other Public Bill which has been
passed by the House of Commons in two successive sessions may be presented for
Royal Assent without the consent of the Lords, provided that a year has elapsed
between the date of the Second Reading of the Bill in the Commons and the date on
which it is finally passed in that House. These limitations to the powers of the Lords
are based on the belief that the chief value of the Upper House, which is a non-elected
assembly, lies in bringing the wide experience of its members into the legislative
process, not in thwarting the elected House. In other words, proceedings in the House
ot Lords give time for further reflection, and often elicit new points of view.
In substance, a Private Bill goes through the same procedure as a Public Bill, but
most of the work is done in committee where the promoters must prove the need for
the powers or privileges that they seek and where any objections raised by opposing
interests may be heard. J 6
Parliamentary Committees
A committee of the whole House is the House itself, presided over by a chairman
instead ot the Speaker. Its function is to consider Bills in detail, clause by clause, after
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
40
their Second Reading. The Committees of Supply and of Ways and Means are
committees of the whole House of Commons, which discharge the financial duties of
the House concerning the grant of public money and the levying of taxation.
There are two other main kinds of parliamentary committee, both of which exist
to a varying degree to relieve their parent House of some of its more specialised and
complex work. They are:
(1) Standing Committees, which are appointed by the House of Commons as
necessary, for the consideration of Bills and other Dusiness committed to
them. With the exception of the Scottish Standing and Grand Committees1
(which deal with Public Bills and other matters relating to Scotland), and the
Welsh Grand Committee2 (which considers the annual report for Wales and
certain selected subjects for debate), each standing committee consists of
from thirty to fifty members nominated by the Committee of Selection (a
body of eleven members drawn from the main parties in the House at the
beginning of each session); in all cases the parties are represented in proportion
to their numbers in the House. The procedure of a standing committee is
generally similar to that of a committee of the whole House.
(2) Select Committees, including joint select committees of both Houses, which
are appointed to inquire into and report to the House on special matters.
Some of these, such as the Select Committees on Public Accounts, on Statutory
Instruments, and on the nationalised industries, tend to be re-appointed each
session. Others are set up as and when required.
Various other committees exist to deal with Private Bill legislation. There are
also a number of unofficial committees, consisting either of one party or of members
of all parties, such as study groups concerning themselves with particular issues,
e.g., the Parliamentary and Scientific Committee; and parliamentary party committees,
e.g., the Labour Policy Committee, and the Conservative and Unionist Members
Committee, popularly known as the 1922 Committee.
Delegated Legislation
Delegated legislation, which is legislation not by the direct functioning of Parlia¬
ment, but by powers conferred on the executive by Act of Parliament (or, more rarely,
by royal prerogative), has been part of the parliamentary system for at least six hundred
years. Parliament, however, made but sparing use of its power to delegate legislation
(except during a period of social, political and economic change in the second half of
the fifteenth and most of the sixteenth centuries) until the end of the nineteenth
century, when a changing conception of the part that should be played by the State
in the life of the community made inroads upon parliamentary time and thus caused
the system to be adopted on a more extensive scale. With the ever-increasing scope of
Government activity during the past sixty years, pressure on parliamentary time has
become even more acute; as a result, the system of delegated legislation created under
statutory powers has become generally accepted.
1 The Scottish Standing Committee consists of thirty members nominated from Scottish con¬
stituencies with up to twenty other nominated members, and the Scottish Grand Committee
contains all the members for the Scottish constituencies, and not more than fifteen others.
2 The Welsh Grand Committee consists of 36 members for constituencies in Wales and
Monmouthshire, with up to 25 other nominated members selected in order to make the balance
of parties in the committee approximate to that in the whole House.
GOVERNMENT
41
The system of delegated legislation empowers ministers and other authorities to
regulate administrative details after a Bill has become an Act. Its advantages are said1
to be: (1) that it shortens and clarifies Bills before Parliament, thus enabling Parliament
to deal with a greater volume of business and to give fuller attention to matters of
policy and principle which are its primary concern; (2) that it encourages flexibility
in that administrative details can be worked out as and when the necessity arises
with greater care and minuteness, and with better adaptation to local and other
special circumstances than they possibly can be during the passage of a Bill through
Parliament ; (3) that it is invaluable in an emergency, for it is ‘the means by which the
legislature can dispense with its own deliberative procedure and arm the executive
with power to take immediate action’; and (4) that it provides a speedy, convenient
and accurate means of giving effect to the policy of Parliament.
In order to minimise the risk—inherent in the system—that delegated legislative
powers might supersede or weaken parliamentary government, such powers are
normally delegated to the Queen in Council or to authorities directly responsible to
ar lament, i.e. to Ministers of the Crown, to Government departments for which
ministers are responsible, or to organisations whose legislation is subject to con-
nrmation or approval by ministers who thereby become responsible to Parliament
or it. Moreover the Act which delegates legislative power generally defines the precise
limits of this power and, in the more important cases, gives Parliament the right to
confirm or annul the statutory instruments2 by which delegated legislation is enacted.
Certain Acts also require direct consultation with organisations which will be affected
by delegated legislation before such legislation is made.
The House of Commons is aided in its supervision of delegated legislation by the
elect Committee on Statutory Instruments, which is set up each session to report on
the unusual or unexpected use of statutory powers. The Special Orders Committee of
the House of Lords examines and reports on all Statutory Instruments requiring
affirmative resolution. n °
Parliamentary Control
arhament s function of controlling the Government in power is exercised in the
final analysis by the power of the House of Commons to pass a resolution of ‘no
confidence in the Government, or to reject a proposal which the Government considers
so vital to its policy that it has made it a ‘matter of confidence’, thus forcing the Govern¬
ment to resign.
The financial control necessary to ensure that money shall be spent only with the
authority of Parliament and for the purposes authorised by Parliament is described
in Chapter XIII, Finance. Methods of general control are provided by:
(1) the institution of Question Time, which is a daily hour of parliamentary
time during which ministers, in rotation, answer questions put to them on
matters for which they are responsible, thus focusing the attention of the
public on the day-to-day processes of government;
(2) the practice whereby the consideration of the Estimates, in Committee of
bylr0Cecn in 1893 and quoted in Concerning English Administrative Law,
uy oir '-ecu <-arr. Uxlord University Press. 1942. pp. 33-34.
me2ntsAUrtr0Tn1^StrTelntS 3re ,mfde Y1 acY°rdJance with the Provisions of the Statutory Instru-
delegated ieHslab-on11^1^63^ ^ rfplacYd RuIes Publication Act, 1893. Instruments of
(‘SR & O ’) made under the Act of 1893 were known as ‘statutory rules and orders’
42
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Supply, has ceased to be a consideration of the financial requirements of
the Government and has become an occasion, initiated by the Opposition,
for the examination of some aspect of the Governments administrative
policy which has been included in the Estimates;
(,) the practice of bringing on a debate later in the same day by moving the
adjournment of the House, which is permitted only if the matter is deemed
by the Speaker to be definite, urgent, of public importance, and to be the
responsibility of the Government, and if 40 members rise m their places to
support it, or 10 members rise and the House grants leave on a division,
(4) the right of members to raise any matter on the motion for the adjournment
of the House at the end of each day’s sitting; and
(5) the power of either House to confirm or annul some statutory instruments.
In addition, Government policy and action are fully discussed in the important
debates which take place during the proceedings at the opening of Parliament and
in the motion for the adjournment of the House before a recess.
Public Interest in Parliament
The public’s interest in the work of Parliament is shown by the queues which form
outside the Houses of Parliament for admission to the public galleries, by the growth
in the circulation of the daily official report {Hansard) which at present is between
three and four times the pre-war figure, and by the large audiences which listen to the
regular broadcast programmes about parliamentary proceedings.
The major news agencies and national newspapers have special parliamentary
correspondents to report on parliamentary activities. A television broadcast of the
State opening of Parliament was transmitted for the first time in 1958. The Hansard
Society for Parliamentary Government, an unofficial non-party educational society
which was founded in 1944’ continues to promote interest in parliamentary affairs.
The Northern Ireland Parliament
The Parliament of Northern Ireland consists of the Sovereign, a Senate and a House
of Commons. The Sovereign is represented in Northern Ireland by a Governor,
who summons, prorogues and dissolves Parliament in Her Majesty’s name; the
Senate is composed of two ex officio senators (the Lord Mayor of Belfast and the Mayor
of Londonderry) together with 24 senators elected by the House of Commons accord¬
ing to the principle of proportional representation; and the House of Commons con¬
sists of 52 members, elected by a system of parliamentary franchise similar to that
which operates in Great Britain. The House, unless sooner dissolved, continues in
existence for a period of five years.
The Northern Ireland Parliament has power to make laws for the peace, order and
good government of Northern Ireland in relation to all matters except those especially
reserved to the Parliament of the United Kingdom, i.e. the Crown or succession to
the Crown; foreign relations; defence; the postal services; the Supreme Court;
customs and excise; income and profits taxes; coinage; standards of weights and
measures; trade marks; submarine cables; wireless telegraphy; aerial navigation; and
lighthouses, buoys and beacons. The Northern Ireland Parliament is prohibited
from making laws which would interfere with religious freedom, and from taking
property without compensation.
In consequence of these reservations, provision was made in the Government of
Ireland Act, 1920, for the continued representation of the Northern Ireland con-
GOVERNMENT
43
stituencies in the House of Commons of the United Kingdom; in accordance with this
provision, 12 members are returned to Westminster.
THE PRIVY COUNCIL
Until the eighteenth century, the Sovereign in Council, or Privy Council, was the
chief source of executive power in the State. As the system of Cabinet government
developed however the Privy Council declined in importance; many of its powers were
transferred to the Cabinet, and much of its work was handed over to newly created
Government departments. The present-day Privy Council exists mainly to give
enect to policy decisions made elsewhere.
Apart from Cabinet Ministers, who must be Privy Counsellors and are sworn of
the Council on first assuming office, membership of the Privy Council (which is
retained for life) is accorded by the Sovereign on the recommendation of the Prime
Ml1n11.Ster-aS an honour t0 persons who have reached eminence in some branch of
public affairs in any country of the Commonwealth. In August 1961 there were some
300 Privy Counsellors.
Procedure and Functions
The Privy Council is convened by the Clerk of the Council and is usually presided
over by the Sovereign. Three Privy Counsellors form a quorum, but, as a rule not
fewer than four are summoned to attend. The whole Privy Council is called together
only on the death of the Sovereign or when the Sovereign announces his or her
intention to marry.
The Privy Council is responsible for the submission for the Sovereign’s approval
of Orders in Council, of which there are two kinds, differing fundamentally in con¬
stitutional principle: those made by virtue of the royal prerogative, for example
those embodying royal instructions to colonial Governors; and those which are
authorised by Act of Parliament and are a form of delegated legislation. Members of
the Privy Council attending meetings at which Orders in Council are made do not
t ereby become personally responsible for the policy upon which the orders are based*
t is rests with the ministers in whose departments the draft orders were framed'
urf i.7 ^ PreSent at the meeting °r not Certain 0rders in Council must be
published m the London Gazette, which is an official periodical published by the
authority of the Government.
The Privy Council also advises the Crown on the issue of royal proclamations, some
of the most important of which relate to prerogative acts (such as summoning or
dissolving Parliament) of the same validity as Acts of Parliament.
Committees of the Privy Council
There are a number of Privy Council committees whose meetings differ from those
of the full Privy Council in that the Sovereign cannot constitutionally be present. These
comiruttees, which have advisory functions, may be prerogative, such as the committee
which deals with legislative matters submitted by the legislatures of the Channel
Islands and the Isle of Man, and the committees for medical research, scientific and
industrial research, agricultural research, overseas research, and nature conservation;
or they may be provided for by statute as are those for the universities of Oxford and
Cambridge and the Scottish universities, and that which deals with applications for
the grant of charters to municipal corporations.
i ^ BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The administrative work of the Privy Council committees is carried out m the Privy
Council Office under the control of the Lord President of the Council (see below).
Judicial Committee
The Judicial Committee of the Privy Council is the final court of appeal on a number
of legal issues arising in some member nations of the Commonwealth and in the
United Kingdom dependent territories. Its appellate jurisdiction derives from the
principle of English common law which recognises ‘the right of all the King s subjects
to appeal for redress to the Sovereign in Council’ if they believe that the courts of
law have failed to do them justice. .
Appeals come to the Judicial Committee in limited categories of cases where a right
of appeal has been specially created, for example, by Statute, Order in Council or
Letters Patent, or by special leave of the Sovereign in Council on the advice of the
Judicial Committee. They are heard by a board of the committee, whose members are
generally selected from the Lord Chancellor, ex-Lord Chancellors and Lords of
Appeal in Ordinary, although other members of the Privy Council who have held high
judicial office (including Chief Justices and certain other judges from other Common¬
wealth countries who have been sworn of the Privy Council) may also be asked to
sit when business is heavy.
HER MAJESTY’S GOVERNMENT
Her Majesty’s Government is the body of ministers charged for the time being
with the administration of national affairs.
Composition
The composition of the Government is subject to variation from time to time, both
in the number of ministers and in the titles of some offices. The usual ministerial
offices may be classified under the following heads:
1. The Prime Minister, who is the recognised head of the Government bat has
no department.
2. Departmental Ministers, some of whom are known as Secretaries of State.
There are at present seven Secretaries of State—for the Home Department,
Foreign Affairs, Scotland, Commonwealth Relations, Colonies, War, and Air.
The more recently created posts usually have the formal title of Minister. A
few of the older posts have special titles: the Chancellor of the Exchequer (who
is responsible for the Treasury and for a number of other departments); the
President of the Board of Trade; the First Lord of the Admiralty; and the
Postmaster General.
3. Non-Departmental Ministers, or ministers who are the holders of various
traditional offices, including the Lord President of the Council, the Lord
Privy Seal, the Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster,1 the Paymaster-General
and, at present, a Minister without Portfolio. Usually these ministers have
few or no departmental duties and are thus available to perform any special
functions which the Prime Minister may wish to entrust to them. For example,
in the present Government, the Lord President of the Council has been
1 The Duchy of Lancaster is an inheritance which, since 1399, has always been enjoyed by the
reigning Sovereign; it is kept quite apart from his or her other possessions and is separately
administered by the Chancellor.
GOVERNMENT
45
entrusted with the general duty of promoting scientific and technological
development as Minister for Science; the Chancellor of the Duchy of Lan¬
caster is responsible for the co-ordination of the Government Information
Services; and the Lord Privy Seal handles Foreign Office business in the
House of Commons, the Secretary of State being a member of the House of
Lords.
4- The Lord Chancellor and the Law Officers. The Lord Chancellor has depart¬
mental functions; he is also in a somewhat special position as a Minister of
the tu-own who is also head of the judiciary in England and Wales. The four
Law Ameers 0f the Crown are: for England and Wales, the Attorney General
and the Solicitor General; for Scotland, the Lord Advocate and the Solicitor
General for Scotland.
5. Ministers of State, who are deputy ministers in Government departments
where the work is particularly heavy and complex, or when it involves frequent
travelling overseas. There is now a Minister of State in the Foreign Office
one m the Home Office, one in the Colonial Office, and one at the Board of
1 rack. In addition, the Secretary of State for Scotland is assisted by a Minister
of State, and there is a Minister of State for Welsh Affairs.
6. Junior Ministers, who generally have the title of Parliamentary Secretary or
where the senior minister is a Secretary of State, Parliamentary Under¬
secretary of State. The primary function of most junior ministers is to relieve
their senior ministers of some of their burden by taking part in parliamentary
debates and answering parliamentary questions, and by assisting in their
departmental duties. The Parliamentary Secretary to the Treasury and the
Junior Lords of the Treasury are in a different category as Government Whips.
The Prime Minister is appointed by the Crown, and all ministers are appointed
by the Crown on the recommendation of the Prime Minister.
The majority of ministers are members of the House of Commons, since the
. °vernment s continuance in office depends upon the maintenance of a majority
m that House. There must, however, always be some ministers in the House of Lords
partly because the House of Commons Disqualification Act, 1957, limits the number
o ministers who may sit and vote in the Commons while receiving salaries from the
Crown, and also because every Government must be assured of spokesmen of stand¬
ing to expound and justify its intentions and its actions to the House of Lords.
The Prime Minister
The head of the Government became known as the Prime Minister during the
eighteenth century. The unique position of authority enjoyed by the holder of this
office derives from his status as leader of the majority party in Parliament and from
is power to submit his own choice of ministers to the Sovereign and to obtain their
resignation or dismissal individually. In modern times the Prime Minister always
Q° ds the of First Lord of the Treasury, and may also hold another portfolio,
bince 1902 he has always been a member of the House of Commons.
f f 1SJ^ne Minister to inform the Sovereign of the general business
o t e mernment; to preside over the Cabinet; and to exercise a general supervision
over departments, settling departmental differences and approving important depart¬
mental decisions where reference to the Cabinet is not required. The Prime Minister
spea's or t ic Government in the House of Commons on the most important topics
and answers questions on its general administration in that House.
^6 BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Prime Minister’s responsibilities include making recommendations for the
appointment of Church of England archbishops, bishops and other senior clergy and
incumbents of Crown livings, as well as for appointments to high judicial and civil
offices such as those of the Lord Chief Justice, Lord Justices of Appeal, Lords ot
Appeal in Ordinary, Lord Lieutenants of counties,1 some Regius Professors in certain
universities, and trustees of certain national museums. He also makes recommendations
for the award of many civil honours and distinctions.
The Cabinet
The Cabinet is composed of a number of ministers (at present 20) who are selected
by the Prime Minister personally. Its origins can be traced back to the informal
conferences that the Sovereign held with his leading ministers, independently of the
Privy Council, during the seventeenth century. After the Sovereign s withdrawal from
an active role in politics in the eighteenth century, and the development of organised
political parties stimulated by successive extensions of the franchise from 1832 onwards,
the Cabinet assumed its modern form.
The functions of the Cabinet are2: the final determination of the policy to be sub¬
mitted to Parliament; the supreme control of the national executive in accordance with
the policy agreed by Parliament; and the continuous co-ordination and delimitation
of the authority of Government departments. The exercise of these functions is
vitally affected by the fact that the Cabinet is a group of party representatives, depend¬
ing for its existence upon the support of a majority in the House of Commons.
Cabinet Meetings
The Cabinet meets in private and its proceedings are strictly confidential. Its mem¬
bers are bound by their oath as Privy Counsellors not to disclose information about its
proceedings. The Official Secrets Acts forbid the publication of Cabinet as well as of
other State papers, and a resigning minister desiring to make a statement involving
disclosure of Cabinet discussions must first obtain the permission of the Sovereign
through the Prime Minister. The theoretical reason for this secrecy is that a Cabinet
decision is advice to the Sovereign, whose consent is necessary before the decision is
made public. From a practical point of view, secrecy is essential in the interests of
unprejudiced discussion, which can take place only if there is no risk of publicity for
every statement made and every point conceded.
In normal times the Cabinet meets for a few hours once or twice a week during
parliamentary sittings, and rather less frequently when Parliament is not sitting.
Additional meetings may be called by the Prime Minister at any time, if a matter
urgently requiring discussion should arise. During Cabinet meetings, decisions are
reached on major issues of Government policy, and the Cabinet settles any matters
which cannot be disposed of at lower levels.
The Cabinet carries on much of its work by means of a committee system which
originated in the nineteenth century and has been developed to keep pace with
Government business during the past sixty years. The system involves the reference
of any issue either to a standing Cabinet committee or to an ad hoc committee com¬
posed of the ministers primarily concerned, which considers the matter in detail and
either disposes of it or reports upon it to the full Cabinet with recommendations for
1 The office of Lord Lieutenant in the county was first created in the sixteenth century.
Its holder was chief among the county justices and commander of the county militia.
2 As defined in the Report of the Machinery of Government Committee (the Haldane
Committee), 1918, Cd. 9230.
GOVERNMENT
47
action. Ministers not in the Cabinet are called to attend Cabinet meetings when
matters affecting their departments are under discussion; they may also be members
of Cabinet committees.
Detailed accounts of Cabinet meetings are not prepared; only the substance of
documents submitted, together with a summary of the arguments and the conclusions
are recorded; even these records have a strictly limited circulation. Responsibility
for the keeping of records lies with the Secretary of the Cabinet.
Ministerial Responsibility
Ministerial responsibility means both the collective responsibility which ministers
share for the policy and actions of the Government and the individual responsibility
of ministers to Parliament for the work of their departments.
The doctrine of collective responsibility, which was fully accepted by the middle of
the nineteenth century, imposes upon ministers the obligation to act not as individuals
but (in the interests of stability of government) as a united group. It does not require
every Cabinet minister to be present at every Cabinet meeting; and the obligations of
individual ministers may be passive rather than active when the decision to be taken
does not relate to their spheres of administrative responsibility. At the same time,
every minister should be fully informed of the subject of discussion beforehand, so
that if he has any objections he may voice them at the meeting. He may not repudiate,
either in Parliament or in his constituency, policies which have received Cabinet
approval, nor may he adopt policies that have not been agreed with the other depart¬
ments concerned (including the Treasury). A minister must also be prepared to vote
with the Government on all issues, and where necessary to speak in support or defence
of its policy; if he feels himself unable to agree or to compromise with the view of the
majority of his colleagues in Parliament or elsewhere he must resign. A minister who
does not resign in these circumstances cannot later reject criticism on the ground that
he did not personally agree with the policy adopted.
The doctrine of collective responsibility also means that the Cabinet is bound to
offer unanimous advice to the Sovereign, even when its members do not hold identical
views on a given subject.
The individual responsibility of a minister for the work of his department means
that, as political head of that department, he is answerable for all its acts and omissions
and must bear the consequences of any defect of administration, any injustice to an
individual or any aspect of policy which may be criticised in Parliament, whether
he is personally responsible or not. Since the majority of ministers are members of the
House of Commons, they are available to answer questions and to defend themselves
against criticism in person. Departmental ministers who are in the House of Lords
must be represented in the Commons by someone qualified to speak on their behalf,
usually their Parliamentary or Under-Secretaries.
Departmental ministers are expected to take the final decision on all matters relating
to their spheres of administration, unless these are of such political importance that
Cabinet sanction is required. If any departmental decision brings a minister under fire
of criticism in Parliament he may be upheld by the Cabinet, which will then treat the
matter as one of confidence in itself; or he may be disowned, when he alone will be
liable to lose office.
The responsibility of ministers for their departments is an effective way of bringing
government under public control, for the knowledge that any departmental action
may be reported to and examined in Parliament discourages the taking of arbitrary
and ill-considered decisions.
48
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS
Government departments are the main instruments for giving effect to Government
policy when Parliament has passed the necessary legislation. They may, and frequently
do, work with and through local authorities, statutory boards, and Government-
sponsored organisations operating under varying degrees of Government control.
As a rule a change of Government does not immediately affect the number or
general functions of Government departments, although a radical change in policy
may be accompanied by some organisational change. The widening scope of Govern¬
ment activity in the past half-century has, however, led gradually to the formation of
many new departments. A few have existed for over 200 years.
The work of some departments, for instance the Post Office and the Board of
Customs and Excise, covers the United Kingdom as a whole. Other departments, for
example the Ministry of Labour, cover Great Britain (England and Wales, and Scot¬
land, but not Northern Ireland); others, such as the Ministry of Health, cover England
and Wales only, and there are similar but separate departments for Scotland and
Northern Ireland. Some departments, for instance the Ministry of Education, make
special arrangements for Welsh affairs.
As a rule a department is headed by a minister. In the case of certain departments
in which questions of policy do not normally arise, the head is a permanent official,
and a minister with other duties is responsible for them to Parliament. For instance,
Treasury ministers are responsible for a number of departments, including H.M.
Stationery Office, the Central Office of Information, the Treasury Solicitor’s Depart¬
ment, the Department of the Government Actuary, the Royal Mint, the National
Debt Office, the Public Works Loan Board, and the National Savings Committee.
The staff of departments are all members of the Civil Service, a body of Crown servants
recruited into the service as a career.
Departments differ in size and in the volume, type and complexity of their work.
Internal organisation varies from department to department since each makes its own
arrangements for discharging its duties, but certain features are common to most
departments: for example, the minister of a major department is likely to have at the
head of his officials a permanent secretary (known as the Permanent Under-Secretary
of State in those departments where the minister is a Secretary of State), one or more
deputy secretaries, and a varying number of under-secretaries and assistant secretaries.
In addition, major departments usually have a principal finance officer and a principal
establishments and organisation officer. A number of establishment divisions have
their own organisation and methods (‘O & M’) branch, the members of which act in an
advisory capacity. Many departments also have their own legal advisers or solicitors,
and their own information division.
Some departments maintain a regional organisation, and some that have direct
contact with the public throughout the country also have local offices.
Many Government departments are assisted by advisory bodies, which are of three
main kinds: consultative bodies, in which representatives of the Government meet
representatives of groups outside Government; expert bodies which formulate recom¬
mendations for action in a particular field; and bodies which have advisory status, but
in practice decide matters for themselves. The majority of these councils and com¬
mittees (of wrhich there are several hundred) are permanent bodies attached to the
main departments; they are appointed by the relevant minister and their membership,
apart from civil servants, includes industrialists, trade unionists, university and
industrial scientists, local government officials and councillors, and experts from many
other walks of life.
GOVERNMENT
49
In addition to these standing advisory bodies there are ad hoc committees which the
Government frequently sets up to examine and make recommendations on specific
matters. When detailed investigations are considered of paramount importance and
time is not of the essence, the procedure usually adopted is the appointment (by
Royal Warrant) of a Royal Commission, whose members are selected on the grounds
of their wide experience and diverse knowledge of the subject under consideration. A
Royal Commission examines written and oral evidence from Government departments
and other interested organisations and individuals, and on this evidence submits a
report containing proposals which the Government may accept in vdiole or in part,
or upon which it may decide to take no further action or to delay action until a later
date. Public inquiries are also undertaken by departmental committees, appointed by
the head of the department concerned with the subject of the terms of reference.
The following pages provide an outline of the principal functions of the main
Government departments. Since much of their work is interconnected, they are not
grouped according to the subjects with which they deal, but are arranged in alphabetical
order, except for the Cabinet Office and the Treasury (which, in view of their central
position, are placed first) and the Scottish and Northern Ireland departments (which
are grouped at the end of the section). Further information on the work undertaken
by the various departments is given in later sections of this handbook under the
relevant subject headings.
The Cabinet Office
The Cabinet Office, or Secretariat of the Cabinet, was instituted during the first
world war and has grown into an instrument of great importance in the co-ordination
of policy at the highest level. It exists primarily to assist ministers in the exercise of their
collective responsibility through the Cabinet and its committees: its functions include
the orderly arrangement of business, the recording of meetings and drafting of reports;
and it is responsible for the security of all Cabinet documents. Attached to the Cabinet
Office, and an integral part of it, is the Central Statistical Office, which is charged with
the collection from departments of statistics relating to the national economy, their
analysis, and their preparation as an agreed body of statistics to assist the Government
in formulating its economic and financial policy.
The Treasury
Nominally the heads of the Treasury are the Lords Commissioners: the First Lord
of the Treasury (now always the Prime Minister), the Chancellor of the Exchequer
and five Junior Lords. In practice, the Lords Commissioners never meet as a board
and their responsibilities are carried by the Chancellor of the Exchequer assisted by
two junior ministers, the Financial Secretary and the Economic Secretary. There is
also a Parliamentary Secretary to the Treasury, who is the Chief Government Whip
in the House of Commons.
The functions of the Treasury fall under four main headings: finance (sub-divided
into home finance and overseas finance), control of expenditure, general civil service
establishment matters, and co-ordination of economic policy. Home finance includes
taxation policy (though executive responsibility for the collection of revenue lies with
the Boards of Inland Revenue and Customs and Excise), the provision of funds for the
day-to-day needs of the public services, currency and banking, and the management
of the national debt. The Treasury has been much occupied with overseas financial
questions since 1946 because of the post-war emphasis on the problem of the balance
of payments.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
50
Control of expenditure is a matter partly for Government departments and paitly
for the Treasury, which scrutinises the detailed annual Estimates and exercises a general
supervision over departmental expenditure, subject always to the overriding control
and authority of Parliament. The Treasury’s responsibility in general civil service
questions has developed gradually out of the control of expenditure.
The co-ordination of economic policy is a function which the Treasury has acquired
since the end of the second world war. It arose from the acceptance by successive
Governments of responsibility for maintaining full employment, safeguarding the
balance of payments and avoiding inflation.
Parliamentary Counsel to the Treasury. The Office of the Parliamentary Counsel
is responsible for the drafting of all Government Bills, except those Bills or provisions
of Bills extending exclusively to Scotland, which are handled by the Lord Advocate’s
Department. The office drafts all financial and other parliamentary motions and
amendments moved by the Government during the passage of Bills through Parliament;
it advises departments on questions of parliamentary procedure; and it attends sittings
of both Houses of Parliament, and their committees. In addition, the Office of the
Parliamentary Counsel drafts delegated legislation when specially instructed, and
advises the Government on legal, parliamentary and constitutional questions falling
within its special experience.
The Admiralty
The Admiralty Act of 1690 appointed Lords Commissioners to the Board of
Admiralty to execute the office of Lord High Admiral. The responsibilities of the
Board of Admiralty are, briefly, to build, direct, maintain and administer the Royal
Navy within the framework of the Government’s naval defence policy. The present
Board of Admiralty comprises nine members (two ministerial, six naval and one civil
servant); the First Lord is the ministerial head of the department and the other
members are responsible to him for specific duties. The Board of Admiralty is served
by three departmental groups: (1) the divisions of the naval staff, responsible for advis¬
ing on general and technical policy, strategy, tactics, operational planning, the disposi¬
tion of the Fleet, methods of naval warfare, and material requirements; (2) the
departments responsible for advising on personnel and material policy, for providing
the men (and their training), for research and development projects, for providing the
ships (including their weapons and equipment) and supplies, for the general organisa¬
tion and administration of associated naval establishments at home and abroad, and
for stating (to the Ministry of Aviation) naval aircraft requirements; and (3) the
secretariat branches, which co-ordinate business, provide advice on precedent and
on general Government policy, supervise the financial administration of the depart¬
ment, and receive, pay and account for all money administered by the department.
The Admiralty also administers the Royal Greenwich Observatory and the National
Institute of Oceanography.
The Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food
The Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food is responsible in England and
Wales for administering Government policy for agriculture, horticulture and fishing.
In the operational control of certain diseases of animals its responsibilities extend to
Scotland.
In England and Wales the ministry also deals with certain questions relating to the
supply and manufacture of food, including its composition, labelling and advertising;
its preservation and nutritional qualities; slaughterhouses; the quality and cleanliness
GOVERNMENT
51
of milk; and the prevention of damage by pests. Ministerial responsibility for the
maintenance of reserve stocks of food extends throughout Great Britain.
The ministry maintains relations with other Commonwealth and foreign countries
interested m the United Kingdom as a market for their food exports, and is responsible
for schemes such as the Commonwealth Sugar Agreement. It contributes to the work
of international bodies such as the Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United
Nations.
Ordnance Survey Department. The Ordnance Survey is administered by the Ministry
0iAgnCnfU!e’ Flsheries and Food> although it is itself responsible for its day-to-day
affairs. The department is responsible for the survey of Great Britain and the mainten¬
ance and publication of maps thereof; for drawing, printing and publishing maps and
plans from the survey on scales ranging from 1/1250 to 1/1,250,000. It also undertakes
a considerable amount of agency work in compilation, drawing and printing for other
departments, particularly for the War Office, the Geological Survey and the Land
Registry.
The Air Ministry
The Air Ministry consists of the Air Council which has administrative control of the
Royal Air Force (RAF), and is headed by the Secretary of State for Air, and the four
executive departments by which the council is served. These departments are: (1) the
department of the Chief of Air Staff, responsible for policy, planning and the fighting
efficiency of the RAf ; advice on the conduct of operations and the issue of operational
orders; operational requirements, flying training, ground combat, navigational,
command and staff training; defence, including the use of guided weapons; operational
and defence research; flight safety; (2) the departmentof the Air Member for Personnel,
responsible for all matters connected with the personnel of the RAF (except training
and establishments); (3) the department of the Air Member for Supply and Organisa¬
tion, responsible for internal organisation in the RAF in peace and war; establishment
of personnel, aircraft, marine craft and mechanical transport; transportation; works
and technical services; technical training; engineering; supply services; work study;
and (4) the department of the Permanent Under-Secretary of State for Air, responsible
for general control and co-ordination of Air Ministry procedure and the conduct of
official business; control of expenditure; establishment of Air Ministry headquarters
and outstations and all civilian staff matters; parliamentary and legal business; and the
general administration of the Meteorological Office.
The supply of airframes, aero engines, and certain other weapons and equipment
is arranged through the Ministry of Aviation and the War Office.
The Meteorological Office, for which the Secretary of State for Air is responsible,
provides the national weather service and meteorological library. It supplies the
material for sound and television forecasts and much of the weather data published by
the press. Local weather information centres have been opened in London, Glasgow,
Manchester and Southampton, from which inquirers may get facts and forecasts,
usually free of charge, covering most of the northern hemisphere. The office is also
responsible for meteorological, climatological, and geophysical research.
The Ministry of Aviation
The Ministry of Aviation is responsible for the execution of Government policy
relating to civil aviation and aircraft production. It also has a number of defence and
industrial responsibilities.
52
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The ministry’s civil aviation responsibilities include the regulation of flying, the
promotion of air safety and efficiency, the provision, administration and equipment of
State-controlled civil aerodromes and other ground services,the organisation of research
on, and development of, civil aircraft, the negotiation of international air transport
agreements,the registration of aircraft, the licensing of aircrew and aircraft maintenance
personnel, and research on air navigation. The minister appoints the members of the
airline corporations and may give them directions in matters affecting the national
interest; he also approves associate agreements between the corporations and the
independent air transport companies for the operation of scheduled services.
The ministry’s defence responsibilities include the supply of military aircraft,
guided and ballistic missiles, nuclear weapons, radar and other electronic equipment
for the fighting services; it is responsible for their design and development, and carries
out the necessary research.
The ministry is also the department primarily responsible for carrying out Govern¬
ment policy in regard to the aircraft industry, the light metals fabricating industry and
the electronics industry (excluding telephones and telegraph equipment and electric
lamps).
The Colonial Office
The Colonial Office deals with the affairs of the great majority of the non-self-
governing countries of the Commonwealth. It does not directly administer the
territories for which it is responsible, each territory having its own administration and
an increasing measure of autonomy, but it conveys to their governments the views and
wishes of the United Kingdom Government on broad matters of policy and provides
them with guidance on a wide range of matters through a staff of professional advisers
and with the help of advisory committees composed of men and women eminent in
many fields. The department is also responsible for ensuring that the interests of
governments and peoples of the dependent territories are safeguarded and promoted,
for providing expert services of many kinds, including the recruitment of administra¬
tive and professional staff for the public services of the dependent territories, and for
allocating funds for some development purposes under the Colonial Development and
Welfare Acts.
The Commonwealth Relations Office
The Commonwealth Relations O ffice links the United Kingdom Government with
the Governments of the other member nations of the Commonwealth (Canada,
Australia, New Zealand, India, Pakistan, Ceylon, Ghana, the Federations of Malaya
and Nigeria, Cyprus and Sierra Leone), with the Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasa-
land, and with the self-governing colony of Southern Rhodesia.
The duties of the office are: to advise the Secretary of State on policy affecting the
other members of the Commonwealth; to co-ordinate the work of the various United
Kingdom departments in so far as other Commonwealth countries are concerned; to
arrange consultation with other members of the Commonwealth on all matters of
common concern; and to act as the main channel of communication through which
information is exchanged.
The Secretary of State maintains relations with the Irish Republic and with the
Republic of South Africa (which, although no longer members of the Commonwealth,
are not treated as foreign countries), and he is responsible for the administration of the
High Commission Territories (Basutoland, the Bechuanaland Protectorate and
Swaziland).
GOVERNMENT
53
The Board of Customs and Excise
The primary work of the Board of Customs and Excise is to collect and administer
the customs and excise dut.es .mposed from time to time in the annual Finance Acts
or by other Ieg.slat.on, and to advise the Chancellor of the Exchequer on any matters
connected w.th them. The board is also responsible for preventing and detecting
evasion of the revenue laws, including smuggling and illicit distillation
In addition to its revenue work, the board undertakes a wide range of non-revenue
agency work for other departments, e.g., the enforcement of prohibitions and restric¬
tions on the importation and exportation of certain classes of goods, exchange currency
con rol, and the compilation of United Kingdom overseas trade statistics from customs
import and export documents.
The Ministry of Defence
m,.Ttse„fIiniStry °n ?efence is sponsible co-ordinating the policies and require¬
ment of the armed forces m accordance with the general defence policy laid down by
the Cabinet It is also responsible for the administration of the Joint Intelligence
Bureau, the Imperial Defence College, the Joint Services Staff College and Amphibious
Warfare Headquarters; and it is concerned with United Kingdom participation in
international defence organisations.
The Ministry of Education
The Ministry of Education is generally responsible for the promotion of the education
devot-dT15^^ EnS and aTnd ValfS aud f°r the pr°gressive development of institutions
devoted to that purpose. In the discharge of its duties the ministry is concerned with
the development of primary, secondary and further education, including vocational
education and education for leisure and the social and physical training of young
people, it deals with the supply, training and superannuation of teachers, the build¬
ing of new schools and other institutions, the school health service, the special
echiccmonal treatment of handicapped children, and the provision of school meals and
milk. In these spheres of activity, the ministry works in co-operation with the local
education authorities—the councils of the counties and of the county boroughs—whose
duty it is to secure adequate facilities for all forms of education in their areas On
professional matters, contact with the local education authorities is maintained through
thron^TF8 SrCh0°1S’ Which iS organised ^ regional divisions
gt w f”gland and Wales for ns work of inspection, liaison and advice. A
separate Welsh Department of the Ministry of Education deals with education in
As the department concerned with education generally, the ministry is also respon¬
sible for policy regarding awards for university students; for the administration of
he Victoria and Albert Museum and the Science Museum, London; and for the
maintenance of educational relations with other countries of the Commonwealth, with
OrganLadon^168’ ^ ^ United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
The Commonwealth Institute. The institute was founded (as the Imperial Institute)
, .,93' 18 .WOrk ia ^0,w directed by a board of governors, some of whom are appointed
nf *mster of Education and others by the Governments of the member nations
ot the Commonwealth. The institute houses permanent exhibitions of the peoples
and products of the Commonwealth, shows films on Commonwealth subjects, and
does much educational work in co-operation with the schools. It also arranges lectures
54 BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
and conferences and provides study and recreational facilities for Commonwealth
students. The institute is financially dependent on an endowment fund and on grants
from the United Kingdom and other Commonwealth Governments. A new building
to house the institute is due to be completed in 1962.
The Foreign OfiS.ce
The Foreign Office, which is the headquarters of the Foreign Service, first became
a separate department of State in 1782. The minister in charge of the Foreign Office,
and responsible to Parliament for the conduct of foreign affairs and for the direction
and operation of the Foreign Service, is the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.
The Foreign Office acts as a channel of communication between the United Kingdom
Government and the Governments of foreign States, either through the representatives
of foreign States in the United Kingdom or through Her Majesty’s representatives
abroad, for the discussion and negotiation of all matters falling within the field of
international relations, including the drawing up of international treaties and agree¬
ments. It also provides the means by which the United Kingdom Government is
represented in the United Nations and on other international bodies and is kept
informed of developments in foreign countries; by which British subjects and interests
abroad are protected and trade promoted; and by which British policy is explained to
foreign Governments and peoples. The work of the Foreign Office is primarily of a
political nature and ranges from issues of great importance to such matters as questions
of nationality, the issue and renewal of passports, and the immunities and privileges of
foreign diplomatic representatives.
The Forestry Commission
The Forestry Commission, which is the national forest authority, with its own annual
Vote in the Estimates, is responsible under the Forestry Acts, 1919-51, for promoting
the interests of forestry, the development of afforestation and the production and
supply of timber in Great Britain, and for licensing the felling of growing trees.
The Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food is responsible for forest policy in
England and Wales, and the Secretary of State for Scotland in Scotland.
The General Register Office
The General Register Office is responsible under the Registrar General for the
regulation of civil marriages and for the administration of civil registration in England
and Wales, for the preparation of statistics and reports relating to population, fertility,
births, marriages, adoptions, diseases and deaths, and for making arrangements for
the periodic census of the population. Responsibility to Parliament rests with the
Minister of Health.
The Ministry of Health
The Ministry of Plealth is responsible for the administration, in England and Wales,
of the National Health Service under the National Plealth Service Acts; it supervises
the work of local authorities under certain sections of the Public Health Acts and the
care of the aged, infirm, blind, deaf and other handicapped persons under the National
Assistance Act, 1948; and it has functions relating to food hygiene and welfare foods.
The Ministry of Health is also concerned with the medical and surgical treatment
of war pensioners in England and Wales, the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man, or
living in the Irish Republic.
I ipringtime on a farm in the Vale of Evesham, Worcestershire.
The Heights of Trotternish, Isle of Skye, Scotland.
A Welsh seaside resort: Aberystwyth, Cardiganshire.
An English village: Winslow, Buckinghamshire.
GOVERNMENT
55
The exercise of the department’s functions in Wales has been delegated to the Welsh
Board of Health, the members of which are appointed by the Minister of Health
The Ministry of Health is represented on the World Health Organisation of’ the
United Nations.
The Home Office
The Home Office was created in 1782. Its head is the Secretary of State for the
Home Department (the Home Secretary), who is entrusted with all the responsibilities
of national administration which have not been especially assigned by law or convention
to another minister. The Home Secretary is the channel of communication between
the Sovereign and his or her subjects, and between the United Kingdom Government
and the Governments of Northern Ireland, the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man.
The chief matters with which the Home Office is concerned are; the maintenance
of law and order; the efficiency of the police service; the treatment of offenders,
including juvenile offenders; the efficacy of the probation service; the organisation of
magistrates courts; the introduction of legislation on criminal justice; the efficiency
of the fire service, the care of children by local authorities and voluntary organisations;
the regulation of the employment of children and young persons; the law relating to
the conduct of parliamentary and local government elections; public safety and
preparations for civil defence; the control and naturalisation of aliens; and general
questions and individual cases relating to British nationality and citizenship of the
United Kingdom and Colonies.
Other matters for which the Home Office is responsible include: receiving and
submitting addresses and petitions to the Sovereign and preparing presentations to
Parliament, preparing patents of nobility for peers and formal proceedings for the
bestowal of honours; advising the Crown on the exercise of the prerogative of mercy;
making and receiving requests for the extradition of criminals; sanctioning by-laws
made by local authorities in so far as they relate to ‘law and order’ and ‘good govern¬
ance’; granting licences to experiment with animals; ordering the exhumation and
removal of bodies; supervising the control of explosives, firearms and dangerous
drugs; and administering the State Management Scheme for control of the liquor
trade in the Carlisle district.
The Ministry of Housing and Local Government
The Ministry of Housing and Local Government is generally responsible for local
government in England and Wales, and exercises powers in regard to housing, town and
country planning, water, sewerage, and other services administered by local authorities.
It is responsible for sanctioning loans for most purposes for which local authorities
require to borrow money, and for acting as the main link between local authorities and
the central Government.
As the central housing authority under the Housing Act, 1936, the minister super¬
vises the administration of the housing statutes and the national housing programme;
and his officers keep in close touch with the local housing authorities in England and
Wales. Local authority proposals for dealing with slum clearance are also submitted
to him.
The town and country planning work of the ministry includes the framing and
execution of the national policy on the use and development of land for the purpose
of achieving the best use of land in the public interest. The functions of the minister
include confirmation of the acquisition and disposal of land by local authorities; and
s6 Britain: an official handbook
the payment of grants, for planning purposes, “^^00^“’^!
“M"f"gS1°and Local Government is also the Minister for Welsh
Affairs.
The Central Office of Information
The Central Office of Information is a common service department w ic P™ uces
information and publici^teri^, and -PP^s^ubUc^ Jent
“te“
reference services, films, exhibitions, photographs display and rea^"g;r°°”d™'be™ j
manages schemes ^
and movides exhMtion stands at trade fairs (fof the Board of Trade). Administratively,
Ae Sd Offi e of Information is responsible to Treasury ministers, while the
masters whose departments it serves are responsible for the policy expressed in it,
work.
The Board of Inland Revenue
The Board of Inland Revenue administers the laws relating to income tax an
surtax profits tax, stamp duty, estate duty, and certain other direct taxes of lesser
importance; and advises the Chancellor of the Exchequer on any ^atter" Conn^Cted
with them. It is also responsible for the valuation of real property for such purposes
as compensation for compulsory purchase, local rates in England and Wales, and
estate duty; and for the collection of tithe redemption annuities.
The Ministry of Labour
The Ministry of Labour co-operates with other Government department on
matters of general employment policy, including the distribution of industry and the
maintenance of a high and stable level of employment. r i
One of the department’s principal functions is to help employees to find the wo
best suited to them and to assist employers to obtain suitable employees; to this en ,
it operates a national system of employment exchanges, which includes a Professional
and Executive Register at 48 of the larger exchanges, the Technical and Scientihc
Register in London, nursing appointments offices, and Government schemes for
vocational training. It is also concerned with the central administration of the Yout
Employment Service, which is provided locally by the Ministry of Labour or t e
local authority, and it provides the Disablement Resettlement Service which helps
disabled persons to secure employment.
Other functions of the department include: the resettlement in civilian employment
of men released from the armed forces; the supervision, through the Factory Inspec¬
torate, of safety, health and welfare measures for industrial workers; the collection and
publication of labour statistics of all kinds; the promotion of good industrial relations;
GOVERNMENT
57
and the provision of services for conciliation, arbitration and investigation in industrial
disputes.
Responsibility for the relations of the United Kingdom Government with the
International Labour Organisation rests with the ministry, which also deals with
overseas questions about labour and employment and with the employment of foreign
workers in Great Britain.
Besides these principal functions, the ministry undertakes agency work for other
Government departments in connection with National Insurance, National Assistance,
repayment of income tax to unemployed persons, and the issue of passports.
The Law Officers’ Department
The Law Officers of the Crown for England and Wales (the Attorney General and
the Solicitor General) are responsible for the legal advice given to the Government;
in addition, they have a wide range of duties in relation to the courts. The Attorney
General, who is the senior Law Officer, is the Crown’s representative in the courts,
and legal proceedings for the enforcement of public rights and on behalf of the interests
of charity are conducted in his name. His consent is required to the institution of
criminal proceedings for certain offences, and the Director of Public Prosecutions is
subject to his superintendence. The Queen’s Proctor also exercises his functions under
the directions of the Attorney General. The Solicitor General is subject to the authority
of the Attorney General but has otherwise the same rights and duties. The Law Officers,
who are appointed from among the leading members of the English Bar and are
always members of the House of Commons, are assisted by a small professional staff.
The Lord Chancellor’s Departments
The Chancellorship is a legislative, judicial and executive office held by an eminent
ex-member of the Bench or of the Bar and carrying Cabinet rank.
In addition to his functions as Speaker of the House of Lords and Custodian of
the Great Seal, the Lord Chancellor is in charge of more than 20 different offices and
branches which are mainly concerned with legal practice and procedure. He controls
the machinery of the courts of law through his patronage, through administrative
powers conferred by the Judicature Act, 1925, and other Acts, through his membership
of the Rules Committee of the Supreme Court and his responsibility for that of the
county courts; he appoints the justices of the peace and recommends to the Crown
other appointments to the judiciary in England and Wales; and he is the minister
responsible for the Judge Advocate General’s Department, which advises the War
Office and the Air Ministry on all legal matters arising out of the administration of
military law, and which may review the proceedings of army and air force courts
martial.1
In addition, the Lord Chancellor is a leading member of the Judicial Committee
of the Privy Council; he appoints the chairmen of certain administrative tribunals in
England and Wales, and (with the Secretary of State for Scotland) the members of the
Council on Tribunals, and is responsible for the administration of the Land Registry
(which maintains a State register of title to land), the Public Trustee Office (which may
act as the executor or administrator of the estate of a deceased person or as a trustee
under a will or settlement) and the Public Record Office (which preserves, and provides
access to, the national archives).
1 The Judge Advocate of the Fleet is responsible for these matters in the Royal Navy.
Britain: an official handbook
58
The National Assistance Board
Asrsiss “zt's sss
for assessing the means of persons applying for legal aid.
The Paymaster General’s Office
The Paymaster General’s Office acts generally as a banker for most Government
departments other than the Boards of Inland Revenue and Customs and Excise, and
thlPost Office, for all of which separate arrangements exist. Money granted by Par la¬
ment is transffirred (in such sums as may be required from day to day) from the
Exchequer account to the account of the Paymaster General at the Bank of Englan -
Most departmental payments are made by means of payable orders drawn on the
Paymaster General’s Office; these are similar to cheques, and their recipients obtain
payments through the commercial banks, whose accounts at the Bank of England are
in turn reimbursed by the Paymaster General’s Office.
The department is also responsible for the regular payment of many pubhc serace
nensions including those of civil servants, teachers, and members of the National
Health Service, as well as the retired pay and pensions of officers of the armed forces,
their widows and dependants.
The Ministry of Pensions and National Insurance
The Ministry of Pensions and National Insurance is responsible (1) for the social
security services established since the second world war by the Family Allowances
Acts the National Insurance Acts and the National Insurance (Industrial Injuries)
Acts' and for reciprocal social security arrangements with other countries, and (2)
for the award and payment of pensions and allowances for disablement or death ue
to service in the armed forces of the Crown in the first world war, the second world war,
and since (including service in the Home Guard), or due to war injuries sustained by
naval auxiliaries, merchant seamen, civil defence personnel and civilians in the second
world war, and for the welfare of pensioners and their dependants and war orphans. In
addition to these responsibilities for war pensioners in the United Kingdom and in the
Irish Republic, the ministry is responsible for the administration of war pensions and
for the medical treatment of war disablement of United Kingdom pensioners living in
Northern Ireland and, through its various agencies, in other countries overseas. The
ministry maintains an office in Ottawa to serve pensioners in North America.
The Post Office
The Post Office was set up in the seventeenth century as the General Letter Office.
It is now controlled by the Postmaster General, and it operates the inland postal,
telegraph, telephone and remittance services and, in co-operation with other countries
and interests, the corresponding overseas services.
Through its 24,000 post offices it also undertakes numerous agency functions,
including the operation of the Post Office Savings Bank, the issue of savings certi¬
ficates and bonds, the sale of broadcast receiving and other licences, the sale of stamps
for National Insurance contributions, and the payment of grants and allowances, such
as National Insurance payments, retirement pensions and family allowances. A con¬
siderable volume of scientific research and technical development relating to telephone,
GOVERNMENT
59
telegraph and radio systems and the mechanisation of the postal services is carried out
by the engineering staff of the Post Office.
All Post Office income is paid into, and all its outgoings are met from, a self-contained
fund, created and placed under the control of the Postmaster General by the Post
Office Act, 1961.
The Postmaster General is the minister responsible to Parliament for broad questions
of national policy concerning the sound and television broadcasting services.
The Ministry of Power
The Ministry of Power has the general duty of ensuring the effective and co-ordinated
development of fuel and power supplies in Great Britain, and of promoting economy
and efficiency in their distribution and consumption. The business of producing and
distributing gas and electricity and of producing coal is operated by the boards of the
three nationalised industries whose members are responsible to the minister on policy
issues. The ministry is also responsible for Government relations with the petroleum
industry; it has certain functions in relation to the iron and steel industries; and it is
specifically responsible for the use of atomic energy as a source of industrial power
and for the safety of nuclear installations other than those operated by the United
Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority.
The ministry is concerned with the general co-ordination of fuel research; it
administers the legislation governing the safety and health of workers in or about
coal mines, metalliferous mines and quarries, and it conducts or arranges for research
on these matters and on other specific projects.
The Department of the Procurator General and Treasury Solicitor
The Treasury Solicitor provides a common legal service for a large number of
Government departments in England and Wales; the duties of his department include
drafting and preparing litigation and prosecutions, representing other departments in
court, and giving general advice on the interpretation and application of the law. The
department undertakes a considerable amount of conveyancing connected with the
transfer of real property and with the administration of the residuary estates (un¬
disposed of by will) of certain deceased persons, and it deals with the outstanding
property and rights of dissolved companies. The Statutory Publications Office is
staffed and controlled by the Treasury Solicitor, who reports annually to the Statute
Law Committee (a body appointed by the Lord Chancellor from among the judiciary
and legal profession in England and Scotland) on its work.
Some Government departments are wholly dependent on the Treasury Solicitor
for their legal work; others have their own legal staffs for a proportion of the work
and draw on the Treasury Solicitor for special advice and, often, for conveyancing;
and others, whose administrative work is based on or deals with a code of specialised
law or involves a great deal of legal work, have their own independent legal sections.
The Treasury Solicitor is also Procurator General (Queen’s Proctor) and in that
capacity has certain duties connected with the operation of the divorce laws.
The Department of Scientific and Industrial Research
The Department of Scientific and Industrial Research is under the charge of a
Council for Scientific and Industrial Research, the members of which are appointed
by the Minister for Science, after consultation with the President of the Royal Society.
The council is entrusted with developing and encouraging scientific and industrial
research and disseminating the results of such research. In particular, it may (a)
6o
Britain: an official handbook
encourage and support acientific research inuni^^,
institutions, (b) establish and ti' «' "P ,n further the practical application of
relating to trade and industry, and (c) take steps to J make grants for
the results of scientific and industrial research. It is empowerea to i g
andTaidf with gran.
some 5o autonomous ™ed whh dl fenaLal
"Xa..th“terpt
fisheries and forestry. It accounts for its own Vote in the Estimates.
The Stationery Office . 1T7 ,
Her Maiesty’s Stationery Office, responsible to the Chancellor of the Exchequer,
the central agency for providing Government departments with printing, binding
duplicating addressing and distributing services, office machinery, equipment and
supplies, published books and periodicals, and desk stationery. It also provides certai
of these services for the armed forces of the Crown, at home and overseas.
The Controller is Queen’s Printer of Acts of Parliament and in him is vested the
copyright of all British Government documents. About a third of all official pnn mg
including all Parliamentary needs, is done in the Stationery Office’s nine printing and
binding works, the remainder being carried out by private printers under contract
As Government publisher, the Stationery Office is responsible for sales of o
publications through its own bookshops as well as the normal bookselling channels,
at home andabroad. It is also the United Kingdom agent for United Nations (including
UNESCO and other specialised agency) publications.
The Department of Technical Co-operation
The Department of Technical Co-operation, under a minister known as the Secre¬
tary for Technical Co-operation, is responsible for co-ordinating, promoting and cariy-
ing out arrangements for furnishing countries outside the United Kingdom wi
technical assistance including, in particular, assistance in the fields of economic
development, administration and social services.
The Board of Trade . ..
The Board of Trade was formally constituted as a Committee of the Privy Council
by an Order in Council of 1786, which still provides its constitutional basis, bince
1867 the President of the Board of Trade has been the only effective member of this
committee and his authority is, in practice, similar to that of a Secretary of State or
other minister of Cabinet rank. . , ,
The Board of Trade has a general responsibility in respect of the United Kingdom s
commerce, industry and overseas trade, including commercial relations with other
countries, import and export trade, the protective tariff, industrial development and
consumer protection. It is also responsible for (1) the promotion of exports, (2) statistics
of trade and industry (both at home and abroad), including the censuses of production
and distribution, and (3) the administration of certain regulative legislation, for example
in relation to patents, registered designs, copyright, trade marks, weights and measures,
merchandise marks, companies, bankruptcy, insurance, distribution of industry,
films, and enemy property.
In addition, the Board of Trade is the department generally responsible tor Govern¬
ment relations with all industries which are not specifically the concern of other
government
6i
departments. In this connection, it provides both a channel of communication with
and a point of contact for these industries, and a central place at which knowledge
about them is accumulated, analysed, and used as a basis for advising ministers and
o er c epartments. The mam industries which fall outside the scope of the Board of
Trades specific concern are food, agriculture and fisheries, building and quarrying
iron and steel, shipbuilding, fuel and power, and transport. 8’
The Ministry of Transport
The Ministry of Transport has powers and duties relating to inland
shipping and shipbuilding.
transport,
As the department responsible for inland transport, the ministry has certain
statutory duties relating to railways, roads, road transport and inland waterways. The
Minister of Transport appoints the members of the British Transport Commission
and agrees the general lines on which its development programme is drawn up. He is
the highway authority for trunk roads and motorways in England and Wales. He
allocates the funds provided by Parliament for road expenditure in England and Wales
including grants for classified roads vested in local authorities, and has many powers
and duties relating to road traffic and safety.
The marine side of the ministry’s work is concerned with national and international
s ipping policy; ships, their masters, officers and men; the provision and operation of
troopships; safety of life at sea; navigation (including pilotage, lighthouses and other
aids to safety in navigation); wreck and salvage; harbours, docks, piers and river
conseiwancy; and the Coastguard Service. The ministry also has responsibilities
(which include advising the Government on economic policy), for the merchant
shipbuilding industry and for the ship repair and marine engineering industries.
The War Office
The office of Secretary of State for War was established in 1854. In I9°4> the Army
Council was constituted on the model of the Board of Admiralty with the Secretary
of State for War as president and a membership of both military and civil personnel.
The War Office is responsible for the administrative control of the Army, including
appointments, promotions, postings and payment. Its functions include the planning
of operations and training; the collection and sifting of military information; the
research, development and production of all arms and equipment for the Army (except
aircraft, guided and nuclear weapons and electronic equipment for which the Ministry
of Aviation is responsible); the determination of financial and labour policy connected
with the Army; and the supervision of War Office civilian staffs both at home and
abroad.
The War Office is also responsible for most of the Royal Ordnance factories (which
produce certain stores and equipment for all three Services and other users, such as
Government departments and some overseas countries) and for the greater part of
the disposal of surplus Service equipment.
The Ministry of Works
The main functions of the Ministry of Works are: the provision of office accom¬
modation for Government departments (including public buildings overseas), and of
research establishments and many other types of accommodation required by civil and
Service departments; the design, purchase, supply and maintenance of furniture and
equipment for Government departments and certain other bodies, and their supplies
of fuel, household articles and stores; the administration of the Ancient Monuments
62 BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Acts and the maintenance of those ancient ”0^"^“^“
toward^^^mahitenance'of hi^tic btdMings
- —- -
“ThTmWstfy^rr^respUl^ tehe0generaPl efficiency of the building
civ WeSg and buiid4 materials —es -djot
results of research and development.
SCOTLAND
The first Secretary for Scotland was appointed in 1885 in recognition of the fact
that Scotland required a system of administration separate from that of England an
Wales Forty yelrs later, his powers and duties were transferred to a Secretary of
^tate aonointed by the Secretaries of State Act, 1926.
The Secretary of State is assisted at ministerial level by a Minister of State and three
ParlianwmtMy^nder-Secretaries of State. There are also two Scottish Law Officers.
The Secretary of State’s functions are discharged by four main administrative depart¬
ments of equal status (the Department of Agriculture and Fisheries for Scotland,
the Scottish Education Department, the Department of Healt^ of
Scottish Home Department), each under a Secretary responsible to the Secretary ot
StThe day-to-day administration of the departments is conducted in Edinburgh but
each department has representatives in London for liaison and parliamentary dutie .
The London office is generally known as the Scottish Office a term also used
describe all Scottish administration for which the Secretary of State is responsi .
The Scottish ministers are advised and assisted (particularly in relation to question
with which more than one of the departments are concerned or which fall outside th
province of any of them) by the Permanent Under-Secretary of State, Scottish Office,
who is free from departmental duties.
The Department of Agriculture and Fisheries for Scotland
The department has a general responsibility for, and in most cases administers,
Government measures for the promotion and development of farming m Scotland. 1
functions include: the administration of guaranteed prices for the major farm products,
fixed by the Government after consultation with the industry; the provision of grants
and subsidies and other services to agriculture; the use and improvement of land an
the improvement of farm stock and crops; the application of measures for control ing
plant diseases and pests and for treating infestations in stored food; the managemen
of the agricultural properties owned by the Secretary of State; the administration ot
grants towards the work of the eight research institutes in Scotland and the educationa
and advisory services provided by the three agricultural colleges; matters affecting
animal health; the promotion of measures for safety, health and welfare of agricultura
workers; the regulation of agricultural wages; and the stimulation of rural industries.
In certain of these functions the department is assisted by eleven agricultural executive
committees, constituted of members of the agricultural industry and organised on an
area basis.
GOVERNMENT
63
The department is responsible for the oversight and protection of the Scottish
inshore, deep sea and fresh-water fisheries. It also has functions relating to harbours,
to steamer services in the Highlands and Islands and to general questions concerning
Highland development.
The Scottish Education Department
The Scottish Education Department is responsible for supervising the adminis¬
tration of the Education (Scotland) Acts, for guiding the development of public
education in Scotland in all its forms, for supervising the training of teachers, for
issuing teachers certificates and administering the Teachers’ (Superannuation)
(Scotland) Regulations, for controlling the distribution of specific Exchequer grants
in aid of educational expenditure, and for conducting the annual examination for the
Scottish Leaving Certificate. It also exercises general supervision over the child care
and adoption services, remand homes, and approved schools; and it is concerned with
the administration of the Royal Scottish Museum.
The Department of Health for Scotland
The Department of Health for Scotland is responsible for the general supervision
of the National Health Service in Scotland; for the central administration of the
Housing (Scotland) Acts; for the supervision of the house-building programme and
for the distribution of grants to local authorities for housing purposes; for the control,
under the Town and Country Planning (Scotland) Acts, of the use of land; and for
the establishment of new towns under the New Towns Act.
The department also has functions relating to coast protection and flood prevention
and is responsible for supervising the administration of various environmental services,
including services connected with water supplies, sewerage, clean air, and clean rivers;
for welfare services, e.g., the care of the aged and handicapped persons; and for the
medical and surgical treatment of war pensioners in Scotland (including hospital
services, and the supply and repair of artificial limbs, surgical appliances and invalid
chairs).
The Scottish Home Department
The Scottish Home Department has a number of important functions relating to the
maintenance of law and order; it is the department concerned with the police and
probation services, criminal justice, legal aid and the services needed by the courts;
and it is directly responsible for the administration of prisons and borstal institutions.
The department is also the central authority in Scotland for the fire service and
civil defence; for highways administration, including road safety matters (except in
so far as they relate to the construction and use of vehicles); and for legislation con¬
cerning shops, theatres, cinemas and licensed premises. Licensed premises in districts
in which State management of the liquor trade is in operation are directly maintained
by the Home Department.
In addition, the department has general duties in connection with the structure
and finance of local authorities, including valuation and rating and the administration
of the Exchequer equalisation grants; and it is closely concerned with the provision of
electric power and with Scottish economic development generally, in co-operation
with the Board of Trade and other United Kingdom departments.
Other Administrative Departments
In addition to the main departments, there are a number of other Scottish depart¬
ments, all of which work in varying degrees under the direction of the Secretary of
64 BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
• i a ‘-ir'nttisVi Information Office, which undertakes
State. Such departments md^ for Scotland> ^ Scottish
information services on behalf of the beer y tments in Scotland) and acts
departments and,1" s0”e of Information; the Department of the
Re^rGelStoTscotland (the General ^try “ce^e^ ^d
of controllers, who are responsible for ensuring that the
policy and procedure of their departments is in accordance with Scottish
and needs.
T5ie Law Officers and Legal Departments
The Law Officers of the Crown for Scotland (the Lord Advocate and the Solicitor
General for Scotland) are the chief legal advisers to the Government on Scottish
Questions and the principal representatives of the Crown for the purposes of litigation
fo Scotland The Lord Advocate, being the senior Scottish lawyer m the Govemme
is also closely concerned with questions of legal policy and administration; he is himse
responsible "for the institution and direction of all prosecutions on indictment in
Scotland, and the control of summary prosecutions in the sheriff cou .
In some of this work the Lord Advocate is assisted by the Lord Advocate
ment the members of which also act as departmental advisers on Scottish questions
to certain Government departments who have no Scottish \t^\ adviser of their o .vt .
The work relevant to prosecutions is centred in the Crozon Office in Edinburg .
The Lord Advocate is always a member of the House of Commons.
The Parliamentary Draftsmen for Scotland are incorporated m the Lord Advocate s
Department and are responsible to the minister concerned and to the Law Officers
fo/the drafting of all Government Bills in so far as they affect the law of Scotland.
Their responsibilities in this connection are similar to those of the Parliamentary
Counsel to the Treasury.
NORTHERN IRELAND
Executive and administrative powers in connection with matters over which the
Northern Ireland Parliament has jurisdiction are vested in the Crown, and exercised
by the Governor, acting on the advice of the Northern Ireland Cabinet throug a
number of departments. Each of the seven ministries (Agriculture Commerce
Education, Finance, Health and Local Government, Home Affairs, and Labour and
National Insurance) is under the control of a minister responsible to the Northern
Ireland Parliament. In addition, there are a National Assistance Board and an ex¬
chequer and Audit Department which, together with the Ministries of Home Affairs,
Education, and Agriculture have functions indicated by their titles. The other depar -
ments have duties of a varied nature, which are summarised below.
The Ministry of Commerce
The Ministry of Commerce is concerned with industrial information and statistical
services; the progress of industrial production and trade in Northern Ireland; the
development of existing enterprises and the attraction of new ones; and the administra¬
tion of schemes of financial assistance to industry. The department also has respon¬
sibilities in relation to electricity and gas undertakings; roads and bridges and inland
GOVERNMENT
65
public transport, the Northern Ireland Road Fund; railways; harbours and inland
waterways, fisheries; the tourist trade; the regulation and inspection of mines and
quarries; mineral development; scientific development; weights and measures; the
registration of companies and trade unions; and the administration of the Assurance
Companies Acts and the Industrial Assurance Acts (Northern Ireland), 1924-48.
The Ministry of Finance
In addition to acting as Treasury to the Government of Northern Ireland, the
Ministry of Finance is responsible for matters connected with recruitment and staffing
of the Northern Ireland Civil Service; Government works services, including agency
services for certain departments of the United Kingdom Government; the preservation
of ancient monuments; valuation and ordnance survey; the Public Record Office;
the Registrar General’s Office; the Land Registry and the Registry of Deeds.
Other functions of the ministry include the issue of Ulster savings certificates; the
collection of death duty, stamp duty and certain transferred excise duties; work in
connection with land purchase; statute law revision; the control of charitable donations
and bequests; the control of borrowing; and the payment of university grants. The
Office of the Parliamentary Draftsmen, which prepares Bills for introduction into
Parliament, is attached to the ministry.
The Ministry of Health and Local Government
The Ministry of Health and Local Government is responsible for the general super¬
vision of the Health Service in Northern Ireland, which is broadly similar to the
National Health Service in Great Britain: the administration of the various aspects of
the service is in the hands of the Hospitals Authority, the General Health Services
Board, and the local health authorities. The ministry also exercises functions under the
Housing Acts (Northern Ireland), supervising the house-building programmes of, and
distributing grants to, local housing authorities and the Northern Ireland Housing
Trust. It also supervises various other functions of local authorities, including planning,
public health, welfare, water, and sewerage services (many of which attract specific
grants-in-aid) and it controls the issue of central financial aid to local authorities.
The Ministry of Labour and National Insurance
The Ministry of Labour and National Insurance is responsible for the administration
of the Factories Acts and other legislation connected with industrial health and welfare;
for the promotion in industry of joint machinery for negotiation and for assistance in
the prevention and settlement of industrial disputes; for the administration of the
Wages Councils Act; for the administration of local employment offices and training
centres and the machinery for dealing with employment questions of all kinds under
the Employment and Training Act and Disabled Persons (Employment) Act; for the
administration of the National Insurance Acts and the National Insurance (Industrial
Injuries) Acts, and of the Family Allowances Acts; and for carrying out certain
statutory functions in connection with the National Assistance scheme in conjunction
with the National Assistance Board for Northern Ireland.
THE CIVIL SERVICE
A civil servant in Britain is a servant of the Crown (not being the holder of a political
or judicial office), who is employed in a civil capacity and whose remuneration is
found wholly and directly out of money voted by Parliament. The number of civil
66 Britain: an official handbook
servantsunder this deMion a.ounts t facto£
Government indnstnal employees m s ^ howeverj generally used only to
and Admiralty dockyards. e ernJ ff f h various Government departments
cover non-industrial members of the starts ot me ^ Service or for other
lation of policy and by sT^enS toTetve his
successorl^^B^itidn^ch^ge^of government do not^inTOlve^^anges^n dcpartmwital
personnel, since it is considered that contmuity makes for administrative stabil y.
Development of the Modern Civil Service
The Civil Service in its present form is a product of the past hundred years^ Before
then departments were free to choose their own staffs, qualifying standards were
unknown there was no central supervision, and political jobbery was rife. Measures
of reform instigated during the nineteenth century included the substitution of open
competition for the practice of obtaining civil service appointments byjavourjr
purchase and the establishment of an independent body, the Civil Service Com
mission, to organise recruitment to the service. The great expansion m State planning
which has taken place during the last fifty years, and the consequent expansion m the
numbers of civil servants and the scope of their duties, have led to further reorganisa¬
tion: recruitment competitions have been adapted to a developing educational system,
co-ordination between the various departments has been improved, and many
commissions and committees of inquiry have been appointed by the Government to
make recommendations for increased efficiency in the conduct of public business.
Moreover, civil servants, though they remain employees of their departments, ha
become members of an integrated service with common conditions of employmen
and common traditions and standards of conduct which belong, not to individual
departments, but to the Civil Service as a whole.
Control of the Service
Uniformity in the Civil Service derives mainly from the fact that the Treasury
exercises general control. One of the two Joint Permanent Secretaries to the Treasury
is the official head of the Home Civil Service and the principal adviser of the Prime
Minister on matters affecting the Civil Service as a whole, and in particular on appoint¬
ments to senior posts in the service. The Treasury is responsible for the salaries and
conditions of employment of civil servants; it controls total number of start and the
creation of higher posts, maintains a central organisation and methods division which
serves all departments which do not maintain an organisation and methods branch of
their own, and deals with general questions relating to training after entry into the
Civil Service. It is also concerned with the number of departments and the distribution
of functions.
1 Part-time staffs are included in these, and subsequent, figures—two part-time officers being
reckoned as equivalent to one whole-time officer.
GOVERNMENT
6?
Civil Service Classes
Because modern government touches almost every aspect of life, the Civil Service
comprises officers with a wide variety of professional and technical qualifications.
Where officers of a particular type are required in more than one department they are
organised in general service or linked departmental classes. This ensures similar
grading and salary structures for the same type of officer in each department. The
main classes are:
1. The Administrative Class, which is responsible for advising ministers on policy,
for dealing with any difficulties which may arise in carrying out existing policy
and for forecasting the probable effects of new measures and regulations. This
relatively small class, which in April 1961 numbered 2,510, is recruited largely
from university graduates.
2. The Executive Class (numbering some 71,000 in April 1961), which is respon¬
sible for the day-to-day conduct of Government business, including the higher
work of supply and accounts, within the framework of established policy.
Members of this class may, after entry, train for specialist work such as that of
auditor, actuary or statistician.
3. The Specialist Classes, which number about 100,000 in a variety of different
categories for carrying out the wide range of specialised activities which are
now undertaken by the Government. These categories include accountants,
architects, doctors, engineers, lawyers, surveyors and scientists in all branches
of science. The professionally qualified staff are assisted by a large number of
technical and drawing office staffs.
4. The Clerical Class (the largest of the main classes, comprising about 123,000
officers), which undertakes all the usual clerical work involved in running
departmental business, e.g., the preparation of accounts and the keeping of
records, the handling of particular claims in accordance with known rules, and
the summarising and annotation of documents for the assistance of senior
officers.
5. The Ancillary Clerical Classes (with some 99,000 members), which include
clerical assistants, shorthand typists and typists, duplicator operators and a
rapidly increasing number of machine-operating grades.
6. Messengerial and Minor Classes (with some 34,000 members) which, in addition
to messengers, include paper keepers, office cleaners and similar workers.
In addition there are departmental classes where employment is peculiar to one
department. The main example is the Post Office with its postmen (110,000), telephone
operators (50,000), postal and telegraph officers (23,000) and a wide range of staff for
the installation, maintenance and development of the telephone, telegraph and wireless
systems. Other examples are the National Agricultural Advisory Service of the Ministry
of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, the Factory Inspectorate of the Ministry of
Labour, the Schools Inspectorate of the Ministry of Education and the Tax Inspec¬
torate of the Board of Inland Revenue.
The Foreign Service
Her Majesty’s Foreign Service is a separate self-contained service of the Crown,
which provides an interchangeable staff for service both at home and at United
£jg BRITAIN : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Kingdom diplomatic missions and consular posts in foreign countries! and i„ ,96.
it numbered some 3,175 established members. r> u a
The classes of the Foreign Service have their own nomenclature: Branch A corre¬
sponds roughly to the administrative class of the Home Civil Service Branch B to the
executive and clerical classes; and Branch C to the typing dass. Branch D carries
out security and guard duties at Foreign Service posts abroad, and Branch T technical
duties in the Foreign Office and at Foreign Service posts abroad^ There are no equiva¬
lents of Branches D and T in the Home Civil Service. Members of Branches A B
and C may be employed on any type of Foreign Service work-diplomatic, consular,
commercial and ‘information’. In addition, various specialists and advisers who are
seconded from the armed forces and from home Government departments (e g.,
those concerned with financial, commercial or labour matters) are often attached to
overseas posts. At many posts abroad some of the staff are locally engaged on a
‘temporary’ basis, i.e. they do not normally qualify for pensions.
Public Services of Overseas Dependent Territories
Overseas governments fill vacancies in their public services by the appointment of
suitably qualified local candidates wherever possible; but because not all vacancies can
be filled in this way, the Colonial Office and the Crown Agents for Oversea Govern¬
ments and Administrations are asked to recruit other candidates, principally from the
United Kingdom. For the most part, the Colonial Office recruits for vacancies for
which men and women with academic or professional qualifications are required, and
the Crown Agents for those for which technical qualifications and experience are
needed.
Recruitment of Staff
The recruitment of all permanent civil servants in the Home Civil and Foreign
Services is in the hands of the Civil Service Commission which, in the selection of
entrants, is independent of both ministerial and parliamentary control; its members
are appointed by the Crown on the advice of the Government. The normal method of
entry is by open competition, conducted in accordance with regulations approved by
the Treasury and consisting of written examinations or interviews, or both. The main
points of entry into the four main classes of the Home Civil Service are planned to
correspond to definite levels in the British educational system, and it is the commission’s
duty to study the requirements of the Civil Service in the light of the education
provided by the schools and universities.
Temporary civil servants, who do not qualify for pensions, but are eligible for
gratuities, are normally recruited by the department concerned. No qualifying
examinations are required for entrance on a temporary basis to the general service.
Training after Entry
Each of the larger Government departments has a training officer and a number
of instructors, who organise both general and technical courses, ranging from courses of
systematic instruction for recruits in all classes to ‘ refresher ’ courses for more
experienced staff covering technical subjects or broader subjects such as management
and supervision.
Methods of training include discussion groups, case studies, instructional films,
1 United Kingdom diplomatic posts in other independent Commonwealth countries are
normally staffed from the Commonwealth Relations Office and (in respect of the Trade Commis¬
sioners’ Offices associated with them) from the Board of Trade.
GOVERNMENT
69
and educational visits to enable civil servants to study the working of appropriate
outside bodies. Officers in the early years of their service may be transferred from
branch to branch and, more rarely, from department to department, in order that they
may gain as wide an experience as possible of Civil Service activities, and there are
openings for selected officers to travel abroad or to study at universities and other
educational establishments. Special facilities are also available for officers who take up
private studies, the degree of assistance depending upon the vocational value of the
subject.
Training is co-ordinated by the Training and Education Division of the Treasury,
which also runs central couises for members of the administrative, professional and
scientific classes at different stages of their careers. In addition, the division trains
departmental instructors and other special groups, for instance, superintendents of
typists, audio-typists, and secretaries.
Promotion
A period of probation (lasting from one to two years according to grade, with exten¬
sions in certain instances) is the rule for all new entrants to the permanent Civil
Service. Promotions from grade to grade are made by departments; those from class to
class paitly through centrally conducted competitions (open only to serving members
of specified Civil Service classes), and parly by departments themselves. All promotions
to the administrative class from other classes require Treasury approval. Promotions
to most of the highest positions in the Civil Service, i.e. permanent secretary, deputy
secretary, principal establishments officer and principal finance officer, must be
approved by the Prime Minister; he is advised in these matters by the official head of
the Home Civil Service.
Conditions of Service
Machinery for negotiation on conditions of service affecting the Civil Service as
a whole is provided by the National Whitley Council,1 which is composed jointly of
official and staff representatives. Negotiating machinery for separate sections of the
service is provided through the various staff associations which civil servants are
encouraged to join (e.g., the Civil Service Clerical Association, the Union of Post
Office Workers, the Society of Civil Servants, the Institution of Professional Civil
Servants, and the Association of First Division Civil Servants), and through depart¬
mental Whitley Councils (of which there are about 70).
In general, the civil servant receives a salary which is intended to compare fairly
with that paid for similar work outside the service, and usually he receives annual
increments up to the maximum of the scale of the grade to which he belongs. In addi¬
tion, although a civil servant holds office at the pleasure of the Crown and may there¬
fore be dismissed at any time, in practice he enjoys a considerable measure of security
of tenure. Thus every permanent civil servant may reasonably expect a full career in the
public service, and a pension on retirement—though this, again, is not a legal right.
Civil servants are generally ‘conditioned’ to a given number of hours of attendance
a week. Overtime is paid to members of most of the lower salary groups if they work
longer than their ‘conditioned’ hours. The standard working week for office staffs is
42 hours in London and 44 hours in the provinces. Annual leave varies according to
1 Whitley Councils are representative bodies for negotiation and joint consultation between
managements and staffs; the councils are named after Mr. J. H. Whitley, former Speaker of the
House of Commons and chairman of a committee which investigated industrial unrest from
yo
Britain: an official handbook
grade up to a maximum of six weeks, i.e. 30 working days, a year. Sick kave onf
pay less any national insurance benefit received, may be granted to Perman“' c‘vl1
servants for up to six months in any twelve months, and on reduced pay up to a
maximum of one year’s sick leave in any four years.
Political and Private Activities
Officially, the position and functions of a civil servant remain the same whichever
political party is in power; and it is his duty to serve the government of the day
irrespective of his own political opinion. The extent to which a civil servan , as a
private individual, is free to participate in political activities varies according to grad^
For this purpose civil servants are divided into three groups: those who are completely
free to engage in all kinds of national and local political activities (although if they
intend standing for Parliament, they must resign their appointment before nomination
day1); those who are free, subject to the acceptance of the need for dl®cretlon’ '
part in all activities except parliamentary candidature; and those who are debarre
from national political activities though they may seek permission to take part in local
government and political activities in the local field. In the non-.ndustnalcivUaerv.ce
the completely free groups are the manipulative grades of the Post Office, and t
minor grades such as cleaners and messengers. The intermediate group is divided m
those who have standing permission to engage in politics (other than parliamentary
candidature) and those who must seek permission from their department. The group
includes mainly clerical and typing grades, and the need for permission depends
broadly, on the work they do. The group which is not allowed to take part in nationa
political activities includes the executive, the professional, the scientific and technical,
and the administrative grades. In general, because the reputation of the service must
be closely guarded, permission to take part in local political activities will be refused to
members of this group if the local activities are conducted on the same party lines and
through the same party organisations as national political activities. Where permission
is granted, it is subject to a code of discretion and to the obligation to notify the
department of election or co-option to a local council. . , .
Civil servants of every grade may, of course, exercise the right of all citizens to
register their private political opinions on appropriate occasions, such as at a general
election or at local authority elections.
The Government is not concerned with the private political views of its servants,
except where there are duties in which secrecy is so vitally important to State security
that it does not feel itself justified in employing any one to carry them out whose
reliability is in doubt; therefore no one who is known to be a member of, or actively
associated with, the Communist Party or with Fascist organisations is employed in
connection with such work. Otherwise, every civil servant may engage in such private
activities as he wishes, provided that these do not in any way conflict with his official
duties, nor with the provisions of the Official Secrets Acts of 1911 and 1920 and his
Prevention of Corruption Act of 1906. A civil servant must not, however, use the
official position to further his private interest; and he is therefore subject to restrictions
in matters of commerce and business from which the ordinary citizen is free, e.g.,
he may not hold private interests in public contracts; and he may not use official
information in writing, broadcasting or lecturing without the express approval of his
department. Above all, a civil servant is expected to conform to the high standards of
integrity which characterise the service to which he belongs.
1 Any civil servant not elected will be reinstated in his previous capacity on application within
a week of declaration day.
GOVERNMENT
LOCAL GOVERNMENT
7i
Local government has been defined as government by popularly elected bodies
charged with administrative and executive duties in matters concerning the inhabitants
of a particular district or place and vested with powers to make by-laws1 for their
guidance.
Government on a local basis has been part of the administrative system of the
mted Kingdom for many centuries. In its present shape, however, it dates back
only to the late nineteenth century, when the conception of a comprehensive system
of locally elected councils to manage various services provided for the benefit of the
community was first incorporated in statute law.
Since ^cal authorities were established, their responsibilities have progressively
increased. They were charged with the management of most of the social services
that were created or expanded during the first forty years of the present century
and after the second world war, although certain of their functions (e.g., those connected
with hospitals and gas and electricity supplies) were transferred to other authorities,
they were given additional duties and powers in connection with the general health
and welfare services, the care of deprived children, town and country planning civil
defence, litter control and clean air.
The Local Government Act, 1958, and the Local Government and Miscellaneous
Financial Provisions (Scotland) Act, 1958, made changes in the local government
financial system of Great Britain to give greater independence to local authorities in
the spending of money in their own areas.
Relationship between Central and Local Government
As the supreme authority in the United Kingdom, Parliament controls local
authorities through Acts of Parliament, which require or permit elected local councils
to implement policies prescribed and defined in those Acts. The scope of local govern¬
ment is limited by the same means; no council may go beyond the bounds fixed for its
activities by an Act of Parliament.
Legislation is supported by departmental supervision: Parliament makes certain
ministers responsible for securing the efficient functioning of local government
services. Departmental supervision is exercised by means of inspections, inquiries,
examinations of statistics, authorisation of loans, the issue of advisory circulars and
statutory instruments, the approval of by-laws, and the administration of Exchequer
grants. The Ministry of Housing and Local Government is the main link between
local authorities and the central Government in England and Wales; in Scotland the
Scottish Home Department is generally responsible for local government; and in
Northern Ireland the Ministry of Health and Local Government.
Principal Types of Local Authority
For purposes of local government, England and Wales and Northern Ireland are
divided into county boroughs and administrative counties. Administrative counties
(outside London) are further divided into three types of county district: non-county
boroughs; urban districts; and rural districts. Rural districts are themselves sub¬
divided into parishes (except in Northern Ireland). Scotland is divided into counties
(including four counties of cities) which are independently administered; large and
1 Laws of local application which must be approved by the appropriate minister.
^ Britain: an oFFiciAL handbook
small burghs; and districts. Each local authority division is administered by a different
council, as follows:
England and Wales1 2 „
,, y rural district councils (474)“
county councils (01) „ \
county borough councils (83) <=oun“ls “
non-county borough councils (318) P™sh mectmg3 (some 3-3°o)-
urban district councils (564)
county councils (6)
county borough councils (2)
borough councils (9)
Northern Ireland
urban district councils (25)
town commissioners (1)
rural district councils (31)
Scotland
county councils (33, of which two pairs are combined for certain purposes)
town councils (19S, consisting of: the authorities for counties of cutes, 4; other
large burghs, 20; and small burghs, 174)
district councils (199: two counties are not divided into districts).
There are, in addition, the local authorities for London, which are unlike those m the
rest of the United Kingdom. They are.
the London County Council
the Corporation of the City of London
metropolitan borough councils (28).
Constitution of Councils .
Local councils comprise a number of unpaid elected councillors (and, in some cases
aldermen elected by the councillors), presided over by a chairman who has varied
ceremonial and civic duties to perform in addition to his work on the counci.
most boroughs of England and Wales and Northern Ireland the chairman ts Ae
Mavor- in the City of London and certain important boroughs, the Lord Ala)or,
in the Scottish counties, the Convener; and in the burghs, the Provost or Lord Provost.
Local Government Commissions
Local authority areas, even when administered by the same type of local counci ,
show great variations in density of population and territorial size. This diversity
has tended to increase during recent decades, and, as a result, two Local Governmen
Commissions have been established to review the general county and county boroug 1
pattern in England (outside the Greater London area) and in Wales respectively, and,
in special review areas (Tyneside, West Yorkshire, South-East Lancashire, Merseyside
and the West Midlands) the district pattern and the distribution of functions as we .
After investigating the circumstances of local government in each area under review
and consulting the local authorities concerned and other interested bodies and persons,
the commissions are required to make recommendations for such changes in the
pattern as they think likely to make local government more effective and convenient.
1 Excluding the county of London.
2 Including the Isles of Scilly.
GOVERNMENT
73
The final proposals for the various areas have to be submitted to the Minister of
Housing and Local Government and cannot be put into effect (with or without modifica¬
tion) except by order of the minister, which must be laid before Parliament with the
commissions report. (Final proposals for the Midlands are now in the minister’s
hands.) After the review of a county boundary by the commission, the county councils
axe required to carry out a review of the areas and status of their respective county
districts. Their recommendations (and any ministerial order) are to be submitted to
Parliament.
A report1 on the system and the working of local government in the Greater London
area was issued in October i960 by a Royal Commission set up by Royal Warrant in
I957 to recommend whether any, and if so what, changes in the local government
structure and the distribution of local government functions in the area, or any part of
it, would secure more effective and convenient local government. The main recom¬
mendation was the constitution of about 52 Greater London boroughs to be the
primary unit of local government in the area; a Council for Greater London would
supersede the existing county councils in the Greater London area and exercise those
functions which could not effectively be administered by the individual borough
councils. The report is being considered by the Government, local authorities, and
other bodies concerned.
Functions and Services
It is the primary duty of every local authority to provide and administer such
environmental and social services as Acts of Parliament require it to provide and
administer. It may provide additional services under the permissive powers of a
general Act or under powers granted to it by Adoptive Acts or by local or Private Bill
legislation.
The responsibilities of local authorities depend upon their type, as follows: in
England (outside the County of London) and Wales and Northern Ireland, county
borough councils are all-purpose authorities, while both county councils and county
district councils have particular functions allotted to them, which they exercise
independently to a considerable extent, although (except in Northern Ireland) there
is a certain degree of delegation from county councils to county district councils,
especially of duties connected with town and country planning and the education,
health and welfare services. Parish councils or parish meetings have a few functions
which they may exercise of right. In Scotland, the town councils of the counties of
cities are all-purpose authorities; elsewhere, the county councils, the town councils
and the district councils all share in local government work.
The broad principle underlying the distribution of powers and duties between the
London County Council (LCC) and the metropolitan borough councils is that all those
powers and duties which require uniformity of action throughout the whole of London
should be administered by the LCC, while those that can be locally managed should be
vested in the borough councils. In the City of London (an area of approximately one
square mile in the centre of the metropolis) the City Corporation exercises the general
powers administered and duties performed by the metropolitan borough councils, and
also a number of functions which, in the rest of London, devolve on the LCC. The City
Corporation is not, however, an all-purpose authority, since certain services in the
City (for instance, education) are administered by the LCC. This pattern of London
government was established sixty years ago. Subsequent developments have inevitably
1 Report of the Royal Commission on Local Government in Greater London. Cmnd. 1164.
74 Britain: an official handbook
^ ^ie sZicespZided by iZl authorities are generally classified under three heads
wmmmm
nuisances, drainage, sewerage, street cleans g, „linolies measures for
“”{? h?H^H5rs a s&zzz
administered by the same authont.es and also m P^-^by
Scotland Town and country planning is carried out in England and wa y
the county councils, which may delegate certain of their powers to county district
councils, in Scotland by county councils and the town c°™c^s 0 “rg f;
and in Northern Ireland by county councils and borough and “ban
councils The all-purpose authorities (county borough councils in England an
Wales and in Northern Ireland and town councils in the counties of cities in
Scotland) usually provide and administer all their own environmental services.
Protective Services include the fire service, the civil defence a" -
nolice The fire service is administered throughout England and Wales by fi e
authorities which are county and county borough councils, or joint fire authorities
“htles) set up by such councils. In Scotland the fire “
tered by eleven fire authorities: the town council of Glasgow and ten joint co
mitteesrf the councils of counties and large burghs. Responsibility f°r orga”s g
local divisions of the Civil Defence Corps in England and Wales is vested in the
county and county borough councils (including the LCC), a few county distnc
councils the London metropolitan borough councils and the Common Council
of the City of London; and in Scotland in the town councils of cities and large
burghs and county councils. The police service is administered by standing joint
committees of county councillors and magistrates in the counties of England and
Wales, by watch committees in the county boroughs, or by committees corisisti g
of representatives of the constituent authorities in the case of combined police
districts. In London, the Court of Common Council has jurisd.c ion over the
police force in the area of the City and the Home Secretary is the police authority
for the metropolitan police district. The police authorities in Scotland are the
county councils, the town councils of certain large burghs, or joint boards for com-
bined forces. In Northern Ireland the police and civil defence services are adminis-
tered directly by the Ministry of Home Affairs, and the fire services (except in the
county borough of Belfast) are the responsibility of a separate statutory authori y.
Personal Services are intended to promote the well-being of individual citizens.
The type of authority concerned depends on the nature of the services, whic
range from health services, education, and housing to the provision of entertain-
GOVERNMENT
75
merits. Local services concerned primarily with health and welfare cover the pro¬
vision of ante-natal, post-natal and child welfare clinics, and some residential and
day nurseries, the provision and supervision of midwifery services, health visitors
and home nursing facilities; measures for the prevention of illness and the after¬
care of physically or mentally sick persons; the provision of domestic help where
necessary, the ambulance service; the provision of facilities for vaccination
and immunisation against certain infectious diseases; and the services for the
permanently disabled or handicapped, for the aged and infirm and for children
deprived of a normal home life. Education and culture are promoted by the
establishment and maintenance of various types of schools; by the provision of
adult education centres, and art and technical colleges; by the award of grants and
scholarships to students of all kinds; and by the provision of libraries, art galleries
and museums. Local authorities provide living accommodation by building new
houses or by acquiring and converting suitable existing ones. Most houses owned
by local authorities are for letting, but they may, in certain cases, be offered for
sale. Councils may also make loans to persons wishing to buy privately owned
houses; and they are responsible for ensuring that houses unfit for human habitation
are demolished or closed.
Some local authorities also engage in trading services, such as passenger transport,
water supply, and harbour, dock and pier services, but to a lesser extent than in
the past.
Local Authority Elections
The normal term of office of a councillor elected to any form of local government
is three years; aldermen hold office for six years. In some local authority areas the
whole council retires every third year and another is elected immediately; in other
areas elections are held annually, when one-third of the councillors retire. Procedure
at local government elections is governed by rules laid down by the Representation
of the People Act, 1949.
Any person (including a member of the House of Lords) is entitled to vote at a
local government election provided that he or she is 21 years of age or over on the
qualifying date and a British subject, or a citizen of the Irish Republic, is not subject
to any legal incapacity and is registered as a local government elector for the area for
which the election is held. In Great Britain a person qualifies for registration as a local
government elector if, on the qualifying date for the register (compiled annually), he
or she is resident in the area or occupies as owner or tenant any rateable land or
premises in the area of a yearly value of not less than £10. In Northern Ireland, in
order to qualify for registration as a local government elector, a person must have been
born in Northern Ireland, or alternatively, have resided continuously in the United
Kingdom for seven years immediately prior to the qualifying date and must have either
a resident occupier’s qualification, or a general occupier’s qualification.
Voting takes place at polling stations arranged by the council concerned, and under
the supervision of a presiding officer appointed for the purpose. The procedure for
local government voting in Great Britain is similar to that for parliamentary elections,
although facilities for postal voting are more restricted.
Every candidate for election as a councillor stands either as a representative of one
of the national political parties, or as a member of an association representing some
local interest, or as an independent. Each must be nominated by two electors, as
proposer and seconder; and in England and Wales (except in elections for metropolitan
borough councils, rural district councils and parish councils) eight other electors for
?6
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
the area must assent to the nomination. In Scotland, each county and district council
candidate requires two proposers and each town council candidate a proposer and five
assenters. Candidates must be of British nationality, over 21 years of age, and must (!)
be registered as local government electors in the register of electors for the area for
which they seek election, or (2) have resided within that area during the whole of the
twelve months preceding the election (or within 3 miles in the case of parish councils),
or (t) in England and Wales, own freehold or leasehold land m the area. Candidates are
also subject to a number of statutory disqualifications designed to ensure that unsuit-
able persons do not offer themselves for election. ,, . .
Procedure at local government elections in Northern Ireland is governed by electoral
regulations made by the Ministry of Home Affairs for Northern Ireland These
regulations are, in general, similar to those which apply in Great Britain, though differ¬
ing in certain particulars; for example, the town clerk or the clerk to the council is
the returning officer for all elections to the authority; there is no postal voting and
the only persons who may vote by proxy are Service voters. .
Just as Great Britain as a whole is divided into constituencies for the purpose of
parliamentary elections, so, for local council elections, most local authority areas
are divided into electoral districts. Administrative counties are split up, in accordance
with orders made by the Secretary of State for the Home Department, the Minister of
Housing and Local Government or the Secretary of State for Scotland, into ‘electoral
divisions’. Boroughs, urban districts and rural districts in England and Wales, and
burghs in Scotland, are either divided into ‘wards’, or, if they are small, left as single
units. In rural districts, the wTards are based on parishes which, if large enough, may
themselves be split into parish wards.
Outside London, county divisions each return one member. The LCC electoral
divisions (which cover the same areas as the London parliamentary constituencies)
return three members each; in other types of local authority area, each ward may return
one or more members.
Internal Organisation of Local Authorities
Local authorities are free to a very considerable extent to make their own internal
arrangements and to choose the means and methods by which they will discharge
their responsibilities. Questions of policy and principle are usually decided by the
whole council, which appoints committees to carry out the detailed administration
of its various services. The more important of the committees of the larger authorities
divide their work among sub-committees, which stand to the parent committee in a
relation similar to that of the main committees to the whole council. The execution
of the policy decided upon by the council and the committees rests with salaried officers
and employees, whose number may vary from about half a dozen in a small rural
district to several thousand in the large counties and in the larger county boroughs
and burghs.
Apart from one or two minor provisions regarding the representation of specialists
on committees and the length of time certain members may hold office, committees
of councils are free from legal restrictions; even those known as ‘statutory’ committees
are constituted according to individual requirements and not according to any set
pattern laid down. For purposes of classification, however, they may be divided into
two kinds: ordinary committees and joint committees. Ordinary committees may be
further divided into statutory committees, the appointment of which is compulsory
under an Act of Parliament; standing committees, which are appointed in accordance
with the standing orders of the council on a permanent basis according to the extent
GOVERNMENT
77
of the council s business; and special committees, which a council may set up for a
limited period to deal with a particular problem that once solved is unlikely to recur.
Joint committees or joint boards consist of representatives of more than one authority.
They are usually established for services that can be more effectively administered
over a wider area than that controlled by a single council, e.g., town and country
planning, water supplies and the police service.
Committees of a local authority may be advisory or executive; their powers and
duties are usually laid down in the appointing council’s standing orders or, in the
case of a county or large burgh in Scotland, in the council’s administrative scheme.
A council is fi ee to delegate all its powers to committees, except its powers in connection
with raising loans, levying rates, or raising precepts (financial demands) which are
legally reserved to the council as a whole.
Officers and Employees
Over one million people (including teachers, transport staff and building workers)
are employed in local government service in Great Britain. Certain posts (e.g., the
clerk, the treasurer, and the medical officer of health) are compulsory in almost all
councils but, apart from these, councils are free to fill such other posts as they deem
necessary for carrying out their work. Choice of personnel is also left to a great extent
to the individual council; in theory, the appointment of certain chief officers is subject to
some central control but, in practice, the nominee of the council is nearly always accepted.
As a general rule, officers are of three kinds: heads of departments or chief officers,
whose duties are mainly of an administrative and managerial kind; subordinate
officers employed in a professional, clerical or technical capacity; and manual workers
who are employed to do the physical work for which the council is responsible. Senior
staff appointments are usually made at the instance of the committee or committees
particularly concerned; most junior appointments are made by heads of departments,
who are also responsible for engaging the manual labour required. Appointments and
engagements are always made in conformity with a set establishment and committees
are informed of any appointments which they have not made themselves.
Rates of pay and conditions of service for local authority staff are within the jurisdic¬
tion of the employing council (except where the proposed salary of an officer requires
the approval of a Government department, as in the case of the clerk of a county
council in England and Wales). They are based on recommendations made by the
Whitley Councils, of which there are several, including the National Joint Council
for Local Authorities’ Administrative, Professional, Technical and Clerical Services,
the National Joint Industrial Council for Local Authorities’ Non-Trading Services
(Manual Workers), the National Joint Council for County Council Roadmen, and, in
Scotland, the Joint Negotiating Committee for Chief Officials of Local Authorities
(Scotland) and the Joint Industrial Councils for Local Authority Services. In England
and Wales, conditions of service and salary scales for senior local government officers
are determined by special negotiating machinery. The local government service in
Northern Ireland has its separate joint negotiating machinery at various levels.
All local government officers are expected to maintain a high standard of conduct;
as public servants they ‘must not only be honest in fact, but must be beyond the
reach of the suspicion of dishonesty’.
Local Government Finance
Total local authority expenditure on current and capital account amounts annually
to over £2,000 million. Income derives from Exchequer grants (paid in Northern
78
Britain: an official handbook
Ireland by the Government of Northern Ireland), from local rates, from loans, from
trading receipts, rents, fees and other miscellaneous sources
Government grants finance more than half the net expenditure by local authorities.
The largest single grant is the general grant which is paid in aid of local revenues
by the Minister of Housing and Local Government to county and county borough
councils in England and Wales, and by the Secretary of State for Scotland to county
and town councils in Scotland. The total sum of the grant is fixed m advance for a
oeriod of two or more years and allocated among the authorities according to a formu a
based mainly on objective factors, such as size and distribution of population, and
numbers of school children. In fixing the amount, the Government takes mto con¬
sideration the current rate of expenditure on the services concerned, any probable
fluctuation in the demand for those services, the need for developing services, and the
extent to which, having regard to the general economic condition of the country, it is
reasonable to develop them. If, during any grant period, an unforeseen rise in the
general level of prices, costs or remuneration occurs and its effect on the cost of
providing the services covered is of such magnitude that it is felt that it ought not to fall
entirely on local authorities, the ministers are empowered to adjust the amount of the
grant They also have power to reduce the allocation of any authority (subject to
parliamentary confirmation) if they are satisfied that that authority has failed to achieve
or maintain reasonable standards in the provision of the relevant services in comparison
with the standards achieved in other areas. In Northern Ireland, instead of the general
grant, there is a system of grants towards the cost of specific services (for example,
education, roads, housing, health and welfare, water supplies and sewerage), supple¬
mented by a general Exchequer contribution which compensates for derating and
takes account of the needs and resources of individual authorities.
Other Government grants are: percentage grants, of which the two principal
examples are those for the police service and highways; unit grants, e.g., housing
subsidies; rate deficiency grants (Exchequer equalisation grants in Scotland), which
are contributions to the general revenues of the poorer local authorities to enable
them to bring their services up to a higher level of efficiency; and assigned revenues,
which are the proceeds of certain national taxes handed over to local authorities, e.g.,
game and gun licences and licences for hawkers, pawnbrokers, money-lenders and
refreshment houses and, except in Scotland, dog licences.
Rates, which are a form of local taxation paid by the occupiers of land and buildings
in a local authority area as contributions to the cost of local services, provide about
one-third of the total income of local authorities. They are levied by a poundage on
the rateable value of property, which in England and Wales is equivalent to the rent
which the property might reasonably be expected to command if let from year to year
with the tenant bearing the rates and the cost of insurance and repairs. Valuation
for rating is undertaken by valuation officers of the Board of Inland Revenue, who
prepare valuation lists every five years for each rating area. The valuation lists in use in
1961 are those which came into force in 19561, under which domestic properties are
fully rated, but on their 1939 values; industry and freight transport are rated at half
of their 1956 net annual values; shops, offices and other similar buildings are rated at
80 per cent of their 1956 net annual values; and agricultural land and buildings are
altogether exempt. Appeals from valuation may be made to local valuation courts, each
1 New valuation lists are due to come into force in 1963 when (except in Northern Ireland)
rates for domestic property will be based generally on current rental values, and industry and
freight transport will be fully rated.
GOVERNMENT
79
consisting of three members of an independent local valuation panel, and thereafter to
the Lands Tribunal.
In Scotland, valuation on a basis similar to that in England and Wales came into
force in 1961, formerly, it had been based, primarily, on the rent actually payable.
Valuation is carried out by assessors appointed by the councils of counties and counties
of cities. Appeals lie to the valuation appeal committee of each valuation area and there¬
after to the Lands Valuation Appeal Court of the Court of Session. A Scottish Valuation
Advisory Council has been established by the Secretary of State for Scotland. In
Northern Ireland the valuation authority is the Commissioner of Valuation, whose
department is part of the Ministry of Finance. The basis of valuation is broadly
similar to that of England and Wales, except that industry and freight transport are
rated at a quarter of their net annual value.
The responsibility for levying and collecting the rates in England and Wales lies
with the councils of county boroughs and county districts; in London, with the City
Corporation and the metropolitan borough councils. County councils finance them¬
selves by issuing a precept on the county districts (in London the metropolitan
borough councils and the City Corporation) for the sums of money required; parishes
are financed by rates levied by the appropriate rural district council on property within
the parish as an addition to the general rates. Rates in Scotland are levied by the town
councils in burghs and by county councils elsewhere; to cover their expenditure,
district councils issue a requisition each year to the county council; a town council
has to meet an annual requisition from the county council in respect of the burgh’s
share of the expenditure on functions exercised by the county council throughout the
county, including the burgh. In Northern Ireland, county councils are responsible
for making, levying and collecting the rates, except in such parts of the county as
fall within the jurisdiction of the county borough, borough, or urban district
councils.
Loans may be raised by all types of local authority for financing capital expenditure,
subject to the consent of the Minister of Housing and Local Government or the
Secretary of State for Scotland, who are guided by the recommendations of the Govern¬
ment department responsible for the service for which the capital is required. Borrowing
powers for specific purposes are sometimes included among the provisions of local
Acts; the London County Council seeks parliamentary sanction every year to raise the
money it needs for capital expenditure.
Loans may be raised by issuing stock upon the Stock Exchange, by internal borrow-
ing, by private mortgage, or from the Public Works Loan Board which is financed
by the Exchequer and acts as lender of last resort to local authorities which cannot
borrow on reasonable terms on the market.
Internal control of finance is exercised on behalf of the council concerned by a
finance committee, whose function it is to keep the financial policy of the council
under constant review. In England and Wales an external audit is carried out (except
for certain general accounts in most of the county borough and about two-thirds of
the borough councils) by district auditors appointed by the Ministry of Housing and
Local Government. County borough and borough councils must use the services of
the district auditor for accounts which relate to education, national assistance, children,
local health services, coast protection, motor tax, rate collection, fire, civil defence and
town and country planning, but they may employ other auditors to do the remaining
work. In Scotland all accounts are audited by a professional auditor appointed by the
Secretary of State for Scotland and paid by the council concerned, and in Northern
g0 BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Ireland by special local government auditors appointed by the Ministry of Health and
Local Government.
THE FIRE SERVICE
The fire services in Great Britain are organised on a local basis subject to a measure
of central control exercised by the Home Secretary (in England and Wales) and he
Secretary of State for Scotland. The fire services m Northern Ireland are controlled
by two authorities, the Belfast Corporation and the Northern Ireland Fire Authori y,
which are responsible to the Minister of Home Affairs. Every part of the United
Kingdom is covered by a public fire brigade.
FIRE SERVICES IN GREAT BRITAIN
In 1961 there were 135 local authority fire brigades in England and Wales and 11
in Scotland.
Fire Authorities
In England and Wales, under the Fire Services Act, 1947, separate fire brigades
are administered by the county or county borough councils, which are the fire authori¬
ties for their areas and have powers and duties which they exercise either separately or
as combined authorities where neighbouring councils care to make such arrangements
in the interests of the efficiency of the service. The London County Council is in direct
control of the London Fire Brigade. In Scotland the local authorities are grouped in
eleven areas each with a single brigade; with the exception of Glasgow, where the town
council of the city is the responsible authority, each area is administered by a joint
committee representative of the councils of the counties and large burghs in the area.
Central Control
The Home Secretary and the Secretary of State for Scotland are empowered to
make regulations prescribing such matters as the maintenance of discipline, training,
and pensions in local fire brigades, and their approval is necessary for certain reductions
in establishment schemes. In matters affecting the fire brigades as a whole (excluding
discipline and similar matters), each minister is advised by the appropriate Central
Fire Brigades Advisory Council, consisting of representatives of the local authority
associations, representatives of the chief officers (firemasters in Scotland) and other
members of the brigades, and other persons having special qualifications. The advisory
councils are not concerned with the conditions of service of members of the brigades;
on these subjects the National Joint Council for Local Authorities Fire Brigades in
Great Britain and the National Joint Council for Chief Officers of Local Authorities’
Fire Brigades in Great Britain are the negotiating bodies.
Central control is also exercised through the inspectors of fire services, whose
duties include advising the ministers on technical matters. In 1961 there were 13
inspectors and assistant inspectors and one woman staff officer in England and Wales,
and one inspector and one assistant inspector in Scotland.
Establishment Schemes
Each fire authority is required to draw up a scheme showing the establishment of
officers and other ranks (both whole-time and part-time), the number and location
of fire stations and the number and type of appliances considered necessary for the
provision of an all-over cover of its area. Establishments vary considerably according
GOVERNMENT
8l
to the fire risks in the area concerned and are not always up to strength, but in 1961 in
the whole of England and Wales there were approximately 21,000 whole-time and
I4>50° part-time firemen, operating almost 4,000 fire-fighting appliances (including
pumps, turntable ladders, water tenders, and emergency and salvage tenders) housed
in some 1,600 fire stations. In Scotland there are approximately 2,100 whole-time
and 2,600 part-time firemen, 600 fire-fighting appliances, and 320 fire stations.
It is the duty of each fire authority to purchase such vehicles and equipment as are
required under the establishment scheme. Equipment is standardised, and appliances
are bought by fire authorities to requirement specifications, which ensure that essential
standards are maintained and yet allow sufficient freedom of design to meet local
requirements.
Operational Methods
Each fire authority is required to appoint a chief fire officer (firemaster in Scotland)
to be the head administrative and executive officer for the fire services in its area.
The appointment must be ratified by the Home Secretary or by the Secretary of
State for Scotland. The chief fire officer or firemaster is responsible to the fire authority
for seeing that both the fire brigade and the fire department (which is the administrative
centre and staff headquarters for the fire brigade) are organised and managed in
accordance with policy laid down.
There is a central headquarters for operational control, which is exercised on a local
basis by divisional officers in charge of the geographical divisions into which most areas
are divided. Each divisional officer has at his disposal a small staff of whole-time, and a
varying number of part-time, officers and men; and he is responsible for mobilising
this force in the strength necessary for dealing with any outbreaks of fire in his division.
Constant communication is maintained between divisional and brigade headquarters,
and if at any time an outbreak of fire should grow beyond the capabilities of a divisional
force, help is sent from one or more neighbouring divisions in its area, or even from the
area of another fire authority. Under arrangements for mutual help made by all fire
authorities, the nearest available force is sent to the scene of a fire, regardless of area
boundaries.
In England and Wales the average number of fire calls a year totals about 210,000,
including false alarms. In addition, there is an annual average of 34,000 special service
calls for such purposes as rescuing persons and animals trapped in dangerous situations,
dealing with crashed aircraft, and pumping and salvage operations. Some 500 people
are rescued each year through fire service operations. In Scotland the average number
of fire calls a year, including false alarms, is 27,000; the average number of special
services is 1,110, and the average number of persons rescued through fire service
operations each year is 90.
Firemen
Only a little over half of the total number of firemen are whole-time. The part-time
firemen include: retained firemen who, in return for a small retaining fee, undertake to
attend fires if called upon; volunteer firemen, who receive no remuneration; and
auxiliary firemen, who are enrolled as members of individual fire brigades but with
restricted duties. In addition, there are the fire-fighting organisations with specialised
functions, for example, those maintained by the War Office, the Air Ministry, the
Ministry of Aviation, and by some large industrial and commercial concerns.
Ranks in the fire services (for men) are chief fire officer, assistant chief fire officer
(firemaster and assistant firemaster in Scotland), divisional officer, assistant divisional
g2 BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
officer station officer, sub-officer, leading fireman, and fireman. Ranks in the women’s
branch which is mainly concerned with controls, administrative duties and duties
of a clerical nature, are (for Great Britain as a whole) group officer, assistant group
office “leading Jwoman, .eading firewoman, and firewoman “on m the
lower ranks of the fire-fighting forces is by examination and by merit, and in the higher
IaIRecruits Midluni'or ranks in the fire service in England and Wales receive practical
training in basic firemanship at training schools run by fire authorities and refres er
courses arranged by fire departments. In Scotland, similar training is carried out at a
central training school which is the responsibility of the Scottish Home Department.
Advanced and specialised training courses, including fire prevention courses, are
provided at the Fire Service College, at Wotton House, near Dorking, Surrey,
which is maintained by the Home Office and the Scottish Home Department as the
central training institution for the fire services.
Finance
The fire authorities bear the cost of maintaining the fire service. There is an
Exchequer contribution towards this cost which is included in the general grant. For
the purpose of arriving at the amount of this contribution, the Government receives
from fire authorities (at the time when the grant is to be considered) details of the
last known actual expenditure for a year, together with estimates for the impending
general grant period.
Research
Research into all aspects of fire prevention and fire-fighting, and in particular into
the relationship between the fire-fighter, the availability of fire equipment and fire
losses, is undertaken mainly by the Joint Fire Research Organisation; the cost of its
work is shared equally between the Government and the Fire Offices’ Committee (a
committee of insurance companies dealing in fire risks). The organisation controls a
fire research station at which practical tests are carried out.
FIRE SERVICES IN NORTHERN IRELAND
In Northern Ireland, the Belfast Corporation controls the Belfast Fire Brigade
and is responsible for the area inside the city boundary, and the Northern Ireland
Fire Authority covers the rest of the country outside Belfast.
The Belfast Fire Brigade maintains five whole-time stations and has an establishment
of 198 officers and men manning 13 appliances, while the Northern Ireland Fire
Authority has one whole-time station in Londonderry and 44 other stations through¬
out the remainder of the area, and an establishment of 91 whole-time officers and men
and 667 part-time firemen, manning 72 appliances.
Ranks of Firemen
The ranks of firemen in Northern Ireland are: for the Northern Ireland Fire
Authority—fire force commander, divisional officer, assistant divisional officer,
senior company officer, company officer, section leader, leading fireman, and fireman;
and for the Belfast Fire Brigade—chief officer, assistant chief officer, divisional officer,
assistant divisional officer, station officer, sub-officer, leading fireman, and fireman.
Finance
The Fire Services Acts (Northern Ireland), 1947-56, provide that the amount of
government
83
fire service grant payable to the Northern Ireland Fire Authority should be 50 per
cent of the loan charges in respect of capital expenditure which do not exceed £60,000,
and 25 per cent of the amount (if any) by which the loan charges exceed £60,000,
together with 50 per cent of the first £150,000 of other net expenditure and 25 per cent
of the excess over that amount. Expenditure in excess of the fire service grant is
apportioned among the local authorities liable to contribute to the funds of the
authority. Under the Fire Services Acts, the Belfast Fire Brigade cannot qualify for
the payment of fire service grant.
III. LAW AND ORDER
THE LAW
In the United Kingdom the maintenance of public order depends on the obedience
In the unitea rv g individuals obey the law out of a sense of private
which the public accord to t 1 . 1 d ’ e th know that if they t0 do
^ThTw^p naSby Lttrities o’f the State On the other hand, the use
of penal measures by State authorities must be, and m fact is, confined to what the
the United Kingdom is a unitary state, it does not have a single body of
within its limits? and in England and Wales Nor^
Ireland and Scotland, respectively, separate systems are in force see p. ^)- The
are however, similarities between the systems. As between England Wales
the’one hand and Northern Ireland on the other the similarity is general, due to the
closeness of the association between these countries since the twelfth century. As
between Scotland and the rest of the United Kingdom the differences are more
extensive although the existence, during the past 250 years, of a common Parliament
a commok public opinion on broader issues, and a common court of appeal for civil
cases has resulted in substantial identity at many points . , Kinpdom
A feature which is common to all the systems of law in the United Kingdom
land differentiates them from some continental systems) is that there is no complete
i“de. The sources of law in all the systems include statutes dealing with particular
subjects, and a large amount of unwritten or ‘common law, which can be gathered
from numerous decisions of the courts and from other sources
The common law of England originated in the customs of the realm and was bulk
up by decisions of the courts. A supplementary system of law, known as equity ,
came into being during the Middle Ages to provide and enforce more effective protec¬
tion for existing legal rights. It was administered by a separate court and later became
a separate body of legal rules. In 1873 the courts of equity were fused with the courlB
of common law, so that all courts now apply both systems, but where they conflict,
eqin Scotland the basis of the modern common law is embodied in the writings of
certain seventeenth, eighteenth and early nineteenth century lawyers of great repu e
who between them, described systematically almost the whole field of private and
criminal law as existing in their times. Broadly speaking, the principles enunciated
by these lawyers, together with the many judicial decisions which have follo wed a
developed those principles, form the body of Scots non-statutory law. Scotland has
never had a separate system of equity—equitable principles having a ways permea e
the ordinary rules of law. , t
Statute law includes Acts of Parliament and delegated or subordinate legislatio
made under powers conferred by Parliament. It is absolutely binding on all courts
of the United Kingdom, taking precedence over any other source of law.
JUDICIAL PROCEDURE
The distinction made between the criminal law and the civil law is a feature common
to the legal systems of the United Kingdom. Criminal law is concerned with wrongs
against the community as a whole; civil law is concerned with the rig ts, uties an
84
LAW AND ORDER
85
obligations of individual members of the community between themselves The
distinction between the two lies less in the acts and omissions that they cover'ffor a
crime is often an injury to a private person as well as being contrary to the order
peace and well-being of society, and some classes of civil injuries are also crimesi
than in the nature of the legal proceedings taken.
Civil Proceedings
The main sub-divisions of civil law in England and Wales are: family law which
includes the laws governing marriage, divorce, and the custody of children • the law of
property, which governs ownership, the rights of enjoyment, transfer of prooertv
mortgages the creation and administration of trusts, intestacy, legacies and similar
matters ; the law of contract, which regulates such transactions as the sale of poods
loans of money, partnerships, and insurance guarantees; and the law of torts which
governs such actionable wrongs as defamation, negligence, malicious prosecution
nuisance, trespass, and other injuries to person or property caused by infraction of duty!
The laws of bankruptcy, the copyright laws, commercial law and maritime law are
also part of the civil law in England and Wales.
In England and Wales, civil proceedings must always be instituted by the aggrieved
person; no preliminary inquiry as to the authenticity of the grievance is required
1 he most common form of proceedings is an action commenced by a writ served on
the defendant by the plaintiff, which notifies the defendant that the plaintiff has a
claim on him and states the nature of the claim. If the defendant intends to contest
the claim, he ‘ enters an appearance ’ by informing the court to this effect on the
appropriate form. The next step is the delivery to the court of the ‘ pleadings
documents usually drafted by counsel, setting out the precise question in dispute,
rnor to the trial, either party may apply for an order that the other should clarify
his pleadings or disclose other documents relevant to the dispute.
Because civil proceedings are a private matter, they can at any time be abandoned
or compromised without leave of the court,1 and in fact, in the great majority of cases
the parties to a dispute are able to settle their differences through their solicitors
before-the stage of actual trial is reached. Actions that are brought to court are usually
tried by a judge without a jury, except in cases involving claims for defamation, false
imprisonment, unlawful arrest, seduction, or breach of promise to marry, when either
party may insist on trial by jury (see p. 88), or in a case of fraud, when the person
charged may also claim this right.
Judgments in civil cases are enforceable through the authority of the court. Most
of them are for the payment of sums of money, and these may be enforced, in cases of
default, by seizure of the debtor’s goods or, if the judge is satisfied that the defendant
has the means to pay, by committal to prison. A judgment for the possession of land
is enforced by an officer entering upon the land and putting the plaintiff in posses¬
sion. Refusal to obey a judgment directing the defendant to do something or to
abstain from doing something may result in imprisonment for contempt of
court. Arrest under an order of committal may be effected only on a warrant of
the court.
As a rule, the court awards the costs of an action (the solicitor’s charges and essential
disbursements) to the winning party (although in practice, he always pays part of
them). In certain circumstances (for instance, extravagance or negligence in the con-
1 Matrimonial causes are exceptional in that all cases (whether defended or undefended) must
come beiore a judge. y
86
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
duct of the case), the court may, in its discretion, refuse to order that one party’s costs
^In'lcotUnTcivIl'proceedings are initiated by the service on the defender of a writ
or summons which sets out the nature of the decree which the pursuer seeks, a state¬
ment of facts upon which the pursuer founds his claim, and a statement of the leg
propositions upon which the pursuer maintains he is entitled to the remedy wh c
see£ In Court of Session actions the next step is the calling of the summons which
is the publication of the action in the court lists. If the defender intends to defend the
action he must ‘ enter appearance ’ within two days of calling an^ ^
defences to it. In the sheriff court ‘ entering appearance precedes the tabhi g
of the case It is much more common in Scotland than m England and Wales to have
legal debates in court as to the competency or relevancy of the written pleadings prior
t0 InScotland a pursuer can abandon his case, including any matrimonial case, at any
time, but where abandonment is sought after the commencement of the proof or
trial only with leave of the court. Trial by jury in civil action in Scotland is much
more common than in England and Wales, being the usual form of proof in actions
of damages for personal injuries.
Criminal Proceedings
Criminal law presumes the innocence of the accused until his guilt has been con¬
clusively proved. Therefore care is taken to deny to the prosecution any advantage,
apparent or real, over the defence. Anyone arrested on a criminal charge must be
informed at once of the reason for his arrest and, in England and Wales, brought
speedily before a magistrates’ court. The Judges Rules,1 formulated for Eng and and
Wales in iQ12, forbid anything in the nature of cross-examination by the police once
they have actually charged a person with a crime; if such a person wishes to make a
voluntary statement, he must first be cautioned that anything he says may be used
in evidence. , _ , . t ,
In criminal cases in England and Wales, arrest may be effected either on a warrant
issued by a judicial authority on information laid before it, or, in certain cases, without
warrant. In the latter circumstances, a police officer may release the defendant on bail:
that is to say, he may discharge him temporarily, subject to his entering into a recogni¬
sance, with or without sureties, for a reasonable sum of money, to appear in court
at the time appointed for the trial. Unless the offence is serious, bail must be granted
if the defendant cannot be brought before the court within a day. Magistrates also
have discretion to grant bail, and this discretion is liberally exercised according to
well-established principles. If bail is refused, the defendant is entitled (unless charged
with treason or murder) to apply to the High Court for bail and he must be informed
of this right. . c,.
Every accused person has the right to employ a legal adviser for the conduct of his
defence, and if he cannot afford to pay he may apply for legal aid at the public expense.
This is granted at the discretion of the court, except in the case of a person committed
for trial on a charge of murder, who must be granted legal aid if his means are insuffi¬
cient. Anyone remanded in custody may be visited in prison by his legal adviser.
During the preparation of the case, counsel for the defence has the right to compel
the prosecution to disclose all documents in its possession which have a bearing
1 These Rules, which are at present under review by a Government appointed committee, do
not have the force of law but carry very great weight.
LAW AND ORDER
87
on the case, and he may require that these documents be produced at the trial. During
the trial, the accused has the right to hear and subsequently to cross-examine (normally
through his own counsel) all the witnesses for the prosecution; to call witnesses on his
own account, who, if they will not attend the trial of their own free will, may be
‘subpoenaed ’ or legally compelled to attend; and to address the court either in
person or through his counsel. But he cannot himself be questioned unless he con¬
sents to be sworn as a witness in his own defence. The right to cross-examine the
accused, even when he is so sworn, is limited by law, with the object of excluding
inquiry into his character or into past offences not relevant to the particular charge
on which he is being tried. In all grave classes of crime, a particular intent or state of
mind is a necessary ingredient of the offence and must be proved by the prosecution.
In England and Wales all the more serious crimes, i.e. crimes known as indictable
offences because a formal written accusation or ‘ indictment ’ is required for their
prosecution, are as a general rule tried in a superior court before a jury. However,
certain specified indictable crimes may be dealt with instead in a magistrates’ court,
if the defendant consents. Conversely, a criminal case which would ordinarily be
dealt with in a magistrates’ court must usually be heard before a jury if the offence
is punishable by more than three months’ imprisonment and the defendant elects so
to be tried.
In Scotland the Judges Rules do not apply, but when an accused person is arrested,
he should be cautioned and have the charge read over to him. Thereafter only the
accused’s voluntary statements may be used in evidence at his trial, and the courts
will reject any statements by him unless they are satisfied that they have been fairly
obtained. Fairness to the accused is also ensured by the fact that, with a few minor
exceptions, he can be found guilty only on properly corroborated evidence (see p. 89).
There is no provision for legal aid in criminal cases, but a ‘ Poors Roll ’ exists to pro¬
vide a legal defence, free of charge, for those in need.
Most criminal offences in Scotland are tried either in the burgh courts, in the justice
of the peace courts in counties, or in the sheriff court, where the sheriff sits alone with¬
out a jury. The more serious cases prosecuted on indictment are heard by the sheriff
sitting under solemn procedure, i.e. with a jury, and the most serious are on indict¬
ment in the High Court of Justiciary (see p. 94).
Prosecutions
In theory, there is no restriction on the right of a private citizen to institute criminal
proceedings, but in fact, in England and Wales most prosecutions are initiated and
conducted by the police. In some cases, the consent of the Attorney General or the
Director of Public Prosecutions or, less frequently, a Government department is
required. The Director of Public Prosecutions is also concerned with prosecutions
m all the more serious classes of indictable offence. There are certain categories of
crime which the police are required to report to him and he may take up any case
which appears to him to need his intervention. He is obliged to prosecute in cases
of murder, and in cases referred to him by a Government department provided that
he considers the institution of criminal proceedings justifiable; and it is his duty
to give advice to chief constables and other chief officers of police.
In courts where a substantial number of cases with which the Director of Public
Prosecutions is concerned are tried, standing counsel are appointed by the Attorney
General to appear on the Director’s behalf. At the Central Criminal Court in London,
for example, there is a panel of counsel, known as Treasury Counsel, who are retained
to prosecute in the Director’s cases.
D
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The cases handled by the Director of Public Prosecutions amount to about 8 per
cent of prosecutions for indictable offences. Another 4 per cent is accounted for by
prosecutions brought by public bodies who handle their own cases, and by those
brought by private individuals. The remaining 88 per cent are police prosecutions.
In Scotland, private prosecutions or prosecutions by the police are virtually excluded.
In the sheriff court, the prosecution is conducted by the Procurator-Fiscal, and in the
High Court of Judiciary by the Lord Advocate, the Solicitor General or by one of the
Advocates Depute.
Habeas Corpus
English law provides that if anyone is arrested or detained otherwise than upon
lawful grounds1 he (or, if he is unable, someone acting on his behalf) may sue out a
writ of habeas corpus against the person who detained him, this person then being
required to appear before the court on the day named to show cause for detention.
If no cause can be shown, the prisoner must be released forthwith, and thereafter he
has the right to sue the person who detained him for assault or false imprisonment.
The writ of habeas corpus may be granted by the Queen s Bench Divisional Court or
by any judge of the High Court. In Scotland, the writ of habeas corpus does not apply,
but the High Court of Justiciary has power to release persons unlawfully detained.
The Jury System
A jury consists of twelve persons duly summoned in pursuance of a precept from
the court. Most property owners and ratepayers (men and women alike) are liable
to be summoned for jury service if they are British subjects and are between the ages
of 21 and 60, unless they are disqualified as, for example, having been convicted of an
infamous crime. Members of certain professions are, however, exempt from service,
and no person can be summoned to serve on any jury more than once in any year unless
all the jurors on the list have already been summoned during that same year.
In criminal trials by jury it is, broadly speaking, the duty of the judge to determine
questions of law (including questions as to the admissibility of the evidence), and to
acquit the accused or pass sentence, according to the verdict of the jury; but the jury
alone decides the issue of guilt or innocence. The judge sums up the evidence for
the benefit of the jury, but he never accompanies it when its members retire to con¬
sider their verdict. The verdict of a jury must be unanimous; if its members are
unable to reach agreement, the case must be retried before a new jury. Members of
the jury are completely independent of both the judiciary and the executive. More¬
over, although both the prosecution and the defence have the right, before the trial
opens, to object to any member of the jury on the ground of his lack of impartiality,
once all the members have been sworn in they are free from interference of any kind,
even if, as sometimes happens, they bring in a verdict in apparent contradiction to
the summing up of the judge. It is an offence to assault, threaten or attempt to corrupt
a juryman either before or during a trial.
Scottish legal procedure differs from the foregoing in a number of respects: notably,
the verdict may be by a bare majority of the jury (which in Scotland consists of fifteen
persons in criminal cases and twelve in civil cases) and, in addition to guilty or
‘ not guilty ’ in criminal cases, may also be given as ‘ not proven . This verdict,
1 These are: in pursuance of criminal justice; for civil debt; for contempt of court or of either
House of Parliament; detention of persons found to be insane or mentally defective; detention
of children by their parents or guardians.
LAW AND ORDER 89
(which does not exist in English law) results in acquittal in the same way as ‘ not
guilty
In civil actions tried by jury (see p. 85), the jury is responsible for deciding questions
of fact (as in the trial of criminal cases) and also the amount of damages to be awarded
to the injured party.
At certain inquests at coroners’ courts (see p. 94) in England and Wales, a jury is
required to be present to return a verdict on how, when and where a deceased person
died. The jury in this instance consists of not fewer than seven and not more than
eleven jurors. A jury is also required at an inquest held by a coroner to decide whether
objects of gold or silver found in the ground are ‘ treasure trove ’.
Law of Evidence
Evidence in the legal sense is all the legal means, exclusive of mere argument,
which tend to prove or disprove any matter of fact, the truth of which is submitted
to judicial investigation. In general, the guiding rules are the same in criminal and
in civil trials: that wherever possible testimony must be given in open court under
apprehension of punishment for perjury, and subject to cross-examination by the
opposing party or his counsel; that hearsay evidence (oral or written statements made
by persons not called as witnesses) is not as a rule admissible; and that although
the uncorroborated evidence of one witness is, as a matter of English law, sufficient,
conviction in criminal cases solely on the evidence of an accomplice (or accomplices)
is, in practice, never allowed, unless the judge has warned the jury of the dangers of
convicting without corroboration. In Scotland, apart from a few statutory exceptions,
no person may be convicted without the evidence of at least two witnesses, or corrobora¬
tion of one witness by facts and circumstances which clearly implicate the accused
person in the crime.
THE COURTS
The courts that apply the law in the United Kingdom may be classified in a number
of ways—for example, as superior and inferior courts—but the most usual distinction
is that made between those with criminal and those with civil jurisdiction. However,
even here no hard and fast line can be drawn, as quite a number of civil cases are
heard in so-called criminal courts, while occasionally a criminal case may be heard
in what is primarily a civil court.
Civil Courts in England and Wales
The courts with civil jurisdiction in England and Wales include:
County Courts
County Courts (of which there are nearly 400) are so located that no part of a county
is more than a reasonable distance from one of them. Originally created by the County
Courts Act of 1846, their jurisdiction has been increased in scope several times since
then and now covers almost all types of minor civil disputes. (Magistrates’ courts
have a limited jurisdiction over certain kinds of small civil disputes, but their impor¬
tance in civil cases is now slight except for their important matrimonial jurisdiction.)
County courts are presided over by a paid judge, who almost always sits alone,
although he may sit with a jury, if either party wishes it, where the sum claimed
exceeds £5. There are 76 county court judges now in office, each having a circuit,
which is either one court, or a group of courts, depending on the amount of work to
be done. In districts where the pressure of business is exceptionally heavy the Lord
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
90
Chancellor may, on representations made to him by the judge of the district, appoint
a person (who must previously have held office as a judge or have been a barrister of
at least seven years’ standing) to act for the judge at any sitting of the court.
The ordinary jurisdiction of the county courts includes all civil actions where the
amount claimed is less than ^400 or where, in actions for the recovery of land, the
rateable value of the land is not more than £100 a year. Cases outside these limits
may be tried in the county court by consent of the parties, or may be transferred to the
High Court. In certain classes of case these limits do not apply: these include rent
restriction cases and certain cases under the Landlord and Tenant Act, i954>
Hire Purchase Act, 1938. Some actions, in particular actions for libel and slander,
cannot be brought in the county court.
In addition to the ordinary county courts, there are still a few local courts with
somewhat similar jurisdiction. Most of these are survivals from the medieval borough
courts, and have little or no work to do at the present time, but the Liverpool Court
of Passage, the Salford Hundred Court and the Mayor’s and City of London Court
are still well used.
The High Court of Justice
The High Court of Justice forms part of the Supreme Court of Judicature. Its
jurisdiction is both original and appellate, and covers virtually all civil causes and
some criminal causes.
The High Court is divided into the Chancery Division, the Probate, Divorce and
Admiralty Division, and the Queen’s Bench Division. The work is distributed
between them in accordance with the Rules of Court (see p. 96) and the practice of the
courts. The Rules do not give exclusive jurisdiction to any Division, but as a rule,
equity disputes (for example, actions concerning the administration of the estates of
deceased persons, partnership actions, and actions connected with trusts and mort¬
gages) appear in the Chancery Division; the Probate, Divorce and Admiralty Division
deals, as its name implies, with the proof of wills, with Admiralty and shipping cases,
and with divorce cases; and the remainder of civil litigation appears in the Queen’s
Bench Division.
The High Court is staffed by 47 puisne judges1: ten in the Probate, Divorce and
Admiralty Division, seven in the Chancery Division, and 30 in the Queen’s Bench
Division. The Lord Chancellor, in strict law the president of the whole High Court,
is also nominally head of the Chancery Division, of which the Master of the Rolls2 is
another member (although in practice neither sits in the High Court); there is a
President for the Probate, Divorce and Admiralty Division; and the Lord Chief
Justice of England presides over the Queen’s Bench Division. For the hearing of
cases at first instance, High Court judges sit singly. Appellate jurisdiction is exercised
either by divisional courts consisting of two (or sometimes three) judges, sitting in one
of the three Divisions of the High Court or, in some cases, by a single judge.
Appellate Courts
Appeals from magistrates’ courts, ministerial decisions and the decisions of judges
sitting in Chambers3 are heard in the first instance in the appropriate divisional court
1 Judges without any other special office.
2 Originally keeper of the records and assistant to the Lord Chancellor, the Master of the
Rolls has for centuries held high judicial office.
3 Decisions reached during proceedings which, under the rules of the court, do not require
to be carried out in court.
LAW AND ORDER
91
of the High Court, but all the more important appeals in civil actions come before the
Court of Appeal, which is part of the Supreme Court of Judicature, and some (with
leave of the Court of Appeal and of the House of Lords) before the House of Lords,
which is the ultimate court of appeal in the whole United Kingdom.
The Court of Appeal hears appeals from the High Court, the county courts and
assizes in civil cases (see p. 93). The Lord Chancellor, the Lord Chief Justice, the
President of the Probate, Divorce and Admiralty Division, the Lords of Appeal in
Ordinary are all members of the court, but its effective head is the Master of the
Rolls, -who is assisted by eleven Lord Justices of Appeal, sitting in four divisions.
The judges in the House of Lords are the Lords of Appeal in Ordinary, who must
have a quorum of three, but often sit as a group of five, and sometimes of seven. Lay
peers may not attend the hearing of appeals (which normally takes place in a committee
room and not in the legislative chamber), but peers who hold or have held high judicial
office may sit. The president is the Lord Chancellor.
Civil Courts in Scotland
Sheriff Courts
Sheriff courts in their civil capacity correspond roughly to county courts in England
and Wales, but they have a wider jurisdiction unlimited by the value of the case.
Scotland is divided into 12 sheriffdoms, each provided with a sheriff and a number
of sheriffs-substitute. The work of the sheriff court is normally done by a sheriff-
substitute, against whose judgment an appeal may be made to the sheriff principal
or directly to the Court of Session.
Minor civil matters (actions not exceeding £5 in value) may be tried by justices of
the peace.
The Court of Session
The Court of Session is the supreme civil court in Scotland; it has universal juris¬
diction, sits only in Edinburgh, and has sole jurisdiction, inter alia, in divorce actions.
The court is divided into two parts: the Outer House, a court of first instance, and the
Inner House which is mainly an appeal court. The Inner House is divided into two
divisions of equal status, each consisting of four judges—the first division being
presided over by the Lord President and the second division by the Lord Justice Clerk.
From the Inner House, an appeal may lie to the House of Lords.
The Scottish Land Court
The Scottish Land Court is a special court that deals with certain agricultural
matters. The court is presided over by a legal chairman, who has the rank and dignity
of a judge of the Court of Session.
Criminal Courts in England and Wales
The courts of ordinary criminal jurisdiction in England and Wales include:
Petty Sessional or Magistrates' Courts
Magistrates’ courts are courts of summary jurisdiction where persons accused of
all kinds of minor offences and a large number of the less serious indictable offences
may be tried without a jury. Over 97 per cent of all persons convicted are convicted
at magistrates’ courts. These courts are also used for committal proceedings, i.e. the
public conduct of preliminary inquiries into indictable offences to determine whether
or not an accused person should be committed for trial in a higher court. The average
92
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
time which elapses between committal for trial by magistrates and the start of trial in
a higher court is about five weeks, the actual waiting period ranging from less than two
weeks to over four months.1
The majority of magistrates’ courts consist of not fewer than two and not more than
seven unpaid ‘ lay ’ magistrates or justices of the peace, appointed for each county
and each borough which has its own commission of the peace. There are also a few
persons who are authorised by statute to act as justices, by virtue of holding some other
public office, for instance, mayors of boroughs and chairmen of county councils.
In central London, most of the courts consist of metropolitan stipendiary (paid)
magistrates sitting alone. There are, at present, 29 such magistrates and the Lord
Chancellor has power to appoint additional acting metropolitan magistrates for limited
periods when the number of cases to be tried is exceptionally high. Some of the larger
towns also have stipendiary magistrates.
Juvenile Courts in England and Wales are specially constituted magistrates’ courts
which deal with young people under 17 years of age who are charged with any offence
except homicide, or are brought before the courts as being in need of care or protection
or beyond control, or as persistent truants. Juvenile courts also deal with many
applications for the adoption of children.
Outside the London magistrates’ courts area, the justices for each petty sessional
division elect from their number a panel of justices specially qualified to deal
with juvenile cases. The panel for the London area is appointed by the Home
Secretary.
A juvenile court consists of not more than three justices drawn from the panel and
must, except in special circumstances, include a man and a woman. A juvenile court
must sit either in a different room or building from that in which other courts are
sitting, or on a different day. Only persons within certain specified categories are
admitted and only limited publicity is allowed.
Domestic Proceedings are also tried by not more than three justices, of whom one
should be a man and one a woman. The hearing of domestic proceedings is separated
from other business and, as in juvenile courts, the public is excluded.
Courts of Quarter Sessions2
There are two different kinds of quarter sessions—county sessions and borough
sessions; both are normally held four times a year, although, when necessary, additional
sittings may be held.
The jurisdiction of quarter sessions covers all but the most serious indictable
offences, but the courts are debarred from trying any crime that carries the death
sentence or (subject to certain exceptions) imprisonment for life.
Each of the 65 courts of county quarter sessions is presided over by a legally qualified
chairman or deputy chairman, who may or may not draw a salary, sitting with a
number of the magistrates of the county. In London, Lancashire and Middlesex,
where the courts have continuous sittings, the chairman and deputy chairman usually
preside alone. In the 96 boroughs which hold separate quarter sessions, most of the
courts, which do not sit continuously, are presided over by a Recorder (usually a part-
1 Means whereby waiting periods before trial could be shortened were among the recom¬
mendations in the Report of the Interdepartmental Committee on the Business of the Criminal
Courts, Cmnd. 1289, published in February 1961.
2 Changes in the organisation of courts of quarter sessions and assizes are recommended in the
Report of the Interdepartmental Committee on the Business of the Criminal Courts, Cmnd. 1289.
LAW AND ORDER
93
time judicial officer), who is a salaried barrister, as sole judge. Trial by jury applies at
both borough and county sessions.
Assizes
Courts of assize are branches of the High Court of Justice. They are held in the
county towns and in certain big cities three times a year, a Queen’s Bench judge or
a Commissioner of Assize (who may be a barrister commissioned to act as a judge)
presiding. The assize judges work on circuits covering England and Wales, and travel
from one county town to another in the course of their duties. They can try any
indictable offence committed in the county.
At the winter and summer assizes, civil business as well as criminal may be taken;
but, except in a few large towns, the autumn assize is confined to criminal cases.
Crown Courts
Crown courts are courts at Liverpool and Manchester which act as courts of assize
in and for the West Derby Division of Lancashire and the Salford Division of Lan¬
cashire. They also act as courts of quarter sessions for the cities of Liverpool and
Manchester. The Crown courts are presided over by the Recorders of Liverpool and
Manchester, who are whole-time judicial officers.
The Central Criminal Court
The Central Criminal Court at the Old Bailey acts as the court of assize for the
criminal business of London, Middlesex and parts of the home counties. The judges
include, a judge chosen, in rotation, from the Queen’s Bench Division for each monthly
session of the court; the Recorder of London; the Common Serjeant; and two
additional judges of the Mayor’s and City of London Court.
Criminal Appeals
Appeals may be brought on a point of law by either the prosecutor or the defendant
direct from the magistrates court to the High Court; but the more usual appeal is
that of a convicted person against his conviction or his sentence, which is heard in the
counties by the Appeal Committee of Quarter Sessions, consisting of between three
and twelve magistrates, and in the boroughs by the Recorder.
Appeals against convictions or sentences by quarter sessions, assizes or Crown
courts go to the Court of Criminal Appeal. Appeals on questions of law may be
brought as of right, but on other grounds only by leave. The Lord Chief Justice
usually presides in the Court of Criminal Appeal, which consists of three or, in special
cases, five judges of the Queen’s Bench Division.
Under the Administration of Justice Act, i960, a further appeal from the Court of
Criminal Appeal to the House of Lords can be brought if the court certifies that a
point of law of general public importance is involved and it appears to the court or
the House of Lords that the point is one that ought to be considered by the House.
Criminal Courts in Scotland
There is no counterpart in Scotland to committal proceedings by magistrates, the
only public hearing being the trial itself. Criminal prosecutions are mainly dealt with
m the sheriff courts sitting under summary procedure, i.e. the sheriff without a jury.
Minor offences are tried under summary procedure in police courts in burghs and in
justice of the peace courts in counties. Any summary court may sit as a juvenile court
when hearing charges involving persons under 17 years of age and, in some areas,
94
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
there are specially constituted juvenile courts. The sheriff also sits under solemn
procedure, to hear the more serious cases prosecuted on indictment.
The most serious cases are taken under solemn procedure in the High Court of
Justiciary, which is the supreme criminal court of first instance. Any one of the follow¬
ing judges is entitled to try cases in the High Court of Justiciary: the Lord Justice
General (who is also the Lord President of the Court of Session), the Lord Justice
Clerk or one of the thirteen Lords Commissioner of Justiciary who are also judges of the
Court of Session. The seat of the court is in Edinburgh, but the judges go on circuit
to preside at trials in other towns. The High Court of Justiciary is also the appeal
court from the summary courts and, sitting as a court of criminal appeal, hears appeals
in indictment cases. Appeals are heard by three or more judges; there is no further
appeal to the House of Lords.
Courts in Northern Ireland
Both civil and criminal courts in Northern Ireland are similar to those in England
and Wales with some minor modifications to suit a smaller community. The main
difference is that all petty sessional cases are dealt with by resident magistrates, who
correspond to the stipendiary magistrates of England and Wales. The inferior courts
are administered by the Parliament of Northern Ireland; the administration of
the superior courts has been reserved to the United Kingdom Parliament.
Coroners’ Courts
Coroners’ courts are common law courts convened when a person appears to have
died a violent or unnatural death or a sudden death of which the cause is unknown, and
in certain other circumstances. In such cases, it is the duty of the local coroner (who
may be a barrister, a solicitor, or a medical practitioner of not less than five years’
standing, appointed by a county or a county borough council) to hold an inquiry into
how, when, and where the deceased died; he may hold an inquest in court for this
purpose, and he must hold an inquest if he has reasonable cause to believe that the
deceased has died a violent or unnatural death or has died in prison or in circumstances
for which an Act of Parliament provides that an inquest must be held. A jury must
be summoned in certain cases, including those in which there is reason to suspect that
the death was due to murder, manslaughter, or infanticide, or was caused by an acci¬
dent arising out of the use of a vehicle on the public highway. If the jury returns a
verdict of murder, manslaughter or infanticide by a particular person, the coroner
commits that person for trial at assizes. If the death is merely a sudden death of which
the cause is unknown, the coroner need not hold an inquest, but may order a post¬
mortem examination to ascertain the cause of death.
In Scotland the office of coroner does not exist. The Procurator Fiscal inquires
privately into all sudden and suspicious deaths in his district and may report the result
of his inquiries to the Crown Agent in order that Crown Counsel may consider what
proceedings, if any, are required.
Administrative Tribunals
Administrative tribunals are tribunals set up by Act of Parliament, or under powers
conferred by statute, to deal with various aspects of the administrative law. They have
either executive or judicial functions, and sometimes both.
Generally speaking, the members of these tribunals are appointed by the minister
concerned with the subject, but other authorities (for instance, the Crown, the Lord
Chancellor, and the Master of the Rolls) have the power of appointment in appropriate
LAW AND ORDER
95
cases. The Lord Chancellor, or the Lord President of the Court of Session in Scot¬
land, makes appointments in all cases where a lawyer chairman or member is required.
Members of tribunals usually hold office for a period specified in the warrant or
instrument by which they are appointed, but there are exceptions to this rule.
Administrative tribunals may be broadly classified as follows:
(1) those which deal with a class of dispute in which a Government department
or public authority is interested: for example, local valuation courts (rating),
general and special commissioners of inland revenue (income tax), and pensions
appeal tribunals;
(2) those which deal with a class of dispute where specialised knowledge or
experience on the part of the tribunal is required: for example, the Lands
Tribunal (assessment of values of interest in land), rent tribunals (assessment
of fair rents for furnished premises), and the Restrictive Practices Court
(investigation of restrictive trading practices); and
(3) those which enforce professional discipline: for example, the General Medical
Council (doctors), and the Disciplinary Committee of the Law Society
(solicitors). J
Appeals from certain of these tribunals lie to the appropriate minister (if there is
one) or, on a point of law, to the appropriate appeal court.
An advisory Council on Tribunals (appointed jointly by the Lord Chancellor and
the Secretary of State for Scotland) exercises general supervision1 over the tribunals
and reports on particular matters, those peculiar to Scotland being dealt with by the
Scottish committee of the council.
Military Courts
Generally speaking, courts martial have jurisdiction over serving members of the
armed forces in connection with the system of military law enforceable under provisions
o the Army Act and Naval Discipline Act. (Non-military offences committed by
members of the armed forces are dealt with in the ordinary criminal courts.) A
military or air force court martial may be convened by any officer authorised to do so;
a naval court martial may be ordered either by the Admiralty or by any authorised
officer.
At every general court martial, and in important cases at district courts martial, an
officer, known as a judge advocate, must be present to advise the court upon law and
procedure and ensure that the accused is afforded a fair trial. The Judge Advocate
General’s Department acts for the Air Force as well as the Army, but the Navy has a
separate Judge Advocate of the Fleet.
Appeals lie to the Courts-Martial Appeals Court, and from that court to the House of
Lords if the court certifies that a point of law of general public importance is involved
and it appears to the court or the House of Lords that the point is one that ought
to be considered by the House.
THE JUDICIARY
The judiciary of the United Kingdom is independent. That is to say, it is free to
administer the law under the protection of the law without fear or favour. All judges,
pubHc^not^oncemed011 °f ^ professionaI disciPhnary tribunals, with which the ordinary
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
96
from those of the House of Lords and the superior courts to stipendiary magistrates
and justices of the peace, must not only be, but must appear to be, completely impartial,
for it is of fundamental importance that ‘ justice should not only be done, but should
manifestly and undoubtedly be seen to be done
The courts of the United Kingdom are the Queen’s courts since the Crown is the
historic source of judicial, as of executive, power; but since the end of the seventeenth
century it has been established that the executive cannot disturb or delay the course of
common justice, attempt to force the judges to act otherwise than impartially, or use
the prerogative powers of the Crown to create courts to administer any system of law
other than ordinary law. Judges always have been, and still are, selected from the
ranks of practising barristers or advocates; and neither their training nor their career
is in any way influenced by the State.
The independence of the judiciary vis-a-vis the legislature is likewise strictly
observed. Originally laid down for England and Wales by the Act of Settlement, 1701,
the law governing the matter was re-enacted in the Supreme Court of Judicature
(Consolidation) Act, 1925, which provides that all judges of the High Court and the
Court of Appeal, with the exception of the Lord Chancellor (who is a member of the
Cabinet), shall hold their offices during good behaviour, subject to a power of removal
by the Sovereign on an address presented by both Houses of Parliament. Since 1701,
only one such address has been moved (against a judge convicted of misappropriation
of funds, in 1830); and it can be stated with confidence that Parliament would never
use this means to attempt to interfere with judicial independence. Similarly, although
no court in the United Kingdom would ever question the validity of an Act of Parlia¬
ment which had been duly passed, legally promulgated, and published by the proper
authority, it might, through its interpretation of the statute, come to a decision contrary
to the policy of the Government which introduced the Act. In such a case, it would be
open to the Government to persuade Parliament to clarify or amend the statute, or to
pass a new Act. It would not be open to it to penalise the judge or to try to influence the
court in any other way.
Administration of the Judicial System
There is no Minister of Justice in the United Kingdom. The central responsibility
for the administration of the judicial system in England and Wales lies partly with the
Lord Chancellor and partly with the ‘Home Secretary. The Prime Minister is also
concerned in that he is responsible for recommending to the Crown the appointment
of the Lords Justices of Appeal and that of the Lords of Appeal in Ordinary.
Judges of the High Court are appointed by the Crown on the recommendation of
the Lord Chancellor, as are county court judges, recorders of boroughs and metropoli¬
tan and other stipendiary magistrates (except for county court judges in Lancashire and
the stipendiary magistrate for Salford, whose appointments are made on the recom¬
mendation of the Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster). The Lord Chancellor appoints
justices of the peace in England and Wales, except in Lancashire where the responsible
minister is the Chancellor of the Duchy. In practice, the Lord Chancellor only makes
appointments to the Commissions of the Peace on the recommendation of the advisory
committees which he has set up expressly to advise him on such matters.
The administrative business of the Supreme Court of Judicature and the appoint¬
ment of the officers of the court (for instance, the masters, registrars and clerks) is
partly in the hands of the Lord Chancellor and partly in the hands of the appropriate
judges. The Lord Chancellor is concerned with legal procedure in that he is a member
of the Rule Committee which makes the rules of the Supreme Court, and that he
LAW AND ORDER
97
appoints the County Court Rule Committee and has power to alter or disallow the
rules made by it. He is also concerned with law reform in that he refers questions on
this subject (save in the field of criminal law, where the Home Secretary is primarily
responsible) to the Law Reform Committee and the Private International Law Com¬
mittee, and that the reports of these committees, which often become the basis of
legislation, are presented to him.
The Home Secretary is responsible for the general administration of magistrates’
courts in England and Wales, except in relation to their judicial functions in which
they can be controlled only by the Queen’s Bench Division of the High Court. He
is also responsible for approving appointments of clerks to justices made by magistrates,
courts committees, of which there is one for each county and county borough and for
certain non-county boroughs. Magistrates’ courts committees exercise local responsi¬
bility for the administration of magistrates’ courts.
In Scotland, the Prime Minister makes recommendations for the appointment of
the Lord Justice General and Lord President and also of the Lord Justice Clerk.
Power of submission for appointment of all other judges lies with the Secretary of
State for Scotland. The Pligh Court of Justiciary and the Court of Session are admini¬
stered by the Clerk of the Justiciary and his staff and the principal Clerk of Session and
his staff respectively. The Secretary of State for Scotland is responsible for the
appointment and removal of justices of the peace and for the staffing and general
organisation of the sheriff courts.
THE LEGAL PROFESSION
The legal profession is divided into two classes of lawyers—barristers (advocates in
Scotland) and solicitors. No hard and fast line can be drawn between their work
since there are many barristers who do little advocacy, and there are solicitors who do
little else, and who have made considerable reputations for themselves in the courts in
which they are permitted to appear; but in general, it may be said that solicitors
undertake legal business for lay clients, while barristers advise on legal problems sub¬
mitted through solicitors and conduct legal proceedings in the higher courts.
A barrister in England is required to have reached an accepted educational standard,
to have passed the legal examinations conducted by the Council of Legal Education
and to have become a member of one of the four Inns of Court—Gray’s Inn, Lincoln’s
Inn, the Middle Temple and the Inner Temple. A barrister with a substantial junior
practice may apply to the Lord Chancellor for a patent appointing him Queen’s
Counsel—a proceeding that is known as ‘ taking silk ’. Most of the higher judicial
appointments are made from among barristers who have become Queen’s Counsel.
The professional conduct of a barrister is subject to the scrutiny of the General Council
of the Bar; but disciplinary powers are vested exclusively in the Benchers of the Inns
of Court.
A prospective solicitor in England and Wales must be considered suitable by the
appropriate committee of the Law Society (the professional organisation of solicitors)
and he must enter into ‘ articles of clerkship ’ with a practising solicitor of not less
than five years’ standing before he can begin his professional career. The term of
articles lasts for three or five years, depending upon the educational qualifications of
the student. An articled clerk must pass the necessary examinations held by the Law
oociety and, unless he has been a barrister or is a law graduate of a university, he is
generally required to attend a course of studies at a recognised law school. Once a
solicitor is qualified, he may become a member of the Law Society.
In Scotland the conditions for admission as, and the standing of, advocates and
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
98
solicitors are much the same as those applying in the case of barristers and solicitors
in England and Wales. The analogous professional organisations are the Faculty of
Advocates and the Law Society of Scotland.
In Northern Ireland barristers are members of the Inn of Court of Northern Ire¬
land; there is also a General Council of the Bar of Northern Ireland. For solicitors,
the professional organisation is the Incorporated Law Society of Northern Ireland.
LEGAL AID AND ADVICE
Schemes for free legal assistance to persons of slender means and resources have
existed for centuries in some courts—to a limited extent in England and Wales, and to
a somewhat greater extent in Scotland. These schemes were revised, and extended
to include the provision of free legal advice, by the Legal Aid and Advice Act, 1949,
and the corresponding Legal Aid (Scotland) Act, 1949, which were introduced both
to improve existing arrangements in civil proceedings so that no one would be financi¬
ally unable to prosecute a just and reasonable claim or to defend a legal right, and also
to make the facilities already available in criminal proceedings more easily accessible
to those who needed them. The Acts also provided for the remuneration from public
funds of solicitors and barristers acting for persons receiving legal aid.
Owing to the financial situation at the time, the 1949 Acts could not be fully imple¬
mented and, at first, only those clauses relating to legal aid in civil proceedings before
the High Court and the Court of Appeal in England and Wales, and before the Court
of Session and the sheriff courts in Scotland, were brought into force. By 1961,
however, legal aid had been made available for appeals to the House of Lords and also
for civil cases in county courts and certain local courts of similar standing. In addition,
the Government had announced that legal aid would be introduced for certain pro¬
ceedings (mainly in connection with matrimonial and affiliation matters) in magistrates’
courts and courts of quarter session. Furthermore, certain procedural changes in the
operation of the free legal aid system in the criminal courts were brought into force
during i960, including the transfer from local to central government funds of the costs
of the defence in criminal cases in which legal aid is granted. The sections in both the
English and Scottish Acts providing for legal aid in matters not involving litigation
and for oral legal advice have also come into force.
Legal Aid in Civil Cases
In England, Wales and Scotland free legal aid in civil cases is available to persons
whose disposable income does not exceed £250 a year, and whose disposable capital
is £125 or less, and contributory legal aid to those whose disposable income does not
exceed £700 a year and whose disposable capital is less than £500, or such larger figure
as may be prescribed. An assisted person is liable for a maximum contribution to¬
wards the cost of his case of a third of the sum by which his disposable income exceeds
.£250 a year, together with the amount by which his disposable capital exceeds £125
or such larger figure as may be prescribed. All applicants for legal aid must show that
they have reasonable grounds for asserting or disputing a claim.
The legal aid scheme in England and Wales is operated through the Law Society
under the general guidance of the Lord Chancellor. The cost is met from the Legal
Aid Fund, drawn from three sources: contributions from assisted persons; costs
recovered from opposite parties in litigation; and a grant from the Exchequer. For
the purposes of the scheme, England and Wales are divided into twelve areas, each with
an area committee of solicitors and barristers responsible for the administration of the
scheme, and sub-divided to give a network of local committees.
LAW AND ORDER
99
Applications for free legal aid in the first instance must be made to the appropriate
local committee, and in appellate proceedings to the area committee concerned. A
successful applicant is allowed to select from a panel a solicitor and, if necessary, a
barrister, to conduct his case. Certain types of action, including libel and slander,
are excluded from the scheme.
In Scotland the legal aid scheme is administered by the Law Society of Scotland
through a supervisory central committee, the Supreme Court committee and sixteen
local committees. Assistance is available in connection with appeals to the House of
Lords from the Court of Session, in civil proceedings before the Court of Session and
the Sheriff Courts and in matters not involving litigation.
Legal Aid in Criminal Courts
Free legal aid is available in the criminal courts in England and Wales under the
Poor Prisoners’ Defence Act, 1930, which provides for the granting of either a legal
aid certificate which entitles the recipient to the services of a solicitor (or, in the case
of a preliminary inquiry into a charge of murder, of a solicitor and counsel) in defending
a charge heard summarily or at a preliminary inquiry, or a defence certificate which
provides both solicitor and counsel in a trial on indictment.
Free legal aid for an appeal to quarter sessions is provided for in the Summary
Jurisdiction (Appeals) Act, 1933, which lays down that, in proper cases, an appeal aid
ceitificate may be granted by a magistrates’ court or quarter sessions. The granting
of legal aid in appeals to the Court of Criminal Appeal rests with a judge of that court
and since the passing of the Administration of Justice Act, i960, that court may also
grant legal aid for the purposes of a further appeal to the House of Lords.
The cost of legal aid in magistrates’ courts is paid out of the Legal Aid Fund. In
the higher courts payments are made in the first instance out of local authority funds
and the cost is reimbursed by the central government.
Under the legal aid scheme, the scale of fees for counsel in criminal cases in the
higher courts ranges between £8 13s. and £64 10s., and for solicitors, between £6 6s.
and £78 I 5S- depending upon the nature of the work done. The maximum fees may be
exceeded in difficult cases.
Pending the full implementation of the Legal Aid and Solicitors (Scotland) Act,
legal aid in criminal cases is afforded to poor persons in Scotland under the Poor’s
Roll system, which is administered on a voluntary basis by the legal profession with the
help of a grant from Government funds.
Legal Advice
Oral advice on legal matters is available, both in England and Wales and in Scotland,
free of charge to persons in receipt of national assistance and at a very reasonable cost,'
i.e. at 2s. 6d. for an interview of up to thirty minutes, to those of limited means.
Advice is given by practising solicitors paid out of the legal aid funds of the two coun¬
tries at the rate of £1 for every half hour. The scheme is administered by the two Law
Societies, which also run voluntary schemes for those who do not qualify for statutory
assistance, where the fee is £1.
Legal Aid in Northern Ireland
In Northern Ii eland, free legal aid in criminal cases is afforded to poor persons
under the Criminal Justice (Northern Ireland) Act, 1945, the cost being met from
public funds.
Legislation providing for a comprehensive system of legal assistance (covering legal
100
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
advice, preliminary legal aid and legal aid by way of representation by solicitor and
counsel in all courts and tribunals) to persons within the income and capital ranges
specified in the Legal Aid Act, i960, was recommended in a majority report of a
committee appointed by the Northern Ireland Minister of Home Affairs, published
in October i960.
TREATMENT OF OFFENDERS
The chief aims of the penal system of the United Kingdom are to deter the potential
law-breaker and to reform the convicted offender. The element of deterrence lies in
the fear of detection, public trial, and possibility of punishment rather than in the
severity of the punishment itself. The treatment of offenders today is based increasingly
on the recognition that the community has a responsibility not simply to punish or
reject the law-breaker but to prevent him from returning to crime.
Penalties
Except in relation to murder and certain rare offences for which there is a fixed
penalty, the court has discretion to select the penalty (within maxima prescribed
by law) that it considers most suitable in the light of the circumstances of the offence
and the offender. In general, the courts have power to impose either imprisonment
or a fine for serious offences (both in certain cases); while most minor offences are
punishable by a fine only, with the alternative of imprisonment if the fine is not paid.
Moreover, the court has discretion, instead of sentencing an offender, to discharge
him absolutely, to place him on probation or, in England and Wales only, to discharge
him conditionally (i.e. subject to the condition that he commits no offence during a
specified period not exceeding twelve months). There are special provisions governing
the treatment of young offenders; and the Criminal Justice Act, 1948, and the Criminal
Justice (Scotland) Act, 1949, provide that no court shall sentence a person under 21
years of age to imprisonment unless they consider that no other method of dealing with
him is appropriate.1 Summary courts are also subject to a similar restriction in sentenc¬
ing adult first offenders to imprisonment.
Two special types of treatment—corrective training and preventive detention—
have been devised to deal with the persistent offender. A sentence of corrective training
of not less than two nor more than four years (seven years in Northern Ireland) may
be imposed on offenders of 21 years of age or over if they are convicted of an offence
punishable with imprisonment for a term of two years or more and have been convicted
of such an offence on at least two previous occasions since attaining the age of 17.
Sentences of preventive detention (primarily for the protection of the public) may be
imposed on persons of not less than 30 years of age, who are found guilty of offences
punishable with imprisonment for a term of two years or more and have been convicted
of such offences on at least three previous occasions since attaining the age of 17, and
have been sentenced to borstal training, imprisonment or corrective training on at
least two of these occasions. A sentence of preventive detention runs for not less than
five years (three in Northern Ireland) or more than 14 years, as the court decides.
Since 1957 the death penalty for murder has been limited to murders classified as
‘capital murder’. These are not necessarily the type of murder regarded as the most
wicked, but are those which strike especially at the maintenance of law and order and
1 In the case of persons under 21 in England and Wales the Criminal Justice Act, 1961,
provides for the eventual abolition of sentences of imprisonment for less than three years (or
in the case of persistent offenders, eighteen months).
LAW AND ORDER
IOI
on which the deterrent effect of capital punishment is believed to be most likely to
operate, i.e. murder done in the course of furtherance of theft, murder by shooting or
by causing an explosion, murder committed to escape lawful arrest or to effect or
assist escape or rescue from legal custody, murder of a police officer (or person assisting
him) acting in the execution of his duty, or murder by a prisoner of a prison officer (or
person assisting him) acting in the execution of his duty. The penalty for murder not
in capital categories is imprisonment for life, except that the death penalty continues
to apply where a person who is convicted of murder has previously been convicted of
another murder committed in Great Britain on a different occasion. Murderers under
the age of 18 years at the time that the crime was committed are not sentenced to death
or to life imprisonment, but ‘to be detained during Her Majesty’s pleasure’. If it can
be proved that a person accused of murder was suffering from such abnormality of
mind as substantially impaired his mental responsibility at the time he committed the
murder, he is entitled to be convicted of the lesser offence of manslaughter.
It is the long-established practice for the Home Secretary or the Secretary of State
for Scotland to review every capital case before the law is allowed to take its course
and to consider whether there are grounds for advising the Crown to exercise the
prerogative of mercy. Where a reprieve is recommended, the sentence of death is
commuted to one of imprisonment for life. A person subject to a sentence of life
imprisonment is liable to be detained for the rest of his life, but the Home Secretary
may, if he thinks fit, release him on licence at any time. In recent years, the average
peiiod served by persons whose death sentences have been commuted has been about
nine years, but the period varies according to the circumstances of the particular
case and the question of whether the prisoner’s discharge would be likely to involve
risk to the public.
In Northern Ireland the exercise of the prerogative of mercy in all capital cases is
considered by the Northern Ireland Cabinet, which tenders advice to the Governor in
his capacity as representative of the Crown.
Administrative Authorities
In England and Wales, the Home Secretary is the minister generally responsible for
legislation relating to the treatment of offenders, for collecting statistical and other
information about the operation of the penal system, for reviewing the advantages and
defects of the various methods of treating offenders, and for bringing information about
these methods to the attention of the courts. He is specifically responsible for super-
vising the approved schools, for promoting the efficiency of the probation service,
and for providing, maintaining and managing prisons and borstal institutions. In
the administration of prisons and borstal institutions the Home Secretary is assisted
by the Prison Commission,1 which is a self-contained department with a separate
parliamentary vote.
The Home Secretary is advised in the discharge of his duties as the central authority
tor all questions relating to the treatment of offenders by the Advisory Council for the
Treatment of Offenders, which also acts as the National Working Party Group for
the Economic and Social Council of the United Nations, and as the National Committee
oi the International Penal and Penitentiary Commission.
Responsibility to the Home Secretary for the formation and application of prison
po icy rests with the Prisons Board, which consists of the five prison commissioners
appointed by the Crown on the recommendation of the Home Secretary, and an
1 The Criminal Justice Act, 1961, provides for the eventual
rrison Commissioners to the Home Secretary.
transfer of the functions of the
102
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
establishment officer. The Prison Commission also comprises nine assistant com¬
missioners—one with special responsibilities for women’s establishments—who are
appointed from the governors of prisons and borstals, and are inspectors under the
Prison Acts. There are also a number of specialist directors, with appropriate profes¬
sional and technical staffs.
The general supervision of penal institutions is the responsibility of visiting com¬
mittees appointed by the justices for those prisons to which convicted persons are
committed direct from their courts, or of boards of visitors appointed by the Home
Secretary for the other prisons and institutions. The main functions of the committees
and boards are: to act as the superior disciplinary authority of the prison or institution;
to constitute an independent judicial body to which any prisoner or inmate may make a
complaint or request; and to report direct to the Home Secretary, both by formal
annual report and as occasion may require, on every aspect of the administration of
the prison. In borstal institutions and central prisons for prisoners sentenced to
preventive detention, the boards also advise the Prison Commission on the release on
licence of the inmates.
The penal system in Scotland is based on principles similar to those applied in
England and Wales, and the Secretary of State for Scotland is advised in the discharge
of his duties by the Scottish Advisory Council on the Treatment of Offenders. In
Northern Ireland the system is the responsibility of the Ministry for Home Affairs.
Prisons
The rising trend in the total number of indictable offences known to the police
has led to severe overcrowding in prisons and has strained the resources of other
agencies, such as borstals, approved schools and the probation service. Measures to
deal with the problems include plans for a substantial increase in the number of
prisons and the other institutions mentioned above, and the reconstruction or replace¬
ment of a number of old prisons.
Prisons in England and Wales are of the following types: local prisons of the ordinary
type, which receive all classes of prisoners direct from the courts; local prisons of a
special type, which may be open or walled, for short-sentence prisoners, chiefly first
offenders; four young prisoners’ centres for the reception of youths under 21 years of
age with sentences of three months or over, as far as accommodation permits; regional
training prisons (some of which are open) for first offenders and trainable prisoners
of other categories, including those sentenced to corrective training; and central
prisons for habitual law-breakers, prisoners sentenced to preventive detention and
long-term first offenders—one for the latter class is an open prison.
The Scottish system of classification of prisoners is broadly the same as that of
England and Wales; but each prison in Scotland, except the open prison, accommo¬
dates more than one classification group. In Northern Ireland, with its smaller popu¬
lation, the necessity for several kinds of prison to separate the various classes of
prisoners does not arise to the same extent. There are 50 prison establishments in
England and Wales, 9 in Scotland, and 2 in Northern Ireland.
At the beginning of 1961 the total number of Prison Commission staff in England
and Wales was 9,680, including 335 part-time staff. Eight per cent of the total staff
were women. In Scotland, the total staff was 1,028 (including 69 women), and in
Northern Ireland, 185 (including 18 women).
Classification of Prisoners
Every person committed to prison is received in the local prison serving the court
LAW AND ORDER
103
from which he is committed. Subsequently, he may either serve his whole sentence
at the local prison or be sent to another institution, depending on his age, the length
and nature of his sentence, and his personal history and character.
The object of classification is first to ensure the separation of the sexes, of young
persons from adults, of untried prisoners from convicted prisoners and of civil
prisoners from criminal prisoners; secondly, to prevent contamination, among con¬
victed prisoners, of the better by the worse; and thirdly, to provide training appropriate
to their needs for those among convicted prisoners who seem likely to benefit there¬
from.
Training
In prison training, efforts are being made to provide (1) work of a kind likely to
help fit prisoners to earn their living after release with technical training in skilled
trades for certain persons, (2) suitable educational facilities, and (3) opportunities for
the development of a sense of personal responsibility, including (for suitable persons)
training in open conditions.
A system of vocational training courses in skilled trades, designed to enable the
trainees to take the examinations of recognised examining bodies, is being developed
in central and training prisons. In 1961 there were 88 such courses, concerning 26
different trades, in the various prisons, and more than 1,500 inmates were taking part.
The standard of training was such that just over 70 per cent of entrants (some 300 in
1961) passed the external examinations.
Employment
New problems in the organisation and management of industries in prisons have
arisen as the result of changes that have taken place both in industrial methods and
in the prison system during the past thirty years, and because of the substantial
increase in the number of prison inmates for whom employment must be found.
The whole subject is therefore being studied by a standing Advisory Council on the
Employment of Prisoners, appointed by the Home Secretary and the Secretary of
State for Scotland, which published its first report in 1961. Among the subjects that
it has so far studied are the value of suitable work as part of the training of inmates,
suitable kinds of work, job training, and earnings.
Prison industries in England and Wales are controlled by a member of the Prison
Commission who, as the Director of Industries and Stores, has a head office staff of
technical officers, supervisors, and industrial managers at the prisons. An Assistant
Commissioner for Industries has been appointed to help carry out any recommenda¬
tions which the Advisory Council on the Employment of Prisoners may make. In
Scotland, prison industries are under the control of the Supervisor of Industries, who
is a member of the Scottish Home Department and is assisted by two technical
assistants at head office and four industrial managers at the prisons.
Except in local prisons, where the hours are shorter, most prisoners spend about
40 hours a week in the prison workshops or in other employment such as building,
farm work, domestic work and gardening in the prison precincts. A few prisoners are
employed outside the prisons on various projects of public value, such as agriculture,
land drainage, road works, and forestry.
In England, Wales, and Scotland, small payments are made to inmates for the work
they do, and good work is rewarded by payments above the minimum; in Northern
Ireland there is a progressive system of earnings, which is not related to output nor
to work done.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
I04
Education
Educational schemes are provided in prisons in England, Wales, and Scotland
by the local education authorities with the advice of the Government departments
responsible for education in their respective countries, and in Northern Ireland by
the Ministry of Home Affairs. The local authorities are reimbursed for the full cost
of their services, and the work in England and Wales is under the organisational control
of the Assistant Commissioner for Education in the Prison Commission. Evening
institutes have been established; and a wide range of correspondence courses is made
available for those who have a serious desire to improve their education and qualifica¬
tions.
Educational schemes are supplemented by periodical lectures, film displays, concerts,
and dramatic performances. Prisoners may also use the prison library, which in most
cases is now stocked by the county, city or borough library committee.
Medical Services
Medical attention is provided by full-time and part-time medical officers under the
supervision of the Director of Medical Services at the Prison Commission. The medical
officer’s duties include not only the care of the physical and mental health of prison
inmates, but also the oversight of those services which affect health in prisons.
Three prisons and one borstal in England and Wales and three prisons and one
borstal in Scotland have their own psychiatric clinics (with qualified medical staff,
visiting psychotherapists and psychiatric social workers) to which inmates may be
transferred if, in the opinion of the relevant medical officer, they would benefit by
psychiatric treatment. Elsewhere, prisoners may, if necessary, be sent for treatment to
psychiatric hospitals outside the prisons. Arrangements may also be made (for prisoners
serving short-term sentences) for appropriate treatment after release. The building of a
central psychiatric hospital for England and Wales, with accommodation for 350
patients, should be completed by 1962.
There is also a psychological service for prisons in England and Wales, whose officers
are employed to assist governors and medical officers in their work of examining and
classifying prisoners, and to advise on methods of treatment.
Religion and Welfare
A chaplain of the Church of England (in Scotland, of the Church of Scotland and
in Northern Ireland, of the Church of Ireland and Presbyterian Church) and a Roman
Catholic priest are appointed to every prison. Ministers of the Methodist Church and
of other denominations are either appointed or specially called in as required. Regular
services are held, and chaplains and other ministers may visit prisoners in their cells.
There is a chaplain inspector on the Prison Commission.
Welfare is the general concern of the prison staff, particularly of the chaplains and
assistant governors; specialised work in this field is the responsibility of the resident
prison welfare officer (of whom there are some 50 in England and Wales and five in
Scotland), or of a visiting welfare officer.
Prisoners may be visited by their relatives and friends at specified intervals and,
in England and Wales, by recognised prison visitors asked to serve in this field by
the Prison Commission. The voluntary work of these visitors is co-ordinated and
guided by the National Association of Prison Visitors.
Privileges and Discipline
On reception under sentence, all prisoners, except those sentenced to preventive
LAW AND ORDER
105
detention or to imprisonment for life, are credited with remission of one-third of their
sentence (one-fourth in Northern Ireland in respect of sentences of less than two years),
provided that this does not reduce their sentence below 31 days (in Scotland, 30 days)!
A prisoner sentenced to preventive detention becomes eligible for release on licence
after serving two-thirds or five-sixths of his sentence (in Northern Ireland, two years,
or one-half of his sentence, whichever is greater) according to an assessment of his
character, conduct and prospects, which is made after he has served a substantial
part of his sentence and a life prisoner may be released on licence by the Home
Secretary (see p.101). All prisoners become entitled to certain personal privileges at
successive stages in their sentence.
For breaches of discipline in prison, the prison governor, the visiting committee
or the board of visitors have power to order forfeiture of remission (or postponement
of the date of release) and forfeiture of privileges.
Discharge and After-Care
Pre-release courses, at which experts hold open forum with prisoners nearing their
release on the domestic, social and industrial problems with which they are likely to
be faced, are conducted at all prisons. Specially selected men amongst those sentenced
to preventive detention and long-term imprisonment are allowed to work, as free men,
in ordinary civilian jobs outside prison during the last six months of their sentence;
hostels for this purpose have been established at 11 prisons in England where there
are reasonable prospects of employment and similar hostels are proposed for more
than one Scottish prison. Home leave, allowing five clear days at home, is extensively
granted to many categories of prisoners with sentences of two years or over towards
the end of their sentences to enable them to make family adjustments and contacts
with potential employers.
On discharge from local or regional prisons, certain classes of prisoners serving
sentences of less than four years (three years in the case of most women) are assisted
y local discharged prisoners aid societies (voluntary bodies supported partly by
private and partly by public funds) or by the National Association of Discharged
Prisoners’ Aid Societies (a central co-ordinating body, maintained by grants from
public funds for its administrative expenses). The local societies are advised by prison
welfare officers, employed by the National Association, who work at the prisons. In
Scotland the prison welfare officers are employed by the Scottish Home Department.
he National Association is also responsible for welfare and after-care arrangements
at regional training prisons and special local prisons.
Statutory supervision in England and Wales applies, generally speaking, to persistent
offenders and those serving sentences of four years or more, to young prisoners, and
persons discharged from borstals. The sanctions for failure to observe the conditions
of supervision are recall to prison or borstal. Statutory supervision is the responsibility
of the Central After-Care Association, a voluntary body financed from public funds
and governed by a council appointed by the Home Secretary, which includes in its
membership representatives of the Ministry of Labour, of the National Assistance
Board and of the probation service. The After-Care Council, appointed by the Secre¬
tary of State for Scotland, carries out similar duties in Scotland.
The Central After-Care Association works through local associates, usually proba¬
tion officers, and the National Association normally works through the after-care
officers of local aid societies. The After-Care Council in Scotland uses the services of
voluntary guardians. The officers of the local organisations make all arrangements
io6
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
for the reception of the prisoner after his discharge, and will advise, assist and befriend
him for as long as is necessary, or required by statute.
In Northern Ireland the after-care of all prisoners is carried out by the discharged
prisoners’ aid societies with the help of probation officers.
Treatment of Young Offenders
Under the English and Scottish legal systems, a child under the age of eight cannot
be charged with an offence. A child between eight and 14 years old, who is charged
with an offence other than homicide, must be dealt with in a juvenile court, unless
charged jointly with an adult.
In England and Wales a young person between 14 and 17 years of age charged
with an indictable offence may be dealt with summarily (as is usually the case) or
committed for trial by jury. In certain cases young persons may claim to be tried by
jury, though this right is rarely exercised. In Scotland and Northern Ireland all young
persons up to the age of 17 years who are charged with offences must be dealt with
in juvenile courts, unless they have been charged in conjunction with adult offenders.
The following methods of treatment are available in law for dealing with children
and young persons who have been found guilty of committing an offence: absolute
discharge; conditional discharge (in England and Wales only); fines imposed upon
the offender or, in certain circumstances, upon his parents; probation; committal
to the care of a fit person (normally the appropriate local authority) until the age of
18; or a period of detention in one of the different types of institution which are
available when institutional treatment is considered necessary. Under the Criminal
Justice Act, 1961, no young person in England and Wales under the age of 17 may be
sentenced to imprisonment.
Remand
In England, Wales and Scotland, remand homes are provided by local authorities
for the custody of boys and girls under the age of 17 before their appearance in court,
or between court appearances (while inquiries are made as to the best method of
treatment for them), while they are awaiting vacancies in approved schools, or for a
short period (up to a month) of punitive detention. In Northern Ireland the respon¬
sibility for providing or arranging for the provision of remand homes rests with the
Ministry of Home Affairs.
In addition to remand homes, remand centres are being established in England and
Wales, to which a court may send young persons between the ages of 17 and 21 who
would otherwise be remanded to prison, and those under 17 years old who are unsuit¬
able for remand homes. The first of these centres was opened in Middlesex in 1961
and eight more, covering the rest of the country, are due to be completed within the
next three years. In Scotland, plans are in preparation for the first remand centre.
The system of remand offers valuable opportunities for observation, the results of
which are included in reports for the guidance of those responsible for the future of
young offenders.
Approved Schools
Approved schools are residential schools for the education and training of young
offenders and children committed to them by the courts as in need of care or protec¬
tion. These schools may be provided by local authorities, by voluntary organisations
concerned with the welfare of children on a national scale, or by local committees
formed by people interested in such work. In England and Wales the schools must be
LAW AND ORDER
I07
approved by the Home Secretary; in Scotland, by the Secretary of State for Scotland-
and in Northern Ireland, by the Minister of Home Affairs. The number of approved
schools in England and Wales in 1961 was 117. There are 23 approved schools in
Scotland, and five (known as training schools) in Northern Ireland.
The schools are for boys only or for girls only. They are classified according to the
ages of the children on admission, and include separate schools for Roman Catholic
children. The assignment of a child to a school in the appropriate age group is deter¬
mined by such considerations as the location of the school in relation to the child’s
home, the type of training provided, and the probable reaction of a child to the
individual personalities of the staff.
In general, the education given in approved schools follows the lines of that given
in ordinary schools, with vocational training for older boys and girls: the emphasis is
on family rehabilitation (parents are encouraged to visit the schools and home leave is
being increasingly used to help the child and his family to solve their problems), and
close attention is given to after-care.
The period during which a child or young person may be detained in an approved
school is determined by law. In Great Britain it is three years, except for children
under the age of 12 years and 4 months at the time of committal, who may be kept
until the age of 15 years and 4 months, and those over the age of 16 on committal,
who can be detained only up to the age of 19, or 19I, if they have been found guilty
of absconding or of serious misconduct in an approved school. Children over the age of
15 who present a serious threat to the discipline of a school may be temporarily trans¬
ferred on a justice’s warrant to another establishment. Those who have proved un¬
suitable for approved school may, with the consent of the Home Secretary, be brought
before a magistrate’s court, which has power to order removal to borstal. Managers of
all approved schools are under an obligation to review the progress of each child in
their school with a view to granting a release as soon as the situation warrants it, but
not within the first six months of the detention period without the consent of the Home
Secretary.
Statutory responsibility for after-care rests on the school managers. A boy or girl
on release remains under the care of the managers during the periods of licence and
supervision. The period of licence lasts until the expiry of the time for which the boy
or girl might have been legally detained in the school. The period of supervision
lasts for three years more, or until the boy or girl reaches the age of 21, whichever is
the shorter period. Managers are assisted in their after-care work by welfare officers
and the probation and child care services.
Attendance Centres
Forty-two attendance centres have been established in England and Wales to
deal with boys between the ages of 10 and 17 found guilty of offences for which an
adult can be sentenced to imprisonment. This form of treatment is designed to teach
young offenders a respect for the law and to give them some instruction in the proper
use of leisure. Boys ordered to attend must do so during their spare time on Saturday
mornings or afternoons; they may be required to attend for up to three hours on any
one occasion and for a total of not less than twelve hours (with certain exceptions) and
not more than twenty-four. The activities include a period of instruction in handicrafts,
or a lecture (for example, on first aid) and a period of physical training or disciplinary
tasks under supervision. Efforts are made at the centres to induce the boys to join a
youth club or other suitable organisation.
An experimental centre for youths aged 17 to 21 has been established in Manchester.
io8
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
This operates on similar lines to those adopted at the juvenile centres, but the activities
have been adapted to meet the needs of the older age group.
Detention Centres
Detention centres provide a means of treating young offenders for whom a long
period of residential training in an approved school or borstal does not seem necessary,
but who cannot be taught respect for the law by such measures as fines or probation.
The sentence is short; the intention is primarily deterrent; and the life of a centre is
therefore strict and vigorous, demanding a brisk tempo and the highest possible stan¬
dard of discipline and behaviour in every aspect of training. The routine provides a
normal working week of 44 hours, including one hour daily devoted to physical
training, and experience has shown that much positive training can be given within
the limits of this framework. Boys of compulsory school age receive full-time educa¬
tion, and classes of further education are provided for others in the evenings. In
1961 nine detention centres were open in England and Wales: two junior centres for
boys over 14 and under 17 years of age, accommodating about 70 and 60 boys respec¬
tively, and seven senior centres for youths over 17 and under 21 years of age, accom¬
modating about 75 and 65 each. Further centres, making a total of 14, are planned.
In Scotland the first senior centre was opened in i960 and the first junior centre
will be opened in 1962, each with accommodation for 60 inmates; a further two centres
are planned.
Borstal Institutions
There are various types of borstal institution, which aim to provide suitable con¬
ditions and training courses for different types of young offenders between the ages
of 16 and 21 years. At the beginning of 1961 there were 23 borstals for youths in
England and Wales. Nineteen of these were training borstals, two were reception
centres (where allocation is made), one was a correction centre and one a recall centre.
For girls there is one open borstal, and while a new security borstal is being built
girls who must be kept in security conditions are being trained in separate parts of
selected women’s prisons. In Scotland there are four training borstals and one recall
centre for youths and one training borstal for girls; and in Northern Ireland, one
training borstal for youths and one for girls. The period of the sentence1 ranges
between a minimum of nine months detention to a maximum of three years, with the
total period of control extending to four years (three years in Scotland and Northern
Ireland), divided between training in a borstal institution and controlled freedom under
statutory supervision. In Scotland there is no minimum period of detention, and the
supervision period is for one year from the date of release from the institution. The
system is essentially remedial and educational, based on personal training by a carefully
selected staff. Emphasis is placed on vocational training in skilled trades; there is
much freedom of movement, and many borstals are conducted in open conditions. An
initial period of classification ensures that each young offender is sent to the institution
best suited to his or her requirements.
Probation
The probation service is designed to secure the rehabilitation of an offender while
he remains at work or at school under the supervision of a probation officer, whose duty
1 When the relevant provisions of the Criminal Justice Act, 1961, are in force the period of
detention will range between six months and two years and will be followed by supervision for
two years from the date of release.
LAW AND ORDER
109
it is to advise, assist and befriend him. A cardinal feature of the service is that it
relies on the co-operation of the offender. Before making a probation order, the court
must explain its effects and make sure that the probationer understands that if he fails
to comply with the requirements of the order he will be liable to be dealt with for the
original offence. A probation order cannot be made without the consent of the person
concerned unless (in England, Wales, and Northern Ireland only) he is under 14
years of age. The order usually requires the probationer to keep in regular touch with
the probation officer, to be of good behaviour and to lead an industrious life. It may
also require him to live in a specified place, or to submit to treatment for his mental
condition. A probation order is made for not less than one year and not more than
three years.
Every magistrates court and superior criminal court must have available the services
of probation officers of both sexes. In 1961 the total numbers were: 1,680 whole¬
time and 50 part-time probation officers in England and Wales, 19 whole-time and
one part-time in Northern Ireland, and 170 whole-time and 31 part-time in Scotland.
In London the appointment of probation officers is the responsibility of the Home
Secretary, and in Northern Ireland of the Ministry of Home Affairs; elsewhere it is
the responsibility of probation committees appointed by magistrates in England and
Wales, and by local authorities in Scotland (except for certain ex officio members),
but first appointments are subject to confirmation by the Home Secretary and the
Secretary of State for Scotland respectively. Training facilities in England and Wales
are provided by the Home Office on the advice of the Probation Advisory and
Training Board and are made available, by arrangement, to Northern Ireland officers.
In Scotland training is provided during the first year of appointment and before
the officer is allowed to make probation work his permanent career.
Research
Research into the causes and prevention of crime and into various methods of dealing
with offenders is increasingly recognised as of vital importance in dealing v/ith the
problems of delinquency, more especially in view of the continued rise in crime which
has been a disquieting feature of the social scene since the end of the second world
war. Such research is being undertaken by the Institute of Criminology in Cambridge
University which, in addition to its research activities, conducts advanced courses in
criminology for people engaged in work relating to the treatment of offenders and the
administration of the criminal law, and a postgraduate course in criminology. A
number of other academic organisations, including the Tavistock Institute of Human
Relations, the London School of Economics, Birkbeck College, the Institute of
Psychiatry at the Maudsley Hospital, Denmark Hill, the Department of Social Ad¬
ministration at Manchester University and, in Scotland, the universities of Glasgow
and Edinburgh, are also studying various aspects of the problem. The research unit
at the Home Office, which is associated with some of the academic projects, also has
its own programme of research.
Special Inquiries
In addition to research, special inquiries into particular questions are conducted as
necessary, by advisory bodies or specially appointed committees. Reports have recently
been issued by the Advisory Councils on the Treatment of Offenders (seep. ioi)on
such matters as alternatives to short-term imprisonment, the after-care and super¬
vision of discharged prisoners, the treatment of young offenders, and corporal
punishment. Among other committees which have recently submitted reports are the
no
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Home Office Departmental Committee on Children and Young Persons, which made
125 recommendations on various legal and administrative aspects of the working of the
law in England and Wales concerning young delinquents and children in need of care
and protection; and the Interdepartmental Committee on the Business of the Criminal
Courts, which recommended a number of changes in the present arrangements in
England and Wales for bringing to trial persons charged with criminal offences and for
providing the courts with the information necessary to enable them to select the most
appropriate treatment for offenders.
THE POLICE SERVICE
The police service of Great Britain is organised and controlled on a local basis under
the guidance of those Ministers of the Crown who are responsible for the maintenance
of law and order in their respective countries. In England and Wales the responsible
minister is the Home Secretary; in Scotland, the Secretary of State for Scotland. In
Northern Ireland the police force is controlled by an Inspector-General, who is
responsible to the Minister of Home Affairs.
POLICE IN GREAT BRITAIN
Police Forces
There are 125 separate, independent police forces in England and Wales, defined
according to area of responsibility as: county forces; borough forces; combined
forces, which are forces whose area of responsibility extends over neighbouring
counties or boroughs; the metropolitan police force, which is responsible for an area
of approximately fifteen miles radius from Charing Cross, but excluding the City of
London; and the City of London force. In Scotland there are 33 forces, including
county forces, burgh forces and combined forces.
In England and Wales and Scotland police forces vary considerably in size accord¬
ing to the area and population which they serve. Thus the metropolitan police force
has a strength of approximately 17,000, while that of the smallest force in Scotland is
16.
The strength of the regular police force in Great Britain in 1961 was approximately
82,100, including women. This is considerably below the desirable figure, but it is
hoped that the increase in the pay of police officers which came into force in i960 will
assist recruitment and prevent trained policemen leaving the service before the retiring
age.
In addition to the regular police forces, there are part-time special constables;
the police of certain public services, e.g., the British Transport Commission police,
the civil aviation constabulary, the Port of London Authority police and other dock
and harbour forces (who have duties and powers analogous to those of ordinary
constables but limited to the premises and immediate neighbourhoods of their employ¬
ers); and the police of the Service departments—the Admiralty constabulary, the
War Department constabulary which guards War Office lands and military property,
the Royal Marine police, who are employed chiefly in dockyards, and the Air Ministry
constabulary.
Police Authorities
In the counties of England and Wales the police authority is the standing joint
committee, half of whose members are members of the county council while the other
half are justices of the peace. In the boroughs the police authority is known as the
‘watch committee’ and is elected by the council from among its members. The police
LAW AND ORDER
III
authority of a combined force is made up of representatives of the constituent areas as
prescribed in the scheme under which they combine.
The police authority for the metropolitan police force is the Home Secretary. In
the City of London, the Court of Common Council is the police authority, although it
usually appoints a standing committee to deal with all police matters on its behalf.
In Scotland the police authority for the counties is the county or joint county
council; in the large burghs it is the town council; where there are combined forces
there is a joint police committee.
It is the statutory duty of the police authorities to establish and maintain efficient
police forces for their areas. They are responsible for the appointment of the chief
officer of police in their areas, subject to the approval of the Home Secretary in the
provinces of England and Wales, of the Crown in the City of London, and, in Scotland,
of the Secretary of State. In the metropolitan police district, the chief officer of police
and tus immediate subordinates are appointed by the Crown on the recommendation
of the Home Secretary.
The police authorities are also responsible (with the approval of the Home Secretary
or the Secretary of State for Scotland) for the size of their forces; for paying the
members of the forces their salaries; for providing and maintaining police premises;
and for exercising disciplinary functions in relation to the most senior officers.
Central Authority
Co-ordination in the administration of the police service is exercised through detailed
police regulations which are made by the Home Secretary and the Secretary of State
for Scotland under the Police Act, 1919, the Police (Scotland) Act, 1956, and under
the Police (Pensions) Acts. The police regulations cover such matters as organisation,
discipline, pay, allowances, pensions, clothing, and conditions of service of the mem¬
bers of all police forces to which the Acts apply.
The Police Council for Great Britain, which is representative on the one side of all
mnks of the police service and on the other of the local police authorities, the Home
Office and the Scottish Home Department, has power to reach agreement on conditions
of service in the police forces, including police pay, and on certain procedural matters.
It also advises the ministers on police pensions and any other matter which may be
referred to it by the ministers or any other body concerned. In their supervisory
responsibilities the ministers are assisted by Her Majesty’s Inspectors of Constabulary,
o whom there were five (in addition to a woman assistant inspector for the women
police) in England and Wales, and one (in addition to a part-time woman inspector)
in Scotland m 1961. Each inspector is responsible for a certain number of forces,
and satisfies himself of their continuing efficiency by annual inspection, ad hoc visits
and consultations when particular problems arise. The inspectors report to the
ministers on the condition of all the forces, with the exception of the metro¬
politan police force, for which the Home Secretary has responsibility as police authority
and which is not inspected.
All police authorities receive a Government grant equal to half their net expenditure
reckoned in accordance with the provisions of orders made under the Miscellaneous
hmancial Provisions Act, 1950 (as regards England and Wales), and the Police (Scot-
j u Ct’ ^aS re&ards Scotland). These orders empower the Home Secretary
and the Secretary of State for Scotland to withhold the grant, in whole or in part,
permanently or for such time as they may determine, if they are not satisfied that a
police area is efficiently policed, that a force is properly maintained and administered,
or that the rates of pay or allowances are as prescribed or approved by them.
112
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Police Officers
There are several different kinds of police officer in Great Britain: regular police
officers who usually serve for 25 years or more and thereafter retire on pension;
members of the first police reserve, which is composed almost entirely of police
pensioners or men with previous police experience who are prepared to give whole¬
time paid service to a particular force in an emergency, whether national or local;
and special constables, who are volunteers who perform short periods of duty without
pay in their spare time from their normal occupations.1
In general, entry to the regular police force is open to men between the ages of 19
and 30, although an exception may be made, in special circumstances approved by the
ministers and on the recommendation of the appointing authority, in the case of men
of over 30 years of age. Women entrants in England and Wales must be between the
ages of 20 and 35, and in Scotland between 20 and 30 years old. The standard police
ranks in Great Britain, except in the metropolitan police district, are: chief constable,
superintendent, inspector, sergeant and constable. The following ranks may also be
adopted in areas where varying degrees of responsibility make intermediate ranks
necessary: assistant chief constable, chief superintendent, chief inspector and, in
England and Wales only, station inspector, station sergeant and acting sergeant. In
the metropolitan police district the chief officer is the Commissioner of Police of the
Metropolis. He is assisted by a deputy commissioner and four assistant commissioners.
Next in rank are commanders, then deputy commanders; thereafter (i.e. from chief
superintendent downwards) the ranks are the same as in the rest of the country. In
the City of London the ranks are the same as in the provinces, except that the chief
officer is the Commissioner of Police and the second in command is an assistant
commissioner.
No member of the police service may belong to a trade union, since it is a basic
principle of the service that its members must not only be free from political bias,
but must also be seen to be free of it. The Police Act, 1919, however, laid it down
that the police should have statutory representative organisations of their own. There
are now several organisations representing the various police ranks, including the
Police Federation in England and Wales and the Scottish Police Federation, to which
all inspectors, sergeants and constables belong. Any branch or committee of the
federations may make representations to the chief officer or police authority concerned
or to the appropriate minister. Delegates from the joint central committees of the two
federations sit on the police councils.
Police Cadets
Police cadets are recruited by most forces from among youths between 15 and 18
years of age, so that prospective constables shall have had some training and have
gained sufficient insight into police duties to make reasonably certain that they wish
to stay in the police service before they undergo constable’s training. A few forces
also recruit girl cadets.
Civil Staff
A number of police authorities employ civilians as shorthand-typists, switchboard
operators, mechanics, canteen staff and cleaners, in order to release uniformed person¬
nel for police duties. In 1961 the civil staff in these categories employed by the
1 In Scotland the employment of special constables, other than in emergencies, is subject
to strict limitations.
LAW AND ORDER
Ir3
police authorities in England and Wales (outside the metropolitan district) was n-8
per cent of the actual strength of the uniformed force.
Traffic Wardens
Under new legislation, traffic wardens are employed in London and several other
areas to assist the police m dealing with the problems created by parked vehicles. In
specially designated areas traffic wardens have power to give motorists who have
committed certain parking offences an option to pay a fixed penalty to the clerk of the
appropriate magistrates court instead of having their cases tried.
Police Duties
Every police officer in Great Britain is an independent holder of a public office.
His powers as a constable, whether conferred by statute or by common law are
exercised by him by virtue of his office and cannot be exercised on the responsibilitv
of any person but himself. Thus, a police officer is personally answerable at law for
any wrongful act. He is not the servant of the police authority, and in discharging his
duties must rely on his own good sense, discretion and knowledge of the law.
The many and varied functions of a police officer as a constable range from the pro¬
tection of persons and property, road or street patrolling and traffic control to criminal
investigation, the apprehension of offenders, and, in England and Wales, the prepara¬
tion and presentation of straightforward cases in magistrates’ courts.
All police forces have their own criminal investigation departments, and many
have other specialised departments, including motor patrols, river police (in districts
which include long stretches of navigable waterway), a mounted branch (for main¬
taining order and safety in large crowds), and police dogs.
Centrally Hun Services
During recent years a number of common services have been established to supple¬
ment those provided by the police authorities for their own use. In England and Wales
such services include a training service, which provides eight residential district
training centres and a central police college; an installation and maintenance service
of wireless equipment for the police; a forensic science service, which provides labora¬
tories for the use of regional groups of forces; and arrangements for conducting
centralised police promotion examinations. In Scotland there is a central police
college, which provides training courses for recruits and courses of higher training-
but the installation and maintenance of wireless equipment is a direct charge
upon the police authorities concerned and there is no centrally run forensic science
service. The resources of the Glasgow police force’s criminal investigation department
(which includes an extensive laboratory service) are, however, made available to other
forces, and the universities of Aberdeen, Edinburgh, Glasgow and St. Andrews
render assistance when required.
A number of national services are provided by the metropolitan police force whose
functions in this respect include: (i) the maintenance of criminal records1 * * and finger
prints, which are available to all police forces of the United Kingdom and to certain
oreign forces; (2) the publication of the Police Gazette* which contains particulars
of people wanted for crime and details of stolen property, and is supplied without
1 There arc, in addition to the Criminal Record Office at New Scotland Yarrl Q q .
cnmmalRecordMicemGlMg0wandregionalcriminalrec„rdofflce8inpar,so4^1a^dan!w2i
ScoltM m GlaSg0W iS resP<'"sibIe for «he publication of the
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
II4
charge to the police forces of the United Kingdom and to certain other Common¬
wealth and foreign forces; (3) the organisation and control of the special branch of the
criminal investigation department at New Scotland Yard, whose duties include the
physical protection of royalty, some ministers, and distinguished foreign visitors;
and (4) the carrying out of extradition orders made by the courts. The metropolitan
police force also provides the United Kingdom bureau of the International Criminal
Police Organisation (Interpol). For certain of these services, the metropolitan police
force receives an additional Exchequer grant.
Royal Commission on the Police
A Royal Commission on the Police was appointed in i960 to review the constitu¬
tional position of the police throughout Great Britain and the arrangements for their
administration and control. Particular matters being considered by the commission
are: the constitution and functions of local police authorities; the status and account¬
ability of police forces, including chief officers of police; the relationship of the
police with the public and the means of ensuring that complaints by the public against
the police are effectively dealt with; and the broad principles which should govern
the remuneration of constables. The commission issued an interim report in Novem¬
ber i960, recommending substantial increases in the pay of constables. The recom¬
mendation was accepted by the Government and brought into force. Consequential
increases in the pay of other ranks of the police service followed.
POLICE IN NORTHERN IRELAND
The Royal Ulster Constabulary comes under the direction of the Inspector General,
who is responsible to the Minister of Home Affairs. It undertakes the policing of the
whole of Northern Ireland, its cost being borne by the Northern Ireland Exchequer
with a nominal contribution from the county borough of Belfast.
The strength of the Royal Ulster Constabulary in 1961 was approximately 2,930,
including women. The Inspector General has, under his immediate command, a
deputy inspector general, a commissioner for the City of Belfast, and a county inspector
for each of the six counties. The area is further sub-divided into districts, each
district coming under a district inspector and each sub-district under a head constable
or a sergeant. Conditions of service and pay follow closely on the lines of the police
service in Great Britain, and the general duties pertaining to the various ranks are
much the same. Although the more senior ranks bear different titles, the ranks of
head constable, sergeant and constable are broadly equivalent to the three junior
ranks in the police service of Great Britain.
The Ulster Special Constabulary also comes under the direction of the Inspector
General. In the main, this force is a part-time body, and, apart from training, its
duties consist in affording assistance to the Royal Ulster Constabulary on special
occasions; if necessary, however, its part-time personnel may be mobilised for full¬
time duty. In 1961 the Ulster Special Constabulary included some 13,300 part-time
members (of whom about 1,400 were mobilised) and just over 100 full-time personnel.
IV. DEFENCE
THE DEFENCE SYSTEM
An adequate general survey of the principles which govern United Kingdom
defence policy is possible only in the wider context of the United Kingdom’s inter¬
national relationships, its place in the Commonwealth and in world affairs, and its
responsibilities towards British dependent and protected territories—subjects which
as explained in the Introduction, fall outside the scope of this handbook. This chapter’
therefore, can attempt little more than an outline of the present pattern of the
development of Britain’s armed forces.
DEFENCE POLICY
The national defence policy has been increasingly based on the realisation that no
country can protect itself in isolation and the defence of Britain is possible only as
part of a system of collective defence. Policy is therefore determined largely by Britain’s
obligations to contribute to the collective defence organisations of which it is a member
™pT,f0fhrAtlan?^TreaV0rga‘,isati0n (NAT°) “d Western European Union
V ; r,hi <7™t'a Treaty Organisation (CENTO, formerly the Baghdad Pact), and
the bEATO defence system in South-East Asia—and to contribute to the long-ranee
nuclear forces of the West, as well as to discharge its own special responsibilities in
many parts of the world; and defence planning is carried out in close co-operation
with Britain s partners in these organisations.
Close liaison is maintained with other Commonwealth countries, between whose
orces there is considerable standardisation of equipment, weapons and training
techniques and interchange of personnel. 6
At the same time the United Kingdom continues to work for the attainment of
international agreement on disarmament under effective control.
Machinery of Higher Defence Planning
Supreme responsibility for national defence rests, under the ultimate control of
Parliament (which makes annual financial provision for defence needs), with the
rime Minister and the Cabinet. Subject to this supreme responsibility, defence
problems which engage the collective responsibility of the Cabinet are normally handled
T?6^111^8 bchal^y th? Defence Committee, meeting under the chairmanship
of the Prime Minister. 1 he Prime Minister determines which members of the Defence
Committee should attend particular meetings of the committee, according to the
subjects to be discussed and the ministerial responsibilities involved The Minister
of Defence, who is a member of the Cabinet and of the Defence Committee, answers
to Parliament for all matters of policy common to the three fighting Services—the
Royal Navy, the Army and the Royal Air Force. The minister has authority to decide
(subject to the responsibilities of the Cabinet and the Defence Committee) all major
matters of defence policy affecting the size, shape, organisation and disposition of
the armed forces, and their weapons and war-like equipment and supply (including
IIS
n6
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
defence research and development). He is also ministerially responsible to the Prime
Minister for the execution of military operations approved by the Cabinet or the
Defence Committee. Recommendations for the more important Service appointments
are submitted by the Service ministers (the First Lord of the Admiralty, the Secretary
of State for War, who deals with the Army, and the Secretary of State for Air) for the
approval of the Minister of Defence, who, in appropriate cases, seeks the covering
approval of the Prime Minister.
The Service ministers working through the Board of Admiralty and the Army
and Air Councils, are responsible for the efficiency and administration of the three
Services. The Minister of Aviation is responsible for the supply to the Services of
aircraft, guided and nuclear weapons, and electronic equipment. All these ministers
are members of the Defence Committee; consultation on defence policy between them
and the Minister of Defence and discussion of inter-Service problems take place at
meetings of the Defence Board, of which the Minister of Defence is chairman.
The Chiefs of Staff Committee, wrhich comprises the Chief of the Defence Staff
(who is principal military adviser to the Minister of Defence), as chairman, and the
professional heads of the three Services, is collectively responsible to the Government
for professional advice on strategy and military operations and on the military implica¬
tions of defence policy generally. Its collective advice is given to the Minister of
Defence by the Chief of the Defence Staff, who tenders his own advice, together with
the view's of the other members of the committee, if the committee cannot reach
agreement. The Chief of the Defence Staff is responsible for issuing operational
orders, and he is entitled to call on the respective Chiefs of Staff to make available, to
assist him in his functions, the services of the Naval, General and Air Staffs. The
Chiefs of Staff are members of the Defence Board, are in attendance at meetings of the
Defence Committee and may be invited to attend meetings of the full Cabinet as
necessary; they have at all times a right of access to the Minister of Defence and, when
necessary, to the Prime Minister.
Britain’s defence policy is reviewed each year in a White Paper presented to Parlia¬
ment by the Minister of Defence immediately before the detailed Estimates of the
Service departments.
The White Paper for 1957—Defence: Outline of Future Policy [Cmnd. 124)—set out
a five-year plan for the reshaping of the defence forces in the light of changes in the
international situation, the rapid progress in military technology, and the need to
relieve the burden which defence requirements had been imposing on the country’s
financial and economic strength. This programme, described in the White Paper as
involving ‘the biggest change in military policy ever made in normal times’ is now being
put into effect, and progress during the first four years was reviewed in the White
Papers of 1958 {Cmnd. 363), 1959 {Cmnd. 662), i960 {Cmnd. 952) and 1961 {Cmnd.
1288).
The Long-Term Plan
Britain’s armed forces, the 1957 White Paper stated, must be able to perform two
main tasks:
(1) ‘to play their part with the forces of allied countries in deterring and resisting
aggression; and
(2) ‘to defend British colonies and protected territories against local attack, and
undertake limited operations in overseas emergencies.
‘The aim must be to provide well-equipped forces sufficient to cany out these
DEFENCE
II?
duties, while making no greater demands than are absolutely necessary upon man-
power, money, and other national resources.’
. The f!Ve"yica.r pIan Provides for smaller, highly trained, all-regular forces with
increased mobility, equipped with the most modern weapons and organised on up-to-
date lines. A central strategic reserve will be maintained together with the means of
transport, including airlift, to take it rapidly to the scene of any trouble. Since ‘the
over-ridmg principle must be to prevent war rather than prepare for it’, the organisation
and equipment of the forces are designed to deter resort to war.
The intention is that there should be no further call-up of men for National Service
and that by the end of 1962 the armed forces should be composed wholly of regulars.
e p an involved a reduction of about 300,000 in the combined strength of the three
Services, which stood at nearly 700,000 (adult United Kingdom males) in 1957.
DEFENCE AND THE ECONOMY
After the end of the second world war the strength of the armed forces had been
drastically reduced It was not until growing world tension made it inevitable that
this trend was first halted and then reversed. Following the outbreak of war in Korea
in 1950, the United Kingdom embarked on a programme for building up its defence
forces, at a cost estimated originally at £4,700 million over a three-year period.
etween 1950 and 1953 annual defence expenditure was nearly doubled, rising
to some £1,400 million in 1952-53, and over the same period the total strength of
the active forces increased from just under 700,000 to a peak of about 875,000 at the
beginning of 1953. With the end of hostilities in Korea, the programme was revised
to meet the changed conditions and to keep it within the limits of the country’s
economic resources in the face of rising costs. In place of a short rearmament spurt
there was substituted the policy of the ‘long haul’; the programme was slowed down
and spread over a longer period.
Nevertheless, the burden on the economy continued heavy. In 19C3 defence
absorbed some 10 per cent of Britain’s gross national product, compared with 7 per
p" Ini95f>.just before the launching of the five-year defence programme,
it was still absorbing almost 9 per cent; some 7 per cent of the working population was
Ie“hne;i,n.th: Semces ,or suPP°rti"g them, and one-eighth of the output of the metal-
defenee dTh t0 ^ eC<fomy 38 a main source of exports-was devoted to
defence. The very heavy cost of maintaining large British forces abroad (which in
1956 mvo ved expenditure of some £179 million in foreign currency) placed a severe
strain on the balance of payments. The total net defence budget in 1956-57 equalled
more than one-third of total central Government current ordinary expenditure.
e effects on the economy of the new defence policy announced in 1957 are
orTuont1.nW trS T, ^ PrOPOrti°n °f the WOrkinS P^'3^ in the Services
or support mg them is falling (it is now estimated at just under five per cent), the claims
mifni.t TS, mgtm StrleS are bemg 3PPreciabIy reduced (about one-tenth of the
output of these industries is at present being devoted to defence), and the call on
scientific and engineering skills is easing. Because of the incre Jng complexity of
modern weapons and equipment and the higher cost per man of regular forces, defence
pendituie cannot show a reduction proportionate to that in manpower. Defence
xpenditure in 1961-62 is expected to represent about 7 per cent of the gross national
It still h C°mpared Wlth ne3rly 9 Per cent at the beginning of the five-year programme
n. however, accounts for just over a quarter of total central Government ordinary
Brifilhforc^ b 19 0 “ exPenditure “ f0«ign currency for the maintenance of
British forces abroad amounted to some £215 million.
n8
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Current Defence Budget
Defence expenditure for 1961-62 is estimated at ^1,655-6 million. Expenditure on
the pay, food, clothing, housing and movement of the forces accounts for some 52 per
cent of this total and expenditure on Britain’s contribution to the Western nuclear
deterrent for some 10 per cent.
The allocation of finance between the various Services is shown in Table 5.
TABLE 5
Defence Estimates, 1961-62
Admiralty
War Office
Air Ministry
Ministry of Aviation
Ministry of Defence
/ million
413-20
506-90
526-67
190-20
18-63
1,655-60
The Ministry of Defence Estimates consist mainly of contributions to NATO and
other international defence organisations.
Net defence expenditure by civil departments in 1961-62 is estimated at £18-61
million.
MANPOWER
Each of the three fighting Services is at present made up of a combination of
voluntarily recruited regulars and men called up for National Service, and each
includes women volunteers who form part of the regular forces. An analysis of the
strength of the forces in April 1961, with estimates for 1962, is given in Table 6.
TABLE 6
Active Strength of the Armed Forces, 1961-62
Thousands
Regular (male)
National Service
Women (including
nurses)
Totals ..
1st April, 1961
Navy
91-8
0-2
3-3
95-3
Army
160-3
64-8
6-2
231-3
RAF
138-8
13-4
6-0
158-2
Total
390-9
78-4
15-5
484-8
1st April, 1962 (estimate)
Navy
91-9
0-1
3-6
95-6
Army
166-2
26-5
6-0
198-7
RAF
137-8
5- 6
6- 5
149-9
Total
395-9
32-2
16.1
444-2
Note: Figures for the Navy include the Royal Marines.
In addition, reserve and auxiliary forces with training liability (volunteers and
part-time National Service men) totalled 470,404 at 1st April, 1961.
The planned figures (United Kingdom adult males) for the all-regular armed
forces for 1963 are: Royal Navy, 88,000; Army, 165,000 (with a recruiting maximum
of about 180,000); Royal Air Force, 135,000. Arrangements for recruitment and training
DEFENCE
of regulars are summarised for each Service separately later in this chapter. Pay and
pensions are reviewed at intervals of not more than every two years and other steps
are bemg taken to improve the conditions of Service life, including a five-year Service
building programme, estimated to cost ^90 million.
A Regular Forces Resettlement Service, set up by the Minister of Labour in 19 cy
assists regular officers and other ranks to find civilian employment on leaving the
mtv'pc V'tA &
National Service
The last National Service men were called up in November i960 and will have left
the forces by the end of 1962. Compulsory military service in peace time was first
introduced in Britain in 1939, shortly before the outbreak of the second world war
Under the National Service Acts, 1948-55, fit male British subjects between the ages
of 18 and 26 ordinarily resident in Great Britain were liable to serve for two years’
whole-time service in the regular forces, and thereafter three and a half years’ part-time
service in an auxiliary force. Deferment of National Service was granted in certain
cases (for instance, for students, trainees, those employed in certain occupations in the
national interest), while postponement of call-up could be granted on grounds of
exceptional hardship.
The Ministry of Labour called up the men from civil life for registration and medical
examination and posted them to the Services. The Army has been by far the biggest
user of National Service men. Sixty-nine per cent of all National Service men were
serving in the Army in April 1957, and 82 per cent in April 1961.
Deployment Overseas
, ..^e dePloyment of United Kingdom forces is world-wide, in fulfilment of responsi¬
bilities under the regional defence organisations of which the United Kingdom is a
member, and for the defence of United Kingdom dependencies. A considerable part
of these forces is committed to NATO on the continent of Europe.1 Forces are also
maintained in the Near, Middle and Far East; East, Central and North Africa; and the
Caribbean.
Where appropriate, unified commands are being established overseas. In October
1959 a unified command (with headquarters in Aden) was established for all United
Kingdom land and air forces in the Arabian Peninsula, Persian Gulf and East Africa
together with the naval forces allotted to the Persian Gulf. This was followed in May
1960 by the establishment of a unified command (with headquarters in Cyprus) for
United Kingdom land and air forces in the Near East, with permanent representation
of the Naval Commander-in-Chief in the Mediterranean at Command Headquarters.
Commissioned Ranks
The following are the main commissioned ranks in the three fighting Services;
each rank is shown parallel to its equivalent in the other Services.
Royal Navy
Admiral of the Fleet
Admiral
Vice-Admiral
Army
Field-Marshal
General
Lieutenant- General
Royal Air Force
Marshal of the RAF
Air Chief Marshal
Air Marshal
are assigned to NATO.
E
120
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Royal Navy
Rear-Admiral
Commodore
Captain
Army
Major-General
Brigadier
Colonel
Lieutenant-Colonel
Major
Captain
Lieutenant
Second Lieutenant
Royal Air Force
Air Vice-Marshal
Air Commodore
Group Captain
Wing Commander
Squadron Leader
Flight Lieutenant
Flying Officer
Pilot Officer
Commander
Lieutenant-Commander
Lieutenant
Sub-Lieutenant
Staff Colleges
Selected officers of all three Services who have had previous staff training or have
been to the Royal Naval Staff College, Greenwich (London), the Army Staff College
at Camberley (Surrey), or the Royal Air Force Staff Colleges at Bracknell (Berkshire)
and Andover (Hampshire), go to the Joint Services Staff College at Chesham (Bucking¬
hamshire), where they live and work together and where particular attention is paid
to the inter-Service aspects of staff work. This college caters for about 150 students
a year from the Navy, Army and Air Force, the Civil Service, and other Common¬
wealth countries. Finally, there is the Imperial Defence College in London, to which
are sent a few specially selected and more senior officers from the Services, the Civil
Service, and from other Commonwealth countries.
SUPPLY OF WEAPONS AND EQUIPMENT
The Ministry of Aviation is responsible for the supply to the Services of aircraft,
guided weapons (including ballistic missiles), nuclear weapons, and radar and other
electronic equipment. The individual Service departments are responsible for the
procurement of other weapons, stores and equipment, except that responsibility for
such stores and equipment when used by more than one Service normally rests with
the War Office, which in many cases is the largest user.
Production and Research
Production for the Services is carried out to a great extent by private industry
on a contract basis, but also by the Royal Ordnance Factories, the Royal Dockyards
and other establishments operated by the Ministry of Aviation, the Admiralty and the
W ar Office. The Ministry of Aviation’s research establishments carry out research and
development on behalf of the War Office and the Air Ministry, and also for certain
aspects of Admiralty requirements, in particular naval aviation. Among the most
important of these establishments are: the Royal Aircraft Establishments, Farnborough
and Bedford; the Royal Radar Establishment, Malvern; the National Gas Turbine
Establishment, Farnborough; the Guided Weapons Establishment (an outstation of
the Royal Aircraft Establishment) at Aberporth, Cardiganshire; the Rocket Propulsion
Establishment, Westcott, Buckinghamshire; and the Aircraft and Armament Experi¬
mental Establishment, Boscombe Down, Wiltshire. War Office controlled research
establishments include the Armament Research and Development Establishment,
Sevenoaks, Kent; and the Fighting Vehicles Research and Development Establish¬
ment, Chobham, Surrey. The Admiralty research establishments (see p. 124) carry
out research on ships, maritime equipment and weapons and also on certain kinds of
electronic equipment on behalf of all three Services. Current production and develop-
DEFENCE
121
ment programmes are summarised later in this chapter in the sections dealing with the
three Services individually.
Development and production of nuclear warheads to meet Service requirements
are carried out by the Atomic Energy Authority (see p. 218) under contract from
the Ministry of Aviation, which is responsible for the completed weapons. The Atomic
Energy Authority is also co-operating with the Admiralty in research on the develop¬
ment of nuclear propulsion.
Service officers attend courses at the Atomic Energy Research Establishment
Harwell, and have also been attached to industrial firms manufacturing guided weapons
during the development stage.
Guided missiles are tested at the Ministry of Aviation’s research establishments,
and guided and ballistic missiles at the Woomera range set up in Australia under the
Joint United Kingdom/Australia Guided Weapon Project. Service firing trials of
air-to-air and surface-to-air missiles are carried out at Aberporth and at the Army
gunnery range in Anglesey; a range for testing surface-to-surface missiles has been
set up on South Uist in the Hebrides. There is close collaboration with the United
States in the exchange of information and visits by technical personnel.
Some military equipment, including guided weapons, aircraft and radar equipment,
is being supplied to Britain by the United States under the Mutual Security Programme!
Part of this equipment is manufactured in the United Kingdom and financed by the
United States under the ‘off-shore procurement’ programme. Under this programme
the United Kingdom is also making equipment for other NATO countries in Europe.
Wherever possible, weapons and other military equipment are standardised with
NATO allies. The United Kingdom and the Federal Republic of Germany, for
example, are co-operating in the development of tanks, light tracked vehicles’ and
anti-tank weapons.
In addition to any orders for warships that may be placed from abroad with British
yards, ships of the Royal Navy which have become surplus to United Kingdom
requirements are made available to the Governments of other Commonwealth countries
and to those of other friendly nations.
Nuclear Weapons
During the second world war, British research workers played an essential part
m the allied project that led to the production of the first atomic bombs in the United
States. After the war, the exchange of information on atomic weapons was for a time
prohibited by an Act1 of the United States Congress (later amended), and the United
Kingdom therefore developed its own independently. The first test explosion of a
British atomic weapon was carried out in 1952 in the Monte Bello Islands, off the north¬
west coast of Australia; further tests took place a year later near the Woomera rocket
range, in central Australia, and early in 1954 it was announced that delivery of atomic
weapons to the armed forces had begun. Further series of tests were held in 1956 and
J957> in the Monte Bello Islands and at the weapons proving ground at Maralinga,
in the South Australian desert. Britain now has a substantial and growing stockpile
of kiloton weapons.
In February 1955 the Government announced its intention to proceed with the
development and production of thermonuclear weapons. The first test explosions
were successfully carried out in May and June 1957 near Christmas Island in the
1 The Atomic Energy Act, 1946 (known as the McMahon Act), subsequently replaced by the
Atomic Energy Act, 1954. Substantial relaxations were made by amending legislation passed in
I95o. ^
122
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
central Pacific, and further tests were carried out in the same area later in 1957 and
in 1958. The production of British megaton weapons is now proceeding steadily and
the exchange of information with the United States1 has enabled important technical
advances to be made in the design of nuclear warheads which will permit a significant
increase in the rate of production.
The chief means of delivering these weapons are at present the RAF’s medium
bombers of the V-class. The development is proceeding of Blue Steel propelled stand¬
off bombs which will greatly reduce the vulnerability of a bomber aircraft by enabling
it to release its bombs a long distance from the target, outside the range of the missile
defence system. In February 1958 the United Kingdom and United States Govern¬
ments signed an agreement for the provision of launching sites in the United Kingdom
for United States Thor intermediate-range ballistic missiles; these weapons, which
became operational in 1959, would be used with nuclear warheads in time of war only
with the agreement of both Governments. The possibilities of mobile launchers
(aircraft or submarines) for long-range delivery of nuclear warheads are being investi¬
gated. The United Kingdom and United States Governments agreed in June i960
that if the United States missile Skybolt (designed for launching from an aircraft) is
successfully developed the United Kingdom will place an order with the United States
for a number of the missiles (for which the United Kingdom will provide the nuclear
warhead) and their associated equipment; the missiles would be carried by the Vulcan
bomber Mark 2. Research is in progress into defensive measures against ballistic
missiles and, under agreements between the United Kingdom and United States
Governments signed in i960 and 1961, a joint Ballistic Missile Early Warning Station
is being built at Fylingdales Moor in Yorkshire and a Missile Defence Alarm Station
(using space satellites to detect missiles) is to be established at Kirkbride, Cumber¬
land. The United States is providing the equipment for these stations. The United
Kingdom is providing facilities for a depot ship in the Holy Loch (Firth of Clyde,
Scotland) for United States Polaris nuclear submarines, as part of the British con¬
tribution to strengthening the NATO alliance.
THE FIGHTING SERVICES
THE ROYAL NAVY
The Royal Navy is governed by the Board of Admiralty, which has three civilian
and six naval members. The First Lord of the Admiralty is the minister responsible
to Parliament for the Navy. The other civilian members of the Board of Admiralty
are the Civil Lord, who is a minister, and the Permanent Secretary, who is a civil
servant and responsible for the general conduct of Admiralty business, including
finance. The naval members are the First Sea Lord and Chief of Naval Staff; the
Second Sea Lord and Chief of Naval Personnel; the Third Sea Lord and Controller
of the Navy, whose responsibilities include ship construction and repair, research and
the provision and repair of naval aircraft; the Fourth Sea Lord, Chief of Supplies and
Transport and Vice-Controller, who is also responsible for maintenance and dockyard
organisation; the Vice-Chief of Naval Staff, who assists the First Sea Lord; and the
1 An Anglo-American agreement, signed in July 1958, made possible the exchange of informa¬
tion on the design and manufacture of nuclear weapons. This agreement was amended and
supplemented by a further agreement, signed in May 1959, which contained provisions to enable
the United Kingdom to buy from the United States component parts of atomic weapons and
weapons systems, other than actual warheads, and to make possible the exchange of nuclear
materials between the two countries.
DEFENCE
123
Deputy Chief of Naval Staff and Fifth Sea Lord, responsible for stating requirements
for ships, aircraft and weapons and for laying down Admiralty policy on aircraft
research and development.
The Shape of the Fleet
The new defence plans, announced in 1957, envisage a Navy that is smaller than
in the past but highly mobile. The aircraft carrier will continue to be the core of the new
Navy. Grouped round the carriers will be supporting ships carrying the latest weapons
for dealing with air, surface and underwater attacks and capable of acting by them¬
selves on detached service. Apart from carriers, the number of large ships will be
restricted to the minimum. Many ships in reserve, including battleships, are being
disposed of. &
During 1961 there were 144 ships in the operational Fleet (including 4 aircraft
carriers, 1 commando carrier, 5 cruisers, 53 destroyers and frigates and 30 submarines),
together with 41 engaged on trials and training and 70 support ships and auxiliaries.
In the ten-year period from April 1951 to April 1961, 6 aircraft carriers, 3 cruisers,
38 destroyers and frigates, n submarines and 258 smaller craft were completed for
the Royal Navy.
The modern carriers have, or are being equipped with, the angled flight deck, the
steam catapult, the automatic aircraft positioning device, and the mirror and ‘Audio’
landing aids (all British inventions), and the most advanced type of air warning and
direction system. A new carrier, Hermes, equipped to carry the latest aircraft now in
production for the Fleet Air Arm (see p. 124-25), joined the Fleet in i960. The recon¬
structed Victorious joined the Fleet in 1958. The former aircraft carrier Bulwark has
been converted into a commando carrier and joined the Fleet in this role in January
i960. Bulwark is designed to carry a Royal Marine Commando (some 600 men),
together with helicopters, landing craft and vehicles. Another aircraft carrier, Albion,
is being converted to become the Navy’s second commando carrier.
Three Tiger class cruisers, with fully automatic armament and the latest control
equipment, have been completed. The first guided missile ship was launched in i960
and is due to be completed by the spring of 1963. The construction of the three others
on order is well advanced and two more are being ordered. Trials of the Seasing missile,
with which these ships will be equipped, have shown this to be a most effective weapon
for the interception of attacking aircraft and a production order has been placed for
this weapon. The guided missile destroyers, in common with the majority of other
ships, will also carry the shorter-range guided missile Seacat for close air defence.
In the five-year period from the beginning of 1956 to the end of i960, 24 new anti¬
submarine frigates, 8 new anti-aircraft frigates and 13 new submarines joined the
Fleet, in the same period, 3 anti-submarine frigates and 14 submarines have been
modernised. The last of 8 fast long-range submarines of the ‘Porpoise’ class will be
completed in 1961-62.
One of the main purposes of Reserve ships is to have ready, at short notice, ships
to replace those in the Active Fleet which are damaged or withdrawn for refit or
modernisation. Under the new defence policy the number of Reserve ships is to be
smaller than in the past, but they are being maintained at a higher state of readiness.
Afloat support to the Fleet for replenishment at sea, or in harbours or anchorages,
is provided by the Royal Fleet Auxiliary Service, comprising tankers, store-issuing
ships, tugs and salvage vessels. These ships fly the Blue Ensign and are manned by
Merchant Navy officers and seamen.
124
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Research and Development
Much experimental work has been carried out, with the Atomic Energy Authority,
on Dreadnought, the Navy’s first nuclear-propelled submarine, which was launched in
i960. Dreadnought incorporates a United States nuclear propulsion unit. An order for
the first all-British nuclear submarine was placed in i960. Fundamental investigations
are also in hand for the development of counter-measures against submarines with
increased underwater speed. The nuclear submarines, with their great endurance, high
underwater speed, sensitive detection gear and armament of homing torpedoes, will be
specially effective anti-submarine weapons. Research is proceeding with the aim of
providing automatic means for handling tactical information in warships.
Research and development work to meet the Navy’s modern requirements for
weapons is now concentrated in two establishments. At Portsdown (near Portsmouth),
the design and development of ship-borne gunnery and guided missile systems is
carried out. At Portland (Dorset), all aspects of work on underwater detection are
co-ordinated with work on underwater weapons.
The close relationship between the United Kingdom and the United States of
America is being continued, as well as collaboration with other members of the
Commonwealth. Several valuable items of new equipment have been brought into
service through the United States Mutual Weapons Development Programme and
certain naval projects are being discussed with countries of the Western European Union.
Commands and Naval Dockyards
The Navy’s main home commands are Portsmouth, Plymouth, Scotland (Rosyth)
and the Commander-in-Chief, Home Fleet. In the North Atlantic and Mediterranean
area, United Kingdom naval forces are equipped predominantly for an anti-submarine
role, and consist of two aircraft carriers, two cruisers and a number of destroyers,
frigates and submarines. In the Far East, the fleet (based on Singapore) is an all¬
purpose force of one aircraft carrier, one commando carrier and one cruiser, together
with destroyers, frigates and smaller vessels. Small naval forces operate under the
Commander-in-Chief, South Atlantic and South America Station, who, when not
afloat, flies his flag near Cape Town (by agreement with the South African Govern¬
ment); the Senior Naval Officer, West Indies Station, who flies his pennant afloat;
and the Flag Officer, Arabian Seas and Persian Gulf, who is also Naval Deputy
to the Commander-in-Chief, Middle East Command.
The dockyards at Portsmouth, Devonport, Chatham and Rosyth provide the Navy
with major supplies and repair facilities at home. Singapore and Gibraltar are the main
dockyards overseas.
Fleet Air Arm
The Hawker Sea Hawk and the de Havilland Sea Venom provide the main day and
all-weather fighter strengths of the Fleet Air Arm, but they are being succeeded
respectively by the Supermarine Scimitar, which can carry an atomic bomb and
which is fitted, owing to its high speed, with a ‘flap-blowing’ system to facilitate
landing on carriers, and the de Havilland Sea Vixen, with armament which includes
an air-to-air guided weapon, the Firestreak. The first front line squadron to be equipped
with Scimitars embarked in the carrier Victorious in 1958 and the equipping of other
squadrons with this aircraft is proceeding. The first squadron of Sea Vixens was
commissioned in July 1959. A new strike aircraft to replace the Wyvern, the Blackburn
Buccaneer (formerly known as the NA.39), is on order; it has a greater range and speed
and is able to carry an atomic bomb.
DEFENCE
125
The anti-submarine turbo-prop Fairey Gannet, in service since 1954, has now been
replaced in that role by helicopters; Garnets are still used in the search role. British-
built helicopters, the Whirlwind and the Dragonfly, are in service with the Fleet Air
Arm. A more powerful all-weather helicopter, the Wessex, has been ordered as a
replacement for the Whirlwind and will become the Navy’s main anti-submarine
aircraft; the first front-line Wessex embarked in the carrier Ark Royal in the autumn of
1961.
Royal Marines
The Corps of Royal Marines is a body of men trained for service on sea or land.
Its official existence dates from 1664. The present-day functions of the corps are:
(1) to provide personnel for Commandos;
(2) to provide crews for minor landing craft and certain other parties required
for amphibious assault; and
(3) to supply detachments for H.M. ships, which {a) play their part in the routine
duties of their ship, (b) provide emergency landing parties, and (c) carry out
guard duties and the like.
Women’s Royal Naval Service
The Womens Royal Naval Service (WRNS) is an integral part of the Navy. Its
members serve both at home and overseas. It has its own disciplinary code. Nursing
services for the Navy are provided by Queen Alexandra's Royal Naval Nursing Service
(QARNNS). 5
Recruitment and Training for tiie Regular Navy
The main entry for naval officers is the Cadet Entry. Cadetships on the General
List (Seaman, Engineer, Electrical1 and Supply) are available to young men between
the ages of approximately 17 and 19 years. A number of scholarships are awarded
to boys between the ages of 15 and 17; these give help with school fees for the two
years before a boy goes to Dartmouth. Those selected enter Britannia Royal Naval
College, Dartmouth, in September each year. Here they spend a year doing Basic
Naval Training, ashore and afloat, followed by a year as midshipmen at sea in the Fleet.
The Seamen and Supply Officers then return for a further year at Dartmouth for
academic training, followed by specialist courses and a further year at sea. The Engineer
and Electrical Officers study for a degree, for which specially selected officers go to
Cambridge, the others reading for an external London degree at the Royal Naval
Engineering College, Manadon. There is also an entry into the Engineering specialisa¬
tion of the General List for graduates in mechanical or electrical engineering. Candi¬
dates must be under the age of 25.
Short service commissions on the Supplementary List for Seaman duties, for air¬
crew duties with the Fleet Air Arm or in electrical specialisation are available to young
men with appropriate qualifications. Doctors, dental surgeons and instructor officers
The Electrical and Engineering specialisations were amalgamated into the one Engineerine
specialisation in the summer of 1961. The amalgamation will be progressively implemented as
othcers trained or experienced in the new departmental responsibilities become available for
Fleet appointments. 1 he organisation of all units of the Fleet will take from two to three years
the cross-training of individual officers will continue for about six years and the initial Engineering
training of General List officers is being adjusted; the first officer so trained will reach the
Fleet during 1962.
126
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
all enter on short service commissions after completing their professional training, and
permanent commissions are awarded to them according to the vacancies available.
Ratings may qualify for a commission on the General List, on the Supplementary
List for Seaman and aircrew duties, and on the Special Duties List.
Commissions in the Royal Marines are gained through examination and successful
candidates are given a special training, part naval and part military, which lasts three
and a half years.
The age limits for entry as a rating in the Navy are as follows: seaman, engineering
mechanic, electrical mechanic and naval air mechanic branches, and stores and cook
ratings in the supply and secretariat branch, 15 to 28 years; communications and naval
airman branches and writer and steward ratings in the supply and secretariat branch,
16J to 28; artificer apprentices, 15 to 17^; mechanician apprentices, 17^ to 23; sick
berth branch, 17^ to 28; artificers (trained), up to 28 years. The initial engagement is
for a period of 9 years over the age of 18, plus a period of three years in the Royal Fleet
Reserve. Exceptionally, for artificer apprentices it is 12 years over the age of 18. Age
limits for entry into the ranks of the Royal Marines are: marines, 17 to 28 years; junior
entry (general service duties), 16 to 17; boy buglers, 15 to 16^; junior musicians, 14 to
17^; musicians (trained), 17^ to 28 years. Women may enter the Women’s Royal
Naval Service between the ages of 17^ and 28 years for an initial period of 4 years;
most WRNS officers are selected from serving ratings.
On entry, all naval and WRNS ratings and Royal Marines other ranks are given
a basic training at the appropriate school or shore establishment and, in most branches,
are given further training during their careers to fit them for promotion within their
branch, to qualify them for the award of a higher specialist qualification or to prepare
them for Special Duties which are not covered by the standard promotion courses.
Reserve and Auxiliary Forces
The Royal Naval Reserve (RNR) consists of volunteer reserves—serving at sea
in the Merchant Navy or the fishing fleets or in civilian employment ashore—who
carry out training in time of peace to meet the Navy’s mobilisation requirements.
Other reserves include the Royal Fleet Reserve (RFR), composed of men who have
completed their service as regulars; the Royal Naval Special Reserve (RNSR), which
includes most of the National Service men who are discharging their liability for part-
time service; the Royal Marine Forces Volunteer Reserve (RMFVR); and the Women's
Royal Naval Reserve (WRNR).
Royal Naval Minewatching Service
The Minewatching Service, a civilian organisation composed of men and women
volunteers, is responsible in time of war for manning posts around the coast and
overlooking the main navigable waterways. Its object would be to spot mines dropped
from aircraft, and to plot and report their positions.
Sea Cadet Corps
The Sea Cadet Corps, which is administered by the Navy League in conjunction with
the Admiralty, is a voluntary youth organisation for boys between 12 and 18 years of
age. Its origin dates from the time of the Crimean War in the mid-nineteenth century.
It aims at developing in the cadets qualities which make for good citizenship, and
through its discipline and sea training it greatly assists those boys who wish to make
their career at sea, whether in the Royal Navy, Royal Marines or Merchant Navy.
DEFENCE
127
THE ARMY
Tbe control of the Army is vested in the Army Council, of which the Secretary of
State for War is president. The other civilian members of the Council are the Parlia¬
mentary Under-Secretary of State for War and Financial Secretary of the War Office
(who is a minister and vice-president of the Council), and the Permanent Under-
Secretary of State for War, a civil servant who acts as secretary to the Council. The
Service members of the Army Council are the Chief of the Imperial General Staff
who is assisted by the Vice-Chief of the Imperial General Staff, responsible for
strategic policy and plans, operations and intelligence, and the Deputy Chief of the
Imperial General Staff, responsible for war organisation, equipment, weapons and
tram mg; the Adjutant-General to the Forces, responsible for manpower, personnel
discipline, medical services, welfare, education, and the women’s services; the
Quartermaster-General to the Forces, responsible for supplies, transport and, jointly
with the Permanent Under-Secretary, works services; and the Master-General of the
Ordnance, responsible for research into, and the design, development, production and
procurement of, Army stores.
Organisation of the Active Army
The active Army is organised in 30 arms and services,1 which include the Household
Cavalry, the Royal Horse Artillery, the Royal Armoured Corps (the historic Cavalry
Regiments and the Royal Tank Regiment), the Royal Regiment of Artillery, the Corps
of Royal Engineers, the Royal Corps of Signals (which provides land and wireless
communications), the five regiments of Foot Guards (the Brigade of Guards), the regi¬
ments of the Infantry of the Line (grouped into brigades and the Parachute Regiment),
the Army Air Corps (which operates light aircraft on reconnaissance and undertakes
aerial observation and liaison work), the Royal Army Service Corps (responsible for
the provision of food and fuel supplies and transport vehicles), the Royal Army
Medical Corps, the Royal Army Ordnance Corps (responsible for most equipment and
stores), and the Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers.
The Women’s Royal Army Corps (formerly ATS) and the Queen Alexandra’s
Royal Army Nursing Corps (formerly QAIMNS) are both corps of the Regular
Army, their officers and other ranks being subject to military law and the Queen’s
Regulations in the same way as members of the other corps.
Within the United Kingdom, the Army is organised into Scottish, Northern
Southern, Eastern, Western, and Northern Ireland Commands, and London District’
Arfj; five main commands overseas: Near East Land Forces (Mediterranean)
Middle East Land Forces (Arabian Peninsula), East Africa Command, Far East
Land Forces, and the British Army of the Rhine (which forms part of Britain’s con¬
tribution to the NATO forces).
Since 1957 the Royal Armoured Corps, the Royal Artillery, the Royal Engineers
and the infantry have been reduced by a total of 51 regiments or battalions. Corres¬
ponding reductions have been made in supporting and administrative units.
Following extensive trials carried out in the British Army of the Rhine, Army
held formations are being reorganised on the basis of flexible, self-contained infantry
and armoured brigade groups, able to fight, to move and to maintain themselves under
minimum direction from headquarters.
As the strengths of overseas garrisons are reduced, increased importance is being
attached to a central strategic reserve, based mainly in the United Kingdom.
These arms and services include the women’s corps.
128
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Equipment
By the end of the five-year programme initiated in 1957, the weapons of the second
world war will have almost entirely disappeared and the Army will be completely
rearmed with a new range of weapons, vehicles and other equipment.
Increasing emphasis is being placed in current plans on transportability by air, in
order to secure strategic mobility. Certain bulky items of equipment, such as heavy
tanks, cannot be transported by air but, apart from these items, air portability is a
major feature of the Army’s new equipment. Equipment transportable by air in service
or being planned includes the Wombat recoil-less anti-tank weapon, improved mortars
and light vehicles for the infantry, the Ferret scout car and the Saladin armoured car
in service with the Royal Armoured Corps, and an advanced guided missile anti-tank
system and the Thunderbird surface-to-air anti-aircraft guided weapon for the Royal
Artillery. Air-portable howitzers of Italian design are being delivered.
For tactical mobility within a theatre of operations, new engineer equipment for
rapid construction and repair and new bridging equipment are on order. To assist
in achieving mobility on the battlefield itself, the Centurion tank has been equipped
with more powerful armament, pending the entry into service of its successor, now
under development; radio communications in the field are being greatly improved with
new equipment which includes the Manpack portable set, a radio relay set, and a new
set for armoured vehicles; and a self-propelled gun of increased range and performance
and an improved type of armoured personnel carrier are being designed. Two types
of light liaison aircraft, the Canadian Beaver and the Scout helicopter, started coming
into service in 1961. The Army has been almost completely re-equipped with the British
version of the FN self-loading rifle, a weapon of Belgian origin adopted by the United
Kingdom in the interests of standardisation with other NATO forces; the FN general
purpose machine-gun is in production.
Progress is being made in the introduction of surface-to-surface guided weapons.
The first guided weapon course was started at the Royal Military College of Science in
Berkshire as early as 1950. In 1955 groups of Army instructors began to receive
training in the United States in the use of the Corporal guided missile; training in
Britain is now given at the School of Artillery at Larkhill. In the British Army of the
Rhine (BAOR) two artillery regiments have been equipped with the Corporal. A
number of composite regiments armed with the United States Honest John missile and
the eight-inch howitzer are being introduced into BAOR. Two of the Army’s heavy
anti-aircraft regiments have been equipped with the Thunderbird surface-to-air
missile. The Australian Malkara air-portable anti-tank guided weapon is being
delivered.
Recruitment and Training for the Regular Army
The normal method of entry for a regular commission in the Army is through the
Royal Military Academy, Sandhurst (Camberley, Surrey), where selected cadets
undergo a course lasting two years before receiving their commissions. This course
gives a general military and academic background for all arms and services, and
young officers on leaving Sandhurst then attend special arm courses to prepare them
for their own arm, some attending technical courses at the Royal Military College of
Science (Shrivenham, Berkshire) and at Cambridge University and a limited number
of Arts courses at Oxford. Cadets may enter Sandhurst direct from school or after
they have enlisted in the Army. Up to 40 scholarships are awarded each year on the
results of a competitive examination held twice a year. University graduates may be
accepted for direct regular commissions without previous service in the ranks.
DEFENCE
129
The War Office also maintains a boarding school, Welbeck College, at Worksop
Nottinghamshire, where 150 boys are educated for two years between the ages of 16
an 18 years. These boys pass into the Royal Corps of Signals, Royal Army Ordnance
Corps or the Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers. A few may be commissioned
into the Royal Artillery, Royal Engineers and Royal Army Service Corps.
egular commissions may also be granted to officers already serving on National
ervice commissions or on short service commissions. Candidates for National
Service and short service commissions are trained at the Officer Cadet School, Mons
Barracks Aldershot. At this school the course, which consists of purely military
training, lasts for four months. Entry to the school for short service commissions is
either directly from civilian life or through the ranks.
Men wishing to enlist in the ranks must be British subjects between the ages of
l7l ^ 30 ^rS’ of good character, medically fit and able to pass an intelligence
test. Those with certain trade qualifications may be accepted up to the age of years
Men can sign on for 22 years (with the option of finishing their Colour Service at the
end of six years or at the end of any consecutive period of three years thereafter
provided they give six months’ notice in writing). Recruits may choose the corps in
osstde^ t0 and thdr WiSheS regardinS trade training are met ^ far as
On entry into the Army, other ranks are trained at the depots or with the training
units of the arms or services for which they have been selected. This initial training
consists of six weeks basic military training common to all arms and services, and a
further period of training which is special to the arm or service concerned. This latter
training varies in length of time, e.g., infantry, four weeks; Royal Signals electronic
technician, 22 weeks.
A boy can enlist in the Army as an apprentice tradesman, between the ages of ic
and 17; a junior leader, between the ages of 15 and i6|; and a drummer band boy
piper or tailor, between the ages of 15 and 17I years.
After the age of 18 years, Army apprentice tradesmen serve nine years with the
Colours and three years in the Reserve. Boys enlisted for training with junior leaders’
units may serve either for nine years with the Colours and three years in the Reserve
or six years with the Colours and six years in the Reserve. The object of the junior
leaders units is to produce long-term regular warrant officers and senior non-commis¬
sioned officers, and that of the apprentice schools is to produce warrant officer and
non-commissioned officer tradesmen for the Regular Army, some of whom may
become specialist commissioned officers. '
• ,WTewmay “If* “7 the Queen Alexandra’s Royal Army Nursing Corps or
into the Women s Royal Army Corps between the ages of 17I and 33 years.
The Reserve Army
With a smaller Regular Army, the Reserve Army, consisting of the Army Emergency
ele,rVe and.the. territorial Army, will have an increasingly important part to play,
tie Territorial Army consists of volunteer officers and other ranks (including
women), organised in formations and units on a territorial basis, and the Territorial
Army Reserve of Officers. A reorganisation of the Territorial Army announced in
July i960 takes account of the coming end of National Service, after which it will no
onger contain National Service officers and men carrying out the statutory obligation
0l 3; yTeTars P^t-time service. Its main role in the event of war would be the defence
ot the United Kingdom, but some units might be needed overseas and all its members
are liable for service in any part of the world when the Army reserve is called out by
T30
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
proclamation. Volunteers are required to attend annual camp and to carry out a mini¬
mum number of training periods. Selected units undergo civil defence training each
year and attend a civil defence camp once every four years. While the military authorities
are responsible for policy, training and discipline, local administration of the Territorial
Army is carried out largely by county territorial and auxiliary forces associations.
The Army Emergency Reserve has as its main function to provide essential com¬
munications and the technical and administrative services required on mobilisation by
both the Regular and the Territorial Armies. It consists of specialist units and pools
of skilled men—both volunteers and part-time National Service men—who can be
called upon at short notice to fill gaps in regular units. A special category of the Army
Emergency Reserve consists of units and individuals willing to be called for service
with the Regular Army on the authority of the Secretary of State for War before a
proclamation of mobilisation has been issued.
Cadet Forces
The Combined Cadet Force (CCF) and the Army Cadet Force (ACF) provide training
on Service lines for boys between the ages of 14 and 18 years. The CCF provides
training in schools in which education is continued to the age of 17 years or above.
Cadets receive a general basic training and then specialised training in the Royal Navy,
Army or Royal Air Force sections. Contingents are affiliated to regular units and
establishments of the Services. The ACF is recruited from schools which do not raise
contingents of the CCF, and from boys who have left school. Like all the pre-Service
organisations, these forces provide citizenship and character training as well as specific¬
ally military training. There is a training centre for the CCF and ACF at Frimley
Park, Surrey.
THE ROYAL AIR FORCE
The Royal Air Force is administered by the Air Council, composed of the Secretary
of State for Air, who is president, and seven other members. The Parliamentary
Under-Secretary for Air is vice-president and the Permanent Under-Secretary of
State for Air, who is a civil servant, is secretary of the Council. The Service members
are the Chief of the Air Staff, who is responsible for strategic policy and the fighting
efficiency of the RAF; the Vice-Chief of the Air Staff, responsible for inter-Service
policy, operations, intelligence, liaison with other air forces, standardisation and ground
defence; the Deputy Chief of the Air Staff, responsible for the preparedness for war
of the RAF, for command, staff and air training, and for policy regarding future
aircraft and weapons; the Air Member for Personnel; and the Air Member for Supply
and Organisation.
Commands
The Royal Air Force is organised into commands administered by the Air Council:
At Home: Bomber, Fighter, Coastal, Transport, Flying Training, Technical
Training, Maintenance and Signals Commands.
Overseas: The Near East Air Force (headquarters in Cyprus), Air Forces, Middle
East (headquarters in Aden), the Far East Air Force (headquarters
at Changi, Singapore) and Royal Air Force, Germany (Second
Tactical Air Force, stationed in Germany as part of Britain’s con¬
tribution to the NATO forces).
DEFENCE
I3I
Aircraft and Equipment
The spearhead of the RAF is the force of Valiant, Vulcan and Victor four-engined
jet bombers. Stocks of nuclear weapons are increasing, together with Bomber Com¬
mand s ability to carry them. Improved marks of the V-bombers, now on order will
carry the Blue Steel propelled stand-off bomb and will be capable of being refuelled in
flight, giving them an increased range. They will later be armed, if its development
programme is successfully completed, with the United States air-launched ballistic
missile Skybolt equipped with a British nuclear warhead (see p. 122). The V-bombers
will thus continue to provide an effective deterrent under independent United King¬
dom control during the next decade. 5
In addition to their strategic role, the V-bombers provide reconnaissance aircraft
of great range and accuracy. The present reconnaissance force is composed mainly of
Valiants, but these are being replaced by Mark 2 Victors.
The tactical force in Bomber Command is equipped with Valiants. A tactical strike
reconnaissance aircraft of great versatility, the TSR.2, is being developed for Army
support and other tactical operations.
Air defence missile squadrons are now being equipped with Bloodhound /, a semi¬
active homing type, and orders are being placed for Bloodhound 2, a more advanced
type which will have greatly improved performance and which will be air transportable
for overseas reinforcement. Manned fighters will, however, continue to be needed to
deal with manned aircraft, the stand-off bomber and radar-jamming aircraft, to prevent
reconnaissance and to investigate unidentified movements. Fighter Command is largely
equipped with Lightning and Javelin aircraft. The Lightning, the RAF’s first supersonic
ghter, entered squadron service in i960. The aircraft is fitted with an electronic com¬
puter to aid bomber interception and is equipped for flight-refuelling to augment
-Tighter Command s capacity for overseas reinforcement.
The system of control and reporting, which has been built into a highly efficient
organisation, is closely linked with the radar systems of Continental allies Great
advances in the development of radar have been made in recent years. A reconstructed
radar chain now covers the whole of the United Kingdom. The high performance of
the latest system makes it possible to have greatly improved cover with a smaller
number of stations. Work has begun on a new high-performance radar system, which
Wi mclude computers and data-handhng equipment for the interception of supersonic
aircraft. The Royal Air Force will command and operate the joint UK-US ballistic
missile early warning stations being constructed in Yorkshire and Cumberland
The RAF’s highly successful first air-to-air guided missile, Fireflash, was used in
1957 for full-scale training and experimental work. A more advanced missile the
hrestreak (also in service with the Fleet Air Arm), is fitted to Mark 7 and 8 Javelins
now in service, and will remain an integral part of the Lightning weapon system until
replaced by a guided weapon of even greater performance.
The development of surface-to-air guided weapons is well advanced. The first
AF missile station, at North Coates, Lincolnshire, was brought into use for service
trials and training in May 1958.
Coastal Command’s long-range maritime reconnaissance force, which is committed
07 18 whoIly equipped with Shackleton aircraft. An improved version—the
Shackleton Mark 3 is now in service, and earlier marks are being progressively
modernised to an equivalent standard.
Transport Command is being re-equipped to provide increased mobility for the
strategic reserves of both land and air forces. Its carrying capacity has increased three¬
fold over the past ten years. A Comet 2 squadron was formed in 1956—the first all-jet
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
132
transport squadron in any air force; it has proved very successful and orders have been
placed for the Comet 4C. Two squadrons of Britannia aircraft are in service for long-
range transport; for short and medium ranges, use will still be made of piston-engined
Hastings. The Beverley freighter, now in service, is a versatile aircraft which can lift
large loads. Ten Belfast (formerly known as Britannic) freighter aircraft are on order
to supply the need for a stategic freighter able to carry large military loads quickly over
long distances. An order has also been placed for a military version of the Armstrong
Whitworth Argosy, which will be used as a tactical freighter for dropping parachutists
as well as for normal movement of troops and stores. Twin Pioneer short-range aircraft
are now in service. A development contract has been placed for the vertical take-off
aircraft, the Rotodyne.
Increasing use is being made of helicopters for operations in support of the Army
in the field and for the Search and Rescue Organisation of Coastal Command, which in
peace time also operates for the rescue of civilians involved in shipping accidents or
other difficulties in coastal waters. During 1961-62 the Belvedere twin-engined heli¬
copter will enter squadron service and the first deliveries of the gas-turbine engined
Whirlwind are expected. Later, a twin-engined version of the Wessex, with a greatly
improved load capacity, particularly in tropical conditions and at high altitudes, will
be introduced.
Basic flying training schools have been largely re-equipped with the Jet Provost
trainer and an order has been placed for a training version of the Lightning', the Gnat
trainer is being developed for advanced jet training. The RAF was the first air force to
adopt all-jet training.
Women’s Royal Air Force
Women play an important part in the work of the Royal Air Force and of its reserve
and auxiliary formations. The WRAF is an integral part of the Royal Air Force and its
members train with and work alongside airmen in the same trades, serving both in
the United Kingdom and overseas. Nursing services are provided by Princess Mary s
Royal Air Force Nursing Service.
Recruitment and Training for the Regular Air Force
Pilots, navigators and air electronics officers are appointed to commissions in the
General Duties Branch, the flying and executive branch of the RAF. They enter either
on the General List, with an assurance of a pensionable career to the age of 55, or on
the Supplementary (Flying) List. Appointment to commissions on the General List
may be obtained through a cadetship at the RAF College, Cranwell, Lincolnshire
(pilots and navigators only), by entry as a university graduate, or under a special
arrangement for other well-qualified entrants. The majority, however, are appointed to
the Supplementary (Flying) List, either to short service commissions or to permanent
commissions which offer a pensionable career initially to about the age of 38, with the
possibility of leaving with a gratuity at an earlier stage and with opportunities of
serving to the age of 55 either on the General List or on the Supplementary (Flying)
List. Except for those entering through Cranwell, where the course lasts three years,
flying training takes about 18 months for pilots and one year for navigators and air
electronics officers.
Officers in ground branches are usually found from people in civil life, some of
whom already hold professional qualifications, who enter the Royal Air Force on short
service or permanent commissions. Short service officers may be selected for permanent
commissions while in the Royal Air Force.
DEFENCE
133
Fnr^ sion* aIsT° be obtained through cadetships at the Royal Air
ce Technical College, henlow, Bedfordshire (Technical Branch), the RAF College
Cranwel! (Secretarial and Equipment Branches), or the Royal Military Academy,
Sandhurst (RAF Regiment). University graduates are also eligible for permanent com¬
missions under special conditions. Some technical cadets proceed after one year at
tienlow to a three-year degree course at a university.
Applicants for enlistment for service as airmen or airwomen must be British subjects
f good character and medically fit. Men between the ages of 17I and 39 years may
e enlisted as trained tradesmen if they can pass the appropriate trade test, or otherwise
^ tnumnginany RAF trade for which they may be suitable, subject to vacancies.
listment is for one of specified periods within a maximum of 12 years. Subject to
requirements, airmen may re-engage to serve for 22 years’ reckonable service for
pension and towards the end of that period may apply to continue to serve to the age
^pos&gTdu™8 C0UrSe °f 8 WeekS iS f0ll0Wed by ^ traini,lg Where
Boys may enlist between the ages of 15 and i7 as apprentice advanced tradesmen
etween the ages of 15^ and ifii as boy entrants for training in skilled trades.
from the’^of Ib8°y entnmtS enIlSt for 12 years or 9 years Plus 3 years’ reserve service
Women between the ages of 17 and 39 may enlist for normal service as airwomen
tor periods of 3, 4 5 or 6 years. Subject to requirements, women, like airmen, may
subsequently extend their engagements to a maximum of 12 years, or re-engage to
serve foi 22 years service reckonable for pension and towards the end of that period
may apply to continue in the Service until the age of 35. Women between the ages of
7 ' 52, may enIlst for local scrv|ce as airwomen for 2 years, which period may be
extended by one or two years at a time. Women of at least 18 years of age and of the
requisite educational standard may be selected for short service commissions. Oppor-
unities exist for both short service officers and airwomen to gain permanent comm issions.
Auxiliary and Reserve Forces
The Royal Auxiliary Air Force consists of three maritime headquarters units and
maritime support unit. The units are raised and maintained by local Territorial and
Auxiliary forces Associations and functionally controlled by Coastal Command. In
addition the Royal Auxiliary Air Force General List comprises officers specially ear-
marked tor service m war appointments. J
Ihe A" 1r0r-e ?TVe C0nsists mainly of officers ai™“ who have served
T th Al" 1'orce-.It lncludf Ae Royal Air Force Volunteer Reserve, whose members,
ike the officers, airmen and airwomen of the Royal Auxiliary Air Force, have a liabilit^
to carry out training on a part-time basis. University air squadrons (established at
17 universities) form part of the Royal Air Force Volunteer Reserve.
x-regular airmen with a liability for reserve service carry out this liability in Class
f 1 hn R0,yal F°rCe Reserve- Part-time National Service men serve in Class H
ot the Royal Air Force Reserve or they may volunteer instead to join the Volunteer
Reserve or the Royal Auxiliary Air Force.
Royal Observer Corps
The tfqya/ Observer Corps, a predominantly civilian and voluntary organisation
offidaBv StlbTh ^ Flghter TCommand> originated during the first world wfr and was
have eStabl.1S.hed,m I?25-Its/resent strength is over 15,000 men and women, who
ave the specialised tasks of identifying and reporting the movements of aircraft
*34
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
and of measuring and reporting on radioactivity in the event of nuclear attack.
Eventually some 1,500 underground operation centres will have been built for the
corps.
Air Training Corps
The Air Training Corps provides pre-Service training for boys between the ages of
14 and 20 years. Like the other pre-Service formations, it seeks to inculcate good
citizenship as well as training for the RAF.
HOME DEFENCE
The second world war showed the importance of having trained and organised
bodies of men and women ready to mitigate the effects of enemy air attacks on the
civil population; and the Civil Defence Act, 1948, recognised that a permanent system
of civil defence was essential to national safety. The development of nuclear weapons,
whilst creating many new problems for civil defence and calling for much replanning,
has increased rather than lessened the need for an efficient civil defence organisation.
Civil Defence remains an integral part of the country’s defence plan.
In the event of nuclear attack, the problems of rescue, fire-fighting and welfare
operations would be greatly intensified by the presence of radioactivity, which would
have to be detected and its extent and intensity measured. The first call would have
to be met by the civilian services on the spot, and these would be supported by the
armed forces in the country at the time, whether regular or reserve, which were
not immediately required for combat operations. The Minister of Defence is charged
with planning the part which the armed forces would play in home defence, and with
co-ordinating the plans of the military authorities with those of the civil authorities.
The country’s economic capacity limits the effort which can be devoted to home
defence preparations; and the main defence objective must be to maintain the nuclear
deterrent—not to prepare for war but to prevent it. In home defence the main task in
peace time is to keep a local organisation in being as a framework for expansion if
necessary, to provide training equipment and to proceed with essential research. The
Government has declared its conviction that, if the deterrent were to fail, countless
lives could be saved by civil defence preparations made in advance.
Organisation of Civil Defence
Civil defence planning in the United Kingdom is the responsibility of a number of
ministers each of whom undertakes the duties which, in war time, would represent a
natural extension of his peace-time functions. As the development of effective civil
defence services involves much detailed planning at local level, the central Government
has enlisted the assistance of local government authorities, of industry and commerce
and of public bodies of many kinds, including voluntary organisations such as the
Voluntary Aid Societies and the Women’s Voluntary Services.
In addition to his direct responsibilities under the Civil Defence Act, 1948, the
Home Secretary is responsible for co-ordinating the defence plans of all the civil
agencies of the Government. The Secretary of State for Scotland is responsible for
civil defence matters in Scotland.
In England and Wales the Home Secretary supervises the civil defence activities
of the police and fire services, the Civil Defence Corps and the Industrial Civil Defence
Service as well as such matters as shelter policy and the national air attack and fall-out
warning and monitoring systems. Other Government departments have direct respon-
DEFENCE
135
sibility for the civil defence applications of the services which they control; for
example, the Ministry of Health is responsible for the hospital and first-aid services
and the Post Office for telecommunications.
In Scotland the Scottish Home Department deals with questions corresponding to
those dealt with by the Home Office in England and Wales, and the Department of
Health for Scotland is responsible for such matters as the hospital and first-aid services
In Northern Ireland the Civil Defence Act (Northern Ireland), 1950, places
responsibility for civil defence matters on the Ministry of Home Affairs, which may
arrange for other departments to undertake some functions on its behalf.
The co-ordination of civil defence planning in Great Britain necessarily involves
much work by interdepartmental committees, on which all departments with civil
defence responsibilities are represented, in order that plans and programmes may be
constantly reviewed to take account of changes in the scale and nature of possible attacks.
England is divided into ten civil defence regions in charge of Regional Directors
of Civil Defence, appointed by the Home Office, and there is also a Director of Civil
Defence for Wales. Their duties include liaison with the armed forces and the planning
of combined exercises. There is no corresponding regional organisation in Scotland,
where planning is carried out centrally, although the country is divided into three
zones for operational purposes.
The Civil Defence Services
To provide the personnel required in war for civil defence tasks, the following
services, in which in times of peace only part-time service is required, are raised in
Great Britain1 by voluntary recruitment of civilians, both men and women:
1. The Civil Defence Corps, which was established in May 1949, to assist local
and other authorities to carry out their civil defence functions.
2. The Industrial Civil Defence Service, which comprises civil defence units
formed in industrial and commercial premises.
3. The Auxiliary Fire Service, to reinforce the fire services maintained by local
authorities under the Fire Services Act, 1947. (The Fire Service would become
a national organisation in time of war.)
4. The National Hospital Service Reserve, limited at present to trained nurses
and persons willing to be trained as nursing auxiliaries to reinforce the National
Hospital Service in England and Wales. In Scotland there is also an Ambulance
Section of the Reserve to provide the additional manpower for the war-time
operation of the Scottish Ambulance Service.
Subject to restrictions regarding age and obligation to serve in the armed forces,
recruits for all services are drawn from men and women who are willing to serve and
who will undertake to train regularly. The Government does not pay the volunteers
for their services but reasonable out-of-pocket expenses are reimbursed.
Strengths in Great Britain on 31st March, 1961, were:
Civil Defence Corps
Industrial Civil Defence Service (on 31st October, i960)
Auxiliary Fire Service
National Hospital Service Reserve
346,047
186,630
19,619
69»535
1 In Northern Ireland there are three main services: the Civil Defence Corps, the Auxiliarv
rire and Rescue Service, and the Hospital Service Reserve.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
I36
The Civil Defence Corps. This Corps is recruited and organised by certain local
authorities (mainly the councils of counties and county boroughs in England and
Wales, or counties and large burghs in Scotland) in local divisions. The local divisions
are subdivided into five sections1 as follows:
Headquarters: control of civil defence operations, communications, recon¬
naissance (including scientific matters).
Wardens: public guidance and control, reporting of damage and radio¬
active fall-out, organisation of immediate self-help measures,
and the local control of life-saving operations.
Rescue: rescue of trapped persons and rendering first aid to them.
Ambulance first aid, conveyance of casualties to Forward Medical Aid Units
and First Aid: and to hospital, and the organisation of stretcher-bearers.
Welfare: escort and welfare of evacuees, care of homeless, assistance with
billeting, rest centres, emergency cooking and feeding, public
information centres.
The Industrial Civil Defence Service. The Government has invited the managements
of the larger industrial and commercial undertakings to form civil defence units for
the protection of their own personnel and to assist the public civil defence services.
The Government’s aim is to have an efficient civil defence unit in all premises where
more than 200 people work. Units formed under these arrangements comprise
headquarters, warden, rescue, first aid, welfare, and fire guard sections. These units
train in much the same way as the Civil Defence Corps, and in war would operate in
close association with it and with the other public civil defence services.
The Auxiliary Fire Service. Fire authorities (see p. 80) are required to enrol
auxiliary firemen as members of fire brigades for service which is restricted, except
in a war emergency, to such duties as are desirable for training. This organisation is
known as the Auxiliary Fire Service, but the personnel are members of the individual
brigades in which they are enrolled.
Training
Members of the Civil Defence Corps are required to undertake the training necessary
to enable them to carry out the duties of an ordinary member of the section of the
Corps to which they belong, and thereafter to undertake a few hours’ refresher
training, including exercises, each year. If they wish to increase their knowledge they
may undertake courses of additional and advanced training.
Civil defence instructors are trained either at one of the the three Home Office Civil
Defence Schools or locally, under arrangements made by local authorities, in accordance
with directions given by the Home Office or the Scottish Home Department. Courses
and studies for senior officials concerned with civil defence are held at the Civil Defence
Staff College at Sunningdale, Berkshire, and in Scotland, at the Home Office Civil
Defence School at Taymouth Castle, Perthshire.
Auxiliary firemen are trained by officers and men of the regular brigades, who
1 Four in Scotland, where there is no separate Ambulance and First Aid section, ambulance
services being provided by the National Hospital Service Reserve, and casualty collecting being
a warden duty. In Northern Ireland the Civil Defence Corps, which is organised directly by
the Ministry of Home Affairs and not by the local authorities, consists of three sections only—
Headquarters, Wardens and Welfare; the Ambulance Service forms part of the Hospital
Service, and the Rescue Section has been integrated with the Auxiliary Fire Service to form the
Auxiliary Fire and Rescue Service.
DEFENCE
137
themselves receive special training in emergency fire-fighting at the Home Office
rire Service Training Centre at Moreton-in-Marsh, Gloucestershire. They are
encouraged to gain practical experience of fire-fighting by performing stand-by duty
at fire stations to enable them to respond, with regular members of the brigade, to
calls to fires. Exercises are also held, involving the control and operation of large
numbers of pumping and other fire-fighting appliances.
The Police
In time of war the police would continue to be responsible for the prevention of
crime, for the maintenance of law and order and for the control of essential service
routes. They are also likely to have duties in connection with evacuation, care of the
homeless and other specialised civil defence tasks. In all these duties they would have
the aid of the Special Constabulary.
Role of the Armed Forces
The Services have a vital role to play in civil defence; all armed forces, whether
regular or reserve, in the country at the outbreak of war who are not engaged in
active operations against the enemy will have to be prepared to assist in the struggle
for survival. The armed forces are in no sense a substitute for civil administration;
the aim will be to support the civil authorities by all possible means. All units of the
Regular and Reserve Armies are trained in peace time for the civil defence tasks they
may be expected to perform in war. In addition, between 1955 and 1958, some 25,000
men of the Royal Air Force were trained in emergency fire-fighting operations at
Home Office training centres to enable them to serve as firemen in a National Fire
Service.
There is close liaison in peace time between the civil and military authorities at
all levels. Joint exercises are continually being held and everything possible is being
done to align the civil and military chains of command. As a result, the functions
which the military authorities could undertake in support of the civil authorities have
been more clearly defined: there is also a growing understanding among the civil
authorities of the part that the military authorities can best play.
There are two main ways in which the fighting Services can render assistance:
by helping the civil authorities to maintain control; and by the direct employment
of units on various tasks such as aid to the police in the maintenance of law and order
and traffic control, aid to the fire service, assistance in the reception and care of the
homeless, in the treatment and evacuation of casualties and in the clearance of radio¬
active fall-out zones, the provision of guards, the maintenance of road, rail and water
communications, light rescue, reconnaissance and the provision and running of camps.
V. SOCIAL WELFARE
STATE AND VOLUNTARY SERVICES
In Britain the State is now responsible, through either central or local government
authorities, for a range of services covering subsistence for the needy, education and
health services for all, housing, employment or maintenance, the care of aged or
handicapped persons, the care of children, the nutrition of mothers and children,
and sickness, maternity and industrial injury benefits, widow’s and retirement pensions
and family allowances. Public authorities in the United Kingdom are spending nearly
£3,944 million a year on social services; that is, about £75 a year a head of the
population.
Voluntary organisations, especially the Churches, were the pioneers of nearly all
the social services. They provided schools, hospitals, clinics, dispensaries, and social
and recreational clubs before these were provided by the State. They made them¬
selves responsible for the welfare of the very young and the very old, the homeless
and the handicapped, before it was generally accepted that the whole community
had a responsibility towards these people. Where the services and the facilities they
provided were adequate, they have been encouraged to continue. The State now
supplements these voluntary services and provides financial assistance, sees that
essential services are brought within the reach of every citizen, and ensures that the
necessary standards are maintained.
Many voluntary social services surround and supplement the State services. The
two types are complementary, not competitive, and they merge into each other.
State services often work through voluntary agencies specially adapted to serve
individual or special needs. The officers of central and local government, in carrying
out their duties, co-operate with the workers of many voluntary social service societies,
while the institutional provision made by the State and by local authorities for the
care of the chronic sick and the aged is supplemented by voluntary homes of various
types for the care of the sick and elderly, most of whom receive State pensions or
benefits.
The Charity Commission, a Government department, gives free advice to trustees
of charities, making schemes to modify their trusts and purposes when necessary.
The commission was reconstituted by the Charities Act, i960, which gave it additional
powers in order to meet modern needs of promoting co-operation between charities
and State services and directed the establishment of a Central Register of Charities
in which, for the first time, information about all the charities in England and Wales
will be gathered together.
Voluntary Organisations
The number of voluntary charitable societies and institutions in Britain runs into
thousands; they range from national organisations to small individual local groups.
Most organisations, however, are members of larger associations or are represented on
local or national co-ordinating councils or committees. Some are chiefly concerned
to give personal service, others are mainly interested in the formation of public opinion
and exchange of information.
SOCIAL WELFARE
139
Organisations concerned with personal and family problems and misfortunes include
the voluntary family casework agencies, of which the Family Welfare Association,
working mainly in London, is the best known, the National Marriage Guidance
Council, and the societies represented on the National Council of Associated Children’s
Homes.
^ Voluntary service to the sick and disabled in general is given by the British Red
Cross, the St. John Ambulance Brigade and the St. Andrew’s Ambulance Association,
but a number of societies exist to help sufferers from particular disabilities, such as the
Royal National Institute for the Blind, the National Institute for the Deaf, the National
Association for Mental Health, and the constituent members of the Central Council
for the Care of Cripples.
Bodies working on a national scale whose work is specifically religious in inspiration
include the Salvation Army, the Church Army, Toe H, the Committee on Social
Service of the Church of Scotland, the Church of England Children’s Society, the
Church of England Moral Welfare Council, the Young Men’s Christian Association,
the Young Women’s Christian Association, the Society of Friends, the Crusade of
Rescue, the Society of St. Vincent de Paul, the Catholic Marriage Advisory Council
and the Jewish Board of Guardians.
A wide range of voluntary personal service is given by the Women’s Voluntary
Service, which ‘lends a hand’ in every kind of practical difficulty, brings ‘meals on
wheels to housebound invalids and old people, minds children, and visits the sick in
hospital, as well as doing relief work in emergencies.
A central link between different voluntary organisations and official bodies concerned
with social welfare is provided by the National Council of Social Service, which brings
together most of the principal voluntary agencies for consultation and joint action,
either as a whole or in groups of organisations concerned with particular aspects, such
as youth work and old people’s welfare, in England and Wales, by the Scottish Council
of Social Service and the Northern Ireland Council of Social Service. It was the
National Council of Social Service which set up the Citizens’ Advice Bureaux, of
which there are now about 430 in the United Kingdom. The role of the bureaux is to
give explanation and advice to the citizen who is in doubt about his rights or who does
not know about the State or voluntary service which could help him.
Social Workers
While the voluntary worker giving full-time or part-time service has done pioneer
work in many of Britain’s social services and continues to play an essential part, social
services of all kinds increasingly depend for their operation chiefly on the professional
social worker, that is, the full-time salaried worker trained in the principles and tech¬
nique of social work. Training for many forms of social work consists of a basic
university degree, diploma or certificate course in social science followed by a specia¬
lised training for a particular service. The latter is sometimes organised by the pro¬
fession concerned. An attempt is being made to lessen specialisation in social work. A
working party on social workers in local authority health and welfare services, which
reported in May 1959, recommended the establishment of a national council for social
work training and a new general training in social work, to be available outside the
universities, leading to a national qualification. The courses of professional training
provided in the universities and one or two other courses of comparable standard would
continue to afford the highest qualifications.
Voluntary organisations were the pioneers in the employment and training of social
workers, but Government departments and local authorities now employ a considerable
140
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
number of trained social workers, for example, in child care, youth work, almoning,
psychiatric social work, and the probation sendee.
NATIONAL INSURANCE AND RELATED SERVICES
National Insurance, Industrial Injuries Insurance, Family Allowances and National
Assistance together constitute a comprehensive system of social security in the United
Kingdom which ensures that in no circumstances need anyone fall below a certain
minimum standard of living.
The Ministry of Pensions and National Insurance administers the first three of
these measures in Great Britain; in Northern Ireland they are administered by the
Ministry of Labour and National Insurance. National Assistance is administered by
the National Assistance Board in Great Britain, and in Northern Ireland by the
National Assistance Board for Northern Ireland.
Pensions and welfare services for war pensioners and their dependants are the
responsibility of the Ministry of Pensions and National Insurance throughout the
United Kingdom.
Appeals relating to claims for insurance benefits, family allowances or war pensions,
or to applications for assistance, are not decided by the ministry or the board but by
independent authorities appointed under the Acts.
Although the development of public provision for social security in Britain can be
traced back for several centuries (the Poor Relief Act of 1601 may be regarded as its
starting point in England and Wales), the modern system of comprehensive provision
is a creation of the twentieth century. Non-contributory old age pensions were intro¬
duced in 1908, and the first contributory pensions for old people, widows and orphans
in 1926. A contributory National Health Insurance Scheme was begun in 1912, and
in the same year a scheme of unemployment insurance was introduced which in 1920
was extended to cover the great majority of employed persons. By the beginning of
the second world war the social security services in Britain were among the best in the
world, but they lacked co-ordination by the very fact of their piecemeal development,
and not everyone came within their scope.
Under the stimulus of war, when plans for post-war reconstruction were being
formulated, Lord (then Sir William) Beveridge was invited by the National Coalition
Government to investigate the country’s existing social insurance system. In 1942
the Beveridge Report was published; it recommended the creation of a comprehensive
and unified system of social insurance. The report aroused intense interest and was
accepted in general by the Government as the basis on which the future social security
structure should be built.
In the immediate post-war years a series of Acts introduced the new comprehensive
system which became fully operative on 5th July, 1948. Adjustments have been made
by a number of subsequent Acts.
Family allowances and national insurance benefits or allowances, other than
maternity, unemployment or sickness benefit, are included in the taxable income
on which income tax is assessed. On the other hand, various income tax
reliefs and exemptions are allowed on account of age or liability for the support of
dependants.
Reciprocity
The national insurance, industrial injuries and family allowances schemes of
Great Britain and those of Northern Ireland and the Isle of Man operate as a single
SOCIAL WELFARE
I4I
system. Northern Ireland and the Isle of Man as well as Great Britain are party to
most of the agreements with other countries. Reciprocal agreements on national
insurance, industrial injuries and family allowances are in operation with Belgium,
Denmark, Finland, Jersey, Norway, Western Germany and Yugoslavia. Agreements
with France, Israel, Italy, Luxembourg, Malta, the Netherlands, Sweden, Switzerland
and Turkey cover national insurance and industrial injuries insurance. With Australia,
Canada and New Zealand there are agreements on national insurance and family
allowances. There is an agreement with Guernsey on family allowances only, with
Cyprus on national insurance, and an agreement with the Irish Republic which covers
national insurance and contains some industrial injuries provisions relating to seafarers.
Other agreements are under negotiation.
FAMILY ALLOWANCES
Family allowances have been provided by the State since August 1946, under the
Family Allowances Act of June I945' Jus^ over 5^ million allowances are being
paid in Great Britain to over 3! million families with two or more children. An
allowance is paid for each child other than the first or only child below the age limits.
The age limits are 15 years for children who leave school at that age, 16 years for certain
handicapped children, and 18 for children who remain at school or are apprentices.
The rate of the allowance is 8s. a week for the second child below the age limits and
10s. a week for the third and each subsequent child.
Family allowances are paid from the Exchequer and their object is to benefit the
family as a whole; they belong to the mother, but may be paid either to the mother
or to the father. There is no insurance qualification, and parents who are not British
subjects may claim allowances if they satisfy a special residence qualification.
The corresponding scheme in Northern Ireland makes similar provision for
family allowances.
NATIONAL INSURANCE
The National Insurance Act, 1946, came into full operation on the 5th July, 1948.
It has been amended by the National Insurance Acts, 1949-60, and the Family
Allowances and National Insurance Acts, 1952 and 1956. The Acts apply, in general, to
everyone over school-leaving age living in Great Britain. There are similar schemes in
Northern Ireland and the Isle of Man.
The National Insurance scheme provides benefits in specified contingencies to
insured persons who have paid the required contributions. The benefits are paid for
partly by insured persons’ contributions, partly by the contributions of employers
in respect of their employees, and partly by a contribution made by the Exchequer out
of general taxation. Up to April 1961, the rates of contributions and benefits were
standard amounts varying only with the sex and insurance class of the insured person
(with lower rates for those under 18). In April 1961 the scheme was modified by the
introduction of the graduated scheme. This applies to all adult employed persons
earning a minimum of £9 a week and not ‘contracted out’ of the graduated scheme and
provides for them to earn additions to flat-rate retirement pension (but not to any
other benefit) in return for graduated contributions, related to earnings, paid normally
in addition to the flat-rate contribution. Employees whose job provides them with a
secure occupational pension at least as good as the maximum State graduated pension
can be ‘contracted out’ of the scheme. About 4,200,000 had been contracted out by
April 1961.
142
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Insured Population
The National Insurance scheme applies, in general, to everyone over school-leaving
age and under pensionable age. Contributors are divided into three classes:
Class 1. Employed persons. Those who work for an employer under a contract
of service or are paid apprentices—about 22 million. This class falls into two
groups: those who are, and those who are not, participating in the graduated
pension scheme.
Class 2. Self-employed persons. Those in business on their own account and
others who are working for gain but do not work under the control of an
employer—nearly million.
Class 3. Non-employed persons. All persons insured who are not in class 1 or 2
—about half a million.
This general classification is subject to certain modifications, made by regulations,
to meet special circumstances. Married women engaged only in their own house¬
hold duties are, in general, provided for by their husbands’ insurance and need not
pay contributions. They can choose to pay contributions provided they were insured
persons when they married. (Those who were already married when the scheme began
to operate on 5th July, 1948, cannot be insured in their own right unless they were
then insured under the old scheme and continued to pay contributions as non-
employed persons, or unless they have since taken up paid work.) Employed married
women may choose whether to pay separate contributions themselves or to rely on
the cover provided by their husbands’ contributions, which make them eligible for
maternity and home confinement grants, retirement pension at lower rate, widow’s
benefit and death grant, but they must pay graduated contributions if they are employed
in a participating employment and their earnings are over £9 a week. Students
receiving full-time education and unpaid apprentices need not pay contributions.
Up to the age of 18, contributions are credited to them. Over that age they may, if
they wish, pay as non-employed persons (class 3) and thus safeguard their title to
widow’s benefit and to retirement pension at full rate. Self-employed and non-
employed persons whose income is not more than £156 a year can apply to be excepted
from liability to pay contributions.
Contributions
The main weekly rates of flat-rate contribution (including the National Health
Service contribution which for convenience is paid with it, though the two services
are separately administered) in force since July 1961 are shown in Table 7.
Contributions are normally paid on a single contribution card by national insurance
stamps bought from a post office. It is the employer’s responsibility in the first place
to see that the class 1 contributions are paid, but he can deduct the employee’s share
from his or her wages. The self-employed and non-employed must stamp their own
cards. Contributions are usually ‘credited’ for weeks of unemployment, sickness or
injury, or if widow’s benefit is being paid.
Graduated contributions are payable by employed persons earning over £9 a week
who are not contracted out, at the rate of approximately 4^ per cent of their weekly
pay between ^9 and ^15. The employer pays the same amount. The contributions are
collected through the same machinery as is used to collect Pay As You Earn (deduction
at source) income tax.
An insured person ceases to be liable for national insurance contributions at the
age of 70 for men, 65 for women, or when he retires, or is deemed to have retired, from
SOCIAL WELFARE
H3
regular employment after reaching minimum pension age (65 for men, 60 for women)
whichever is the earlier. If such a person does any work as an employed person
thereafter, he must pay an industrial injuries contribution; his employer’s liability
remains the same as shown in Table 7.
TABLE 7
Weekly National Insurance and National Health Service Contributions
Class 1
Employed persons con¬
tracted out of the
graduated pension
scheme:
Paid by employee ..
Paid by employer ..
Totals ..
Employed persons not
contracted out:
Paid by employee ..
Paid by employer ..
Totals ..
Class 2
Self-employed persons
Class 3
Non-employed persons
MEN(a)
National
Insurance
(*)
d.
9 51
9 2i
18 8
7 IQi
7 11|
15 10
Health
Service
s. d.
2 8J
7i
3 4
3 4
Totals
s. d.
12 2
9 10
22 0
10 7
8 7
19 2
11 4
8 7
2 10
2 10
14 2
11 5
WOMEN(a)
National
Insurance
(*)
s. d.
7 51
7 n
Health
Service
14 7
6 71
6 81
13 4
9 4
6 7
7J
2 8
2 0|
7i
2 8
2 2
2 2
Totals
s. d.
9 6
7 9
17 3
8 8
7 4
16 0
11 6
8 9
(a) Boys and girls under 18 years of age contribute at lower rates.
(b) Including, for class 1, the industrial injuries insurance contribution of yd. from employee
woman tl0m emp oyer ^or a man> an^ 4d. from employee and sd. from employer for a
Benefits
The scheme provides payments to contributors during unemployment (if normally
working for an employer), sickness (if normally working for an employer or self-
employed), confinement and the weeks immediately before and after (for women
normally working for an employer or self-employed and paying national insurance
contributions at the full rate), and to widows in the first 13 weeks after bereavement
and subsequently while they have young children or if they have reached the age of 50
when widowed or when their children have grown up; two kinds of allowances in
respect of orphan children where a widow’s pension is not payable; and pensions for
i44
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
people who have reached 65 (60 for women) and who, if under 70 (65 for women),
have retired from regular work. The scheme also provides cash grants for three
expensive contingencies—the birth of a child, a confinement at home (or elsewhere,
otherwise than at public expense), and a death (though not for the death of someone
already over minimum pension age when the scheme started).
For most of the benefits there are two contribution conditions. First, before benefit
can be paid at all, a minimum number of contributions must actually have been paid
since entry into insurance; secondly, the full rate of benefit cannot be paid unless a
specified number of contributions have been paid or ‘credited’ over a specified period.
There are special rules to help a widow who does not become entitled to a widow’s
pension at widowhood or when her children have grown up, to qualify for sickness
or unemployment benefit in the period before she can have established or re-established
herself in insurance through her own contributions; there are also provisions to help
divorced women who were not paying contributions during their marriage.
Amounts
The basic standard rate of the majority of benefits is now £2 17s. 6d. a week for
men and women alike, which may be reduced if insufficient contributions have been
paid, but is not affected by other unearned income or the previous level of earnings.
Earnings made while the benefit is in payment, however, may cause its reduction or
withdrawal; unemployment benefit cannot be paid to a person earning more than a
specified amount from a secondary occupation; widows, and retirement pensioners
under the age of 70 (65 for women), have their pensions reduced in step with earnings
over certain specified amounts; sickness benefit, though not affected by continued
payment of wages, is terminated if the person receiving it does more than a negligible
amount of paid work. Exceptions to the basic standard rate are the higher rate of £4
a week payable to widows, without regard to any earnings, during the first 13 weeks
after bereavement, the increased retirement pension payable to someone who has
continued at work beyond minimum pension age, and the lower rate of 19s. a week
unemployment or sickness benefit payable to a married woman who is not separated
from her husband and unsupported by him or else maintaining an invalid husband, i.e.
who is the second not the first breadwinner in the household. The standard rate of
retirement pension for a woman on her husband’s insurance is ^1 15s. a week. Standard
increases are payable for dependants at the rate of £1 15s. for an adult (generally a
wife), 17s. 6d. for the first or only child under the family allowances age limits and
9s. 6d., over and above any family allowances payable, for other children. However,
the amounts payable to widows for their children are larger: £1 5s. for the first or only
child and 17s. for others.
Graduated contributions add 6d. a week to retirement pension for each £7 10s.
of graduated contributions paid by a man, with the matching £7 10s. paid by his
employer, and for each ^9 paid by a woman, with the matching ^9 paid by her employer.
The allowance provided for a child who has lost both parents (one of whom must
have been insured under the National Insurance Acts) is a guardian’s allowance of
£1 12s. 6d. a week. It is paid to the person in whose family a child is, for the time being,
included. For certain orphan children a child’s special allowance is provided: it is
payable to a woman whose marriage has been dissolved or annulled, on the death of her
former husband, for any children of that marriage below the family allowance age
limits to whose support he has been contributing. The weekly rate of the allowance
depends on the amount he has been contributing, subject to a minimum of 5s. and a
maximum of £1 5s. for the first or only child and 17s. for each other child.
SOCIAL WELFARE
I45
e rates of grants are varied: ^14 maternity grant is payable for a confinement
and a further grant for each additional child born at the same confinement living 12
urs after its birth; £6 is paid for a confinement at home or elsewhere other than at
public expense; and £25 death grant on the death of an adult (less for a child, or for
started) Wh° WaS Wlthm 10 yCarS °f minimum Pension age when the scheme
All these amounts have been increased since the scheme came into operation- the
figures given are those introduced in April 1961. * ’
Duration
In general National Insurance payments continue as long as the situation requiring
them lasts However, sickness benefit cannot be paid for more than a year if less than
156 contributions have been paid (possible within three years for a contributor who
was continuously at work) and unemployment benefit is payable in the first instance
30 weeks, after which it may be continued for up to 19 months in all, according to
the person s record of contributions paid as against unemployment benefit drawn in
recent years. Maternity allowance begins 11 weeks before the expected week of
confinement “thisthter" ^ ^ f°Il0Wing ^ eXpeCted Week 0r the *ctuaI
Similarly, widowed mother’s allowances at the full standard rate cease when the
children reach family a lowance age limits, though a mother can continue to receive
£2 17s. 6d. a week for herself while she has living with her a son or daughter above
the age limits but under 18 The widow’s pension payable to the childless widow
L°;“e 18 —f 50 (and had beCn married at least three years when her husband
died) and the similar pension normally paid to the widowed mother who has reached
50 when her widowed mother’s allowance ends, continues until she has reached
minimum pension age and retired, or at most till age 65. If she has satisfied the
conditions she then becomes entitled to a retirement pension.
NATIONAL INSURANCE (INDUSTRIAL INJURIES)
The Industrial Injuries Insurance scheme, which, in July 1948, replaced the Work-
r^°mpenrr SCaem/ (first introduced by the Workmen’s Compensation Act
of 1897), provides benefits for personal injuries caused by accidents arising out of and
in the course of, employment, and for prescribed diseases due to the nature of employment
I covers practtadJy everyone in class 1 of the National Insurance scheme and certain
others. Like the National Insurance scheme, the Industrial Injuries scheme is financed
par ly from contributions (see Table 7) and partly from taxation. The relevant Acts
°na InT?nCe (Atrial Injuries) Acts, 1946 to i960. Cover against
industrial injuries and diseases in Northern Ireland is provided to the same extent by
the separate legislation of the Parliament of Northern Ireland.
Benefits
Injury Benefit
adUlt !S ^4-,7S' 6d' 2 W6ek pluS & I5S- for an adult dependant
and 17, 6d for the first or only child under the family allowances age limits and 9s. 6d.
r each other eligible child, in addition to any family allowance payable. It is-paid
when the insured person is incapable of work as a result of an industrial accident or
prescribed disease, and payment can continue for a maximum of 26 weeks beginning
on the date of the accident or development of the disease. 6
146
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Disablement Benefit
Disablement benefit may be paid if, after the payment of injury benefit has ceased,
there remains some loss of physical or mental faculty as the result of the industrial
accident or prescribed disease. The amount depends on the extent of the disablement,
as assessed by a medical board; it varies from £4 17s. 6d. for 100 per cent disablement
to 19s. 6d. a week for 20 per cent disablement. For disablement of less than 20 per
cent a gratuity is normally paid, ranging up to £320.
In the following circumstances disablement benefit may be increased:
1. It will be made up to the 100 per cent rate during in-patient treatment in a
hospital for the relevant injury or disease, and increases for dependants may
also be paid.
2. If benefit is being received at the 100 per cent rate and someone is needed to
look after the insured person, a constant attendance allowance not exceeding
£2 a week (£4 in cases of exceptionally severe disablement) may be paid.
3. If the insured person is permanently unfit for work an unemployability supple¬
ment of £2 17s. 6d. a week may be paid, with allowances for dependants.
4. If the insured person is unfit to return to his former job, or work of a similar
standard, benefit may be increased (subject to a maximum of £4 17s. 6d.) by a
special hardship allowance of up to £1 19s. a week.
Death Benefit
If the accident or disease results in the insured person’s death, death benefit may be
paid to the dependants.
For widows living with their husbands at the time of death, a pension of £4 a week
is payable for the first thirteen weeks of widowhood. Thereafter, if the widow (1) is
entitled to a child’s allowance or was over the age of 40 on ceasing to be so entitled, or
(2) was over 50 years of age or was permanently incapable of self-support at the time
of her husband’s death, or (3) is not entitled to child’s allowance, but has residing with
her a young person under the age of 18 who was or could be treated as being in her late
husband’s family, or (4) is over 40 years of age when (3) ceases to apply, or (5) is preg¬
nant by her late husband, she is entitled to a pension of £3 4s. a week. If none of these
conditions is satisfied, the widow may receive a pension of £1 a week.
In addition, allowances are paid for children under the family allowances age limits.
For widows, these allowances are normally at the rate of £1 5s. a week for the first or
only child and 17s. a week for each other child. For other beneficiaries, the rate is
17s. 6d. and 9s. 6d. a week respectively.
Certain other dependants, such as parents and other relatives, may be entitled to
pensions, allowances or gratuities. The amounts vary with the closeness of the
relationship and the extent to which the dependants were maintained by the deceased
during his lifetime.
NATIONAL ASSISTANCE AND WELFARE SERVICES
The National Assistance Act, 1948, which came into operation on 5th July, 1948,
inaugurated a single comprehensive State service of financial assistance for those in
need, whether because their resources, including social security benefits, were not
enough to meet their particular requirements, or because they fell outside the scope of
other social services. It also gave authority for other kinds of social welfare services
besides financial assistance.
SOCIAL WELFARE
147
mThheef0^faI ^,sistance BToard « sponsible for administering cash assistance,
the form of weekly grants. It has various other duties, including the administration
of non-contributory pensions under the Old Age Pensions Act, 1936 (still payable on a
nationality, means and residence test to a diminishing number of persons aged 70 years
or over on 30th September, 1961, and to blind persons aged 40 years or over Iho are
not qualified to receive National Insurance pensions); the administration of hostels
Le/al A dUnHerAH A ReSettlement Act> *947; and the determination (under the
Legal Aid and Advice Acts, 1949 and i960, and the Legal Aid and Solicitors (Scotland)
C , ’ 1949 and i960) whether a person’s resources bring him within the Legal Aid
. Chem.e and’lf 1°’ what> lf anything, is the maximum amount he may be called upon
to pay towards the cost of his case.* It is also responsible for influencing ‘persons with¬
out a settled way of living’ to lead a more normal life, and provides temporary accom-
P0°rd^°n f®r ^em ln centres, usually through the agency of local authorities.
For men who have become demoralised by long unemployment and who are in receipt
t national assistance grants or are using reception centres, it runs two re-establishment
centres where they are given courses designed to help them get back into work.
The provision under the National Assistance Act of residential accommodation for
the aged infirm and others of temporary shelter for people who lose their homes, and
of special welfare services for the blind, the deaf, the crippled and other handicapped
p ople is the responsibility not of the National Assistance Board but of county and
county borough councils in England and Wales and, in Scotland, of councils of coun¬
ties and large burghs.
In Northern Ireland, financial assistance to a person in need is given under the
provisions of the National Assistance Act (Northern Ireland), 1948, and there is also
a system of non-contributory pensions similar to that operating in Great Britain
c^mcTtv I ACt (N°rthern Ireland)’ I949» local authorities, in their
capacity as welfare authorities, provide residential accommodation for the aged
infirm and others in need of care and attention. The welfare authorities also provide
special services for the blind, deaf and other handicapped people.
Welfare Services for the Blind and the Disabled
All local welfare authorities provide services for the blind, either directly or through
voluntary organisations acting as their agents. They are also providing, or arranging
dLorTerT TmT ^ ^ deaf ^ 0ther handicapped people including the mentally
disordered of all descriptions; voluntary organisations also play an important part in
this work by supplementing local authority services. F
Sr!7!fl f°r thC uIind include a home visiting and teaching service, employing
qualified home teachers, to assist the-blind to adjust themselves to their blindness
(special attention is given to the newly blind and to those with more than one disability,
such as the deaf-blind); instruction in craft work and in the use of embossed letters
tor reading and writing; social clubs, holiday and other recreational facilities; the
supply or loan of apparatus, such as wireless sets, embossed and recorded books
adapted tools and games; residential social rehabilitation and placement in employ-
ment, and an advisory service on the special financial and other benefits available to
e blind (including preventive and medical treatment, special education, and training
for employment). Voluntary organisations for blind welfare include local blind
societies and also national bodies, notably the Royal National Institute for the Blind
e National Library for the Blind, St. Dunstan’s (for those blinded in the wars)’
lor further information on legal aid see pp. 98-100.
148
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
the Scottish National Federation for the Welfare of the Blind and the Scottish National
Institution for the War Blinded.
Welfare services for the blind are well established and progress is being made with
similar services for other severely and permanently disabled people. The teaching of
handicrafts, training for employment either in open industry or sheltered workshops,
the organisation of social centres, clubs and other social activities, the adaptation of
premises to meet individual disabilities, and the arrangement of holidays, are some of
the services most generally provided. Local authorities are required to keep registers
of the blind in their areas and of other local physically handicapped people who wish
to register.
Old People’s Welfare
The newer homes provided by local authorities for aged and other infirm persons
usually have accommodation for 35 to 60 residents; over 1,100 have been opened in
Great Britain since the end of the second world war. County welfare authorities in
Northern Ireland have provided 27 similar homes. These smaller homes are gradually
replacing the larger institutions which were previously maintained by local authorities.
There are also about 1,900 small homes for old and disabled people run by voluntary
bodies or by private individuals. Most of the voluntary homes have been established
since the second world war, usually with the assistance of grants from public funds.
A number of home services for old people are provided by statutory and voluntary
bodies to help them to go on living in their own homes for as long as possible. Local
health authorities supply, under the National Health Service, home nursing and
domestic help (seep. 159); over half the district nurses’ time is spent on the aged or
the chronic sick and the same group makes the heaviest demands on the home help
service.
Local authorities are enabled by the National Assistance Act to contribute to the
funds of voluntary organisations ‘whose activities consist in or include the provision of
recreation or meals for old people’. Some 7,000 social clubs for elderly people have
been started by voluntary effort in recent years in all parts-of Britain. Other voluntary
welfare services for old people include ‘meals-on-wheels’ (cooked meals delivered to
their homes), the organisation of regular friendly visiting, holidays, chiropody services,
and laundry services.
Local Old People’s Welfare Committees have been formed and are aided by the
National Old People’s Welfare Council, an associated group of the National Council
of Social Service widely representative of voluntary and statutory bodies having direct
contact with old people, or by the Scottish Old People’s Welfare Committee, a com¬
mittee of the Scottish Council of Social Service. A National Corporation for the Care
of Old People was established in 1947 by the Nuffield Foundation1 to stimulate and
to give financial support to schemes for the welfare of the aged, to maintain an expert
technical advisory service, and to encourage and undertake research and experiment
for the welfare of old people. It is now concentrating its main effort on home services.
The King George VI Foundation, which was financed from the fund raised in
memory of the late King, has spent nearly £600,000 on schemes for old people, by
1 The Nuffield Foundation was established by Lord Nuffield in 1943 for the advancement of
health and the prevention and relief of sickness; the advancement of social well-being; the
care and comfort of the aged poor; the advancement of education; and such other charitable
purposes as might be declared by Lord Nuffield in his lifetime and by the trustees after his
death. Prominent among the foundation’s many activities are the promotion of medical, scientific
and social research and the development of medical services and of technical and commercial
education. Its resources consist of a fund of £10 million provided by Lord Nuffield and of gifts
and bequests from other persons.
SOCIAL WELFARE
H9
Sir*8 f°r ^ dfveIoP";el;t 0f existin« dubs’ the establishment of new dubs
and the training of workers to help old people. ’
CARE OF CHILDREN DEPRIVED OF NORMAL HOME LIFE
The Children Act, 1948, which came into force with the ending of the Poor Law
?WideS„„XntheC: amf °ritT 1" Great Brkain a dut^ to their -e aTy’
or wWd h r ge °f 17 7,h° haS n° parent °r guardian’ or who has been abandoned
or u hose parents are unable to provide for him temporarily or permanently Local
authorities must keep a child in care until he is 18 years of age or until he no longer
Twi !hC ChiIdl'en and Y°Ung Persons Act«5 1933-52, as regards EnZd
and Wales, and under the Children and Young Persons (Scotland) Acts, 1^37 and ™c6
ap?ifUSh°Knt-eS are1required also to accePt children committed to their care, untiHhe
ge of 18, oy juvenile courts, as needmg care or protection. Both categories of children
are to be treated so as to further their best interests and to afford them opportunity for
the proper development of their characters and interests. opportunity tor
Children in care are, if possible, boarded out with foster parents, who receive an
allowance to cover the cost of maintenance. If a foster home cannot be found for a
ild, or he is not suitable for boarding out, he may be placed in a children’s home
noTnm -*7 f.°Ca aiJthonty or a voluntary organisation. Many children’s homes are
nftw i ed/n SmadhJouses> on housing estates or in ordinary streets, where a group
of twelve or fewer children live in the care of a housemother or houseparents1 * * * * * * 8 * * the
husband following his normal employment. Other children may be placed in hostels
or lodgings or m other accommodation specially suited to their needs. The desirability
of returning a child to his family circle as soon as possible is fully appreciated and work
is carried out to rehabilitate the family where this is necessary! and WOrk
To carry out then-functions under the-Children Act, each local authority (county
council and county borough council or, in Scotland, council of a large burgh) is
ToTthe t0 3 ChlIdrCi;,S committee and a children’s officer to be responsible
assisted bva^staZTT!11/ Chl!fen “ authority’s care. Children’s officers are
rh; , d by, a S aff °/ chdd care officers who undertake inquiries and who supervise
children pkccd m foster homes. Regulations for England and Wales safeguarding
the boarding out of children by local authorities and voluntary organisations8^d th?
conduct of children’s homes have been made by the Home Secretary. In Sco^nd
similar regulations have been made by the Secretary of State for Scotland. The cost of
he local authorities child care service, including the provision of training for house-
PainnN anth Chl f Shared betWeen theI°Cal authorides andtheExchequer
In Northern Ireland the Children and Young Persons Act (Northern Ireland) iqco
gave to the welfare authorities of each county and county borough (under the general
1 ^ ,°f H°me AffairS) duty ^ homdess and neglecteti
c ildren. Legjslation relatmg to children and arrangements for their care follow
the same general principles as in Great Britain.
an^ee'p^r the reSP°nSibility of the Ministry of P“d<>ns and National Insur-
Voluntary organisations, many of which were pioneers in child care continue to
play Yalfuible P^r* ” work. The larger societies, such as Dr. Ba’rnardo's the
Church of Eng and Children’s Society and the Catholic Child Welfare Council’ are
constituent societies of the National Council of Associated Children’s Homes to
valual/ W •KUmber of,smal,er voIuntary homes are also affiliated. In Scotland a
valuable contribution is also made by the Children’s Homes and Hostels under the
auspices of the Church of Scotland Committee on Social Serv.“d by other
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
150
voluntary organisations, including the Quarriers’ Home (formerly the Orphans’ Homes
of Scotland). Children’s homes provided by voluntary organisations (of which there are
about 620 in Great Britain and 23 in Northern Ireland) are required to be registered
under the Children Act (in Northern Ireland under the Children and Young Persons
Act). The boarding out of children and all children’s homes, whether local authority
or voluntary homes, are subject to inspection by Inspectors of the Home Office
Children’s Department, of the Scottish Home Department or of the Northern Ireland
Ministry of Home Affairs.
Legal provision for adoption was first made in England and Wales in 1926 and in
Scotland in 1930. Over 14,000 adoption orders are made annually by the courts in
Great Britain and some 250 in Northern Ireland; there are always more would-be
adopters than children available for adoption. Adoption is now regulated by the Adop¬
tion Act, 1958, in Great Britain and by the Adoption of Children Act (Northern
Ireland), 1950, in Northern Ireland. The Registrars General keep registers of adopted
children; adoption societies (there are over 80 societies which arrange adoptions) must
be registered with the local authority (in Northern Ireland with the Ministry of Home
Affairs).
To safeguard the welfare of children living with their own parents or guardians, the
children’s departments have a duty to cause inquiries to be made in any case in which it
is reported that a child may need care or protection, unless they are satisfied that such
inquiries are unnecessary. In addition, local authorities, at the request of the Govern¬
ment departments concerned, have appointed local committees to co-ordinate local
authority and voluntary services dealing with unsatisfactory families; one of their
officers is designated as co-ordinating officer for the purpose of calling meetings of
interested bodies to discuss particular ‘problem families’ and to decide on a course of
action. These problem families, a very small minority in the community, are the focus
of much attention from health, housing, education, children’s and welfare authorities
and voluntary bodies. The voluntary Family Service Units undertake intensive and
prolonged casework with such families and there are several voluntary recuperative
centres to which mothers, with their children, can be sent for a period of residential
training, sometimes as a condition of a probation order.
The old-established National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children
and its Scottish counterpart maintain inspectors and visitors for the investigation of
cases of reported cruelty to, or neglect of, children in their own homes; when necessary
they resort to law for the protection of such children, but they prefer to achieve their
purpose by warning and advice.
WAR PENSIONS AND RELATED SERVICES
Pensions to persons disabled or bereaved through the wars are paid under Royal
Warrants and other instruments administered by the Ministry of Pensions and National
Insurance.
The current basic pension for 100 per cent disablement for a private soldier is
£417s. 6d. a week, but the amount varies according to rank and the degree of disablement.
The latter is assessed by comparing the disabled person with a normal healthy person
of the same age and sex, without taking earning capacity into account. Allowances
for a wife and children are paid in addition to the basic pension and there are various
supplementary allowances, the main ones being for unemployability (£3 3s. a week),
constant attendance (up to £2 and, exceptionally, £4 a week), comforts (10s. or £1
a week), and lowered standard of occupation (up to .£1 19s. a week). There is an
Stormont Castle, Bel¬
fast, the seat of the
Northern Ireland Par¬
liament and Govern¬
ment.
The RAF’s stand-off bomb
Blue Steel fitted to a V-bomber.
Civil Defence: Operations Room of the Warning and
Monitoring Organisation.
The Dreadnought, Britain’s first nuclear submarine, launched in i960.
The Malkara anti-tank guided missif
SOCIAL WELFARE
ISI
allowance (at rates varying between 5s. and 15s. a week) for persons drawing disable¬
ment pensions who are aged 65 or over and whose assessment is 40 per cent or more.
Both the basic disablement pension and the supplementary payments are free of
income tax, and children’s allowances are paid in addition to any allowance payable
under the Family Allowance Acts.
Pensions are also paid to war orphans and to war widows. The standard rate of
pension for war widows of private soldiers is £3 16s. a week, an addition being made
for higher rank, and they also receive allowances for their children (j£i 9s. for each
child), and, in certain cases, an allowance for rent (up to £1 9s. a week). There is an
additional allowance of 10s. a week for widows aged 70 or over. Parents or other rela¬
tives who w^re dependent on a person whose death resulted from the wars may receive
pensions if they are in financial need.
The Ministry of Pensions and I\ational Insurance maintains a welfare service for
war pensioners, with a special branch for war orphans, and war pensioners have
priority (except over more urgent cases) for treatment of their war disabilities in
National Health Service hospitals.
Many voluntary associations, such as the British Legion and other ex-Service
organisations, give financial aid and personal service to disabled ex-Service men and
women and their families. The ministry and these bodies work in co-operation.
HEALTH
The concern of the State with the nation’s health is chiefly a development of the
years since the passing of the Public Health Act of 1848. The second half of the nine¬
teenth century was notable for the growth of the environmental or public health
services, such as provision of pure water, sewerage, disposal of refuse and cleaning of
streets, and the first half of the twentieth century for the development of publicly
provided personal health services, as distinct from environmental services, culminating
in the introduction in 1948 of a comprehensive National Health Service available to
every citizen. The scientific discoveries, especially of new drugs, and the improved
services of the last fifty years, including maternity and child welfare, school health
services and school meals, are reflected in declining mortality rates (see p n.)
and improved physique.
PUBLIC HEALTH
The Public Health Act of 1936 brought up to date and consolidated preceding Acts;
it constitutes the present basic public health code in England and Wales. Local
authorities are mainly responsible for its implementation and they have extensive
powers for the making and administration of by-laws relating to matters of public
health. The local authorities chiefly concerned are the councils of county and non-
county boroughs, urban and rural district councils, and, to a limited extent, parish
councils. Local authorities also have power to secure clean air by establishing smoke
control areas (see p. 279).
Public health services in Scotland and in Northern Ireland have developed on much
the same lines as in England and Wales, although they are based on separate Acts and
there is a different allocation of services between the various types of local authority.
The Public Health (Scotland) Act, 1897, and the Burgh Police (Scotland) Act, 1892,
constitute the basic legislation for Scotland. The local authorities concerned are the
councils of counties and burghs. In Northern Ireland the councils of county and
non-county boroughs and urban and rural district councils are mainly responsible for
administering the Public Health Acts (Northern Ireland), 1878-1955.
I52 BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Control of Infectious Diseases
Local authorities are responsible to the Ministry of Health (or the Welsh Board of
Health or the Secretary of State for Scotland or the Ministry of Health and Local
Government for Northern Ireland) for recording notifications of the prescribed
infectious diseases; they are also responsible for the investigation by the Medical
Officer of Health of outbreaks of infectious diseases, and for disinfection and other
measures advised by him for preventing the spread of infectious diseases in the area.
The same departments have a general responsibility for supervising the operation of
health control at seaports and airports, the primary object of which is to prevent the
introduction of infectious disease into the country. This health control is undertaken
by health authorities using the services of medical officers, public health inspectors,
rodent inspectors and others.
Pure Food
The purity, hygiene and description of food are controlled by legislation now
consolidated for England and Wales in the Food and Drugs Act, 1955, for Scotland
in the Food and Drugs (Scotland) Act, 1956, and for Northern Ireland in the Food
and Drugs Act (Northern Ireland), 1958- England and Wales the Act and regulations
made under it are, in general, carried out and enforced by food and drugs authorities
(i.e. county councils, county borough councils and, generally, the larger borough and
urban district councils) in relation to composition, adulteration and description, and
by local authorities (i.e. county borough, borough, urban district and rural district
councils) in relation to purity and hygiene; the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of
Agriculture, Fisheries and Food are the central departments responsible for advising
and for making regulations under the Act. Premises where food for sale for human
consumption is prepared, sold or stored are required to conform to certain hygienic
standards. Authorised officers of food and drugs authorities and of local authorities
are empowered to take samples of any food for sale for human consumption for
analysis or for bacteriological or other examination. Special regulations are in force
for certain foods such as milk, meat and ice-cream.
In Scotland the local authorities chiefly concerned are the councils of counties and
large burghs; the central department is the Department of Health for Scotland.
In Northern Ireland administration is in the hands of the county and county
borough health authorities, the central department being the Ministry of Health and
Local Government.
THE NATIONAL HEALTH SERVICE
The Acts setting up the National Health Service—the National Health Service Act,
1946, the National Health Service (Scotland) Act, 1947, and the Health Services Act
(Northern Ireland), 1948—came into force simultaneously on 5th July, 1948.
The object of the National Health Service Act, 1946, is ‘to promote the establish¬
ment in England and Wales of a comprehensive health service designed to secure
improvement in the physical and mental health of the people of England and Wales
and the prevention, diagnosis and treatment of illness, and for that purpose to provide or
secure the effective provision of services’. The National Health Service (Amendment)
Act, 1949, and the National Health Service Acts, 1951 to 1961, made some modifications
in the scheme for Great Britain and provided for charges to be made for certain parts
of the service, which is otherwise available free of charge to all according to medical
need without regard to any insurance qualification, although all national insurance
SOCIAL WELFARE
153
contributors are required to pay a separate weekly national health contribution under
the National Health Service Contribution Acts, 1957 to 1961 (see Table 7).
Reciprocity
Arrangements have been made between Britain and Denmark, New Zealand, Nor¬
way, Sweden and Yugoslavia under which nationals of these countries may receive
treatment under the National Health Service and British nationals may receive health
benefits under the legislation of those countries. Visitors from other countries who come to
Britain for treatment are expected to pay for it, but treatment can be given under the
emergency provisions of the National Health Service to any who have the misfortune
to fall ill during a visit to Britain.
Health Service Admirastratioii m Great Britain
In England and Wales the Minister of Health has direct responsibility for (1) the
provision on a national basis of all hospital and specialist services, including those for
mental disorder, (2) the conduct of research work into matters relating to the causation,
prevention, diagnosis or treatment of illness or mental disorder, (3) a public health
laboratory service, and (4) a blood transfusion service. He has indirect responsibility
for the general practitioner services and local health authority services. He is advised
by the Central Health Services Council and by standing advisory committees on
various aspects of the service.
The hospital and specialist services are administered through regional hospital boards
and hospital management committees or, in the case of teaching hospitals, by boards of
governors. The hospitals themselves have been grouped into administrative units; these
consist sometimes of several formerly independent hospitals and sometimes of one.
heie are nearly 400 such groups under the control of hospital management commit¬
tees, which are in turn under the control of 15 regional hospital boards. The regions are
arranged so that the hospital and specialist services can conveniently be associated with
a university having a school of medicine.
The members of the hospital management committees are appointed by the regional
hospital board. The committees, by their constitution, reflect the communities con¬
cerned, for they usually include not only medical practitioners but members of local
authorities, trade unionists and others. The regional hospital boards are appointed
by the Minister of Health and are similarly constituted. The term of office is three
years, one-third of the board or committee retiring each year but being eligible for
reappointment. The boards of governors of teaching hospitals are appointed by the
minister, a proportion of the members being nominated by the teaching faculty of the
university, the regional hospital board and the medical staff. All appointments to
hospital management committees, regional hospital boards and boards of governors
are honoraiy. Medical and dental schools are not under the control of the minister;
but it is his responsibility to provide clinical facilities for the training of medical
students. The universities are responsible for the provision of teaching.
The administration of the general medical, dental, pharmaceutical and optical
services is in the hands of 138 executive councils, each covering the area of a county
or county borough. In a few cases, two areas are combined under one council. Each
council has an ophthalmic services committee responsible for administering the sup¬
plementary ophthalmic service. Doctors, dentists and pharmacists are represented
on the executive councils and each profession also forms a local committee. Councils
of counties and county boroughs are the 146 local health authorities in charge of local
health services.
J54
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
In Scotland the Secretary of State for Scotland is the responsible minister; 31
county councils and 24 town councils of large burghs are the local health authorities;
hospital and specialist services are administered by five regional hospital boards
appointed by the Secretary of State, assisted by 83 boards of management (the equiva¬
lent of hospital management committees in England); and there are 25 executive
councils, each serving the area of one or more local health authorities. The teaching
hospitals in Scotland come under the control of the regional hospital boards, but
special medical education committees consider matters relating to medical teaching.
The Scottish Health Services Council and its standing advisory committees advise
the Secretary of State and keep closely in touch with the Central Health Services
Council on common issues.
The Northern Ireland Health Services are described separately on page 161.
Health Service Finance
Annual expenditure on the National Health Service in the United Kingdom amounts
to about 31 per cent of the total national income. The greater part of the cost falls on
the Exchequer, to be met from general taxation, and a small part is met from local
rates. Other income is derived from the national health contribution paid with the
national insurance contribution and from the-payments for those parts of the service
for which charges are made. These charges, first introduced in 1951 and since increased,
are designed to help to limit rising costs without reducing the services offered.
There is a charge of 2s. for each item entered on a prescription form. Charges are
also made for dentures (except for children under 16 or still at school, and expectant
and nursing mothers) and spectacles (except children’s spectacles in standard frames),
for elastic hosiery supplied in the family doctor service or hospital out-patients’
department, for certain appliances supplied to out-patients, for treatment in the dental
service (but not for examination only or for treatment given to persons aged under 21
years or to nursing or expectant mothers), and for some local health authority services.
Certain exemptions or refunds are made and anyone may apply to the National Assis¬
tance Board for help in meeting any of these charges. Under the 1946 Act, a limited
number of beds may be put aside for hospital patients wishing for privacy, provided
that this accommodation is not needed on medical grounds for non-paying patients.
Charges for these ‘amenity’ beds are fixed by statutory regulations. Provision is also
made at certain hospitals for patients who wish to occupy private patients’ accommo¬
dation on payment of the whole cost of this accommodation and treatment. Such pati¬
ents may make private arrangements for treatment by a doctor of their own choice.
Hospital medical staffs are either full-time and salaried, or part-time; part-time
medical officers are usually paid on a sessional basis and are free to accept private
patients. General medical practitioners in public service are remunerated mainly by
capitation fees according to the number of persons on their lists.
Dentists providing treatment in their own surgeries are paid on a prescribed scale
of fees according to the treatment they have carried out. Pharmacists dispensing on
their own premises are paid on the basis of the prescriptions they dispense. Doctors
and ophthalmic opticians taking part in the supplementary ophthalmic service are paid
prescribed fees for each sight test made; opticians who dispense spectacles are paid
according to the number and type of pairs supplied.
The General Practitioner Services
The general practitioner services cover the medical attention given to individuals
by doctors and dentists of their own choice, from among those enrolled in the service.
SOCIAL WELFARE
155
Doctors and dentists normally work at their own surgeries j in a few places they practise
in health centres established under the National Health Service Acts. Over 24,000,
or almost all, general medical practitioners (principals and assistants) in Great Britain
take some part in the service.
Doctors previously in practice were entitled to join the service at its start in the
place where they were practising. Those now wishing to enter practice have to apply
through their executive councils to the central Medical Practices Committee, so that a
better distribution of doctors throughout the country may be facilitated. The maximum
number of patients’ names permitted to be on a family doctor’s list is normally 3,500;
the average number in England and Wales is about 2,300. It is normally through the
patient s own doctor that access to most other parts of the health service is obtained.
There are about 10,250 dentists in England and Wales and over 1,060 in Scotland
in the general dental service.
Over 900 ophthalmic medical practitioners and over 7>35° ophthalmic and dispensing
opticians in England and Wales, and over 70 ophthalmic medical practitioners and
nearly 820 ophthalmic and dispensing opticians in Scotland, are engaged in the supple¬
mentary ophthalmic service. This service provides for the testing of sight and provision
of spectacles. Cases requiring treatment are dealt with through the hospital eye service.
Almost all chemists (over 15,800 in England and Wales and about 2,900 in Scotland)
are taking part in the service.
Hospital and Specialist Services
The hospital and specialist services include the provision of consultants; accommo¬
dation of all kinds including tuberculosis sanatoria, maternity departments, infectious
disease units, psychiatric hospitals and units, convalescent homes, and rehabilitation
centres; and all forms of specialised treatment.
Hospitals
A large proportion of the 3,000 hospitals in the National Health Service in Great
Britain were built in the nineteenth century; some trace their origins to much earlier
charitable foundations, such as the famous St. Thomas’s and St. Bartholomew’s
Hospitals in London. One of the newest hospitals in use is the Princess Margaret
Hospital, Swindon, of which the first part was opened in i960; it embodies the latest
ideas in design and facilities. Restrictions on capital investment required by the
economic position just after the second world war and, after 1948, claims on the avail¬
able financial resources by other parts of the National Health Service, have meant
that a full-scale post-war hospital building programme was not launched until 1956.
Thirteen new hospitals have now been completed in whole or in part, and a further 45
are at present under construction or planned, including six new dental hospitals, and
five ‘acute’ hospitals (not for patients with chronic diseases) to serve new towns, as
well as extensions and improvements to existing hospitals. It is intended to spend
nearly £41 million on hospital building in Great Britain in 1962-63.
About 2,640 of the hospitals in the National Health Service are in England and
Wales, including the 26 teaching hospitals in London (actually groups of hospitals
comprising about 100 hospitals, convalescent homes, branches, annexes, or treatment
centres) and the 10 teaching hospitals elsewhere in England and Wales (comprising
some 70 hospitals and other establishments). They have over 470,000 staffed beds and a
nursing and midwifery staff of 162,000 full-time and 44,000 part-time nurses and
midwives. There are 402 hospitals in Scotland with about 63,650 beds and 21,180
full-time and 5,960 part-time nurses and midwives.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
156
A small number of hospitals remain outside the service for special reasons. Most
of these are run by religious orders. Some, such as the Italian and French Hospitals,
serve a special group of patients; others are maintained for the chronic sick or for
convalescents by charitable organisations. There are also private nursing homes,
which must be registered.
Rehabilitation
The importance of rehabilitation as a facet of medical treatment is firmly established
and today hospital treatment is not limited to the relief of pain, or alleviation or cure
of pathological conditions, but aims at restoring the individual’s functional capacity
without delay. Special rehabilitation facilities are provided, for those requiring them,
in the departments of physical medicine and occupational therapy at the main hospitals,
and in a few special rehabilitation centres which are not attached to any hospital!
The work is carried out under the guidance of the appropriate medical specialist by
physiotherapists, remedial gymnasts, occupational therapists and social workers,
working as a team. Experience has shown that efficient medical rehabilitation reduces
the stay in hospital, the incidence of permanent disability and the period of incapacity
for full work. The departments work in close association with the Disablement Resettle¬
ment Service of the Ministry of Labour. Rehabilitation methods have been applied
with advantage in the care of the chronic sick, the aged and the handicapped and
have enabled many patients to become self-sufficient or to be discharged from hospital
and to resume an independent life in their own homes.
Blood Transfusion
The National Blood Transfusion Service in England and Wales is administered by
the regional hospital boards under the National Health Service. Each region maintains
an organisation for collecting blood from voluntary donors in the region, who give
their blood without payment. The blood is kept in the regional blood bank, or issued
to area blood banks maintained at general hospitals in each region. Each regional
transfusion centre acts as a reference centre for all transfusion problems arising in the
region. There are two central laboratories administered by the Medical Research
Council on behalf of the Ministry of Health: the Blood Group Reference Laboratory,
which prepares grouping serum and investigates blood grouping problems referred to
it, and the Blood Products Laboratory, which prepares dried plasma and plasma
fractions. In Scotland the Blood Transfusion Service is under the direction of the
Scottish National Blood Transfusion Association, an independent voluntary body set
up in 1940, which is supported partly by voluntary contributions, but in the main by
a grant from State funds, made by the Department of Health for Scotland. A close
liaison is maintained with the National Blood Transfusion Service, the Blood Group
Reference Laboratory and the Blood Products Laboratory.
Mass Miniature Radiography
Mass miniature radiography was introduced in 1943 as a means of early diagnosis
of tuberculosis. About 75 units in England and Wales and 10 in Scotland operate
under the regional hospital boards in close co-operation with the local health authorities.
They examine about 3! million people a year, concentrating increasingly on areas
with a bad record for tuberculosis, on specially susceptible groups in the population,
and on adults in regular contact with organised groups of children.
Medical and Psychiatric Social Work
There are over 1,000 trained almoners working in Britain; the majority work in
hospitals, others in local authority services or elsewhere. The almoner co-operates
SOCIAL WELFARE
r57
with the medical staff in the investigation and treatment of disease by elucidating and
adjusting social and economic factors which contribute to a patient’s disability or
impede his restoration to health. Psychiatric social workers are specially trained for
work in the mental health services and in child guidance clinics. They make an invalu¬
able contribution, not only to hospitals but also to the local health and education ser¬
vices, in assessing the environmental factors in mental abnormalities and in helping
patients to make the necessary adjustments.
Bacteriological and Virological Laboratory Services
The Public Health Laboratory Service provides a network of bacteriological and
virological laboratories throughout England and Wales which conduct research and
assist in the diagnosis, prevention and control of epidemic diseases. Its largest establish¬
ment is the Central Public Health Laboratory at Colindale in north-west London,
which includes the National Collection of Type Cultures, the Food Hygiene Labora¬
tory, and reference laboratories specialising in the identification of infective micro¬
organisms.
In Scotland (and Northern Ireland) where there is no separate public health
laboratory service, bacteriological work is mainly done in hospital laboratories.
Mental Health Services
Treatment for mental disorder is provided as part of the National Health Service.
Patients who are suffering from mental illness can consult the family doctor and
receive specialist advice at hospital out-patient clinics in the ordinary way. If they need
to enter a hospital for mental treatment, whether a general or a mental hospital, they
can do so without formalities. If patients, or their relatives, are unable or unwilling to
make the necessary arrangements for admission to a mental hospital, it is the duty of
a mental welfare officer of the local health authority to do so.
Where necessary in the interests of society or of the patients themselves, mentally
disordered patients can be compulsorily detained in hospital. Compulsory admission
to hospital is regulated in England and Wales by the Mental Health Act, 1959, and in
Scotland by the Mental Health (Scotland) Act, i960. There are procedural safeguards
to protect the patient from unnecessary detention and he, or his relatives, may appeal
against detention, in England and Wales to a mental health tribunal, and in Scotland
to the Sheriff.
Local health authorities have a duty to provide services, including facilities for
training or occupation and residential accommodation, for mentally disordered people
in the community. If necessary, the local health authority can place a mentally dis¬
ordered person under guardianship within the community or arrange for his admission
to a psychiatric hospital. In Scotland, education authorities share the responsibility for
providing training or occupation.
Welfare Foods Service
Under the welfare foods service1 liquid milk is available at qd. a pint for expectant
mothers, children under five and handicapped children under 16 who are unable to
attend a school or training centre. (Beneficiaries get tokens from the Ministry of Pen¬
sions and National Insurance to enable them to get supplies from their usual milk
retailer at the special price.)
The welfare foods other than liquid milk provided for expectant mothers and young
1 The service began as a war-time measure with the National Milk Scheme in 1940, but in
1946 the Government decided to continue the extended scheme as part of the peace-time social
services.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
158
children under five at cost prices are distributed by local health authorities; they are
free to families who cannot afford to pay. These foods are national dried milk as an
alternative to liquid milk and at an equivalent price, orange juice, cod liver oil and
vitamin A and D tablets.
Local Health Services
The Local Health Services administered by the county and county borough councils
(in Scotland, county and large burgh councils) include those for maternity and child
welfare (but not hospitals and maternity homes), domiciliary midwifery, health visiting,
home nursing, the provision of domestic help (in such circumstances as sickness,
confinement or old age), the ambulance service (in Scotland the responsibility of the
Secretary of State, and in Northern Ireland of the Northern Ireland Hospitals Author¬
ity), the prevention of illness and the care and after-care of the sick (including the
mentally ill and also the mentally defective), vaccination and immunisation, and the
establishment and maintenance of local health centres (in Scotland, the responsibility
of the Secretary of State).
Welfare Centres
Maternity and child welfare centres have existed for many years. They are part of
the advisory and preventive services of the local health authority; they offer regular
supervision by doctors and nurses to expectant and nursing mothers and young
children. Special sessions for test feeding and for remedial exercises are held at some
centres, and a feature of the service is the education of mothers by means of talks,
discussion groups, demonstrations and classes. Practically all centres are distribution
points for the national dried milk and vitamin preparations provided for expectant
mothers and young children (see above). About 80 per cent of all babies are taken to
the centres.
Maternal Care
According to the advice given by the doctor or midwife, or in some areas her own
preference, the expectant mother may arrange to have her baby at home or in hospital;
in allocating hospital beds, priority is given to those for whom domiciliary confinement
is inadvisable for medical or obstetric reasons or because of adverse home conditions.
The proportion of confinements taking place in hospital varies considerably between
different areas; the national average has increased continuously over the past 25 years
and is now 64 per cent for England and Wales and 73 per cent for Scotland.
For a home confinement, every mother can call upon the services of either a general
practitioner obstetrician or her own family doctor if he is willing to undertake her
maternity care, besides those of a trained midwife in the domiciliary service of the local
health authority. The doctor carries out certain ante-natal and post-natal examinations,
attends at the confinement and gives any other medical care required. The services of
a consultant obstetrician are also available if the doctor seeks his advice. Routine super¬
vision and advice is given by the midwife, who visits regularly before the confinement
to examine, advise and help the mother. The expectant mother may attend the ante¬
natal clinic for instruction in preparation for motherhood and in some cases for interim
ante-natal supervision. Frequently it is the midwife who undertakes the actual delivery.
Both she and the doctor attend during the 10 days after confinement. The post-natal
examination is carried out at or about six weeks after delivery. Midwives work in close
touch with the welfare centres in the care of the mother both before and after the birth
of the child.
SOCIAL WELFARE
J59
Other Maternity and Child Welfare Services
Many local health authorities make special arrangements for premature babies
remaining in their own homes, by lending equipment and appointing experienced
nursing staff to supervise their care.
There are some 450 day nurseries for children under five in Great Britain provided
by local health authorities or voluntary associations working with them. The National
Health Service Act, 1952, gave local authorities power to make charges for the use of
day nurseries. Private or factory nurseries (of which there are about 550 altogether)
must be registered with the local health authorities; this regulation applies also to
persons who mind for payment more than two children, not all of the same family
Most local authorities contribute to the cost of the work done by voluntary denomina¬
tional and other bodies which care for unmarried mothers and their babies; a few
authorities make direct provision for their special needs through their health depart¬
ments. The voluntary associations for moral welfare employ specially trained workers
to help the unmarried mother in making plans for herself and her child. Most homes
and hostels for the ante-natal and post-natal care (and, in some cases, the confinement)
of these mothers are provided by such organisations.
Health Visiting
Health visitors are State Registered Nurses, with at least six months’ training in
midwifery, who have had a special course of training in health visiting. They are
employed by local health authorities to visit people in their own homes to give advice
on the care of young children, expectant and nursing mothers, people suffering from
illness, including mental illness, and any injury or disability requiring medical or dental
treatment, and on measures necessary to prevent the spread of infection. Their duties
include health education and attendance at ante-natal and child welfare clinics. They
may also undertake tuberculosis visiting and school nursing.
Home Nursing
The employment of nurses to attend patients who require nursing in their own
homes is the responsibility of the local health authorities. Although many authorities
employ nurses directly for this purpose, others have arranged for voluntary district
nursing associations to provide a service on their behalf.
Domestic Help
Local health authorities (welfare authorities in Northern Ireland) have the power
to make arrangements for domestic help (commonly called ‘home help’) in households
where it is needed owing to illness, confinement, or the presence of children, old people
or mental defectives. This service is mainly used in the care of old or chronically sick
people, m maternity cases and, to a lesser extent but increasingly, for families where
such help is needed to prevent children having to be cared for away from home, for
example, during the absence of the mother. Home help is not one of the free services,
and authorities are authorised to recover from those assisted such charges as the'
authorities consider reasonable, having regard to the person’s means.
Ambulance Services
Ambulances are provided free by local health authorities either directly or, on their
behalf, by voluntary organisations, in the case of any accident or sudden illness in the
street or a public place; also, if authorised by a hospital or a doctor, for the conveyance
of patients between home and hospital or clinic. The Hospital Car Service (organised
by the St. John Ambulance Brigade, the British Red Cross Society, and the Women’s
oluntary Services) augments the ambulance service in many areas for the conveyance
i6o
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
of sitting patients. In Scotland ambulances are run by the Scottish Ambulance
Service (St. Andrew’s Ambulance Association and the Scottish branch of the British
Red Cross Society) on behalf of the Secretary of State. In Northern Ireland they are
run by the Northern Ireland Hospitals Authority.
Prevention of Illness: Care and After-Care
Measures for the prevention of tuberculosis, e.g., the tracing of sources of infection,
the prevention of its spread, and the removal of the cause of infection, are the responsi¬
bility of all local health authorities. Facilities for diagnosis and treatment are the
responsibility of the hospital service and are provided through sanatoria and chest
clinics. The chest physicians staffing these clinics are often employed jointly by the
hospital authorities and local health authorities, to ensure that diagnosis and treatment
are properly co-ordinated with prevention and after-care. Among the duties of these
officers are those of making recommendations for residential treatment, visiting the
homes of patients, and examining and advising ‘contacts’. They are assisted in this
work by tuberculosis health visitors and nurses and, in most areas in England and
Wales, by almoners or other chest clinic social workers. Most local health authorities
have statutory or voluntary tuberculosis care committees. BCG vaccination is available
to children of 10 and upwards, to students at universities and colleges, and to various
other persons specially exposed to risk.
Care and after-care of patients is supplemented by general advice and assistance
to the households in which they live. Local health authorities send suitable patients
to the village settlements for tuberculous persons which are run by voluntary bodies
or by local health authorities of other areas; training for employment is carried out
in conjunction with the training and resettlement schemes of the Ministry of Labour.
Care and after-care arrangements are made by all local health authorities for other
types of illness, including mental illness or mental subnormality, to varying extents;
in particular, there are a number of different services for people being nursed at home,
such as the loan of special equipment or the laundering of bed linen. A chiropody
service is provided in many areas. As part of their preventive work, local health
authorities can take preventive and remedial measures to safeguard the physical and
mental health of children in disintegrating families and give help and advice
to the parents.
A charge may be made for some of these services, if the person wishing to make
use of them can reasonably be expected to contribute towards their cost.
Vaccination and Immunisation
Arrangements for vaccination against smallpox and immunisation against diphtheria,
without charge, as part of the National Health Service, are made by all local health
authorities; in addition, most local health authorities have similar arrangements for
immunisation against whooping cough, and many provide for immunisation against
tetanus. In i960 there were only five deaths from diphtheria in Great Britain, against
3,158 in 1941.
Vaccination against poliomyelitis is also available through local health authorities
for persons under 40; those over 40 may be vaccinated by their general practitioner.
BCG vaccination against tuberculosis is available to certain adults and children (see
above).
Health Centres
A few’ health centres have been established to provide facilities for several services
under one roof; they differ widely in size and character according to local need.
SOCIAL WELFARE
l6l
Experience shows that they are likely to be most successful in areas of housing develop¬
ment where new services are needed. Because of the need to observe the working of
the experimental centres already set up and to explore various other forms of co-opera-
tion between the various services, any general increase in health centres is unlikely in
the near future. In Scotland the provision of health centres is not the responsibility
of local health authorities but of the Secretary of State for Scotland.
Problems of the National Health Service
The National Health Service is not without its difficulties and shortcomings. For
example, the original ideal of a comprehensive free service for all has to some extent
been breached by the introduction of charges for some parts of the Service which the
majority of the users have to pay. None the less, the total cost of the Service has con¬
tinued to rise, largely because of increases in prices and in staff salaries, the high cost
of many new drugs and of modern equipment, and the increased use made by the
public of the services provided. Moreover, shortages of staff, including dentists,
mid wives and nurses, give some anxiety. There is also some disparity between different
parts of the country; some have more family doctors than others, more hospital beds
for confinements of mothers who would prefer to have their babies in hospital though
they do not need specialist medical care, and more extensive local authority services by
way of home helps and night attendance to enable infirm old people and the chronic
sick to remain in their homes.
On the credit side of the balance may be set the steady improvement in the country’s
vital statistics to which the National Health Service has largely contributed, the
decrease in invalidity from neglected ailments, and the removal of anxiety about the
cost of treatment from which many of those who now use the service previouslv
suffered. J
HEALTH SERVICES IN NORTHERN IRELAND
In Northern Ireland the historical development of the health services has taken
broadly the same course as in other parts of the United Kingdom, and the health
services established under the Health Services Act (Northern Ireland), 1948, corre¬
spond fairly closely to the medical care system established under the National Health
Semce in Great Britain. The essential principle is that the same range of services
shall be available to citizens in Northern Ireland as in England, Wales and Scotland.
The services in Northern Ireland are financed as in the rest of the United Kingdom.
In hospital administration the role of the central Government is not quite so imme¬
diate or direct as in Great Britain: hospital property, for example, is vested not in the
Minister of Health and Local Government but in the Northern Ireland Hospitals
Authority. The Hospitals Authority has under its control 75 hospitals containing in
all about 16,800 beds.
Vaccination against smallpox is compulsory in Northern Ireland but otherwise
the range of preventive and domiciliary services is similar to that existing in Great
Britain.
VOLUNTARY AID FOR THE SICK AND HANDICAPPED
A number of voluntary organisations provide extensive welfare services for sick and
handicapped persons in co-operation with, or supplementary to, the provision made
y central and local authorities. Some convalescent homes, for instance, of a type
outside the scope of the hospital service, are administered by such bodies. In many
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
162
areas invalid children and others needing care in their own homes are visited and
helped by voluntary organisations. Though the need for material aid from private
sources becomes less as public provision extends, many forms of help to meet individual
needs that would not otherwise be met are given by voluntary agencies. Their most
valuable service is probably to pioneer in aspects of personal service as yet not touched
by the public services. These voluntary agencies are able to make use of many part-
time or full-time unpaid volunteers.
A great deal of voluntary help is given to hospitals by voluntary bodies and individual
voluntary helpers. More than half the hospitals in England and Wales have their
own Leagues of Friends or similar bodies of voluntary workers who organise and
undertake a variety of services for their hospitals. Many hospitals also have help from
the British Red Cross Society, the Order of St. John, the Women’s Voluntary Services,
or a similar organisation. The operation of canteens for out-patients, and trolley-
shops and book and picture library services for in-patients, visiting in the ward?,
receiving new patients, and mending linen are among the tasks commonly undertaken.
THE MEDICAL, DENTAL AND ALLIED PROFESSIONS
Only persons whose names are on the medical register can practise as doctors
under the National Health Service. Apart from registered medical practitioners, only
persons whose names are on the dentists’ register can practise dentistry in Britain. The
minimum qualification for registration as a doctor requires five to seven years’ train¬
ing in medical school and hospital, plus one year as an intern; for a dentist, four or
more years at a dental school are required. The governing body of the medical profes¬
sion is the General Medical Council, first set up in 1858; that of the dentists is the
General Dental Council, which succeeded the Dental Board in 1956. The British
Medical Association is the doctors’ professional association; that of the dentists is
the British Dental Association.
The minimum period of hospital training required to qualify for registration as a
general trained nurse is three years. Training is available also in sick children’s, mental,
and mental deficiency nursing. The qualifying period for an enrolled nurse is one
year’s practical training followed by one year’s work under supervision. The governing
body of the nursing profession is the General Nursing Council, set up in 1919. Mid¬
wives must have the certificate of the Central Midwives Board. Most pupil midwives
are already state registered general nurses or sick children’s nurses; for them the
two-year midwifery training period is reduced to one year and, for state enrolled
nurses, to 18 months. The Royal College of Nursing and the Royal College of Mid¬
wives are the professional bodies for nurses and midwives.
Only registered pharmaceutical chemists may practise as pharmacists or describe
themselves as such, and qualifications requiring four to five years’ academic study
and practical training are necessary for registration. The Pharmaceutical Society of
Great Britain is the governing body of the profession. Under the Opticians’ Act, 1958,
a General Optical Council regulates the profession of ophthalmic optician and only
registered ophthalmic opticians (or registered medical practitioners) may test sight.
Training takes three years followed by a year under supervision.
For the professions of almoner, chiropodist, dietitian, medical laboratory technician,
occupational therapist, psychiatric social worker, physiotherapist, radiographer and
speech therapist a good general education is required followed by a professional train¬
ing. The length and nature of the training varies according to the profession, and may
be as long as three years. With the exception of almoners, psychiatric social workers
SOCIAL WELFARE 163
and speech therapists, these professions will shortly have their own registration
machinery under the Professions Supplementary to Medicine Act, i960.
MEDICAL RESEARCH
The Medical Research Council (see below) is the main governmental organisation
engaged in medical research in Britain. A considerable amount of research is also
carried out by the universities and their associated medical schools and teaching
hospitals, while the Minister of Health and the Secretary of State for Scotland,
through hospital boards and committees, are also able to maintain research within the
National Health Service.
A valuable contribution to research in particular branches of medicine is made
by private organisations, of which the British Empire Cancer Campaign and the
Nuffield Foundation are probably the largest. There is close co-operation between the
Medical Research Council and these organisations to ensure the best allocation of
their respective resources.
Medical Research Council
The Medical Research Council’s programme of work is carried out both in its
own research establishments and by independent investigators, in the universities
and elsewhere, with support from the council in the form of research grants. The pro¬
gramme includes fundamental studies of the structure and natural processes of the
body; clinical and laboratory studies of disease; the development and evaluation of
special methods of treatment and also of prophylaxis and diagnosis; and the study of
social and occupational factors affecting health and the efficiency of body and mind.
In planning and carrying out its programme, the council is assisted by special
advisory committees which it appoints. Two of the more important of these are the
Clinical Research Board, set up in consultation with the health departments to assist
the development of clinical research, and the Tropical Medicine Research Board,
appointed in consultation with the Colonial Office and Commonwealth Relations
Office, to advise on the promotion and co-ordination of research in this field.
EDUCATION
There are nearly nine million children and young people in full-time attendance
at schools, universities, training colleges or technical colleges in the United Kingdom.
Over 90 per cent of school children attend publicly provided or aided schools. The
universities are independent, self-governing institutions but are aided from public
funds. Most technical colleges and other centres of further education are publicly
maintained. Many schools and colleges continue to benefit from the endowments
provided by benefactors in past centuries.
The bulk of the expenditure on education in the United Kingdom therefore comes
from public funds. Total public expenditure on education, including university
education, exceeded £950 million in the year 1960-61.
In England and Wales the main development of publicly provided primary educa¬
tion dates from 1870, and that of secondary education from the beginning of the present
century. In 1833 the Government had begun to make annual grants to the voluntary
societies which were providing schools, and the Elementary Education Act of 1870
accepted the principle of compulsory education. By the end of the nineteenth century,
elementary education had become virtually both compulsory and free of charge.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
164
Public provision of secondary education (already begun in Wales) started in England
under the Act of 1902. The Education Act of 1944 now governs public education in
England and Wales. It seeks to widen and improve educational opportunities at
every stage.
The Scottish and Northern Ireland educational systems both have long histories
independent of that of education in England, but the same general policy is now
being implemented throughout the United Kingdom, with some national variations.
Educational Administration
Administration of publicly provided education in Britain is divided between the
central Government departments (the Ministry of Education for England and Wales,
with its separate Welsh Department, the Scottish Education Department, and the
Ministry of Education for Northern Ireland), local education authorities, and various
voluntary organisations. The relation between these three groups is based on consulta¬
tion and co-operation, both by direct contact between the parties and through Her
Majesty s Inspectors of education who act as liaison officers, particularly between local
education authorities and the departments.
Tne local education authorities are responsible for ensuring that adequate provision
is made in their areas for the two stages of school education (primary and secondary),
and that those pupils who would profit by proceeding to a university are not deterred
by lack of financial means. They are also responsible for the provision of all forms of
further education , i.e. post-school education outside the universities.
The planning of the curriculum is largely in the hands of the head teacher of each
school and the individual teachers. In England and Wales teachers are not subject
to direction from the central department on questions relating to curricula or methods.
Her Majesty s Inspectors, who are responsible for the inspection of all schools includ¬
ing independent schools, review and report on the content and value of the education
provided and, during their visits, are available as advisers. Local education authorities
also employ inspectors to advise on the schools which they maintain. In Scotland
the broad outline of schemes of work in primary and secondary schools is subject to the
approval of one of Her Majesty’s Inspectors. In Northern Ireland the curriculum of
each grant-aided school is subject to the approval of the ministry, but considerable
latitude is afforded both in the scope of the curriculum and in the methods employed.
SCHOOLS
Parents in Britain are required by law to see that their children receive efficient
full-time education, at school or elsewhere, between the ages of 5 and 15. The school¬
leaving age is to be raised to 16 as soon as enough teachers and adequate accommoda¬
tion become available to allow of this being done without thereby increasing the size
of classes; this, however, is unlikely to be possible for some years to come. In England
and Wales nearly 7 million children are attending publicly maintained schools, besides
110,000 others who are at schools receiving direct grants from the Ministry of Educa¬
tion. There are also 497,000 children of all ages at about 4,150 independent schools.
In Scotland, 900,000 children are attending publicly maintained or aided schools and
about 17,000 are at independent schools. In Northern Ireland, 281,000 children are
attending publicly maintained or aided schools; independent schools are few. The
number of school children in Britain is increasing; as the exceptionally large numbers
of children born shortly after the second world war pass from primary to secondary
schools, reduced numbers of primary school children are being more than offset by
larger numbers in secondary schools, especially as more children each year stay on
SOCIAL WELFARE
i65
beyond the minimum school-leaving age. Moreover, while there was a certain drop in
the birthrate after 1949, the rates for 1958 and 1959 rose again sharply, so that primary
school numbers will again be very high in 1963-64. There is, therefore, a continuing
demand for more teachers and more school buildings.
In England and in Northern Ireland it is usual for boys and girls to be taught
together in primary schools, but rather more than half the secondary schools are
for boys or girls only. Mixed schools are more common in Wales; and in Scotland
all but a few city schools take both boys and girls.
The majority of independent schools are for boys or for girls only, except in classes
for small children. There are, however, a few schools which are co-educational.
In England and Wales three kinds of school are supported from public funds:
county schools (the largest group) which are provided and maintained by local education
authorities, i.e. their full cost falls on public funds; voluntary schools (mostly ‘aided’
or ‘controlled’ schools) which have been provided by a voluntary body, usually of a
religious denomination, but which are maintained by local education authorities1; and
direct grant schools which are completely independent of local education authorities
but receive a grant-in-aid from the Ministry of Education. These last (the smallest
group) mostly provide education of the grammar school type; they include some schools
of ancient foundation.
In Scotland most of the schools supported from public funds are provided by educa¬
tion authorities and are known as public schools (in England this term is used for a type
of independent school of which there are also a few in Scotland and Northern Ireland,
see pp. 167-68). There are also a few grant-aided schools (some of ancient foundation)
conducted by voluntary managers and receiving grants direct from the Scottish
Education Department.
In Northern Ireland there are county schools, managed by local education
authorities, and voluntary schools, which are grant-aided schools under voluntary
management.
In England and Wales no fees are charged to parents of children attending schools
maintained by local education authorities, and books and equipment are supplied
free. Direct grant schools still charge fees but must offer each year, to pupils who
have at any time previously attended a grant-aided primary school for not less than
two years, free places to the extent of not less than 25 per cent of the previous year’s
admission; and a further 25 per cent of the places must be put at the disposal of the
local education authorities if they require them. Pupils occupying these latter places
need not previously have attended a grant-aided primary school. Day pupils not hold¬
ing free places are entitled to claim a remission of fees in accordance with an approved
income scale, and the Ministry of Education pays the governors of the school the
amount of the fees so remitted. Local education authorities also pay for some free
places in independent schools which normally charge fees. A number of independent
schools are able to offer some scholarships from endowments.
In Scotland education authorities may charge fees in certain schools provided
that this does not prejudice the provision of free education for all who desire it.
In Northern Ireland no fees are charged to parents of children attending any
county or voluntary primary, intermediate or special school; qualified pupils attend-
1 Aided schools have more independence than controlled schools, but they are partly responsible
for maintaining their buildings (see p. 171) whereas controlled schools are not. Over a third of
the schools maintained by local education authorities in England and Wales are voluntary schools
and the majority of these are Church of England schools. There are some 2,000 Roman Catholic
voluntary schools and smaller numbers belonging to other religious bodies.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
166
ing both county and voluntary grammar schools receive scholarships from the local
education authorities which cover the whole or most of the fees charged by the school.
Primary Schools
A child’s primary education continues until about the age of n in England, Wales
and Northern Ireland and 12 in Scotland. There are some nursery schools and classes
for children between 2 and 5 years old. In England and Wales there are infant schoolsf
or departments, for all children between 5 and 7 zx\d junior schools for those aged 7 to
11, while in Scotland there zxt primary departments for children aged 5 to 12 years.
In Scotland primary pupils must be taught reading, writing, arithmetic, English,
music, art and handwork, nature study, physical training and, at the appropriate
stage, history, geography, and written composition; girls must learn needlework.
Religious instruction is also given. In England, Wales and Northern Ireland, the
curriculum is similar in scope, with the addition in Wales of the teaching of Welsh.
(Children who speak Welsh at home normally receive the early stages of their primary
education in Welsh and are taught English as a second language.)
Secondary Schools
Public provision of secondary education is being greatly extended with the aim
of giving all children an education suited to their particular abilities.
England, Wales and Northern Ireland
Since the organisation of schools is a responsibility of local education authorities
in England and Wales, subject to the approval of the ministry, the type of provision
made for secondary education varies to some extent between areas. In some areas,
different types of school specialise, in particular in the later years, in different types
of course, with arrangements for the transfer of pupils between schools where desirable;
in others, flexibility is achieved by an overlap of the courses provided in different
types of school. There are, however, two main types of publicly maintained secondary
schools in England and Wales: grammar schools and secondary modern schools.
Grammar schools take children who hope to reach a university and others likely
to profit from an academic type of education. A large proportion of university students
are recruited from these schools which, in England and Wales, are attended by about
one secondary school pupil in four. Secondary modern schools form the largest group
of secondary schools. They give a general education with a practical bias, closely
related to the interests and environment of their pupils. There is also a small group
of secondary technical schools-, these schools offer an education related to industry,
including commerce, and agriculture, but still general, and not vocational, in purpose.
Each local education authority decides how the selection shall be made for its
secondary schools: generally speaking, this selection depends upon an assessment
of the child’s ability as shown in the primary school, often coupled with objective
tests taken at about eleven years of age, which are commonly known as ‘the eleven-
plus’. There is provision for an appeal to the Minister of Education in the event of
a dispute between a local education authority and a parent, and authorities reconsider
original decisions when subsequent events prove this to be necessary. Both the system
of allocating children to different types of secondary school at the age of eleven and the
selection methods used have been the subject of much public discussion and critical
thought. Local education authorities are constantly experimenting with methods of
selection which will minimise any strain on children or their parents. At the same
time, the authorities are seeking to organise their schools in such a way that every
SOCIAL WELFARE
167
Fn!dtWhaVe’ iand hee' 'hat he<:hat’ ^ °PPortunity to develop his talents to the full.
For those pup,Is who can profitably follow them, many modern schools now offer
courees of the type found in grammar and secondary technical schools.
, l',L“Ild°n C?Unt'V' C°un“l and some other local education authorities have
C0’??r?ham™ s'hooh Providing all types of secondary education for all, or
‘ ?f’ *e chddren of a district. In urban areas, such schools tend to be larger than
the other types of school and may have as many as 2,000 pupils.
whichIrcIa"d’ there,. are Zrammar schmh’ secondary intermediate schools,
h, a e equivalent of the secondary modern schools in England and Wales
which offer the same “as
hrJn* nUmber °/ PTll remaining at sch°o1 beyond the minimum leaving age has
been increasing steadily for some years. Thirty-one per cent of the 15- to 16-year-old
nearfvr0Uri ^ ^ Stf T f^11"tlme educati°n at schools or technical colleges, and
nearly 15^ per cent of the 16- to 17-year-old age group. Most grammar school pupils
* SC^°01 Untl! they are1l6 >rears old. s°me until they are 17, 18 or 19 years old.
Most secondary modern pupils at present leave at the age of 15, but the number
staying on until the age of 16 is increasing. 5
Scotland
extendi SeCOn^7 fal1 into two main categories, those providing courses
extending normally to three years, generally called/amor secondary schools, and those
p ding courses of four, five or six years, known as senior secondary schools. In
SevaryePdiff "I™?°UrSeS ^ intended t0 Provide a gencral education, but
they are differentiated m character to suit the varying needs and abilities of the pupils,
and include literary, commercial, boys’ technical, domestic and rural courses. While
some schools are purely junior secondary and some purely senior secondary, there
are also many schools of the comprehensive type, traditional in Scotland, in which all
nds of courses, both junior secondary and senior secondary, are provided. Over
school age °f * PUP1 S 8° ^ t0 SeCOndar>r courses on reaching secondary
J~n fi0mithm?ri?ary t0 the secondary sch°o1 takes place usually between the
ages of n| and I2|. The fitness of pupils to profit from the various types of secondary
course is assessed on the basis of teachers’ estimates of attainment, intelligence tests
and attainment tests, with due regard to the wishes of the parents. There is provision
for an appeal to the Secretary of State for Scotland in the event of a dispute between
e education authority and the parent and also for the reconsideration of original
ocations if, later, transfer to another course appears to be necessary.
Independent Schools
The largest and most important of the independent schools are known in England
s public schools, although not all schools classed as public schools are independent
(tnose which are not are mostly direct-grant schools) and public schools form only a
minority of all independent schools.
TYve public school is a characteristic English institution which has made a notable
contribution to English education. Many public schools date from the sixteenth
n ury, some are older (e.g., Winchester, founded in 1382, and Eton, founded in
k a ?°St haVC some mcome from endowments. Each is controlled by its
™ 0ar 0 gov^rnors. Public schools have emphasised the importance of character-
uuaing, and in these schools were developed the prefect system, whereby day-to-day
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
168
discipline is largely maintained by the pupils themselves, and the house system,
whereby a school is divided into groups of about 50 pupils, each under the care of a
housemaster. The public school is also characterised by a high staffing ratio and a
high proportion of pupils doing advanced work. A public school is often, although
not necessarily, a boarding school; day boys are also taken at some of these boarding
schools. The usual age of entry to the independent public schools for boys is 13 and
the leaving age about 18. There are some girls’ public schools modelled to a certain
extent on the public schools for boys.
Independent schools also include preparatory schools, many of them boarding
schools, for boys aged from about 8 to 13 years most of whom are intending to enter
public schools; some similar schools for girls; and a wide range of other day and
boarding schools covering every age group and grade of education and every variety
of educational method. Some of these schools are owned and managed, often under
a trust deed, by independent non-profit-making bodies. Others are privately owned by
proprietors for whom the running of the school provides a living. All independent
schools must be registered with the ministry.
Secondary School Examinations
In 1951 the General Certificate of Education (GCE) superseded the former School
Certificate and Higher Certificate examinations in the secondary schools (State-
aided and independent alike) of England and Wales. This examination, which may
also be taken by candidates not attending school, is conducted at three levels (ordinary,
advanced and scholarship). Most grammar school pupils and an increasing number
of pupils from other secondary schools take the examination at ordinary level. Many
technical college students also take the certificate examinations. The advanced and
scholarship examinations are at university entrance and scholarship level respectively.
Most candidates are at least 16 years old on 1st September of the year of their first
examination, but pupils can sit at an earlier age at the discretion of the headmaster
or headmistress of their school, and many do so.
In Scotland courses in senior secondary schools lead to an examination conducted
by the Scottish Education Department. Until 1961 the Scottish Leaving Certificate,
with passes on the Lower or Higher grades, was awTarded to school pupils, generally
at about 17 years, on the results of this examination. From May 1962 school pupils
in the fourth year of secondary courses, and some candidates who have left school,
will be able to sit an examination at 16 years for the award of passes on the Ordinary
grade of the Scottish Certificate of Education. It will also be possible from 1962 for
pupils in the fifth year, and candidates who have left school, to obtain passes on the
Higher grade of the Scottish Certificate of Education at a standard equivalent to that
of the Higher grade of the Scottish Leaving Certificate.
In Northern Ireland the Junior Certificate Examination is taken at about the age
of 15 and the Senior Certificate Examination, which is conducted at two levels, at
about 17 years of age.
Teachers
Teachers are appointed by local education authorities or school governing bodies
or managers. In i960, there was one full-time teacher to 25 pupils in publicly main¬
tained primary and secondary schools in England and Wales and Scotland, the figure
was 28 for Northern Ireland. The high birth rate at the end of the second world
war is the chief of several factors in the present need for more teachers and, as more
teachers enter the profession, the Government’s first aim in educational improvements
SOCIAL WELFARE
169
is to reduce the size of over-large classes in England and Wales, to the statutory
maxima of 40 for a primary school and 30 for a secondary. 7
year lofoT, ‘eacher-trai"ing “Keges in England and Wales; in the academic
LTected to rise ,0 cT cc T * “ theSe C°IleSes' and the «
expected to rise to 54,000 by 1966-67; many colleges are being extended and several
yeT wlthVee ^ usual training coLe has lasted for tw
yeys with three-year courses for women taking housecraft or physical education
but the ordinary course was extended to three years in September 1960, There are 24
r r^dT,rtar °f .edUCati°n pr0vidinS a ^ for gradual
In Scotland all teacher training is provided in four general colleges of educftion two
enommational colleges and a college for training women teachers of physical educa-
uom Courses are normally of one year’s duration for graduates or the eqS „t “d
of three years for non-graduates. During 1960-6. there were over 5,200 students in
hese colleges and a programme of extension and new building has been started to
relieve pre^ure on accommodation. Northern Ireland has two general achers’
on for8^r’,°nehUmTity traini4ng department and three sp'iaIiat
one for training teachers of physical education, one for teachers of domestic science
years0nThe ednc 7 ^ ^ general training colleges lastoThree
educatl0R departments, the universities, local education authorities and
other bodies provide a variety of short courses for practising teachers
e JCaC“”nStCh0?b ” th\U“ted Ki"gd<® g° to a number of overseas countries
00 tench r f ‘ntorchange schemes or schemes for temporary overseas posts. About
90 teachers from the United States and about 40 teachers from Canada exchange posts
for a year with teachers from Britain, and similar exchange schemes on a snfaller
scale, operate between Britain and Australia, New Zealand, South Africa and the
beTTn Bnrh i deS,a There are *0 official schemes operating
temorT f , T SeVerc °!her EuroPean countries for similar exchanges and for
emporary assistants posts for language specialists.
. ^iere are national salary scales for teachers in schools and other educational
inZnZlrrirelZ^ frTt,public fRnds in EnSland and Wales, in Scotland, and
n .[Northern Ireland, and these scales influence the salaries paid to teachers in
independent schools. There are also national superannuation schemes which are
administered by the central departments.
Edu^atwfh1"1-311? WaleS’ agreerd SaIary SCaIeS are submitted to the Minister of
“T ^ J01 Committees of representatives of local education authorities’ and
Com n aSSOCia.tlons; The best known of these committees are the Burnham
in r; er dea mg^lth the salanes of teachers primary and secondary schools and
modify^ ^entS °/t > eduCation- The minister can accept or reject (but not
on local 1“^” ati°nS ^ SCaks mandatory
Broadcasting and Visual Aids
seJdToutTTJrT38'1"? Departmen,t of the Bri*h Broadcasting Corporation
the IlniterlT- Jd transmisslons a week which reach more than 29,000 schools in
to schools °-Ver 70 Pfr ClCnt of tlle Posslble total. Television broadcasts
Associated Red ffe?Un t" I95l / Tththe Brit!sh Broadcasting Corporation and
to recTe the ffUSIOn In JUne I951’ nearl7 3.°“ schools were equipped
o schools T„ ,TIOn pr°grammes- From September .960, the BBC has broadcast
o schools nine television senes a week and, with repeat broadcasts, a total of 20
tiansmissions each week; the Associated Rediffusion programmes for schools have also
170
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
been extended. Neither sound nor television broadcasting attempts to cover the whole
school curriculum, or to replace the teacher; the purpose is to supplement existing
work in the schools. Other visual aids to education—films, film strips, wall charts,
pictures, and models—are being used increasingly in Britain’s schools.
Religion in Schools
In England and Wales all children in county or voluntary schools, that is, all
schools wholly or partly financed by local authorities, receive religious instruction
and take part in a daily corporate act of worship unless their parents object. In county
schools, and in certain circumstances in voluntary schools, religious instruction of
an undenominational Christian character is given. In all kinds of voluntary school
there is opportunity for denominational instruction. In county schools in Northern
Ireland clergy have a right of access to give religious instruction to children of their
denomination for a limited period each week. In Scotland, subject to safeguards for
the individual conscience, matters relating to religious instruction are in the hands of
the school managers, but there are a number of denominational schools conducted
by education authorities.
Services in the school chapel and religious teaching are an essential part of the
life and education of the independent public schools and most of these schools are
linked to some religious denomination.
Health and Welfare of School Children
Physical education, including organised games, is a part of the curriculum of all
schools.
The School Health Service provides regular medical examination and certain free
treatment for all children attending schools maintained by local education authorities.
Treatment facilities include dental clinics and child guidance centres. (There are
also child guidance clinics in the National Health Service.) In Northern Ireland the
School Health Service is operated by the health authorities.
Milk (normally one-third of a pint a day) is given free to all school children who
wish to have it, and the School Meals Service provides a daily dinner at a subsidised
price (remitted where there is need) to just over half the pupils in county and voluntary
schools. Education authorities have power to provide free transport for children who
live more than a reasonable distance from the schools which they attend; this distance
is defined as two miles for those under eight years and three miles for those over eight
years (n years in Northern Ireland).
Special educational treatment, either in special schools or otherwise, is provided
between the ages of five (or less) and 16 for children who require it on account of
any physical or mental handicap, including maladjustment. There are about 950
special schools in the United Kingdom, including hospital schools, day and boarding
schools, and boarding homes for handicapped children attending ordinary schools.
School Building
An extensive building programme for education has been undertaken in Britain
since the end of the second world war. Many war-damaged schools had to be repaired
or rebuilt. Entirely new schools, both primary and secondary, were needed to provide
for the increased number of children of school age, for the many post-war housing
estates and for the new towns; new buildings were also needed to replace or improve
those which were out of date and ill-equipped by modern standards. Although 6,000
SOCIAL WELFARE
171
new post-war schools had been completed in the United Kingdom by the end of
i960 nearly 600 more were under construction, and extensions had been made to a
very large number of existing schools, much remains to be done. Early in 1959 the
Government announced a school building programme for the five years 1960-6 c
amounting in value to about £300 million in England and Wales and £65 million
in Scotland; in Northern Ireland plans for 119 more schools had been passed by the
end of i960 and were expected to be completed within three years.
, T° thelP voluntary schools to keep pace with county schools in the standard of
their buildings, the Education Act, 1959, raised the rate of grant for alterations,
improvements and external repairs to 75 per cent of the approved cost. With a few
exceptions, the schools affected are Church of England or Roman Catholic ai ded
schools. (The whole cost of maintenance of all denominational schools in Scotland
as of voluntary controlled schools in England and Wales, is borne by public funds.)
Grants may also be made for building new aided secondary schools needed for children
from aided primary schools which existed on 15th June, 1959.
Advantage is being taken of the opportunity afforded by the extensive post-war
building programme to raise standards in public educational building and to introduce
new ideas and methods in the design and construction of schools. Education authorities
are using both traditional and new methods of building. Post-war school buildings
are light and airy, with an imaginative use of colour and generous provision of practical
rooms and space for outdoor games.
Local education authorities are responsible for providing the schools and other
buildings needed for public education in their areas. The central departments exercise
control by approving annual building programmes, framing regulations, fixing cost
limits and approving or rejecting the authorities’ plans; they also offer guidance to
authorities by means of building bulletins and in other ways.
UNIVERSITIES
There are 23 universities in the United Kingdom: 17 in England, four in Scotland,
the University of Wales, and the Queen’s University of Belfast in Northern Ireland.
The English universities are: Oxford, Cambridge, London, Birmingham, Bristol,
Durham, Exeter, Hull, Leeds, Leicester, Liverpool, Manchester, Nottingham,
Reading, Sheffield and Southampton. The University College of North Staffordshire,
which is empowered to award its own Bachelor of Arts degree, will attain full university
status, as Keele University, in 1962. The new University of Sussex admitted the first
students in October 1961. Plans have been approved for the establishment of univer¬
sities in York, Norwich, Canterbury, Coventry, Colchester and one other place yet
to be chosen. The Universities of Oxford and Cambridge date from the twelfth and
thirteenth centuries, and the Scottish Universities of St. Andrews, Glasgow, Aberdeen
and Edinburgh from the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. All the other universities
were founded in the nineteenth or twentieth centuries.
The Universities of Oxford and Cambridge are each composed of a number of
residential colleges. These colleges are corporate bodies governed by their own Fellows
and distinct from the university. Most of the Fellows of the colleges are university
teachers or oflicers and the majority of university teachers are also Fellows of colleges.
The universities, as distinct from the colleges, own the main libraries, laboratories,
and other buildings used for teaching and research.
The other universities in Britain are in the main non-residential and most are non-
collegiate. Those composed of groups of largely autonomous colleges are London,
which, with over 20,000 students, is by far the largest of Britain’s universities; Durham,
172
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Universities and
Major Technological Colleges
St. Andrews
University
Date of
foundation or
granting of
charter
area 1170
circa 1210
1411
I45I
I494
i583
1836
1837
1849
Durham •
Bradford
.Hull
A •Leeds
Manchester
• Sheffield
®Keele ^Nottingham
S Loughborough®,
• Leicester
0 Coventry
Birmingham^
Swansea
Oxford
Cambridge
St. Andrews
Glasgow
Aberdeen
Edinburgh
London
Durham
Queen’s University
(Belfast)
University of Wales
(with constituent colleges
at Aberystwyth, Bangor,
Cardiff and Swansea) 1893
Birmingham 1900
Manchester 1903
Liverpool 1903
Leeds 1904
Sheffield 1905
Bristol 1909
Reading 1926
Nottingham 1948
University College
of N. Staffordshire
(Keele) 1949
Southampton 1952
Hull 1954
Exeter 1955
Leicester 1957
Sussex (Brighton) 1961
Existing
universities
„ Oxford #
^ AAA
Jiff #
• Bristol Reading London o _
Canterbury
Brighton
O New universities
approved but
not opened
A Major
technological
colleges
SOCIAL WELFARE
*73
which includes Kings College, Newcastle upon Tyne1; and St. Andrews, which con¬
sists of colleges in St. Andrews itself and in Dundee. The University of Wales com¬
prises the University Colleges of Aberystwyth, Bangor, Cardiff and Swansea, and the
Welsh National School of Medicine at Cardiff.
The education departments have no jurisdiction over the universities, and their
relations with them are concerned mainly with the training of school teachers, the
provision of extra-mural education, and the award of scholarships from public funds.
The universities receive aid from the State mainly in the form of direct grants from the
Treasury which, in Great Britain, are made on the advice of the University Grants
Committee, a committee appointed by the Chancellor of the Exchequer from persons
with wide experience of schools and universities, or experience in industry.
The proportion of university income provided by the Exchequer is increasing and
in I959~^° was 72'2 Per cent for the United Kingdom. Another 2*6 per cent was
contributed by local authorities, io-o per cent by fees, and the balance by endowments
and other sources
Students
Admission to the universities is by examination and selection; there is no religious
test and no colour bar. Women are admitted on equal terms with men, but at Cambridge
their numbers are limited by statute (as they were at Oxford until 1957). The general
proportion of men to women students is three to one; at Oxford it is six to one, and at
Cambridge ten to one.
All universities in Britain limit the number of undergraduates; in spite of the increase
in these limits which has taken place since the end of the second world war, the demand
for places continues to be very keen and many candidates are unable to gain entrance
to the university of their first choice.
At the beginning of the academic year 1960-61, there were 109,000 full-time
students at universities or university colleges in the United Kingdom. This total,
more than double the pre-war figure, is to be still further expanded (see p. 174).
Scholarships and Other Awards
Scholarships and other awards are now very widely available, for it is the national
educational policy that no able boy or girl shall be prevented by lack of means from
taking an advanced course at a university or elsewhere. About 80 per cent of university
students in Great Britain are now aided from public or private funds.
At present the Ministry of Education offers about 2,000 State scholarships annually
on open competition for full-time honours courses at universities and, in addition, it
gives some 1,500 new supplementary grants each year to winners of open scholarships
awarded by the universities and colleges from their own funds. The ministry also
awards 225 technical State scholarships annually. (These and the ordinary State
scholarships may be held at a technical college instead of a university for courses of
appropriate level.)
Local education authorities in England and Wales make awards to over 16,000 other
students each year to enable them to enter a university. As a result of the recom¬
mendations of the Anderson Committee, which issued its report in i960, measures
have been announced to improve the present award system from the beginning of the
academic year 1962-63. These include the replacement of all present forms of State
1 A proposal to separate King’s College from Durham and establish it as an independent
university is under consideration.
i?4
BRITAIN.* AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
scholarship and local authority major awards by a single system and the acceptance of
the principle that any British student who is offered a university place and holds
two passes at the Advanced level of the GCE should be eligible for an award.
State studentships for postgraduate study in arts subjects are offered annually by
the Ministry of Education; 262 were awarded in i960. Postgraduate awards for
scientists and technologists are made by the Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research and the Research Councils, which awarded 1,300 studentships in i960
(see p. 211).
In Scotland awards to full-time university students, students training as teachers
and students taking advanced full-time or sandwich courses at other educational
establishments, are made by the Scottish Education Department. The education
authorities award bursaries to other further education students and to school pupils
in compliance with regulations made by the Secretary of State.
University scholarships in Northern Ireland are awarded by the local education
authorities. The Ministry of Education awards State exhibitions. Scholarships awarded
by the universities and State exhibitions may be supplemented by local education
authorities. Postgraduate awards are made by the Ministry of Education.
Studies and Degrees
Courses in arts and science are offered by all universities and, at nearly all universities,
courses are available in one or more applied sciences. At the beginning of the academic
year 1960-61, 43 per cent of full-time university students in Great Britain were taking
arts courses and 57 per cent were studying science or technology (including medicine).
University degree courses generally extend over three or four years, though in
medicine five or six years are required. The first degree of Bachelor (Master in Scotland)
is awarded on the completion of such a course, depending on satisfactory examination
results. In most universities an ordinary (or pass) degree or an honours degree can
be taken, although the majority of students in England and Wales take honours courses.
Further study or research is required at the modern universities for the degree of
Master and by all universities for that of Doctor. Actual degree titles vary according
to the practice of each university; some differentiate between the arts and sciences
and some do not. Diplomas and certificates are awarded after shorter courses in
some subjects.
The tutorial system of individual tuition to supplement the lecture system is a
traditional and valued feature of the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge; it is now
being developed in the other universities and colleges of Britain.
Most members of the academic staffs devote time to research and at all universities
there are postgraduate students engaged in research. There has been an expansion
particularly of research in science and technology in recent years (see p. 210).
University Expansion
The universities of Britain are expanding rapidly to meet the greatly increased
demand for university education and also the need of a modern democracy for a highly
educated population and the particular need, in a technical age, for scientists and
technologists.
An increase in the number of full-time students in universities in Great Britain
from 100,000 in 1958-59 to 135,000 in the latter half of the 1960s has already been
agreed; and the possibility of providing an additional 35,000 to 40,000 places by the
late 1960s is now being considered. About two-thirds of the additional students who
SOCIAL WELFARE
I75
technology^ t0 ^ ^ ^ Universities ^ about ^65 will be students of science or
An extensive building programme is in progress to provide for the increased number
students. In particular, ha s of residence are being built to enable a higher proportion
of students to enjoy the intellectual, social and cultural advantages of community life
and many new science buildings are needed to provide up-to-date facilities far the
increasing proportion of science students.
Building projects in Great Britain to the value of £104 million were begun, or have
been authorised to begin, in the six-year period 1958-63, and universitks have been
au onsed to make further plans on the basis of projects to the value of £30 million
to start m each of the years 1964 and 1965. These figures exclude the expansion of the
Imperial College of Science and Technology in the University of London where
separate special provision is being made for a doubling of numbers—from 1 650 in
1952 (when the plans were first approved) to 3,300-at a total cost of over /15 million
These amounts, together with additional sums for the purchase of sites and properties
d the provision of equipment for new buildings, are met from Exchequer funds-
further sums are collected by the universities themselves.
sh°ftthA maJ°r pr°Jects included ln the annual programmes for the period 1960-63
ou 5 per cent by value is for buildings to accommodate teaching and research in
the various faculties, including about 44 per cent for science subjects and technology
The remaining 44 per cent by value is for general service buildings, such as halls of
residence, student unions, refectories and libraries.
FURTHER EDUCATION
Outsfae the universities there is a great variety of further education, full-time
aredrPen? Tt’ ^ ^ ^ Wh° haVe left SchooL Local education authorities
are required to secure such provision either directly or by aiding voluntary bodies
and institutions. Vocational and non-vocational courses at all levels and in a/subjects
are available in technical, commercial and art colleges1 and in evening institutes
ihese courses may lead to a wide variety of qualifications ranging from external
iversity degrees and the highest technological awards to craftsman’s certificates,
they may offer opportunities for pursuing leisure-time interests. In the year iqcq-6o
ere were some 125,000 full-time students at the technical and commercial colleges
(excluding art colleges and agricultural institutes) in Great Britain and some li
^dother^T6 StUde”tS- ^increasing number of young employees, apprentices
d others (480,000 in Great Britain in 1959-60) are released by their employers to
end technical or general education classes during working hours and the Government
is urgmg industrial and commercial concerns to encourage more of their young people
o attend such classes. Nearly a million other students attend evening institutes^
Technical and Technological Education
Within the field of further education, facilities for technical and technoloai^al
education have been expanded greatly since the second world war and the Government
is promoting further development. In 1956 the Government announced a five-year
nf°!ran?Ti?r thC exPansion of technical colleges designed to provide for an increase
nnH ti M as,many a8ain in the number of students completing advanced courses
the dL TL nrmu erS by ^ emPloyers for part-time courses during
he day. The cost of the programme for buildings and equipment in the five years
For further information on art colleges see p. 232.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
176
from 1956 to 1961 was nearly £100 million, comprising £70 million spent on buildings
and .£15 million on equipment in England and Wales, and £10 million for buildings
and £2 million for equipment in Scotland. A further £15 million a year in England
and Wales and £2 million in Scotland is to be spent on buildings for technical education
in each of the three years from 1961 to 1964. The expansion of advanced courses of
further education is being helped by sharing the cost among all local education
authorities.
The largest group of students attending technical colleges are young employees
and apprentices who are released by their employers for study, usually on one day a
week; day release study is often supplemented by attendance at evening classes. A
wide variety of craft courses is available for young workers in various trades and
occupations leading to appropriate qualifications at the end of a course of three to
five years. Courses of a more professional character which are suitable for technicians
or for those who aim ultimately at membership of a professional institution are also
provided, leading to the National Certificates approved by joint committees representa¬
tive of the education departments and the appropriate professional body (e.g., the
Institution of Mechanical Engineers). Such courses are normally at two levels, ordinary
and higher. Most courses for the ordinary certificate last three years and students
usually follow them between the ages of 16 and 19. The higher certificate requires a
further two years’ part-time study and is generally considered to reach a level
corresponding to a pass degree in the subject concerned.
In 1961 the Government proposed measures for a major reorganisation of education
in technical colleges in Great Britain, providing for greater continuity between school
and technical college education, a broadening of technical education and a closer
adaptation of the system to the needs of industry.
Full-time courses are taken by large numbers of younger students who leave school
to enter secretarial or clerical work and also as an introduction to apprenticeship.
But the most important group of full-time students are those following advanced
courses leading to an external degree of the University of London, to the Higher
National Diploma (awarded by joint committees in the same way as the Higher
National Certificates) or to the Diploma in Technology (a national qualification first
awarded in 1958). The Diploma in Technology (Dip. Tech.) is granted on the
successful completion of an approved course in a technical college and is equivalent
in standard to a university honours degree. It is administered by the National Council
for Technological Awards, an autonomous body set up by the Minister of Education
in 1955. The council has also instituted an award higher than the diploma—Member¬
ship of the College of Technologists (MCT).
The form of advanced full-time course which is rapidly gaining favour is the ‘sand¬
wich course’. This lasts from three to five years and consists of periods usually of three
or six months spent alternately in studying full-time in a technical college and in
gaining practical experience in industry; the majority of Diploma in Technology
couxses are sandwich courses. In the academic year 1959-60 there were some 10,000
sandwich course students. It is through a major increase in the number of students
taking sandwich courses that the technical colleges are expected to achieve a 50 per
cent increase in the output of advanced students.
There is a growing demand for courses of postgraduate standard, whether in tech¬
nical subjects or in management studies, in technical colleges for students who have
already obtained a first degree, a diploma, or a Higher National Certificate. A wide
range of advanced short courses of a very specialised nature is also offered for senior
technical staffs engaged in industry. A considerable amount of research is also carried
SOCIAL WELFARE
177
on in the technical colleges: the arrangements vary widely and frequently take the form
of a contract between the college and a local industrial concern
Under this system there is great flexibility in the arrangement of courses As a
P<^P C Can Start, co^rses.at various ages on leaving school and can attain
the highest qualification to which their abilities entitle them
Technical colleges in England and Wales vary greatly in siZe, range of subjects
evel of work and type of course. The largest has a total of some ,4,000 studentT™
the rol. The large colleges usually offer a wide variety of subjects, covering the basic
btaTX: mal SCienCeS' ^ -e mganise^in Tm
(1) Local Colleges (150), providing mainly part-time courses, some (lasting two
o ve years) leading directly to craftsman and technician qualifications such
Certificates^ Natl°na Certlficates and City and Guilds of London Institute
(2) Area Colleges (170), providing also some advanced courses from two to four
Th8 T d^at-°n ^students starting at 18 or 19 years of age, and leading
to Higher National Certificates and Diplomas; 8
(3) Regional Colleges (22), covering wider areas than the local and area colleges
and domg a substantial amount of advanced work, including full-time and
sandwich courses; and &
(4) Colleges of Advanced Technology concentrating entirely on advanced work
me u ing postgraduate and research work, and comprising the following
nine colleges: the Btrmingham College of Technology; the Bradford Institute
of Technology; the Welsh College of Advanced Technology, Cardiff; Lough-
BrkZeS%0TTlChTl0gy; the R°yal Technical Colkg<b Salford; the
Bnsto! Co lege of Technology; and, in London, the Battersea, Chelsea and
Northampton Colleges of Advanced Technology. (In the north-east of Eng-
and the Rutherford Technical College, Newcastle upon Tyne, has been
selected as a potential college of advanced technology.)
mn' Tr “ EP,gland and Wales there are 432 technical colleges (other than art
« h,at PJ°vlde for full-time students, besides 162 others which take part-time
students only. There are also National Colleges, which have been established to provide
T,™nCed cours“ for the particularly specialised techniques of certain industries
Id the”^, *Uch asI,,hose for Rubbor Technology and Food Technology
and the National Foundry College; they are managed by independent bodies with
grants direct from the Ministry of Education.
Scotland has ,6 Central Institutions for further education, of which seven are
technical colleges. Five of these have full-time courses leading to their own diploma
or associateship and in some the greater part of the work is full-time. The fuff-time
courses are of three or four years’ duration and comparable in scope and standard
to university degree courses. There are dose ties between the central institutions
Dotted hr""'"?' The uentr?1 instituti0Ils’ working 0" a regional basis, are sup-
Ld 71<>Ca tefhnl,cal colleges’ offering full-time and part-time day coursed,
in th/, vr,ngclass7 at Iocal centres. Twenty-one new colleges are expected to open
m the early 1960s; of these, three had been opened by December i960.
an/wT ':ITI rtli!n(:!the system of technical education is similar to that in England
and Wales and includes courses leading to National Certificates. The Ministry of
Education for Northern Ireland awards junior and senior trade scholarships to appren-
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
I78
tices, to enable them to follow full-time courses of study at the Belfast College of
Technology. The junior course lasts five months and the senior course eight months.
Most of the technical colleges and other further education establishments in the
United Kingdom are either maintained or aided from public funds. Tuition fees are
therefore moderate, and often nominal for young people under 18 years of age. Many
full-time students are helped by awards from local education authorities. The awards
are generally based on the results of the General Certificate of Education or a corre¬
sponding examination; they are assessed to cover tuition fees and a maintenance
grant, but parents who can afford to contribute towards the cost are required to do so.
There are also some scholarships available from endowments, and others are awarded
under schemes organised by particular industries or companies for the most promising
of their young workers. In England and Wales, State scholarships are available for
advanced technological courses.
Commercial Education
Commercial education is provided in local authority commercial and technical
colleges, in independent colleges and by bodies organising correspondence courses.
Well over half the candidates taking professional examinations in commercial subjects
do so through correspondence courses.
In England and Wales local education authorities maintain about 200 establish¬
ments that offer commercial courses at or above intermediate (i.e. Ordinary National
Certificate) level: there are 15 colleges of commerce, over 170 commerce departments
in technical and other colleges, and nearly 20 establishments which have advanced
courses in commercial subjects in the evenings only.
The tradition of relying mainly on evening study has continued longer in com¬
mercial education than in technical education, but in 1961 the Minister of Education
announced changes designed to broaden the scope of the National Certificate and
Diploma Courses and the introduction of a National Diploma in Management Studies
at a postgraduate level.
Adult Education
Adult education (non-vocational study, outside the universities, for those who
have left school) is organised by local education authorities (sometimes in association
with voluntary bodies) in evening institutes, schools of art, adult education centres,
community centres and youth clubs. Many of the classes are practical, but there are
also wide opportunities for academic study at all levels. Voluntary organisations, such
as the National Federation of Women’s Institutes and the National Union of Towns¬
women’s Guilds, offer courses in handicrafts and other subjects to their members;
the local education authorities usually supply the teachers.
In general, courses at the highest levels in arts subjects are provided by the extra¬
mural departments of the universities, many of which have full-time staff appointed
for this purpose and can call on the services of other members of the university staff;
by the Workers’ Educational Association, which also employs organising tutors and in
many regions works in close collaboration with the university extra-mural departments;
and by other voluntary bodies. In 1959-60, 180,000 students in England and Wales
attended such courses, which are grant-aided directly by the Ministry of Education and,
in many cases, are assisted financially and in other ways by local education authorities.
Voluntary bodies with a particular view-point, such as the National Council of
Labour Colleges and the Co-operative Union, also organise adult education courses
without grant-aid. Six residential colleges (five in England and Wales and one in
SOCIAL WELFARE
179
Scotland) directly aided by the education departments offer one-year or two-year
cultural, non-vocational courses for adult students. In addition, there are about 10
other residential colleges where students can take short courses of a similar kind lasting
for a few days or a few weeks. Most of these latter colleges are maintained or aided
by local education authorities.
The National Institute of Adult Education provides in London a centre of informa¬
tion and research for adult education, as well as a channel of co-operation and
consultation for the many organisations in England and Wales which are interested
in the subject. It is assisted by a grant from the Ministry of Education. There is a
corresponding body in Scotland, the Scottish Institute of Adult Education.
Local education authorities can provide community centres for urban areas; these
centres normally supply facilities for both vocational and non-vocational classes
for the further education of young people and adults. The centres are usually managed
by community associations, many of which are affiliated to the National Federation
of Community Associations. Similar classes in rural areas are held in village halls and a
variety of other premises by local education authorities and voluntary bodies; in
Cambridgeshire there are nine ‘village colleges’, which combine facilities for secondary
and adult education, and a similar ‘college’ was opened in Derbyshire in 1958.
Financial assistance is given by the education departments to local voluntary
organisations towards the capital cost of community centres, village halls, playing
fields and similar facilities for social and physical recreation for adults.
OVERSEAS STUDENTS IN BRITAIN
Opportunities for students from overseas to come to Britain to study in universities
or other educational institutions, or to obtain specialised training in industry or
elsewhere, have greatly expanded since the second world war. There are some 50,000
overseas students in Britain, of whom about one-quarter are at universities, another
quarter at technical colleges, and the remainder training for the law, in industry
or at hospitals as doctors or nurses. In the year 1960-61, Britain’s universities contained
7,900 students from Commonwealth countries overseas and 4,500 full-time students
from foreign countries. About 300 British Council1 scholarships, tenable usually for one
year in the United Kingdom, are awarded annually to graduates of overseas universities.
I wenty-four Marshall Scholarships for university study in Britain are offered annually
by the United Kingdom Government to graduates from the United States of America
and over 60 Rhodes Scholarships are awarded annually to Commonwealth and United
States graduates for two years of study at the University of Oxford. Other universities
and colleges themselves offer many scholarships for which graduate students of any
nationality are eligible. Some two-thirds of all overseas students are from the Common¬
wealth.
Some universities and other educational institutions in the United Kingdom
annually reserve a proportion of their places for students from the United Kingdom
EnJJh Councd exlstV0 Promote a wider knowledge of the United Kingdom and the
founded in ! °yerseas and ,to develop closer cultural relations with other countries. It was
committee Ire4 Tu Z Royal CharJter ln I(H°- Nine of the 30 members of its executive
Publkfunds Tt “r*, by Government departments; it is financed almost entirely from
tation of'cuhnraf “sually d^ated as the Government’s principal instrument for the implemen-
taffs who ^n <fnle . n °nS t0 WhlCh thf Un^d Kingdom is a party. The council maintains
Britishlife andTnnlht0^38 l°TT Ernglish.studies, provide regular information on
and achievement5nowlTedge of the scientific, literary and other developments
for schokrs^eachers^nVnrKingdoP- ^ arranges Study programmes in the United Kingdom
ior scnoiars, teachers and other professional visitors from overseas.
i8o
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
dependencies. At the end of i960, there were over 15,000 students from United
Kingdom dependencies studying in the United Kingdom or the Irish Republic,
over 2,500 of them at universities. Of the total, 2,590 held scholarships. The chief
sources of grants are funds set aside by Colonial Governments (sometimes supple¬
mented by United Kingdom Colonial Development and Welfare funds) and funds
contributed by public boards and corporations in the territories.
A wide range of public and private fellowships and scholarships for advanced
study in Britain are awarded annually to students and research workers from Common¬
wealth countries overseas. Under the Commonwealth Scholarship and Fellowship
Plan awards have been made available by the Governments of certain Commonwealth
countries for tenure by men and women from other Commonwealth countries at
universities, colleges and other institutions of higher learning in the country of offer;
the United Kingdom Government has allocated a little under £3! million for the
five-year period 1960-65 to enable a maximum of 500 scholars in any one
year to study in Britain and on an average 400 others to take teacher training
courses. An example of smaller schemes is the Athlone Fellowship Scheme, under
which the United Kingdom Government has from 1951 awarded 38 fellowships a
year to engineering graduates in Canada for up to two years’ further study, training
and research in institutions or industries in Britain.
Under the United Nations Programmes of Technical Assistance, nearly 675 holders
of fellowship awards came to Britain between 1st April, i960, and 31st March, 1961,
for study or training, a larger number than ever before and almost certainly a larger
number than received in any other country during that period. Similarly, under the
Technical Co-operation Scheme of the Colombo Plan for Economic Development in
South and South-East Asia, 632 trainees came to Britain during that same period
for industrial or other practical training or for postgraduate research or study of
some kind.
During the same period under the Central Treaty Organisation, the Foundation
for Mutual Assistance in Africa South of the Sahara, and the British Technical Assis¬
tance Programmes for Yugoslavia, Ghana and Nigeria, 265 fellowships and training
awards were taken up for study at British training institutions of many kinds.
Arrangements for Overseas Students
Various bodies in the United Kingdom, official and unofficial, have assumed
responsibility for the welfare of overseas students. The Commonwealth Relations
Office is also closely associated with educational schemes for students from the over¬
seas member nations of the Commonwealth and from the Federation of Rhodesia
and Nyasaland, and is concerned with their welfare. The Students’ Branch of the
Colonial Office is responsible for placing scholarship holders and recommended
students from the United Kingdom dependencies in universities and teacher-training
colleges. Student offices, set up in the United Kingdom by the majority of the
dependencies and by some overseas Commonwealth member nations, are responsible
for the placing of students from their territories in technical colleges, and for practical
training and the general welfare of their students.
Students from overseas are given many opportunities to get to know more of
Britain in their leisure time and to make friends with British people. The British
Council offers a wide range of activities. The council has overseas students’ centres in
London and in other university cities, which organise a varied programme of lectures,
discussions and social and other activities. Many British people like to invite students
to their homes and the British Council arranges introductions. In the vacations, there
SOCIAL WELFARE
l8l
are courses in many parts of the United Kingdom which offer opportunities for getting
to know more about British life in town and country. In term time there are visits to
various places of interest, and theatre and concert parties are arranged. The British
Council assists many students to find accommodation, particularly those from the
United Kingdom dependencies and from a number of other Commonwealth and
foreign countries. They are met on arrival and helped to settle down quickly in their
new environment. ^ J
Among many voluntary organisations which offer a welcome to overseas students
are the East and West Friendship Council, Rotary, Round Table, the Victoria League,
eRoyal Overseas League, the Royal Commonwealth Society, the National Union
of Students, the English-Speaking Union and Churches of all denominations. The
London Conference on Overseas Students, on which the British Council and Govern¬
ment departments are represented, co-ordinates their work in the metropolis. In some
London boroughs there are committees which help students to make contact with
ocal residents and organisations. Similar conferences have come into being in other
large cities of the United Kingdom. S
British Students Overseas
It has been estimated by UNESCO (Study Abroad, i960) that there are some 3,000
students from the United Kingdom at institutes of higher education in 18 countries
overseas.
The Commonwealth Education Liaison Unit, set up after the Commonwealth
Education Conference in 1959, supplements normal direct dealings on education
between the countries of the Commonwealth. Under the Commonwealth Scholarship
n Fellowship Plan, a number of scholarships are made available annually to United
Kingdom students by the governments of other Commonwealth countries for study
m their universities colleges and other institutions of higher learning. At present
fCd S^0lar^hiPs are being held by United Kingdom students in Australia,
Canada, Malaya, New Zealand, and the Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland, and
others are being offered for competition to United Kingdom students with tenure in
Ceylon, East Africa, Hong Kong, India, Malta, Nigeria and Pakistan.
For many years the United States have offered awards for British students, the
best known being the Fulbnght travel grants for postgraduate study at American
universities. Students of British nationality are also offered scholarships (mostly for
one aca^nuc year) at institutes for higher education in 15 European countries, and in
Brazil, Iceland, Indonesia, Iran, Israel and Japan.
YOUTH SERVICE
The object of the youth service in Britain is to provide for the leisure-time activities
young people and to offer them opportunities—complementary to those of home
so that ^UCat'°nI“^ work lor discovering and developing their personal resources,’
slietv tk e t“r etiulPPed t0 be sponsible members of a free and civilised
vn?S ^ 18 n° re«lmentatl“n of y°nng People; they are free to join any of the
youth orgamsatrons, or none, and the aim is to offer facilities sufficiently varied to
appeal to every type of boy and girl. ^
State and Voluntary Partnership
dettCnt^ f°r Jouth service m.the United Kingdom is shared by the education
partments, local education authorities, voluntary organisations and the Churches.
i8z
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
There is no attempt to impose uniformity or to create any national youth organisation,
but a number of youth organisations have spontaneously developed over the last
century, mainly by voluntary effort. Between the two world wars, some of the local
education authorities tried to help and co-ordinate voluntary work in their areas through
Juvenile Organisations Committees; in the 1930s the State also began to promote
social and physical training and recreation and in 1939 brought into being what is now
called the Youth Service as a partnership of voluntary organisations, local authorities
and central Government.
The status of youth services as an essential part of the educational system of Great
Britain was confirmed by the Education Act of 1944 and the Education (Scotland)
Act of 1945; in Northern Ireland, youth welfare work was promoted by the Physical
Training and Recreation Act of 1938 and the Youth Welfare Acts of 1944 and 1947.
The education departments provide grants in aid of the administrative and training
work of national voluntary youth organisations, towards the expense of training full¬
time youth leaders and towards the cost of premises and equipment of youth clubs
provided by voluntary bodies.
Local education authorities co-operate with voluntary organisations in their areas:
most give some financial help and lend premises and equipment; most also employ
youth organisers to help in the promotion and encouragement of youth work; where
voluntary services are considered inadequate, local authorities themselves organise
youth centres and clubs. Most local authorities have appointed youth committees on
which official and voluntary bodies are represented.
In addition to such grants as are received from the State and local authorities,
voluntary organisations may receive help from charitable trusts for the furtherance of
special projects, notably from the King George’s Jubilee Trust (see p. 184) and,
during the years 1953-60, the King George VI Foundation, which distributed nearly
£1 -2 million from the memorial fund in remembrance of the King. The greater part of
the funds of the voluntary organisations is, however, raised by their own efforts.
In 1958 the Minister of Education, aware that the Youth Service needed to do more
to assist young people, appointed a committee, under the chairmanship of Lady
Albemarle, to review the situation and advise on steps to be taken. The minister
accepted in principle the committee’s recommendations, published in its report in
February i960, and announced immediate increases in financial help for the head¬
quarters of national voluntary organisations, a building programme of £7 million to be
started in the next three years, more grants to voluntary projects, including experi¬
mental ones, and immediate steps towards increasing the number of trained full-time
leaders. In January 1961 a National College for the Training of Youth Leaders was
opened at Leicester. The minister is advised by a Youth Service Development Council.
The Albemarle Committee’s inquiry extended only to England and Wales, youth
provision in Scotland having already been the subject of reports by advisory bodies;
but some of its main recommendations applied to Scotland, while others reflected
the existing Scottish position. A Standing Consultative Council on Youth Service in
Scotland, with functions similar to those of the Youth Service Development Council
for England and Wales, was set up by the Secretary of State for Scotland in December
1959 for an initial period of two years. In September i960 an emergency one-year
training course in Youth Leadership for full-time youth leaders and organisers was
introduced at Moray House College of Education. More money is being made available
from central funds to national voluntary organisations in Scotland and, as in England
and Wales, increased expenditure on youth services by Scottish education authorities
is taken into account in calculating the Exchequer general grant.
The St. John and Red Cross hospital library
service, run by voluntary helpers.
Reading aids for the blind: above, the
Optophone, an electronic machine, trans¬
lates printed symbols into a code of sounds;
left, the Talking Book Machine developed
for the Royal National Institute for the
Blind plays recordings from tape.
A school building <
modern design: ne
main hall of Trinit
Comprehensive Schoi
for Girls, Southwark, i
London.
School-to-school tele
vision: a science lesso
at Hayes County Grarr
mar School is simui
taneously transmitted t
Barnhill Secondar
Modern School tw
miles away as part c
the regular curriculun
The new Llandaff Technical
College in Cardiff.
SOCIAL WELFARE
l83
The Voluntary Organisations
The backbone of the youth services is the voluntary organisations. Although their
programmes vary greatly, most of them provide educational and religious activities
as well as social and recreational pursuits for their members, and all of them seek to
inculcate high ideals of personal conduct and service to the community.
Twenty-five large national voluntary youth organisations are constituent members of
the Standing Conference of National Voluntary Youth Organisations, a consultative
body which takes action only in the name of its member bodies and with their consent.
A further 21 bodies are associate or observer members, for example, the Church of
England Youth Council, which represents some 200,000 young people who are
members of clubs sponsored by the Church of England. These major organisations
have a total membership of some 3 million young people under 21. The corresponding
body in Scotland is the Scottish Standing Conference of Voluntary Youth Organisations,
and in Northern Ireland the Standing Conference of Youth Organisations.
Among the youth organisations with a mainly religious origin and purpose are the
Young Men’s Christian Association (YMCA) and Young Women’s Christian
Association (YWCA), with approximately 36,000 and 20,500 members under 21
respectively; the Boys Brigade (164,000), the Church Lads’ Brigade (16,000), the
Girls’ Life Brigade (64,000), the Girls’ Friendly Society (23,000), Girls’ Guildry
(33>000)> the Methodist Association of Youth Clubs (172,000), the Salvation Army
Youth Organisations (67,000), the Catholic Young Men’s Society of Great Britain
(25,000), the Young Christian Workers (17,000), the Grail (13,000), and the Association
of Jewish Youth (15,000).
The Boy Scouts Association and Girl Guides’ Association have world-wide affilia¬
tions; they are undenominational and non-political, and were founded by Lord
Baden-Powell in 1908 and 1910 to develop character and good citizenship in boys and
girls. They have various sections, based on age groups, but the largest number are
under 16 years. Their total United Kingdom membership is about 518,000 scouts and
530,000 guides.
The National Association of Boys’ Clubs, with over 2,000 affiliated clubs and 149,000
members, and the National Association of Youth Clubs, with over 2,500 affiliated
clubs and 163,000 members, are concerned mainly with the 14 to 20 age-group.
Each affiliated club has its own rules, but all try to give their members opportunities
to take part in physical, mental and social activities, to develop their capacities and
grow to maturity as individuals and members of society. Representatives from clubs
form local committees and these send representatives to the national members’
councils.
The National Association of Training Corps for Girls, with about 8,000 members,
comprises the Girls’ Training Corps, the Women’s Junior Air Corps and the Girls’
Nautical Training Corps; all wear uniform and formal discipline is encouraged. The
pre-Service organisations (the Combined Cadet Force, Sea Cadet Corps, Army Cadet
Force and Air Training Corps), combine social, educational and physical development
with training for possible entry into the armed forces; their combined membership
is about 170,000.
The National Federation of Young Farmers’ Clubs in England and Wales has
nearly 38,000 members between 10 and 25 years old, the Scottish Association of
Young Farmers’ Clubs has nearly 7,000 and Northern Ireland Young Farmer Clubs
over 3,000 members: in addition to encouraging interest in agriculture and appreciation
of country life, the clubs provide training in the arts of citizenship and develop ability
to serve the community.
184
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Welsh League of Youth (Urdd Gobaith Cymru) has a membership of about
48,000; its aim is the ‘development of Christian citizenship among the youth of Wales’,
and its work takes full account of the Welsh background of its members.
The Youth Hostels Associations in England and Wales, Scotland and Northern
Ireland have a network of hostels for walkers and cyclists, particularly intended for
young people of limited means. They seek to promote knowledge and love of the
countryside, and are closely linked with each other and with similar organisations in
other countries.
Adult organisations with youth sections include the British Red Cross Society,
St. John Ambulance Brigade and the leading political parties.
Other Organisations Concerned with Youth Work
King George's Jubilee Trust was established in 1935 to advance the welfare of the
younger generation: the Trust Fund is applied for the benefit of the young people of
the United Kingdom. King George V sanctioned the inauguration of the Trust by the
then Prince of Wales, and the dedication to it of the nation’s gift of approximately
£1 million, subscribed as a thank-offering to mark his silver jubilee. The income is
augmented by gifts and legacies and the Trust has made grants of well over £1 million
for the benefit of young people.
The Duke of Edinburgh's Award Scheme for boys is operated by local authorities,
schools, youth organisations, industrial firms and other bodies, and is designed as a
challenge to boys between the ages of 14 and 19 to reach standards of achievement
in three progressive stages in leisure-time activities comprising public service, expedi¬
tions and pursuits and fitness. A similar scheme for girls was launched in 1958 as an
experiment for girls between the ages of 14 and 20. The three progressive stages cover
the following sections: design for living, interests, and adventure and service.
The Outward Bound Trust maintains five schools which offer 26-day character¬
building courses for boys, based on adventure and testing experience. Modified
courses are held for girls.
The aims of the Central Council of Physical Recreation, the Scottish Council of
Physical Recreation and the National Playing Fields Association bring them into touch
with many youth organisations: their activities are described in Chapter XVIII: Sport.
In addition to organisations on a nation-wide basis, there are a large number of
town, district or village social clubs run by voluntary groups for general or particular
purposes; photographic societies, folk dance, table tennis or jazz clubs, for instance.
In small communities social clubs may not be specifically for young people but those
with the more strenuous activities (e.g., tennis clubs) usually have a high proportion
of young people as members.
VI. HOUSING AND
PLANNING
PROBLEMS AND ADMINISTRATION
The problems of housing and of planning the use of land in Britain have their
origins mainly in the sevenfold expansion of the population in the last two and a
half centuries and its concentration in industrial urban areas, which gave rise to over¬
crowding in the older houses in the centres of cities and to the unplanned spread of
outer suburbs. In spite of a high rate of building in the nineteen-thirties, the second
world war left Britain facing formidable problems of housing and planning: the need
and scope for much rebuilding resulted from enemy action, which destroyed or
damaged approximately one house in three. Although the achievements in housing
the population during the last fifteen years have been considerable, current housing
policy is being formulated in the light of the problems remaining; these include
housing shortages and the completion of slum clearance programmes in big towns and
cities, the elimination of overcrowding, the provision of accommodation for old people
and the modernising of thousands of older houses.
Ministerial Responsibility for Housing and Planning
Ihe Minister of Housing and Local Government is responsible in England and
Wales for formulating housing policy, for housing standards and for general super¬
vision of the housing programme. In planning, the minister is responsible for imple¬
menting general policy regarding the use and development of land throughout England
and Wales, and for directing and guiding local planning authorities, the new towns
development corporations and the National Parks Commission in the carrying out
of their planning functions.
The Secretary of State for Scotland has similar responsibilities in Scotland.
In Northern Ireland the Minister of Health and Local Government is responsible
for housing and planning.
The Ministry of Works acts as production authority in Great Britain for the building
industry. The agricultural departments are responsible for advising on the agricultural
value of land proposed for housing or other development. The Board of Trade is
responsible for regulating the distribution of industrial development. An inter¬
departmental committee on the Services’ land requirements meets to harmonise
Service and civilian needs and proposals for land use.
HOUSING
While responsibility for housing policy and for the general execution of the housing
programme rests with the minister, local authorities are responsible for housing in their
areas to the extent that they must ensure as far as possible that housing conditions
are satisfactory, see that adequate standards are maintained in newly built and existing
houses, and submit plans for the clearance of unfit dwellings, and for new provision
where required. In England and Wales and Northern Ireland the local housing
185
i86
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
authorities are the councils of county boroughs, boroughs (including metropolitan
boroughs), urban districts and rural districts, the London County Council and the
Common Council of the City of London. In Scotland all town and county councils
are housing authorities.
There are in all about i6| million houses in the United Kingdom: over 14^ million in
England and Wales, 1,600,000 in Scotland, and about 400,000 in Northern Ireland.
About 3! million of the houses in England and Wales and over half a million houses
in Scotland are owned by local authorities, that is, in all, about 1 house in 4. Nearly
6 million houses, about 1 house in 3, are in owner-occupation; most of the remainder
(mainly older houses) are rented from private landlords.
Private enterprise is responsible for about half the houses and flats now being built,1
but local authorities (that is, for the most part, private builders under contract to
local authorities) built about 70 per cent of the 3! million houses completed between
1945 and the end of i960. While resources were still very limited, following the second
world war, and the demand for houses urgent and widespread, local authorities were
given the greater share of the programme. Quantitative restrictions on private building
were, however, gradually removed from the beginning of 1952, and finally abolished in
November 1954. Building reached a peak in 1954, at 354,129 houses or flats completed
during the year. The total number built in i960 was 304,255. By the end of 1961 one
family in four will be living in a post-war house.
Funds for houses built by private enterprise are obtained mainly by borrowing.
The chief agencies concerned in lending money are the building societies, insurance
companies, industrial and provident societies, and local authorities.
The main emphasis in local authority housing is now on slum clearance and on
housing specially suited to old people, although shortage of housing, particularly of
unfurnished accommodation for renting, is still a problem in some areas, notably in
London, Glasgow, and some other large conurbations. Nevertheless, since 1951 over
8£ million people have been rehoused in new dwellings. In selecting their tenants local
authorities are required to give preference to families living in overcrowded or other¬
wise unsatisfactory housing conditions.
New Building
The agencies for building houses in Britain are private builders, local authorities,
new towns development corporations, certain Government departments which need
to house the families of the armed forces or other Services, and housing associations,
which are non-profit-making bodies providing houses mostly for letting rather than
for sale. In 1961 details were announced of a scheme whereby Exchequer loans of up
to a maximum of £25 million are to be made available to approved housing associations
in order to finance the building of houses to let at unsubsidised rents. There have also
been self-help groups whose members, in their spare time, build houses to be occupied
by group members; some of these groups are organised as housing associations.
Local authority houses are normally built for letting, and privately built houses
for owner-occupation.
The initial capital cost of houses built by or for local authorities is met by raising
loans; current expenditure, including loan repayment and interest on loans, is met
1These proportions relate to Great Britain as a whole. In Scotland the proportion of private
building to local authority building is lower than in England and Wales. Out of a total of 28,592
dwellings built in Scotland in i960, 6,656 (about 23 per cent) were for private owners.
In Northern Ireland, in the three years 1958-60, out of a total of 16,269 new houses, 7,306
were built for private owners.
HOUSING AND PLANNING
187
from rents rates and, where available, Exchequer subsidies. Local authorities may
rase loans for housmg etther in the open market or, where borrowing from private
sources cannot be effected at normal rates of interest, by borrowing from the Public
Works Loan Board (see p. 79).
The central departments have issued manuals of guidance setting standards of
space structure, design and equipment for different types of houses and flats provided
y public agencies, and describing how estates can be laid out attractively while saving
and and money, by the use of new and improved types of layout.
A number of new forms of construction for permanent houses have been developed
with practica encouragement from the Government during the experimental stage.
The typical family house is designed for a household of four or five persons and
contains one or two living-rooms and a kitchen, a store, a bathroom and water closet
and two or three bedrooms. To provide for the growing numbers of old people, though
a great deal remains to be done, a much higher proportion of smaller dwellings has been
uilt in recent years, in response to the encouragements of the Government’s policy
the percentage of local authority one-bedroom dwellings has risen from 7 per cent
in 1951 to 28-3 per cent in i960 in England and Wales and from 2-4 per cent to 18-1
per cent in Scotland.
The majority of new dwellings are houses (usually of two storeys) or bungalows*
the remainder are flats or maisonettes in blocks of from 2 to 13, and sometimes 21’
storeys. Most of the high blocks are built in central areas of cities, where densely
populated old unfit houses are being replaced. Others are in the new towns and other
areas of new housing where they counterbalance smaller-scale buildings to provide
a variety of types of accommodation at a moderate overall density.
Fhe typical 3-bedroom house built by a local authority in England and Wales in
19 o had a superficial area of just under 900 square feet and cost £1,611 to build.
Slum Clearance
Returns made by local housing authorities in 1955 indicated that there were about
0nj ,0n f Um dwellings in Great Britain which ought to be cleared. In England
and Wales about 850,000, or 6*5 per cent of all houses, and in Scotland over 150,000
about 10 per cent, were estimated to be unfit for human habitation and due for demoli¬
tion. In Northern Ireland the number of such houses was estimated in iqcc at
about 50,000.
In the five years 1956 to i960, local authorities in England and Wales demolished
or closed 255,000 unfit houses, involving about 750,000 occupants; while in Scotland
40,943 houses were demolished or closed during the same period. In Northern Ireland
2,338 dwellings were demolished or closed in the three-year period 1958-60.
WelJ over half the 1,469 housing authorities in England and Wales should have
completed their 1955 programmes by the end of 1965. Within the next 10 years the
great majority of them should have succeeded in getting rid of all their slums. In
certain areas, however, mainly the older industrial towns, and including Birmingham
Liverpool and Manchester, three of the biggest cities in the country, the proportion
ot unfit houses is so high that clearance will take much longer.
To help in those areas of Great Britain where the number of slum houses is so
arge that it would not be practicable to replace all of them within the next few years
local authorities can acquire houses unfit for human habitation and ‘patch’ them in
order that they may be occupied for a strictly limited period pending their demolition.
he intention is that these houses should be demolished as soon as possible: the
temporary repairs are not intended as an alternative to slum clearance. Exchequer
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
188
contributions are available to meet part of the costs of acquisition and essential
repairs.
Housing authorities are under a statutory obligation to see that other accommodation
exists, or can be provided by them, for persons to be displaced from slum clearance
areas. Where an unfit house is demolished by order of the local authority and the owner
retains his land, he normally receives no compensation. But if the local authorities
acquire an unfit property in order to demolish it themselves and to rebuild on the land,
the normal basis of compensation is the market value of the house as it stands or
the value of the site after clearance, whichever is the less. In England and Wales
there are, however, special provisions for owner-occupiers who bought between 1939
and 1955, and they receive full compensation regardless of whether the house is being
acquired by the authority or not; similar terms apply to business occupiers. The slum
clearance code also provides for special payments for the good maintenance of unfit
houses and business occupiers may receive hardship payments in certain cases. Hard¬
ship payments are not provided in Scotland, where the basis of compensation for
unfit houses is different; but payments in recognition of good maintenance are avail¬
able, as in England and Wales.
House Purchase Loans
Loans to enable persons to buy their houses by a system of instalment purchase
are available from various sources, including building societies, insurance companies,
industrial and provident societies, banks, and local authorities.
Building societies, of which there are about 750, are the most important of these
agencies. They do not themselves build houses; their chief activity is providing long¬
term loans on the security of houses bought for owner-occupation, whether newly
built or older houses, or houses under construction. Loans are usually repayable over
periods of 20 or even 30 years, by equal monthly instalments to cover capital and
interest. The societies’ funds are derived mainly from investment of relatively modest
sums by the general public.
Many local authorities also operate a scheme whereby, for a house costing up to
£2,500, they guarantee part of the loan made by a building society so that an advance
greater than normal (up to 95 per cent of the value of the house in some cases) may be
made to the purchaser. The Exchequer undertakes to share any liability local authorities
may incur under this scheme.
Under the House Purchase and Housing Act, 1959, the Government has powers to
advance money to building societies for re-lending to prospective purchasers of
older houses.
Local authorities have power to make loans under the Housing Acts for the
acquisition, conversion, improvement, repair and alteration of houses. Under the
House Purchase and Housing Act, 1959, they may now make loans of up to 100 per
cent of the house’s value, and there is no longer any restriction upon the value of
houses that can attract loans. (There is still a limit of £5,000 for loans made by local
authorities under the Small Dwellings Acquisition Acts, but authorities make wider
use of the more flexible alternative provisions in the Housing Acts.)
Building Subsidies and Improvement Grants
Housing subsidies, at varying rates and for varying purposes, have been provided
in Britain since 1919, when they were first introduced to facilitate the building of
houses for letting at moderate rents.
After the second world war subsidies at higher rates, payable annually for 60
HOUSING AND PLANNING
189
years from the year of building completion, were provided for all new housing accom¬
modation built with ministerial approval by the local authorities, by new towns
development corporations, or by housing associations under arrangements with
local authorities.
In England and Wales a standard rate of subsidy was paid for ordinary houses or
flats built to meet general needs, and higher rates of subsidy were provided for certain
types of housing (such as high blocks of flats on expensive sites), housing built for parti¬
cular purposes (for instance, for the agricultural population) and housing in special
areas (such as poor areas of low rate-paying capacity). Under the Housing Subsidies
Act, 1956* the standard subsidy on dwellings built for general needs was abolished,
except for onc-bedroom dwellings, on which it was retained to encourage the provision
of accommodation for elderly and single persons.
Further legislation on subsidies for new housing in England and Wales was con¬
tained in the Housing (Financial Provisions) Act, 195^* The categories of new building
by public bodies for which subsidies were available were: dwellings built for the
purpose of slum clearance rehousing, or for rehousing persons in unsatisfactory
temporary accommodation; housing for the population moved out of a congested
area (for example, to a new town or as part of an approved scheme of town development)
or moving to meet the urgent needs of industry; dwellings otherwise unsubsidised
with not more than one bedroom; housing provided to meet the needs of the agricul¬
tural population; housing on expensive sites, or where measures have to be taken
against subsidence, or to preserve the character of the surroundings; and housing in
areas where more accommodation is urgently required than could be provided by the
local authority without imposing an unreasonably heavy burden on the local rates or
necessitating the charging of unreasonably high rents. On flats, higher rates of subsidy
were paid for blocks of four or more storeys. There was also a subsidy available to
private persons building houses for agricultural workers.
The changes in subsidies in England and Wales announced in the Government
White Paper of 1961 and implemented by the Housing Act, 1961, mean a reversion
to the principle of providing a general subsidy on all types of housing. However,
the allocation of the revised subsidies takes more account of the varying financial
resources of housing authorities and makes provision for the payment of an increased
subsidy of £24 for every house built by authorities with inadequate resources and a
lower one of £8 for those completed by other authorities. The additional subsidy for
dwellings in tall blocks is retained and a discretionary supplement, similar to that
introduced in 1956, of £30 a house for authorities in great financial difficulties, is
raised to £40.
Local authorities and private owners in England and Wales can obtain Exchequer
assistance for the improvement of existing houses or adaptation of buildings for
housing. Cash grants can be made by local authorities, with Exchequer assistance, to
persons converting or improving existing buildings for housing at a cost of over £100
per dwelling. The grants may amount to half the cost, with a maximum grant of
£400 for each dwelling. There are certain technical conditions which the dwellings
as improved or converted must fulfil, to ensure that public money is only spent on
property that will provide satisfactory accommodation for a sufficiently long period.
Grants for similar work in houses owned by local authorities may also be paid by the
minister, but on an annual basis over 20 years. In either case, the payment of grant is
at the discretion of the local authority, or the minister, as the case may be. Local
housing authorities are, however, obliged to make grants called ‘standard grants’, for
the provision in houses of a bath in a bathroom, hot-water supply, water closet, wash
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
190
basin, and food store; these cash grants are to cover half the cost of the work, subject
to a maximum grant of ^155 or smaller sums if not all of the five items are needed.
Similarly the minister is obliged to make standard grants to local authorities, but again
on an annual basis over 20 years. The Acts under which these improvement grants are
now available are the Housing (Financial Provisions) Act, 1958, and the House
Purchase and Housing Act, 1959. In i960 some 130,000 improvement grants were made.
Building subsidies and improvement grants are also provided in Scotland and
Northern Ireland; the amounts of subsidy are generally higher owing to different
circumstances. In Scotland there is a subsidy of £24 per house per year for houses
built by public authorities to meet general needs, with higher rates of subsidy for
those for special purposes (such as overspill, incoming industry, agricultural workers).
Grants are also available to local authorities and private owners for the improvement
or conversion of existing properties, and to private owners for the provision of new
houses for farm workers. In Northern Ireland annual subsidies are paid to local
authorities, the Northern Ireland Housing Trust1 and housing associations; in
addition, ‘lump sum’ subsidies are paid to private persons who build houses for letting
or for owner-occupation. Grants are available for the provision of new houses and for
the reconditioning of existing premises to accommodate farmers and approved
workers.
The average annual cost of housing subsidies in the United Kingdom has been over
£100 million since 1954, some three-quarters of the total being paid by the Exchequer
and about a quarter by local authorities.
Control of Rents
The first Act of Parliament to restrict rents was passed in 1915, when houses were
in short supply because of war-time movement of population. Rent control was originally
intended as a temporary measure, but was retained by successive Acts until 1957.
During this period nearly all privately owned houses let unfurnished were subject to
a system of rent control which gave the tenant a fixed rent and security of tenure.
Since 1954 control has not applied to houses owned by local authorities or charities,
nor does it affect farmhouses let with land, and some other minor categories of houses.
Since 1954 the Government has pursued a policy of progressive abolition of rent
control on the grounds that the previous system was leading to deterioration and to
wasteful use of the nation’s stock of housing. The Rent Act, 1957, released from
rent control all dwellings with a rateable value over £40 in the London Metropolitan
Police District and in Scotland and over ^30 elsewhere; it also freed from control all
new tenancy agreements entered into after 6th July, 1957. This Act also provided for
the decontrol from time to time of further categories of houses by order, subject to
approval by Parliament. For those houses remaining within control, it laid down a
maximum rent which was more in keeping with the current value of money and the
costs of maintenance. Security of tenure for controlled tenants is retained under the
Act; a controlled tenant cannot be forced to give up possession except by a Court
order, which will not be granted unless the Court is satisfied that this is reasonable
and, with some exceptions, that suitable alternative accommodation is available for the
tenant.
Where houses or parts of houses within the rateable value limits for rent control are
let with furniture or services provided by the landlord, a different system of control
1 The Northern Ireland Housing Trust, a statutory body, was established in 1945 to erect
houses for letting, to supplement building by local authorities. The Trust has built about a
quarter of Northern Ireland’s post-war houses.
HOUSING AND PLANNING
191
operates. If the tenant feels he is being overcharged, he can apply to a rent tribunal to
review his rent. These tribunals are appointed and maintained by the Government
(Minister of Housing and Local Government) but are independent, quasi-judicial
bodies, from whose decisions there is no appeal, except on a point of law. The tribunal
decides in^ each case what is a fair rent to fix for the accommodation and services
provided. The rent so fixed is registered with the local authority for the district, and
any subsequent overcharging by the landlord is a punishable offence.
Somewhat similar measures of control and de-control apply in Northern Ireland.
In 1951 legislation was passed which permitted prescribed increases in the rent of
controlled houses, provided that they were maintained in good repair; and the Housing
(Miscellaneous Provisions) and Rent Restriction Law (Amendment) Act (Northern
Ireland), 1956, permitted an increase of one-third in the rent levels fixed by the
1951 Act where the landlord had recently incurred expenditure of a certain amount
on repairs. The 1956 Act also released from control houses with a net annual value
of over ^50 (with certain safeguards) and houses with a net annual value of over
^26 of which the landlord was in actual possession when the Act came into force,
or of which he subsequently obtained possession.
TOWN AND COUNTRY PLANNING
Britain is one of the most densely populated areas in the world and it is essential to
plan land use if a satisfactory national distribution of employment and population is
to be secured, agriculture safeguarded, the amenities of the countryside preserved, and
the improvement of the places where people live and work sustained.
From 1909 onwards, successive Acts of Parliament recognised the principle of the
planned use of land, but because the pattern of development over much of the country
had already hardened into large unplanned urban concentrations (as a result of
industrial expansion in the previous century) the powers granted to planning authorities
were inadequate for the task in hand.
The twenty years between the two world wars were decades of expansion in industry,
engineering, house-building, and motor transport; the population was increasing and
becoming more mobile; there was a general movement towards better standards of
living, and consequently a greater need for systematic planning than had hitherto been
required. At the beginning of the nineteen-thirties a major effort was made to con¬
solidate and strengthen planning law and to extend the planning powers of central
and local authorities to the point at which they could exercise effective control. Despite
this effort, which culminated in the Town and Country Planning Act, 1932, inter¬
war planning legislation had only a limited effect, mainly because it failed to deal
adequately with the financial problems involved. Planning inevitably confers certain
values on certain property and, at the same time, restricts the value of other property.
This gives rise to injustices between one individual and another, and to conflicts
between private interests and the public interest, which no method of compensation
and betterment (a charge payable by a person whose property is enhanced in value by
development or proposed development) has been able to resolve entirely. In the
nineteen-thirties local authorities often hesitated to exercise their powers effectively
for fear of being involved in compensation liabilities beyond their means; therefore, in
spite of improved sanitary and environmental conditions and some progress in
preserving amenities, much unregulated urban development and spoliation of the
countryside continued to take place.
Renewed efforts to tackle these problems were made immediately before and
192
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
during the second world war. Between 1937 and 1942 three expert committees were
appointed to study and report upon (1) the unregulated growth and spread of industry,
(2) the hampering of planning by the financial and administrative difficulties of
compensation and betterment and (3) the encroachment of urban development upon
the countryside. After the war, other committees studied the question of new towns
and national parks.
Almost all the principal planning recommendations of these committees have now
been incorporated in Acts of Parliament, as follows: the Distribution of Industry
Acts, 1945 and 1950; the New Towns Acts, 1946 and 1959; the Town and Country
Planning Acts, 1947 to 1959; the National Parks and Access to the Countryside Act,
1949; the Town Development Act, 1952; the Housing and Town Development
(Scotland) Act, 1957; and the Caravan Site and Control of Development Act, i960.
Town and country planning in Northern Ireland is governed by the Planning and
Housing Act (Northern Ireland), 1931; the Planning (Interim Development) Act
(Northern Ireland), 1944; and the Planning Acts Amendment Act (Northern Ireland),
1944.
Planning in Great Britain
The Town and Country Planning Act, 1947, and the Town and Country Planning
(Scotland) Act, 1947, are the principal Acts that govern the pattern of land use in
Great Britain. They provide for the co-ordination of planning by means of develop¬
ment plans drawn up by local planning authorities and approved by the Minister of
Housing and Local Government or the Secretary of State for Scotland; and they
control development by making it subject, generally, to the permission of a local
planning authority or of a central Government department. They also give extensive
powers to public authorities to acquire and develop land for planning purposes,
provide for grants from public funds towards the cost of major redevelopment schemes,
and deal with certain questions of amenity, for instance, the preservation of buildings
of special historic or architectural interest, and of trees and woodlands, and the control
of advertisement display.
Compensation for loss of development value through the refusal of planning
permission is paid by the Government according to a formula laid down in the 1954
Town and Country Planning Acts. Compensation to owners whose land is compul¬
sorily purchased is paid by the acquiring authorities, the amount being based (under
the Town and Country Planning Acts, 1959) on the price the land might have fetched
if sold in the open market, with safeguards for local authorities against paying for
value brought about by their own activities and for owners against depreciation which
the threat of public acquisition might cause. In general, expenditure on planning
purposes (other than schemes of major redevelopment) is taken into account in the
amount of the general grant paid to local authorities under the Local Government
Act, 1958, and the Local Government and Miscellaneous Financial Provisions
(Scotland) Act, 1958.
Development Plans
Local planning authorities (in England and Wales, the councils of counties and
county boroughs and, in some areas, joint planning boards; and in Scotland, councils
of counties and of large burghs, and the councils of the two small burghs of St. Andrews
and Thurso) are required to prepare and submit development plans covering the whole
of their areas to the Minister of Housing and Local Government and to the Secretary
of State for Scotland respectively. Each development plan is expressed by maps and
HOUSING AND PLANNING
193
a written statement describing the major projects in the plan, supplemented by a
report or survey (comprising maps and a written analysis) which gives the background
to the plan in terms of existing land use, communications and similar matters. Fresh
surveys must be carried out every five years and plans may be extended and altered
at any time, so that they may be kept up to date. Local authorities must advertise their
plans wmen they submit them for approval, and the ministers concerned must consider
objections and representations from the public and, when necessary, arrange for
local inquiries to be held. Once a plan has been approved, it cannot be challenged
except on the grounds that it is ultra vires or that statutory requirements have not
been tulfilled.
By 1961 most planning authorities had submitted their plans, many of which had
been approved wholly or in part. Many authorities had also submitted amendments
and additions to their original plans and several had submitted their first five-yearly
review. The need to preserve open country round large towns has been constantly
emphasised by the central authorities and a number of proposals for the maintenance
or extension of green belts had been put forward for incorporation in approved
development plans. Planning authorities have also been urged to provide more land for
evelopment beyond green belts and to make more intensive use of land within
existing towns.
The Distribution of Industry
The Town and Country Planning Acts, 1947, and the Local Employment Act, i960,
contain provisions relating to the location of industry. General problems of industrial
development are dealt with jointly by a number of Government departments, but the
main responsibility for dealing with the siting of industry, as apart from its general
location, rests with the local planning authorities, for it is their duty, subject to the
consent of the Board of Trade, to ensure that industrial development fits properly
into existing and expanding communities and is consistent with the best use of
land.
New Towns
The New Towns Act, 1946, gives the Minister of Housing and Local Govern¬
ment and the Secretary of State for Scotland, who are the responsible ministers,
powers to make an order designating any area of land (which may include as its’
nucleus the area of an existing town) as the site of a proposed new town, after con¬
sultation with the local authorities concerned and if it is in the public interest to
do so. Once the site has been designated, the responsible minister appoints a develop¬
ment corporation (consisting of a chairman and up to eight other members) to be
responsible for the development of the new town. A master plan is then prepared, and
this becomes the basis for development proposals, each of which covers a part of the
area. Every proposal is submitted to the responsible minister, who must consult the
local planning authority and, together with the Treasury, be satisfied with the proposal
on economic grounds before giving approval.
The development corporations have powers in general (subject to the consent of
the Minister of Housing and Local Government or the Secretary of State for Scotland)
to acquire, by agreement or compulsory purchase, any land or property in the designated
areas which is necessary for their purposes, and they may provide housing, commercial
and industrial premises, estate roads and other buildings or services essential for the
development of the towns. In England and Wales, the Minister of Housing and Local
Government has made a special development order to exempt the development
i94
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
corporations from having to obtain planning permission from the local planning
authorities; in Scotland the Secretary of State has made a similar order in respect of
Cumbernauld new town.
The capital cost of developing the new towns is advanced to the corporations from
public funds and must be repaid on terms approved by the ministers with the con¬
currence of the Treasury. Many of the towns are now making a profit on land and
buildings, but most have an accumulated debt in respect of early heavy expenditure
on the provision of roads and such services as water supplies and sewerage, which will
take some time to repay. The corporations must submit annual reports (which must
include copies of their audited accounts) to the Minister of Housing and Local
Government or to the Secretary of State for Scotland, who are responsible for laying
them before Parliament.
As each new town in England and Wales is substantially completed (a point which
has almost been reached in some towns), the development corporation will be dissolved
and, under the terms of the New Towns Act, 1959, its assets and liabilities will be
handed over to a central agency—the Commission for New Towns. The commission,
which came into being on 1st October, 1961, will operate during the period of new
town consolidation and will be responsible for maintaing and enhancing the value of
the land entrusted to it with due regard to the purpose for which the towns were
developed and the convenience and welfare of the people working there. No new towns
commission is proposed for Scotland, where new town development is at a less advanced
stage.
There are fifteen new towns in Great Britain—twelve in England and Wales and
three in Scotland. Eight of the new towns in England and Wales—Basildon and
Harlow in Essex; Hemel Hempstead, Stevenage, Hatfield and Welwyn in
Hertfordshire; Crawley in Sussex; and Bracknell in Berkshire—are designed to
help in absorbing excess population from the Greater London area; four others—
Corby in Northamptonshire; Aycliffe and Peterlee in Durham; and Cwmbran in
Monmouthshire—are to serve the special needs of their areas. The Scottish new towns
—East Kilbride in Lanarkshire, Glenrothes in Fife and Cumbernauld in Dunbarton¬
shire—are being established to assist in housing the surplus population from Glasgow,
as will the fourth new town, to be designated before the end of 1961, in the Midlothian-
West Lothian area. Sites for other new towns in England are under consideration:
one at Skelmersdale in Lancashire to supplement the provision already being made for
Merseyside overspill, and one at Dawley in Shropshire.
The new towns are generally recognised as one of the most successful experiments
of the post-war years, industrially, financially, and socially, and they represent a
notable achievement in the translation of planning into reality. By the end of June
1961, the total population of the new towns in England and Wales, designed to be
550,000 when the towns are completed, had reached an estimated total of 431,100
including the people previously living in the area. More than 93,370 new houses had
been built or were being built by the corporations; some 401 factories had been
established and 43 were being erected; 651,400 square feet of office accommoda¬
tion had been provided; 1,850 new shops had been opened and 140 more were
being built; and 165 schools had been completed. By the same date, 20 new health
centres were in use, two new general hospitals were completed and a third was being
built; extensive works had been carried out to provide roads, water supplies, sewerage
and additional gas and electricity supplies; and more police, fire and bus stations, as
well as extra postal telegraph and telephone services were being provided.
In most of the towns the new centres had taken or were taking shape, and although
HOUSING AND PLANNING
I95
provision for entertainment still lagged, particularly commercial entertainment for
young people, facilities for communal activities had increased. Approximate total
figures for certain amenities, including temporary buildings and some which are
adequate for limited use only, are (in England and Wales): 220 halls for hire; 48 com¬
munity centres, 96 churches and church halls; 21 public libraries; 31 health centres
and clinics, and 55 public houses. Public open spaces, parks and playing fields are
provided in most of the towns.
In the Scottish new towns, at the end of June 1961, the population, eventually to
be 170,000, had reached 52,534; 12,335 houses had been built, with a further 2,248
under construction, 47 firms occupied 2,305,000 sq. ft. of factory space and a further
402,600 sq. ft. were being built; 147 shops had been completed and 15 were under
construction; 16 new schools were in use, and the extension of communications,
public services and communal amenities was under way.
Under the New Towns Act, 1946, Parliament approved a consolidated fund of
£,5® million to provide for advances to the development corporations for work on
the new towns. This fund was increased by subsequent Acts and, under the 1959 Act,
stood at £400 million.
Town Development Schemes and War-damaged Cities
The Town Development Act, 1952, makes provision for the relief of congestion in
large industrial towns by encouraging the transfer of population and industry from
these areas to appropriate country districts in England and Wales. By the beginning of
1961, as a result of a series of agreements between local authorities, nearly 10,000
houses had been built or were under construction (with a further 21,000 projected) in
the fourteen expanding towns around London where the target is to provide homes and
jobs for some 31,000 London families; and nearly 10,000 houses had been built (with
a further 24,000 projected) for overspill from large provincial cities. By the same date
108 factories had been built or were under construction, covering an area of over
4 million square feet in the London expanding towns. In addition, the Ministry of
Housing and Local Government had approved the establishment of a county council
new town at North Killingworth, near Newcastle upon Tyne, to provide homes and
work for some of the overspill population of Newcastle and Wallsend.
The Housing and Town Development (Scotland) Act, 1957, makes similar provision
for Scotland, and agreements have been made between Glasgow and town and county
councils providing for over 7,000 houses for Glasgow families.
Individual plans for the reconstruction of areas of extensive war damage have
also been drawn up and approved and the central areas of several provincial cities
(for instance Bristol, Coventry, Exeter, Kingston upon Hull, Portsmouth, Plymouth,
and Southampton), have been almost entirely rebuilt. In the county of London,
some 6J- square miles of comprehensive redevelopment should be finished within the
next ten years; while in the City of London, projects valued at about £79 million
had been completed by the end of June 1961. The redevelopment of outworn and
obsolete areas is also taking place in many towns: Glasgow, for example, has started a
progrogramme of rebuilding 29 areas, housing nearly a third of the population and
accommodating much of the industry and commerce of the city. Detailed proposals
for three of these areas have been approved and the work of clearance and rebuilding
is well advanced in one of them—the Gorbals area.
National Parks and Access to the Countryside
The National Parks and Access to the Countryside Act, 1949, provided that certain
areas of beautiful country in England and Wales should become national parks, where
196
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
the characteristic landscape would be safeguarded and facilities for open-air recreation
provided or improved.
A National Parks Commission was set up by the Act and its work has resulted in
the establishment of ten national parks: the Peak District, the Lake District, Snowdonia
in North Wales, Dartmoor in Devon, the Pembrokeshire Coast, the North York Moors,
the Yorkshire Dales, Exmoor in Devon and Somerset, Northumberland (comprising
most of the upland country from the Cheviots in the north to the Roman Wall in the
south), and the Brecon Beacons in South Wales. These parks cover a total area of
5,254 square miles, almost one-eleventh of the area of England and Wales, and have
various forms of administration: for the Peak District and Lake District National Parks,
for example, there arejoint planning boards; for Dartmoor, the Pembrokeshire Coast, the
North York Moors and Northumberland, special park planning committees of the
appropriate county councils have been set up; while in Snowdonia, the Yorkshire
Dales, Exmoor and the Brecon Beacons (which include areas of more than one county
council) there are park planning committees of each of the constituent county councils,
advised by a park joint advisory committee concerned with the park as a whole. All
these authorities control development in the parks and take such action as they deem
necessary to enhance their natural beauty and to promote enjoyment of them by the
public. For instance, derelict land is reclaimed and trees are planted to screen
blemishes on the landscape; unsightly structures are removed, new building is made
to harmonise with the natural surroundings, advertisement displays are reduced,
and car parks and camping sites are provided in suitable localities. Government
grants at the rate of 75 per cent are available towards certain approved expenditure
on improvements.
The National Parks Commission has power to designate other areas in England and
Wales as ‘areas of outstanding natural beauty’ in order to keep them unspoiled. By
the end of June 1961, 12 of these areas had been established and a further eight
were under consideration. Those established are Gower, Quantock Hills, Lleyn,
Surrey Hills, Northumberland Coast, Dorset, Cannock Chase, Shropshire Hills,
Malvern Hills, and parts of Cornwall and of the North and South Devon coasts and
hinterland. In these areas government grants are available for certain measures taken
to enhance natural beauty.
Designation of a park or area of outstanding natural beauty does not, of itself, mean
that the general public has right of access. Local planning authorities must survey the
extent to which land is already open to the public, and may increase it, where desirable,
by means of agreements with owners or by access orders. Government grants are
available towards the cost of making such agreements or orders and in the Peak District
large tracts of country have been opened to the public in this way.
A survey of all footpaths and bridleways in England and Wales is being made by
local authorities as a comprehensive national record of public rights of way; and in
some areas existing footpaths and bridleways are being linked to form long-distance
routes, which will become continuous rights of way for travellers on foot or on horse¬
back. Responsibility for making proposals for long-distance routes rests with the
National Parks Commission; once the proposals are approved by the Minister of
Housing and Local Government, it falls to the local authorities to give effect to them.
By the end of June 1961 the National Parks Commission’s proposals for the creation
of seven routes, covering 1,028 miles, had been approved; progress had been made by
means of surveys, cairn building and footpath agreements, towards their completion;
and discussions were taking place between the commission and the relevant local
authorities regarding the establishment of more routes of this kind.
housing and planning
197
National Forest Parks
The Forestry Commission has formed, and opened to the public, seven National
Forest Parks in Great Britain: Argyll, Glen Trool, Glen More, and the Queen Elizabeth
Forest Park in Scotland; the Forest of Dean in England; Snowdonia in Wales and the
Border Forest Park (adjoining the Northumberland National Park to the westward),
which includes forests on the borders of Northumberland and Cumberland in England
and of Roxburgh in Scotland. The total area of the seven parks is rather less than half a
million acres, including planted areas and unplantable moorland and mountains.
Camping facilities are provided in all the forest parks.
The historic New Forest, in Hampshire, although not a National Forest Park, is
also open to the public.
Nature Conservation
The responsibility for nature conservation rests with the Nature Conservancy,
which derives its powers from the National Parks and Access to the Countryside Act,
I949- The object of conservation is to influence soils, water, vegetation and animal
life by means of research, experiment and control, and it entails the acquisition and
management of a representative series of reserves, as well as the establishment of
laboratories for use in long-term research schemes and the making of grants-in-aid
for specified research.
Eighty-five nature reserves, 46 of which have already had comprehensive manage¬
ment plans prepared for them, had been declared in Great Britain by the end of June
1961. The combined area was 140,354 acres, of which 39,689 acres comprise the
Cairngorms, the largest reserve in Britain and one of the largest in Europe. Seven other
areas (mostly in the north) are managed by local authorities, using their powers under
the National Parks Act, in consultation with the conservancy.
Seven forest nature reserves have been set up; of these, six have been created by
agreement between the Forestry Commission and the Nature Conservancy and consist
of forest land managed under joint supervision in the interests of nature conservancy
and forestry. A similar arrangement has been made with the Crown Estate Commis¬
sioners, by which a 45-acre area is being managed in the interests of nature conservation
and ecological research.
The unofficial and voluntary counterpart of the Nature Conservancy is the Council
for Nature, established in 1958 on the initiative of the Society for the Promotion of
Nature Reserves. The council represents the interests of both national and local
natural history societies (at present over 230 such societies are members) and the
importance of its work is recognised in the substantial grants made by the Ministry of
Education, the British Broadcasting Corporation and the Carnegie United Kingdom
Trust. The council’s Conservation Corps consists of young people who carry out
practical tasks of nature reserve management, such as the clearance of scrub and the
opening up of blocked waterways. Its Intelligence Unit acts as an information bureau
on all aspects of natural history in the British Isles, issues a monthly press bulletin of
natural history news, and edits the council’s half-yearly bulletin, News for Naturalists.
The unit’s Films Officer organises training courses for amateur cinematographers
interested in making natural history films.
Preservation of Amenities
Responsibility for the preservation of the historic, scenic and architectural beauties
of Great Britain is vested mainly in the Minister of Housing and Local Government,
the Secretary of State for Scotland, and the various statutory planning authorities
198
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
and commissions. The Ministry of Works is also concerned as the department respon¬
sible for the maintenance of royal parks and palaces, for the protection of ancient
monuments (under the Ancient Monuments Acts), and for making grants (on the
recommendation of the appropriate Historic Buildings Council) for the repair and
maintenance of buildings of outstanding historic or architectural interest or their
contents and for the upkeep of adjoining land. About 600 of the 10,000 most important
protected monuments listed in Britain (ranging from prehistoric remains to nineteenth
century buildings) are in the care of the ministry; and, by the beginning of 1961
grants totalling over £3 million had been offered and accepted towards the cost of
urgently needed repairs to 765 historic buildings in England, Scotland and Wales.
Unofficial amenity societies, wholly dependent upon the support of their members,
include: the Council for the Preservation of Rural England, founded in 1926 to
organise concerted action to secure the protection of rural scenery and of town and
country amenities from disfigurement or injury; the Association for the Preservation
of Rural Scotland, founded in 1927 for the protection of rural scenery and of the
amenities of country districts and towns and villages in Scotland; the Commons,
Open Spaces and Footpaths Preservation Society; the Ramblers’ Association; the
Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings; the Pilgrim Trust; the National Trust
for Places of Historic Interest or Natural Beauty in England, Wales and Northern
Ireland; and the National Trust for Scotland. The National Trust for England, Wales
and Northern Ireland (which was founded in 1895 and by mid-1961 had some 103,000
members) is (apart from the Crown) the largest land-owner in the United Kingdom.
It has acquired, mainly through gifts, over a thousand properties, which it holds for the
enjoyment of the public; it administers more than 250,000 acres of land of great
natural beauty; and it owns many fine gardens. The National Trust for Scotland, an
independent body, founded in 1931 to promote the preservation of places of historic
or architectural interest or of natural beauty in Scotland for the benefit of the public,
now has about 18,000 members and has under its care over 60 properties, covering in
all over 70,000 acres.
Planning in Northern Ireland
The Planning and Housing Act (Northern Ireland), 1931, which is the main source
from which power to prepare a planning scheme is derived, provides for the preparation
by local authorities of planning schemes for development or redevelopment of their
areas, with the general object of securing proper sanitary conditions and amenities
in connection with the laying out and use of land. The Interim Development Act of
1944 enables persons wishing to carry out development to do so without delay, while
ensuring that such development shall conform to the provisions likely to be included
in the planning scheme for the area.
The provisions of the Acts brought all land in Northern Ireland under planning
control and required every local authority to prepare a planning scheme for its area.
Interim control is exercised in accordance with the section of the 1944 Act which
requires that, where application is made to an authority for permission to develop,
the authority may grant the application conditionally or unconditionally or may
refuse it altogether. In the event of a refusal or conditional approval, the applicant
has a right to appeal to the Ministry of Health and Local Government for Northern
Ireland (which is the department primarily responsible for the administration of the
planning Acts) to have the matter determined by the ministry or, if the appellant wishes,
by an independent person appointed by the ministry.
Local planning authorities in Northern Ireland have made appreciable progress
HOUSING AND PLANNING
J99
in the preparation of outline plans which indicate broadly the proposals for their
areas, thus providing a foundation for the preparation of more detailed plans at a later
s age and facilitating materially the work of interim development control. In January
1961 an interim report recommending six areas outside Belfast in which public
aut orities might build houses for Belfast families was published, as part of a Govern¬
ment-sponsored plan for the Belfast region. Sites for about 5,000 houses could be
provided in these areas.
Northern Ireland Forest Park
Northern Ireland’s first forest park at Tollymore Park, Newcastle, County Down
was opened to the public in 1955. Situated at the foot of the Mountains of Mourne’
it covers an area of 1,200 acres. It contains an arboretum comprising a wide variety
of native and exotic trees, and is rich in mountain, river and parkland scenery. Caravan
facilities and a camping site for youth organisations are available.
VII. THE CHURCHES
Every person living in Britain possesses the right of religious freedom as described
in Article 18 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights: he may change his
religion at will, and may manifest his faith in teaching, worship and observance
without interference from the community or the State. Churches and religious societies
of all kinds may own property, conduct schools, and propagate their beliefs in speech
and in writing.
Freedom of conscience in religious matters was achieved gradually from the seven¬
teenth century onwards; in many cases, relaxation in the administration of laws
discriminating against minority religious groups preceded the repeal of the legislation
concerned. Heresy ceased to be a civil offence with the passing of the Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction Act, 1677, and the Toleration Act of 1688 granted freedom of worship
to Protestant dissenters. In 1828, the repeal of the Test and Corporation Acts freed
nonconformists from political disabilities and made it possible for them to be appointed
to public offices; Roman Catholics gained political emancipation under the Roman
Catholic Relief Act, 1829; the Jewish Relief Act, 1858, enabled Jews to become members
of Parliament; while religious tests that had been imposed on prospective students
and members of the academic staff of the universities of Oxford, Cambridge and
Durham were successively abolished by Acts of 1854, 1856 and 1871. Nowadays, there
is no religious or denominational bar to the holding of public office, except that the
Lord Chancellor may not be a Roman Catholic.
In the services administered by the State, such as the armed forces, the national
hospitals, and the prisons, the clergy of the established Church of England or the
Church of Scotland provide the principal ministrations and are paid a salary by the
State for this part of their work. Priests of the Roman Catholic Church and ministers
of other denominations may also be appointed or specially called in as required.
Voluntary schools (see p. 165) provided by churches of any religious denomination
may be wholly or partly maintained from public funds.
There is no precisely accurate or uniform method of assessing the number of
adherents to the various churches in the United Kingdom, since no inquiries are
made about religious beliefs in population censuses or other official returns, and each
church adopts different criteria in counting its members. The membership figures
given in the following sections should therefore be taken as approximate.
Church of England
The Church of England is the Established Church, and claims to be the ancient
catholic church of the land. At the Reformation in the sixteenth century, it repudiated
the supremacy of the Pope, but retained the historic episcopate, and the creeds and
sacraments upon which its doctrines are based; therefore it claims to be both ‘catholic’
and ‘reformed’. Its form of worship is embodied in the Book of Common Prayer,
which was first compiled in 1549.
In England the relationship of Church and State is one of mutual obligation-
privileges are accorded to the Church which are balanced by certain duties which it
must fulfil.
200
THE CHURCHES
201
The Church is uniquely related to the Crown, in that the Sovereign, who must be
a member of the Church of England, is called ‘Defender of the Faith' (a statutory
Utle as protector of the Church) and promises on his or her accession to uphold it.
The coronation of the Sovereign is performed by the Archbishop of Canterbury,
Primate of all England; prayers for the Sovereign and other members of the royal
family are said in all the statutory services of the Church; Church of England arch¬
bishops bishops and other senior ecclesiastical dignitaries as well as incumbents of
Crown livings are appointed by the Sovereign on the advice of the Prime Minister-
and all clergymen take the oath of allegiance to the Crown.
The Church is further linked with the State through the House of Lords, in which
the two archbishops of Canterbury and York and the twenty-four senior diocesan
bishops have seats. This makes it possible for the views of the Church leaders to be
expressed freely on any moral issue raised in connection with the corporate conduct
of the State as well as on specifically ecclesiastical issues—a matter of particular
significance in view of the fact that the clergy of the Church of England (together
with those of the Church of Scotland, the Church of Ireland and the Roman Catholic
Church) are legally disqualified from sitting in the House of Commons.
The Church is not free to change its form of worship, as laid down in the Book of
Common Prayer, without the consent of Parliament; canon laws (Church rules)
cannot be made or amended without the consent of the Queen in Council; and the
measures of the Church Assembly (as distinct from their regulations) are not valid
without parliamentary assent.
Church Organisation and Government
The Church of England is organised by geographical areas, and not by congregations.
There are 43 dioceses (with the Isle of Man and the Channel Islands) each under
a bishop, grouped into two provinces, each under an archbishop: Canterbury (20
dioceses) and York (14 dioceses). The dioceses are sub-divided into ecclesiastical
parishes, of which there were 14,636 in 1959. Everyone in England is born in a parish,
and the parish church is expected to play an active part in local life. Many people
who do not attend its services regularly tend to look to it for such personal ministrations
as baptism, marriage and burial. The baptised membership of the Church is about
27 million, i.e. two-thirds of the population born and resident in the two provinces.
. SPirituaI authority in the Church rests with the bishops. The authoritative bodies
m matters of doctrine, belief and practice are the Convocations of Canterbury and
York, each presided over by its archbishop, and consisting of an upper house of
bishops, and a lower house of representatives of each cathedral chapter, archdeacons
and elected clergy. The Convocations meet not oftener than three times a year.
The legislative and central administrative body of the Church is the National
Assembly of the Church of England, which is commonly called the Church Assembly.
It was set up by the Crown in 1919 at the request of the two Convocations, and was
given power to legislate by measure by the Church of England Assembly (Powers)
Act of 1919. It can discuss any matter connected with the Church of England, but
may not make any doctrinal statements, nor infringe upon the rights of the Convo¬
cations. It consists of three houses: bishops, clergy and laity. The first two houses
are composed of the members of the Convocations; the house of laity consists of men
and women elected every five years by the lay members of diocesan conferences, and
the constitution allows for ten co-opted members.
The Church Assembly usually meets three times a year. Measures, after passing
through various stages in the assembly, are presented to an ecclesiastical committee
202
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
of both Houses of Parliament, consisting of 30 members, of whom 15 are appointed
by the Lord Chancellor and 15 by the Speaker of the House of Commons. This
committee lays the measures, together with a report upon them, before both Houses.
If both Houses so resolve, the measure is sent to the Sovereign for Royal Assent,
after which it has the same force and effect as an Act of Parliament. Parliament, though
it may reject a measure, has no power to amend it.
The Church Assembly is the centre of an administrative system consisting of
boards and councils dealing with various aspects of the Church’s work, such as
education, training for the ministry, and Church work at home and overseas. The
Church Assembly, through the Schools Council of its Board of Education, is responsible
for some 8,000 Church of England schools of all types, for approximately half of which
the Church bears a quarter of the cost of improvements, alterations and repairs.
Parochial church councils were set up in 1921 to associate the laity with
the government of the Church in the parish. The members of these councils are
appointed by the parochial electors, i.e. persons who are baptised, are not members
of any other church, are 17 years of age and over, and have applied for membership
of the electoral roll of the parish where they habitually reside or worship. The estimated
number on the parish electoral rolls in 1959 was just under three million.
The Church of England has its own ecclesiastical courts. Their jurisdiction, as
it is exercised today, consists almost entirely of faculty cases, with occasional cases
of discipline against clergy, either for moral or ecclesiastical offences. A faculty is
necessary for any specific alteration or addition to the fabric or ornaments of a church
or to a churchyard.
The Church has 26 church training colleges for teachers1 and 26 theological colleges.
Church Finance
Each parish is responsible for its own finances, and also contributes an annual
apportioned quota to diocesan funds, and each diocese similarly contributes to the
Church Assembly. In the diocese, the financial authority is the diocesan board
of finance, which administers the money contributed by the parishes, and acts as
trustee on behalf of the parochial church councils, which have only limited powers of
holding property. The Church Assembly Fund and various other central funds
(including that for the training of ordination candidates) are administered by the
Central Board of Finance of the Church of England. The State makes no payment
to the Church except for services rendered (for example, chaplaincies to the armed
forces and in prisons). The income from all sources of 14,244 parochial church
councils in 1958 was ^18,592,144.
The Church Commissioners, a body created by measure in 1947 to replace the
former Ecclesiastical Commissioners and Queen Anne’s Bounty, administers the
endowment income of the Church. It is largely responsible for the payment of stipends
of the clergy, and it also provides finance for pensions, new churches, parsonage
houses, and church schools. The Commissioners’ income from investments has
doubled during the past thirteen years; in broad terms, this means that the stipends
of the poorer clergy have been doubled over the same period with smaller increases for
the less poor, and that the Commissioners have been able to embark on large-scale
assistance for providing better parsonage houses, for church buildings in new areas of
population, and for better pensions for clergy and their widows.
1 A programme of expansion of church training colleges, which included an increase in the
number of students from nearly 5,000 to nearly 8,000 and the building of a new college, was
approved by the Church Assembly in 1959.
THE CHURCHES
203
The Anglican Communion
The Anglican Communion comprises 17 autonomous churches in the United
Kingdom and overseas, with a total membership of over 40 million.
In the United Kingdom, in addition to the established Church of England, there
are unestablished Anglican Churches in Ireland, Scotland and Wales: the Church of
Ireland (disestablished in 1869) has 14 dioceses in Northern Ireland and the Irish
Republic, and some 354,000 members; the Episcopal Church in Scotland, 7 dioceses,
377 churches and some 108,000 members; and the Church in Wales (disestablished
in 1920), 6 dioceses and some 200,000 Easter communicants.
Outside the United Kingdom, the Anglican Communion exists wherever English¬
men have gone as settlers, traders and missionaries. The Protestant Episcopal Church
in the United States of America, the Church of India, Pakistan, Burma and Ceylon,
and the Anglican Churches of South Africa, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, the
West Indies, China, Japan, West Africa and Central Africa are all autonomous
members of the Anglican Communion. In the Middle East, Jerusalem now has the
status of an archbishopric with jurisdiction over five dioceses in the region. A new
province of East Africa includes five dioceses in Kenya and Tanganyika. In Uganda
and Ruanda Urundi, a province has been formed which comprises eight dioceses. In
addition, there remain a number of overseas dioceses under the jurisdiction of the
Archbishop of Canterbury. Terms of limited intercommunion with the Church of
South India, similar to those already existing between that Church and the Church of
India, Pakistan, Burma and Ceylon, were laid down in resolutions passed by the
Convocation of Canterbury in 1955.
Since 1867 the Lambeth Conference has met every tenth year (except for the
war years) as an unofficial consultation between all Anglican bishops; it is presided
over by the Archbishop of Canterbury. The last meeting, which was held in London
during July and August 1958, was attended by 310 bishops from all parts of the
Anglican Communion. The conference has no executive authority, but enjoys great
moral prestige, and its findings on doctrine, discipline, relations with other com¬
munions, and on the attitude of the Anglican churches to political and social questions
are widely studied.
An executive officer of the Anglican Communion was appointed in i960 to be the
executive officer of the Anglican advisory council on missionary strategy, and to exercise
general supervision on behalf of the consultative body of the Lambeth Conference
over all matters affecting the welfare of the Anglican Communion which call for
attention between the meetings of the conference.
The Church of Scotland
The established church in Scotland is the Church of Scotland, which in government
is presbyterian. It has been described as ‘the supreme example of a church which is
established and yet is free’. Its position, defined in the Treaty of Union, 1707, was
further safeguarded by the Church of Scotland Act, 1921.
Whereas in episcopacy, church government is a hierarchy of persons, in presby-
terianism there is a hierarchy of courts. All ministers are of equal status, and each
of the 2,242 churches is governed locally by the Kirk Session, consisting of the minister
and elected elders (of whom there are over 45,400 in all): above this is the Court of
the Presbytery, then the Court of the Synod, and finally the General Assembly, which
meets annually and consists of elected ministers and elders presided over by an
elected Moderator who serves for one year. The Sovereign is represented at the
General Assembly by the Lord High Commissioner. The Church of Scotland has
204
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
fought with the utmost vigour throughout the years for complete freedom in all
spiritual matters and for the right to appoint its own officers and to decide
all matters of doctrine and discipline. This freedom is recognised by Parliament, and
the decisions of the Church of Scotland are not subject to parliamentary debate or
modification.
The thorough training for the ministry, which lasts at least six years, has given
the church a high reputation for scholarship and has in turn influenced the standard
of education in Scotland. The membership of the Church of Scotland in 1961 was
estimated at 1,307,000.
The Free Churches
The phrase ‘Free Churches’ is now commonly used to describe those churches
in England which were more generally known in the past as ‘nonconformist’ churches;
and protestant churches in Scotland (except the established Church of Scotland),
Wales and Northern Ireland. The main Free Churches are the Methodist, Baptist
and Congregational Churches, and the unestablished presbyterian churches through¬
out Britain. In addition, there are a number of other protestant denominations in the
United Kingdom as well as such religious associations as the Society of Friends and
the Salvation Army, which have certain links with the main Free Churches.
The word ‘nonconformist’ signifies dissent from certain of the formularies and
practices of the established church. The Methodist Church, for example, originated
in the evangelical revival led by John Wesley within the Church of England during
the eighteenth century. More positively, the Free Churches would affirm that the
reason for their existence is a deep conviction about the nature of religious worship.
The Methodist Churches
The largest of the Free Churches is the Methodist Church, formed in 1932 by
the union of the majority of independent Methodist Churches. It has some 728,600
adult full members. The supreme authority is the annual conference, and the system
of government is in many ways presbyterian: the leaders’ meeting corresponding
to the kirk sessions, with circuit meetings and district synods resembling presbytery
and synod. One of the characteristics of Methodism is its strong emphasis on lay
leadership. There are some 22,300 trained lay preachers sharing the work of 4,500
ministers and preaching in many local churches.
Methodist Churches which did not join the union in 1932 include: the Independent
Methodists, in which ministerial service is on a purely voluntary basis and women
(many of whom are ministers) have full equality with men; and the Wesleyan Reform
Union (with some 6,000 members) which, while retaining the essential Methodist
doctrine, gives autonomy to each of its 60 individual churches.
The Congregational and Baptist Churches
The Congregationalists are the oldest community of dissenters in Britain. In
1831, most of their churches were formed into the Congregational Union. Local
churches have formed county and national unions, whose secretariat and assemblies
have much influence, but no compulsive authority over them, since great importance
is attached to the autonomy of local church meetings. Adult membership is
approximately 211,300.
Like the Congregationalists, the Baptists are for the most part grouped in associations
of churches, and the majority of these belong to the Baptist Union formed in 1813.
Baptists differ from Congregationalists in that they practise the baptism of believers
THE CHURCHE
205
only; they do not baptise infants.The Baptist churches have a total of about 321,000
members.
The Unestahlished Presbyterian Churches
The largest of the presbyterian churches outside the established Church of Scotland
is the Presbyterian Church in Ireland; in Ireland, there are 29 presbyteries (some of
which are situated in the Irish Republic) and the communicant membership is about
138,000. The Presbyterian (or Calvinistic Methodist) Church of Wales, which arose
from the revivalist movement led by Howell Harris in 1735, now includes a considerable
proportion of the Welsh-speaking population; its members number some 147,000.
The Presbyterian Church of England is organised in 14 presbyteries and has nearly
W’SS0 members; its highest court is its general assembly; women are admitted to the
eldership and ministry.
Other presbyterian churches in Britain include: the Free Church of Scotland;
the United Free Church of Scotland; the Free Presbyterian Church of Scotland;
the Reformed Presbyterian Church of Scotland; the Reformed Presbyterian Church
of Ireland (which consists of 43 congregations and preaching stations, all but five
of which are in Northern Ireland); and the Non-Subscribing Presbyterian Church of
Ireland, comprising three presbyteries (two of which are in Northern Ireland), with
34 congregations.
Other Denominations
Among other Protestant denominations in the United Kingdom are: the Unitarian
and Free Christian Churches, which number about 300, with a membership of some
20,000; the Churches of Christ (known also in the United States of America as Disciples
of Christ) which have been an organised community in Britain since early in the
nineteenth century, and now have 165 churches in the United Kingdom, and a
membership of about 8,500; the British Province of the Moravian Church, which is
an international missionary church, with 40 congregations and preaching stations
in the United Kingdom and some 2,800 communicant members; the Free Church
of England (or Reformed Episcopal Church), which was formed in 1844 as a direct
result of the Oxford Movement, and now has 50 churches; the Society of Friends;
and the Salvation Army.
The Society of Friends, or Quakers, arose in the middle of the seventeenth century
under the leadership of George Fox. A distinctive feature is the way of worship, which
is based on silent waiting upon God; outward sacraments are not observed and there is
no separated ministry. Friends place great emphasis on work for peace, and their
influence in many parts of the world, especially in social reform and in the relief of
suffering, is very wide in relation to their numbers. There are 441 Quaker Meetings
in Britain and 21,627 members; and the Society has nine schools (the pupils and staff
of which are not exclusively Quaker).
The Salvation Army, founded in 1878 by a Methodist, William Booth, is a religious
movement, composed of men and women who seek the spiritual and social betterment
of their fellows, primarily by preaching the gospel to those hitherto untouched by
religious effort. The movement, in which military rather than ecclesiastical terminology
is used, has branches all over the world, and its social work (particularly that connected
with the welfare of members of the British armed forces serving overseas) is well
supported.
The Christian Scientists, who are in no way connected with any other church,
have about 340 branch churches and societies in Britain.
206
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Roman Catholic Church
The Roman Catholic hierarchy in England and Wales, which became temporarily
extinct during the sixteenth century, was restored in 1850; the Scottish hierarchy
became extinct in the early seventeenth century and was restored in 1878, while the
Irish hierarchy never became completely extinct. The normal government of the
Roman Catholic Church, namely by territorial archbishops and bishops, is once
again the rule in the whole of the United Kingdom.
The central territorial unit of the Roman Catholic hierarchical organisation is the
province or archdiocese under the metropolitan, who is always an archbishop. The
chairman of the bench of bishops in England and Wales is the Archbishop of West¬
minster. A province normally comprises several dioceses, each under a bishop aided
by a chapter of canons and others, and by priests in charge of the parishes into which
the diocese is sub-divided. In England and Wales there are four provinces and
archdioceses (Westminster, Liverpool, Birmingham and Cardiff), 14 dioceses, and
about 2,220 parishes; in Scotland there are two provinces and archdioceses (St.
Andrews and Edinburgh, and Glasgow), six dioceses, and nearly 400 parishes; in
Northern Ireland there are six dioceses (several of which have territory partly in the
Irish Republic and partly in Northern Ireland since there is one hierarchy for the whole
of Ireland) and about 170 parishes. In the whole of the United Kingdom there are
some five million adherents (including children) to the Roman Catholic faith.
The Roman Catholic Church attaches great importance to the education of Roman
Catholic children in their own faith, and requires that the children of marriages
between Roman Catholics and members of any other Church should be brought up
as Roman Catholics. Many schools for Roman Catholic children in the United Kingdom
are staffed by members of the Religious Orders for men and women, who also undertake
other social work such as nursing, child care, and the conduct of homes for the aged.
Jewry
Jews first settled in England at the time of the Norman conquest, but were expelled
at the end of the thirteenth century by an edict of Edward I. The present Anglo-
Jewish community dates from 1656, the earliest arrivals being the Sephardi (from
Spain and Portugal). At the end of the seventeenth century an Ashkenazi community
(from Germany and East Europe) was established, which increased rapidly and spread
to the principal provincial cities. As a result of the virtual destruction of whole Jewish
communities on the Continent during the second world war, the present Anglo-Jewish
community of some 450,000 is the largest group of Jews in Europe.
The Anglo-Jewish community is divided into two schools of thought, each of
which has its own form of worship and its own services: the Orthodox (the original
groups) and the Reform. The Reform Movement, which attaches less religious
importance to some of the ancient rituals and practices of the Jewish faith, began
in 1840. It was followed in 1901 by the establishment of the Liberal Jewish Move¬
ment which, in addition, lays emphasis on the reinterpretation of traditional Judaism
in the light of modern thought and custom. Of the Jews in Great Britain who belong
to any kind of synagogue, about 80 per cent are Orthodox. The Chief Rabbi is the
head of the largest group (Ashkenazi) within Orthodox Jewry; the Haham is the head
of the Sephardi group.
Synagogues in Britain number approximately 450. There has been an increase in
the number of Jewish denominational schools, which are now attended by about one
in seven Jewish children, while the remainder attend the ordinary State or independent
schools and receive extra-curricular instruction in the Jewish faith.
THE CHURCHES
207
Other Religious Communities
Many immigrants to Britain from overseas Commonwealth countries and foreign
countries have established centres for worship for their own communities in the
United Kingdom, and especially in London. The Christian communities include
^heuGfek> Russian, Polish and Serb Orthodox, with some Estonian and Latvian
Orthodox, and also the Armenian Church. There are also churches belonging to
the Lutheran Churches of Denmark, Finland, Germany, Norway and Sweden, and
centres where Estonian, Latvian and Polish Lutherans worship according to their
creed. In addition, the French, Dutch, Swiss, Hungarian and Polish Reformed
Cliurches are represented in Britain, the first three having their own places of worship.
Phe principal non-Christian communities in Britain, apart from the Jews, are the
Moslems and the Buddhists. The Moslems are the more widely represented; it is
estimated that the Islamic population of Britain may now number about 200,000 of
whom some 2,000 are in the Muslim Society of Great Britain. Their principal mosque
is the Shah Jehan Mosque at Woking, and there are also mosques in London
Birmingham, Manchester, Cardiff and Glasgow.
A Buddhist temple was opened in South Kensington, London, in 1954; and other
premises were opened in 1956 as a meeting place and discussion centre for the several
thousand adherents of Buddhism in Britain.
Co-operation between the Churches
An outstanding feature of recent years has been the growth of co-operation between
the Churches. The British Council of Churches was founded in 1942 and includes
official representatives from almost all the churches of the British Isles, with the
exception of the Roman Catholic Church. The council facilitates common action
between the churches and seeks to further the cause of Christian unity. The Archbishop
of Canterbury is president. In addition, most, though not all, of the Free Churches
in England and Wales are members of the Free Church Federal Council (formed in
1940 by the amalgamation of the Federal Council of Evangelical Free Churches with
the National Free Church Council), the aims of which are to promote unity and joint
action between the Free Churches, and to provide a channel through which the Free
Churches can communicate and negotiate with central and local government organs
as a united body. Discussions on changes in organisation to allow of closer relations
between the Church of England, the Church of Scotland, the Episcopal Church in
Scotland, and the Presbyterian Church of England have been taking place for the
last few years. Conversations on the same subject are also being held between
representatives of the Church of England and the Methodist Church.
The Archbishop of Canterbury is advised on these matters, both at home and
abroad, by the Church of England Council on Inter-Church Relations.
. The Angiican, Presbyterian and Free Churches in the British Isles also participate
m the World Council of Churches, which was constituted at Amsterdam, Nether¬
lands, in 1948, and its third assembly was held in the autumn of 1961 in New Delhi,
India. The council links together 171 churches in over 50 countries for co-operation
in action and the study of common problems.
Co-operation of other Churches with the Roman Catholic Church takes place on
specific issues, but there is no machinery of continuous co-operation. The Council
of Christians and Jews works for better understanding between members of the
two religions, and deals with problems arising in the social field.
VIII. PROMOTION OF THE
SCIENCES AND THE ARTS
THE PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES
The promotion of the sciences in the United Kingdom is largely the concern of
those learned societies and institutions devoted specifically to this end, but only a
small part of the national research programme is carried out directly by them. Most
pure research is conducted in the universities, which also play an essential part in
promoting the sciences by maintaining a steady supply of trained scientists. In practice,
it has become impossible to distinguish clearly between science and its extensive
applications in everyday life, with the result that scientific research has become the
concern also of industry and of various Government departments, a number of which
maintain their own research establishments.
Today it is an acknowledged responsibility of the Government not only to under¬
take research directly but also to keep under review the facilities for the training of
scientists, to encourage fundamental research, to finance certain research projects, and
to ensure that adequate research is directed to matters of national interest. As a
result, a system of collaboration between the universities, industry and the Government
has developed, which leaves the greatest possible measure of freedom to individual
scientists. The learned societies, membership of which is derived from all three
categories, play an important part in the discussion and publication of the results of
research. Important work is also undertaken by independent organisations.
THE LEARNED SOCIETIES
The learned societies have had a profound and lasting influence upon the develop¬
ment and organisation of science in Britain; not only have they provided the back¬
ground for continuity of research from the seventeenth century onwards, but they
have been a meeting ground where scientists can foregather for the exchange of ideas,
and a reliable source from which new ideas for the enrichment of knowledge can
flow. Although today most research operations are conducted under other auspices,
the learned societies have retained their traditional function of facilitating the spread
of scientific knowledge and the application of new discoveries.
At present there are over 200 learned scientific societies in Britain with approxi¬
mately 400 scientific publications. There are also numerous technical institutions
and professional associations, many of which are playing a distinguished part in
promoting their own branches of science or are interested in the education and
professional well-being of their members. Prominent examples of these are the
British Medical Association, the Institution of Civil Engineers, the Institution of
Mechanical Engineers, the Institution of Electrical Engineers, the Institution of
Chemical Engineers, the Institution of Metallurgists, the Royal Institute of Chemistry,
the Institute of Physics and the Physical Society, the Institute of Biology, the National
Institute of Industrial Psychology and the National Institute of Economic and Social
Research.
208
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS
209
The most eminent of the learned societies concerned with science in its broadest
aspects (as distinct from those societies with specialised interests and activities) are
noted below.
The Royal Society (or, more fully, the Royal Society of London for the Improvement
of Natural Knowledge), founded in 1660, occupies a unique place in the country’s
scientific affairs and admission to it is regarded by scientists as a high honour. The
Queen is Patron. There are today three main categories of Fellowship; Royal Fellows,
comprising the Queen Mother and three Royal Dukes; Foreign Members, of whom
there are now 65; and the main body of Fellows, numbering some 625. Election to the
Fellowship, which is for life, is restricted to 25 people a year and to foreign membership
to four a year. The Society is governed by a Council of 21 members.
Its present activities include the holding of scientific meetings; publication of
research work, mainly in the Philosophical Transactions and the Proceedings-, the award
of medals; the giving of endowed lectures; and the award of research appointments
and grants. The highest medal awarded is the Copley Medal, for which scientists from
all countries are eligible; there are also two Royal Medals, and the Rumford, Darwin,
Buchanan, Sylvester and Hughes Medals. There are five lectureships; the Croonian
(biology); the Bakerian (physical sciences); the Ferrier (nervous system); the Wilkins
(history of science); and the Leeuwenhoek (microbiology). Events to mark the ter¬
centenary of the Society in i960 included the foundation of the Wolfson Research
Professorship of the Royal Society, endowed by the Wolfson Foundation.
Although an independent private corporation, the Society has always had a special
relationship with the Government, which provides its accommodation and makes
grants for research activities administered by it. The President of the Society is con¬
sulted on appointments to Government research councils and its Fellows serve on most
governmental advisory councils and committees concerned with research.
The Society represents the United Kingdom on the international unions comprising
the International Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU) and appoints the national
committees for each of them.
The Royal Society of Arts (properly, the Royal Society for the Encouragement of
Arts, Manufactures and Commerce) has a character at once scientific, artistic,
technical, industrial and commercial. Since its foundation in 1754, however, one of
the Society’s principal objects has been to promote the progress and application to
useful ends of all departments of science. Today it fulfils this purpose chiefly by the
dissemination of new scientific knowledge. The Society regularly holds meetings
for the delivery of lectures, and publishes a monthly Journal, thus providing effective
media for the exposition and assessment by leading authorities of developments
which have a public as well as a specialist interest.
The Royal Institution was founded in 1799 as a public body for facilitating the
introduction of useful mechanical inventions and improvements, and for teaching
the application of science to everyday life. Later it undertook the ‘promotion of
chemical science by experiments and lectures for improving arts and manufactures’,
and ‘the diffusion and extension of useful knowledge’. Its character, however, was
largely determined by the work of Sir Humphry Davy and Michael Faraday, who
established a tradition of research. Today, the Royal Institution has extensive research
laboratories, and lectures are given on recent developments in science and other
branches of knowledge. Its library of some 60,000 books includes many early scientific
works and manuscripts.
The British Association for the Advancement of Science was founded in 1831 to
210
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
promote general interest in science and its applications. One of its chief activities
is the Annual Meeting, attended by many young students as well as by eminent
scientists. Its 14 sections cover the whole range of pure and applied science other
than medical science, and there is a division for studying the social and international
relations of science. In addition to the annual meeting and in order to extend its
influence, the association plans continuous activities throughout the year, in particular
special lectures, exhibitions and discussions (some designed for young audiences),
the publication of pamphlets, the organisation of conferences, the appointment of
study groups and liaison with the Press and with sound and television broadcasting
services. The association has set up area committees and three lectureships for young
scientists—the Kelvin, the Darwin and the Lister lectureships, dealing respectively
with the physical, biological and sociological sciences—to encourage scientists to
make their activities known to wider audiences. Collaboration with other scientific
organisations has always been an important function of the British Association, and
it has an organised relationship with over 150 scientific bodies and learned societies.
It has also played an important part in the development of science by taking or
recommending action to remove obstacles to the discovery and application of scientific
knowledge.
UNIVERSITIES AND COLLEGES OF TECHNOLOGY
According to a survey carried out by the Ministry of Labour, the number of
qualified scientists and engineers (i.e. holders of degrees or diplomas, or members of
certain professional institutions) in employment in Great Britain at the beginning
of 1959 was 173,000 (72,200 scientists and 100,800 engineers) representing an increase
of 28,000 or nearly one-fifth over the numbers recorded in a similar survey in 1956.
On the basis of the 1956 survey the Committee on Scientific Manpower of the Advisory
Council on Scientific Policy estimated that by 1970 the current annual output of some
10,000 qualified scientists and engineers would need to be raised to 20,000. The
Government accepted this figure as a reasonable goal and supported measures to
ensure that the universities and technical colleges together would be able to produce
at least this number. By mid-1961 trends indicated that the number of 20,000 would
be reached by about 1964.
The Universities
During recent years there has been a considerable expansion of scientific and
technological training and research facilities within the universities. For example, the
Imperial College of Science and Technology, London, the Royal College of Science
and Technology, Glasgow, and the Manchester College of Science and Technology
provide degree and postgraduate courses for the universities with which they are
associated. At the new Churchill College, Cambridge, 70 per cent of the students will
be studying scientific and technological subjects. More than half of the students at
universities are now studying some branch of science or technology.
Eighteen of the 23 universities of the United Kingdom have faculties of engineering;
chemical and aeronautical engineering have been developed in recent years. Univer¬
sities in industrial centres have long been renowned for studies relating to their
local industries, such as metallurgy at Birmingham, Sheffield, Swansea and other
centres of the metals and metal-using industries, and naval architecture and marine
engineering at Glasgow, Liverpool, Newcastle upon Tyne and Southampton. In the
textile areas, Manchester offers courses in textile chemistry and engineering and Leeds
has specialised in courses and research in connection with the wool textile industry,
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS
211
including colour chemistry and dyeing. Leeds is the only university in Britain that
has a department devoted to the study of leather manufacture, and Manchester offers
courses in paper technology. Sheffield is unique for its department of glass technology
—the pioneer among such departments in the world. Aeronautical engineering
is a main subject for first degree courses at Bristol, Cambridge, London, Manchester,
Southampton, Glasgow and Belfast. Birmingham and London offer first degree
courses in oil technology.
All universities and university colleges in the United Kingdom have laboratories
or research departments. About 70 per cent of the recurrent income of the universities
and over 90 per cent of their money for new building comes from Government sources.
There is no direct departmental control and the method of administering the grant—
through the University Grants Committee (see p. 173)—is designed to ensure academic
freedom. The universities also receive funds for the furtherance of research from
industrial organisations, foundations, and individuals as well as from the Government
research councils and the autonomous industrial research associations. The Govern¬
ment research councils award a substantial number of studentships for postgraduate
training in science and technology, as well as post-doctoral research fellowships.
Leading firms in such industries as chemicals, oil, motor vehicles, textiles, electrical
equipment, food, and mining provide grants for specific research projects or endow
research fellowships, such as the Imperial Chemical Industries and Leverhulme
Fellowships, or professorships. Foundations which provide similar benefactions
include the Nuffield Foundation, the Ford Foundation, the Carnegie Trust, the
Wellcome Trust and Courtaulds’ Scientific and Educational Trust Fund. Among
individuals whose major contributions to universities have included provision for
research facilities are Lord Nuffield, with gifts to the Clarendon Laboratory, Oxford,
Lord Austin, who provided new buildings for the Cavendish Laboratory, Cambridge,
members of the Wills family, who financed the Physics Laboratory at Bristol, members
of the Boot family at Nottingham and of the Brotherton family at Leeds.
There are several examples of continuous co-operation between industry and
commerce and the universities. A notable one is the Manchester Joint Research
Council, set up in 1944 by the Manchester Chamber of Commerce and the University
of Manchester, which have equal representation on it: this body organises lectures
and discussion meetings and conducts investigations into the use made of research by
industry. Another is the Glass Delegation of the University of Sheffield, which directs
the work of the Department of Glass Technology and is composed of members
appointed by the Council of the University and representatives of firms and companies
who subscribe funds for the furtherance of training and research. An example of
co-operation between a Government department, an independent organisation and a
university is the world’s largest steerable pencil-beam radio telescope at the Nuffield
Radio Astronomy Observatory, Jodrell Bank, Cheshire (see p. 220), financed jointly
by the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research, the Nuffield Foundation,
and Manchester University, which has been responsible for its development.
Technical Colleges
The Government’s plans for a large-scale and rapid expansion of education in
advanced technology (outlined in 1956 in a White Paper, Cmd. 9703), include the
increase of advanced work at technical colleges as well as at the universities. Certain
technical colleges in England and Wales, which concentrate entirely on advanced
work, including postgraduate and research work, have been designated as ‘colleges of
212
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
advanced technology’ (see p. 177). In Scotland, advanced instruction in a wide range
of technologies is given at the Central Institutions (see p. 177)-
Most postgraduate studentships and fellowships awarded by the Government
research councils may be held at colleges of advanced technology and technical
colleges as well as at universities.
RESEARCH IN INDUSTRY
Industrial research in Britain is conducted by industry in its own laboratories
both with and without governmental finance, by co-operative research associations
which are assisted in varying degrees by the Government, by independent institutes
for sponsored research, by consultant laboratories, by Government laboratories and
by universities and technical colleges. The main nationalised industries have their own
research establishments (particulars of which are given in the appropriate sections of
Chapter X, Industry), and also give financial support to organisations concerned with
research into matters of interest to them. Results of inquiries into research expenditure
are given on p. 227.
Research Associations
A scheme by which the Government helps groups of firms with similar interests
to form industrial research associations was started in 1915 with the decision to
create the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research. In 1959-60, there were
52 such research associations, varying considerably in size, with a combined income
of £7-9 million (compared with £5-1 million in 1955), of which about one-quarter
was contributed by the Government through the Industrial Grants Committee of the
Department of Scientific and Industrial Research. The amounts of the Government
grants are related to the contributions made by the industries concerned. The industries
served by the associations cover a very wide range, including textiles, engineering,
metallurgy, fuel and food manufacturing.
The research associations are autonomous bodies, governed by their own councils
whose members are mostly representatives of industry. The councils are advised by
research committees in the preparation of research programmes. The research asso¬
ciations make the results of their work known to their member firms by a variety of
methods, among which are bulletins, publications, lectures, films, training classes,
exhibitions and mobile demonstration units.
Institutes for Sponsored Research
A number of institutes exist to carry out work for sponsored research on a confidential
basis for industry, the results and patents arising being retained as the property of
the sponsor. The principal institutes of this type are the Fulmer Research Institute,
Stoke Poges, Buckinghamshire, and the Sondes Place Research Institute, Dorking,
Surrey.
National Research Development Corporation
The National Research Development Corporation (NRDC) was set up by the Board
of Trade in 1949 under the Development of Inventions Act, 1948. Its primary function
is to develop and exploit, in the public interest, inventions resulting from research
carried out by Government departments and other public bodies. It may also develop
and exploit an invention from any other source where, in the corporation’s view, the
public interest requires it. Under the Development of Inventions Act, 1954, the NRDC
may promote or assist research to meet specific practical requirements, or may assist
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS 213
the continuation of research which may lead to inventions of practical importance.
It is an independent body, subject only to general direction by the Board of Trade,
with powers, under the Development of Inventions Act, 1958, to borrow from Govern¬
ment funds to a total of £10 million up to 1968. Projects sponsored by the Corporation
include among many others such varied items as electronic digital computers, towed
flexible barges (known as dracones), interferon (an anti-virus agent), selective weed¬
killers, a new form of transport known as the hovercraft, a hydrogen-oxygen fuel
cell as a transportable source of electricity and a group of new antibiotics called
cephalosphorins. The Corporation has a substantial annual income from the exploita¬
tion of inventions.
ORGANISATION OF GOVERNMENT RESEARCH
1 he active participation by the Government in scientific research is for the most
part a development of the twentieth century, though its association with science dates
back to a much earlier period.
Evolution of the Research Organisations
In 1675, King Charles II established Britain’s first State-supported research
institution—the Royal Greenwich Observatory (now transferred to Herstmonceux,
Sussex) to correct the tables of the positions of the moon and fixed stars ‘for the use
of his seamen’. The Geological Survey of Great Britain, the first national institution
of its kind in the world, was founded in 1835. In 1842, the Board of Inland Revenue
established a chemical laboratory which eventually developed into the Laboratory of
the Government Chemist; and in 1854 the Meteorological Office was established by
the Board of Trade. All these Government departments were using scientific know¬
ledge, but there was little organised effort towards the application of the discoveries
made in pure science.
The need for research in physics and engineering, and particularly into methods
of precise measurement, led to the establishment in 1900 of the National Physical
Laboratory under the control of the Royal Society, with a small grant from the
Treasury towards equipment and a yearly grant towards upkeep. Government
recognition of the importance of scientific research and its applications was hastened
by the first world war, and the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research
(DSIR) was established in 1916 as a separate Government department. In 1918,
the DSIR took over financial responsibility for the National Physical Laboratory
from the Royal Society, but the society appoints a general board and an executive
committee which supervise scientific policy.
A Medical Research Committee was appointed in 1913 to administer the research
funds provided under the National Health Insurance Act of 1911. In 1920 the
committee was superseded by the Medical Research Council (MRC), established
under Royal Charter and supported by a grant-in-aid provided by Parliament.
Agricultural research, in its early days, was not centrally organised. The first
research institutes were founded and initially maintained by private individuals
Rothamsted Experimental Station, for example, the oldest of them, was founded
in 1843 by Sir John Lawes, who personally financed it until, in 1889, he endowed it
and set up the Lawes Agricultural Trust to administer the endowment; as research
became more costly, Government funds were sought and obtained, though the institute
remained independent. The Development Commission, set up under the Development
and Road Improvement Funds Act, 1909, recommended that financial aid should
214
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
be made available from the Development Fund to ‘aid and develop agriculture and
rural industries by promoting scientific research’ and in 19 n this fund was used to
promote a scheme which led to the establishment of many of the present-day agricul¬
tural institutions. In 1931 the Agricultural Research Council (ARC) was established
by Royal Charter to be responsible for the general organisation and development of
agricultural research in Great Britain. In addition to advising the agricultural depart¬
ments on the programmes of the institutes and, in the early stages, acting as scientific
adviser to the Development Commission, the ARC was given funds to spend at its
own discretion and it gradually took over the Commission’s responsibilities for
agricultural research. The Nature Conservancy, which is concerned with the con¬
servation of flora and fauna, was set up in 1949.
During the second world war, a Scientific Advisory Committee to the War Cabinet
was created to co-ordinate defence research and civil research. This committee was
replaced in 1947 by two bodies: an Advisory Council on Scientific Policy to advise
the Lord President of the Council, who had come to be regarded as the minister
responsible for the formulation and execution of Government scientific policy;
and a Defence Research Policy Committee ‘to advise the Minister of Defence and
Chiefs of Staff on matters connected with the formulation of scientific policy in
the defence field’.
Ministerial Responsibility for Civil Scientific Research
Ministerial responsibilities for Government scientific organisations were rearranged
following the governmental changes in October 1959. A Minister for Science was
appointed in conjunction with one of the ancient Offices of State traditionally within
the Cabinet (at first that of Lord Privy Seal, but from July i960 that of Lord President
of the Council) who is responsible to Parliament for the Council for Scientific and
Industrial Research, the Medical Research Council, the Agricultural Research Council,
the Nature Conservancy and the Overseas Research Council. He also exercises
ministerial functions under the Atomic Energy Acts, and general supervision over
the programme of space research.
Other ministers remain responsible for the scientific establishments within their
own departments; but the Minister for Science, advised by the Advisory Council on
Scientific Policy, is broadly responsible for civil scientific policy. The minister is
assisted by an administrative staff, known as the Office of the Minister for Science,
which is composed of a general division and an atomic energy division.
The Advisory Council on Scientific Policy
The members of the Advisory Council on Scientific Policy, who are appointed
by the Minister for Science, include eminent scientists drawn from the universities,
industry and Government service.
In order to give adequate attention to each of the subjects within its wide range of
interest, the Advisory Council has established standing committees on Scientific
Manpower; Scientific Library and Technical Information; Overseas Scientific
Relations; and Statistics.
Department of Scientific and Industrial Research
The DSIR is responsible to the Committee of the Privy Council for Scientific
and Industrial Research. It is governed by a Council for Scientific and Industrial
Research, known as the Research Council.
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS
215
The Research Council consists of as many members as may be determined by
the Minister for Science; in 1961 it had a chairman and 14 members. It is entrusted
with the organisation, development and encouragement of scientific and industrial
research and with the dissemination of the results of such research. In particular,
it may:
(1) encourage and support scientific research in universities, technical colleges
and other institutions;
(2) establish or develop institutions or departments of institutions for investi¬
gation and research relating to the advancement of trade and industry; and
(3) take steps to further the practical application of the results of scientific and
industrial research.
These functions are discharged through 14 national research organisations under
the Research Council’s own control and direction and financed from its own Vote,
and one, the Joint Fire Research Organisation, which is maintained by the DSIR
and the Fire Offices’ Committee; and through the autonomous industrial research
associations. The council also makes grants for these purposes and for postgraduate
instruction in science and technology to individual workers and to institutions.
Since DSIR was set up, technological changes have necessitated a measure of
reorganisation. Science-based industries, such as the chemical and electrical industries,
have matured and prospered; entirely new industries, such as electronics, plastics,
synthetic fibres and synthetic rubber industries, have emerged. Industry, for its own
purposes and on behalf of the Government, has become the largest employer of
research workers. Organised teamwork has increasingly replaced individual effort
in scientific research, leading to a demand for trained research workers who can both
specialise and co-operate with colleagues trained in other subjects, and also for men of
outstanding qualities to direct large research departments. Research projects, at the
same time, have become increasingly expensive and have to be selected with more care.
The following are among the principal research stations operated by DSIR: the
National Physical Laboratory, Teddington, Middlesex, which conducts research in
various branches of non-nuclear physics and maintains British primary standards and
physical units; the National Chemical Laboratory, also at Teddington, which con¬
centrates on basic chemical research not being done elsewhere applicable to a variety
of industries; the National Engineering Laboratory, at East Kilbride, Scotland; the
Road Research Laboratory, at Harmondsworth, Middlesex, which does research on
road construction, safety and traffic flow; and the Building Research Station, near
Watford, Hertfordshire. The Warren Laboratory, near Stevenage, Hertfordshire,
opened in 1959, provides facilities for research and development, including pilot-scale
work on subjects of national importance which cannot be fitted into the programme of
other organisations, undertakes sponsored research and has accommodation for teams
from industry; its initial programme includes development of a pilot-scale plant for
the synthesis of liquid fuels, research on atmospheric pollution and research and
development in mineral processing. The Tropical Products Institute, in London,
transferred to DSIR from the Colonial Office in 1959) aims at improving the economic
viability of the less-developed countries of the tropics, especially those within the
Commonwealth, by research into new uses for tropical plant and animal products.
The Laboratory of the Government Chemist, in London, transferred to DSIR from the
Treasury in July 1959, provides a wide variety of analytical, investigatory and advisory
services to all Government departments on request, has a statutory function as official
analyst and as an adjudicator in cases of disputed analyses, and in addition undertakes
H
216
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
various research projects, including the development of chemical and physical methods
of analysis. The Radio Research Station at Slough, Buckinghamshire, besides carrying
out research on radio wave propagation and space research, has housed, since October
1956, the World Data Centre for the International Geophysical Year (IGY) and
latterly a similar Data Centre for scientific information obtained from space vehicles.
In 1939 the annual expenditure of DSIR for all purposes amounted to ^500,000.
By 1960-61 the total net expenditure was estimated at £12-2 million and it is planned
to raise it to ^18-6 million in 1963-64. The largest increases have been in support of
work in the universities. In 1960—61 it was estimated that ^i‘6 million would be spent
for special scientific research in universities and similar institutions and 2,692 students
were receiving DSIR grants for research training. Expansion of staff in DSIR’s own
laboratories and increases in grants to research associations are proceeding steadily
and much more attention and money are being devoted to ensuring that the results of
research are known and applied.
Medical Research Council
The Medical Research Council (MRC), the successor of the Medical Research
Committee, was incorporated under its present title by Royal Charter in 1920. It
is responsible to the Committee of the Privy Council for Medical Research, of which
the Minister for Science is chairman and the Secretaries of State for the Home Depart¬
ment, Scotland, Commonwealth Relations, and the Colonies, and the Ministers of
Health and of Labour are members.
The members of the council, appointed by the Committee of the Privy Council
for Medical Research for a period of four years, are twelve in number. Nine members,
representing different branches of medical knowdedge and the fundamental sciences
on which these are based, are appointed after consultation with the President of the
Royal Society and with the council itself: on retirement, these scientific members are
not eligible for immediate reappointment. Of the three lay members of the council,
one must be a member of the House of Lords and one a member of the House of
Commons.
The MRC’s chief function is to promote research into all aspects of health and
disease. In planning and carrying out its research programme, the council is often
assisted by special committees appointed to advise on particular subjects. Its anange-
ments for the support of research fall under four main headings:
(1) investigations by members of the council’s scientific staff, mostly working
in its own research establishments;
(2) temporary research grants to independent investigators in universities and
elsewhere;
(3) long-term research grants in support of specific research programmes in
university medical departments; and
(4) research fellowships and scholarships for tenure both at home and abroad.
The National Institute for Medical Research, at Mill Hill and Hampstead, London,
is the council’s main research establishment; in addition, there are over 70 smaller
establishments, generally known as research units, which are attached in most cases
to universities and hospitals in the United Kingdom. The council also undertakes
work overseas and, with additional support from Colonial Development and Welfare
funds, maintains laboratories in the Gambia and units in Uganda and Jamaica.
In the financial year 1959-60 the council’s total expenditure of public funds was
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS
217
^3-8 million on ordinary account and .£80,102 on non-recurrent account. This was
about one-eighth more than in the previous year.
Agricultural Research Council
The Agricultural Research Council (ARC) was established by Royal Charter
in 1931. It is responsible to the Committee of the Privy Council for Agricultural
Research, consisting of the Minister for Science, the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries
and Food and the Secretary of State for Scotland.
The council consists of not more than 18 nor fewer than 13 members, five of whom
are appointed for their general experience of and interest in agriculture. Others
are appointed by the Committee of the Privy Council, after consultation with the
President of the Royal Society, on account of their qualifications in one or other of
the sciences relating to agriculture. Included in the council’s membership are the
Chief Scientific Adviser (Agriculture) and the Chief Veterinary Officer of the Ministry
of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, also one member appointed by the Minister of
Agriculture, Fisheries and Food and one by the Secretary of State for Scotland.
The council has 24 research stations and units under its direct control in Great
Britain including three laboratories concerned with the preservation, storage and
protection of foodstuffs. It is also responsible for the financing of the independent
research institutes in England and Wales. The programmes of all these institutes are
co-ordinated and approved by the council and are integrated with those of the indepen¬
dent research institutes in Scotland, which are grant-aided by the Department of
Agriculture and Fisheries for Scotland.
The council makes grants to universities and other recognised research institutions
for special investigations, and awards research fellowships and postgraduate student¬
ships in agricultural and veterinary science, agricultural and dairy engineering and
agricultural statistics.
The greater part of the council’s expenditure is met from the Agricultural Research
Fund, which is financed by parliamentary grant-in-aid. In the financial year which
ended on 31st March, i960, gross current expenditure was £4-5 million; capital
expenditure on buildings and special apparatus amounted to £514,000.
Nature Conservancy
The Nature Conservancy was established by Royal Charter in 1949 and is
responsible to the Privy Council Committee for Nature Conservation. Its functions,
as summarised in the charter, are ‘to provide scientific advice on the conservation and
control of the natural flora and fauna of Great Britain; to establish, maintain and
manage nature reserves in Great Britain, including the maintenance of physical
features of scientific interest; and to organise and develop the research and scientific
service related thereto’.
Research stations have been set up by the Nature Conservancy at Merlewood,
Grange-over-Sands, in Lancashire, at Furzebrook, Wareham, in Dorset, and at
Speyside, Inverness, and field stations at Moor House, Westmorland, and at Anancaun,
Ross, where long-term ecological research is undertaken into such problems as the
relation of vegetation to soils and climates, peat growth, effects of grazing and of moor
burning, coastal erosion and roadside spraying. Grants are made for research, and the
Nature Conservancy awards annually a number of postgraduate studentships.
Overseas Research Council
The Government established the Overseas Research Council in July 1959. The
Council is under the general control of a committee of the Privy Council and its
2l8
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
principal functions are to formulate policy in respect of scientific research for overseas,
and to co-ordinate advice and assistance on research matters provided by the United
Kingdom research councils and the various colonial research committees (see p. 224).
Matters concerning scientific development in the United Kingdom dependencies, in
Commonwealth countries and in countries outside the Commonwealth can be referred
to it. The council thus provides a central point to which Commonwealth Government
and research institutions can refer for advice and information, and advises generally
on United Kingdom co-operation in scientific research overseas.
Nuclear Energy
Before 1946 the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research was responsible
for atomic energy research and development. From 1946 the end of 1953
responsibility rested with the Minister of Supply. Because of its growing industrial
applications, however, the Government decided to transfer responsibility for atomic
energy to a non-departmental organisation. As a result, in January 1954 ministerial
responsibility (except for weapons production) was transferred to the Lord President
of the Council; and the Atomic Energy Authority Act, 1954, established the United
Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority (UKAEA) which, in August 1954, took over
responsibility, under the Lord President, for atomic energy research and development.
Ministerial responsibility under the Atomic Energy Acts was assumed by the Prime
Minister in April 1957, and in October 1959 was transferred to the Minister for
Science.
The Minister of Aviation has taken over from the former Minister of Supply
responsibility for the development and production of atomic weapons for the Services
in accordance with agreed defence policy; in practice, however, the Atomic Energy
Authority produces the explosive nuclear material and assemblies for atomic weapons
under contract and carries out weapon research. The Minister of Power (in Scotland,
the Secretary of State) has a general responsibility for the civil nuclear power
programme; the power stations are being built and will be operated by the electricity
authorities. The Admiralty is concerned (in close collaboration with the Atomic
Energy Authority) in the development of nuclear power for naval propulsion, and has
a general responsibility for the application of nuclear propulsion in merchant ships.
The Authority collaborates with a number of other Government departments—the
Ministries of Health, Labour, Housing and Local Government, Agriculture, Fisheries
and Food, Transport, the Post Office, the Scottish Office, and the Home Office-
on various aspects of health and safety in relation to atomic energy.
Expert advice on radiation hazards is provided by the Medical and Agricultural
Research Councils and by the Radioactive Substances Advisory Committee. This
committee advises ministers on the administration of the Radioactive Substances
Acts which deal with the safeguards necessary in the use of radioactive substances and
apparatus producing radiation.
The Atomic Energy Authority
The Atomic Energy Authority, appointed by the Minister for Science, consists of
a chairman, a deputy chairman and not more than fourteen other members.
The authority, like other statutory public corporations, is free from day-to-day
Government control (subject to the power given to the responsible minister to issue
directions to the authority in matters of over-riding national importance), but differs
from them in that the bulk of its revenue is derived from money voted by Parliament
and in that its accounts are certified by the Comptroller and Auditor General.
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS
219
The organisation is divided into five groups controlling various establishments
and has a London office, which is responsible for central financial, administrative
and establishment matters, and for raw material procurement.
The Research Group, centred at Harwell, Berkshire, conducts research into all
aspects of atomic energy. Much of its work is of a fundamental nature without direct
regard to particular applications. Most of the applied research at Harwell is now
devoted to peaceful uses of nuclear energy, although some assistance is given on specific
problems relating to weapons. In addition to numerous research reactors and acceler¬
ating machines, Harwell houses Hermes—the largest isotope separator in Europe—
and an apparatus for producing short bursts of neutrons—the neutron project. All
controlled thermonuclear research is being moved from Harwell and Aldermaston to
a new research centre at Culham, Oxfordshire (a few miles north of Harwell).
The research group has two main outstations: the Radiochemical Centre at Amer-
sham, Buckinghamshire, and the Radiation Laboratories at Wantage, Berkshire. The
former, which prepares and distributes radioisotopes and other radioactive materials,
has been enlarged to meet a demand for radioactive products which has more than
trebled since 1955. Harwell also runs an isotope school, started in April 1951 and now
situated at Wantage, and a reactor school, started in September 1954, which provides
training for home and overseas students.
There are three groups with headquarters at Risley, Lancashire. The Reactor Group
is responsible for the design and development of reactors, and of relations in regard to
them with industry in Britain and with countries overseas. It includes the Atomic
Energy Establishment at Winfrith, Dorset, which houses among other things high-
temperature gas-cooled reactor experiments such as Zenith and the Dragon project,
the latter a 20 MW reactor, financed jointly by a number of member countries of the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), including
members of the European Atomic Energy Community (Euratom), due to be com¬
pleted by 1963- The United Kingdom is providing the largest share and will retain
ownership of the reactor. The reactor group also includes the Dounreay experimental
reactor establishment in Caithness, Scotland (housing a materials-testing reactor and
a fast-breeder reactor). The group has research laboratories at the main establishments
of the Pi oduction Group, which is responsible for the operation of factories producing
fissile material at Windscale in Cumberland, Capenhurst in Cheshire and Springfields
in Lancashire and the UKAEA’s nuclear power plants at Calder Hall in Cumberland,
and Chapelcross in Dumfries. The third group with headquarters at Risley is the
Engineering Group, responsible for the construction of plant, works and buildings, and
for the design and inspection of fuel elements for production purposes.
The Weapons Group, centred on Aldermaston, Berkshire, conducts research on
and development of nuclear weapons. The group also carries out other research work
with civil, as well as defence, applications. It has outstations at Foulness in Essex,
Orfordness in Suffolk, and Woolwich Common, London.
National Institute for Research in Nuclear Science
In 1957 the Government set up a National Institute for Research in Nuclear
Science (NIRNS), which provides, for common use by universities and others,
facilities and equipment which are beyond the scope of individual universities and
institutions carrying out research in the nuclear field. It does not replace the research
already being done in individual universities with assistance from Government funds;
nor does it affect the Government’s participation in the international scheme for
common facilities set up in Geneva under the auspices of the European Organisation
220
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
for Nuclear Research (CERN). The institute is financed in the main by grants through
the Atomic Energy Authority from the Atomic Energy Vote. The Rutherford High
Energy Laboratory being built at Harwell will house the institute’s proton synchrotron
(particle accelerator). This 7,000 million electron volt apparatus, due for completion
in 1963, will be one of the largest such machines in the world. Early in 1961 NIRNS
took over from Harwell responsibility for the development of particle accelerators.
Space Researcli and Astronomy
A United Kingdom programme of upper atmosphere research using Skylark
rockets has continued since its initiation in association with the International
Geophysical Year. By the end of i960 many successful experiments had been carried
out at the Woomera launching ground in Australia and valuable information obtained
on winds, temperature and electron density, at heights of up to about 100 miles. The
Skylark, however, was designed as an upper atmosphere research tool and is not
strictly a space vehicle.
At present a limited programme of scientific experiments is in hand. A Steering
Group on Space Research has been set up to advise the Minister for Science, who has
co-ordinating responsibility for the programme as a whole. A British National Com¬
mittee on Space Research appointed by the Royal Society is responsible for its
scientific aspects, and co-operates with international scientific bodies such as the
Committee on Space Research (COSPAR), a special committee of the International
Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU). As a first stage, in May 1959, the Government
announced approval for a programme for the design and construction of instruments
to be carried in earth satellites. Advantage is also being taken of a United States offer
to launch satellites containing scientific instruments designed and constructed in
other countries, and experiments designed in the United Kingdom are to be included
in several Scout satellites to be launched from the United States under a joint Anglo-
American programme during the next five years, beginning in the winter of 1961-62.
Britain has taken an active part in the work of the 11-nation Preparatory Commission,
set up to make plans for a European Space Research Organisation. It has also been
negotiating with other Commonwealth and European countries to work out a pro¬
gramme for a heavy satellite launcher; it is proposed that the United Kingdom rocket,
Blue Streak, on which much development work has already been done, should be used
as its first stage.
Besides making important discoveries of their own, radio astronomy observatories
in the United Kingdom have proved of great value in tracking, controlling and record¬
ing data received from earth satellites and space probes launched by the Soviet Union
and the United States. The Mullard Radio Astronomy Observatory at Cambridge
University is equipped with two very large radio telescopes: one a radio star inter¬
ferometer, and the other a pencil-beam telescope. Recent observations with the more
powerful instrument have been valuable in testing the various cosmological theories.
The largest of the steerable dish type of radio telescopes is at the Nuffield Radio
Astronomv Observatory at Jodrell Bank, Cheshire. This instrument has sent messages
via the moon and Venus and has tracked and controlled United States and Soviet
satellites (although only five per cent of its time has been devoted to this activity).
Tracking is also being carried out at the Radio Research Station of the DSIR, both at
Slough and at the Minitrack Station at Winkfield, in Berkshire, where the equipment
has been provided by the United States National Aeronautics and Space Administra¬
tion. The Radio Research Station also provides one of the three World Data Centres
set up to continue work of this kind initiated in connection with the International
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS
221
Geophysical Year. A new radio telescope interferometer, complementary to those at
Cambridge and Jodrell Bank, has been completed at the Royal Radar Establishment of
the Ministry of Aviation, near Malvern. The Post Office is to build a further station
for co-operation with the United States in testing communications satellites. Both
Cambridge and Jodrell Bank have plans for new radio telescopes and a steerable radio
telescope is to be built for the Radio Research Station.
Optical Astronomy
Optical and astronomy observatories in Britain are being extensively re-equipped.
The Isaac Newton 98-inch telescope, to be constructed for the Royal Greenwich
Observatory, Herstmonceux, will provide additional research facilities for optical
astronomers in Britain; and grants to the Radcliffe Observatory in South Africa, with
its existing 74-inch telescope, and the merger of the Cape of Good Hope Obser¬
vatory and the Royal Greenwich Observatory will enable astronomers to have improved
use of large optical telescopes in both hemispheres. The Royal Observatory, Edin¬
burgh, has been situated at Blackford Hill, Edinburgh, since 1895; it is primarily a
research institution concerned with work in astrophysics and stellar astronomy and
undertakes spectroscopic and photometric observations. It is also engaged in seis-
mology and, at an outstation in Peebles-shire, on the tracking of artificial satellites.
Other Government-sponsored Scientific Research
All departments rely on one or other of the Government research councils for
scientific advice. While some use these bodies as their main source of scientific
information, a few have set up supplementary research organisations of their own.
Research and development is undertaken by the Service Departments primarily to
meet the requirements of the armed forces, but a substantial amount of this work has
important civil applications, for instance, in land transport, aviation, navigation and
meteorology.
Agriculture
Apart from research at the centres controlled or grant-aided by the Agricultural
Research Council and the Department of Agriculture and Fisheries for Scotland, the
Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food carries out a certain amount of applied
research in its own veterinary laboratories at Weybridge, Surrey, and at Lasswade,
Midlothian, Scotland, and also at its plant pathology laboratory at Harpenden,
Hertfordshire; while at its infestation control laboratories at Tolworth and Worplesdon,
Surrey, it co-ordinates work on the control of insect pests of stored food and conducts
research on the control of harmful mammals and birds. The Scientific Services of the
Department, of Agriculture and Fisheries for Scotland in Edinburgh undertake a
number of statutory duties and international obligations in regard to crop improve¬
ment and crop protection. Research is carried out as it arises from this work. In
Northern Ireland research in all the major agricultural sciences is carried out in
conjunction with the Ministry of Agriculture.
Fisheries
The authorities concerned with fisheries research are: the Ministry of Agriculture,
Fisheries and Food, which maintains four laboratories for marine, shell-fish and
salmon and freshwater fisheries research, and four research vessels; the Department of
Agriculture and Fisheries for Scotland, which maintains a marine research laboratory,
four research ships at Aberdeen, and a freshwater research laboratory at Pitlochry;
and the Development Commissioners.
222
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Development Commissioners, through their Advisory Committee on Fishery
Research, co-ordinate all fishery research. From the Development Fund a number
of independent institutions receive grants for marine and freshwater research.
Food
With the guidance of the Chief Scientific Adviser (Food), the Food Science and
Atomic Energy Division of the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food is respon¬
sible for formulating the ministry’s general policy on the acquisition and dissemination
of scientific and technical information about food and the food handling and processing
industry, for furnishing scientific advice to the other divisions of the ministry; and
for sponsoring or carrying out experimental work. The division has its own experi¬
mental laboratories and kitchens in London.
The Food Research Advisory Committee, appointed by the Minister of Agriculture,
Fisheries and Food and the Secretary of State for Scotland, advises on food problems
(other than fish, which is dealt with by the Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research) requiring investigation or research which should be undertaken with the
aid of public funds.
Forestry
The Forestry Commission undertakes experimental work relating to silvicultural
and allied problems. By means of grants, it also aids forest research work undertaken
by various universities and other institutions, including the Imperial Forestry
Institute, Oxford.
Fuel and Power
The Minister of Power is responsible for research on safety in mines and under¬
takes a certain amount of research into the development and economical utilisation
of fuel and power, notably in connection with coal gasification. The nationalised coal,
electricity and gas industries are required to submit their research plans for his con¬
currence and there is close collaboration between the Ministry of Power, the scientific
departments of these industries and the Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research.
Transport and Aviation
The Ministry of Transport is concerned with research into aspects of marine
navigation, marine propulsion, and road construction, but most of the basic work
is carried out for the ministry by the Admiralty and the Department of Scientific and
Industrial Research. Research on radio aids for marine navigation is undertaken by
the Admiralty, which is also responsible for research on nuclear propulsion and inter-
Service electronic valve research, and for the administration of the Royal Greenwich
Observatory, at Herstmonceux, and the National Institute of Oceanography.
The Ministry of Aviation, which carries out most of the research needed to meet the
technical requirements of air defence, is also responsible for some civil research, for
instance, at the Royal Aircraft Establishment and the National Gas Turbine Establish¬
ment at Farnborough, and at the Royal Radar Establishment, Malvern. Some
fundamental research is carried out for the ministry by imiversities and industrial
organisations. The Ministry of Aviation is also responsible for research into airport
operations and air traffic control.
Meteorology
The Air Ministry finances the Meteorological Office, which is responsible for
research in meteorology and geophysics, mainly directed to non-military ends. The
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS
223
headquarters of the Office and most of its research sections are at Bracknell, Berk¬
shire. The Forecasting Research Section has been equipped with a large-capacity
electronic computer. Balloon and aircraft soundings and radar techniques are used to
investigate the movement and composition of the atmosphere, and instruments are
being designed which will be used in rockets and an earth-satellite. The Air Ministry
also makes grants for fundamental meteorological research carried out under the
auspices of the Royal Society or in university departments.
Land Use and Planning
The Ministry of Housing and Local Government deals with geographical, geological,
economic and sociological research relating to the use and development of land in
England and Wales. Similar arrangements are made in Scotland by the Department
of Health for Scotland, and in Northern Ireland by the Ministry of Health and Local
Government.
Building
The Building Research Station of the Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research is responsible for reviewing the whole field of research and technical develop¬
ment of the building industry and, with the Ministry of Works, for ensuring that the
results of research are made available to the industry.
Communications
The Post Office, which is responsible for postal services and most civil aspects of
telecommunications, undertakes scientific research on a wide range of subjects related
to the mechanisation of mail handling and to line and radio systems for telecom¬
munications, as well as experimental development. When the work reaches the
development stage it is usual to co-operate fully with industry, so that the final product
has been jointly engineered. A prototype electronic telephone exchange, planned in
conjunction with industry through the Joint Electronic Research Committee, and
now in operation at Dollis Hill, London, is an example. Another important outcome
is the novel submarine telephone cable system completed to Canada in 1961 and due
to span the Pacific to Australia by 1964, the design having been adopted by the
Commonwealth partners concerned. In this instance the research and development
was carried out by a unit run jointly by the Post Office and Cable and Wireless, Ltd.,
a Government-owned company concerned with long distance overseas telecom¬
munications.
Medicine and Health
In addition to the work carried on under the aegis of the Medical Research Council,
the Ministry of Health may conduct and promote research into the cause, prevention
and treatment of illness.
The Department of Health for Scotland has similar responsibilites, in the discharge
of which it is advised by its Advisory Committee on Medical Research; liaison with
the Medical Research Council is also maintained.
In Northern Ireland the Hospitals Authority (a statutory body set up by the
Minister of Health and Local Government) has power to conduct or assist medical
research. In addition, it has a statutory duty to provide adequate bacteriological and
pathological services.
The General Register Office carries out research in four main fields: (1) analysis
and interpretation of statistics of causes of death; (2) statistical inquiry into the
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
224
treatment of cancer and its results; (3) morbidity as revealed in hospital statistics;
and (4) mental health.
Research in the Human Sciences
The Council for Scientific and Industrial Research promotes research in the human
sciences in three ways. On the advice of its Human Sciences Committee it awards
grants for special researches to universities, colleges of advanced technology, and other
research institutions. Work in the general field of the human sciences is conducted
as part of the programme of the Building Research Station, the Road Research
Laboratory and the National Physical Laboratory. A Human Sciences Section at the
Warren Spring Laboratory has its own programme of research, some of which is
put out on contract to universities and other research institutions.
Social and Economic Research
A great deal of social and economic inquiry is carried out inside Government
departments. The Social Survey Division of the Central Office of Information is
responsible for sample survey inquiries which involve direct contact with members of
the public or of special groups. The Social Survey works at the request of all Govern¬
ment Departments and from time to time also carries out studies in collaboration with
universities and other independent research organisations.
Colonial Research
The bulk of the research work relating to colonial development is done in the
colonial territories and is assisted by funds made available under the Colonial Develop¬
ment and Welfare Acts. Much of it requires close collaboration with research institutes
and laboratories in Britain. The Overseas Research Council advises on general
questions of policy and co-ordination. Specialist committees deal witn research into
such subjects as agriculture, animal health, forestry, medicine, social science, and
colonial products.
Anti-Locust Research
An example of Britain’s research work on behalf of colonial territories is provided
by the Anti-Locust Research Centre in London, which has been internationally
recognised as a world centre for locust research since 1931. This organisation receives
and co-ordinates information on locust movements and breeding from some 40
countries, undertakes scientific research into the life history and habits of the different
species of locust, and investigates and develops methods for their control and
destruction. In co-operation with the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organi¬
sation (FAO), it provides an information service on the movements of desert locusts
and provides forecasts of swarm movements which are distributed to the countries
threatened.
Botanical Research
There are a number of scientific institutions administered by Government depart¬
ments which undertake research work in addition to their other scientific activities.
These include the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, founded in 1759 and now administered
by the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, which has the largest collection
of living plants in the world. Its three research departments are: the Herbarium, con¬
cerned primarily with the classification and accurate determination of plants, the
Jodrell Laboratory, for the study of plant anatomy and plant physiology, cytology and
genetics; and the Museum of Economic Botany, dealing with the economic exploitation
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS
225
of plants. The library, attached to the herbarium, was founded in 1853; it consists of
more than 55,000 botanical books, about 80,000 reprints and separately issued items
and a collection of over 150,000 drawings and paintings of plants.
Scientific Museums
The British Museum (Natural History)—an independent section of the British
Museum contains one of the world’s largest collections of natural history material
and is recognised as a leading research institution.
The Science Museum illustrates the development of pure and applied science
in all countries, but chiefly in Great Britain, which has always held a leading place
in engineering, agriculture, navigation, mining, aeronautics, and in the development
of industrial machinery and processes, all of which are represented in the museum’s
collections.
The geology of Britain is known in more exact detail than that of any other country
in the world, and the Geological Survey (since 1919 an establishment of DSIR),
responsible for this work, has an outstanding collection of exhibits in its Geological
Museum.
These three museums are in South Kensington, London.
Important collections outside London are the Museum of Science and Industry,
in Birmingham, and the Museum of the History of Science, at Oxford.
The Parliamentary and Scientific Committee
The Parliamentary and Scientific Committee was founded at the end of 1939
by members of the House of Commons and replaced the former Parliamentary
Science Committee. It is one of a number of informal, unofficial, all-party parliamen-
tary groups which have grown up spontaneously and have varying degrees of influence.
Membership is open to members of Parliament of any party in both Houses, and also
to nominated representatives of such non-profit-making scientific and technological
organisations in Britain as may be affiliated under its constitution. Membership in
i960 comprised 178 members of Parliament and representatives of 109 scientific
and technological institutions. 1. he committee provides, as far as possible, for a regular
exchange of information between members of Parliament and scientists.
Scientific Liaison Overseas
1 he history of scientific progress is essentially a story involving many nations;
the organisation of a country’s scientific research would, therefore, be incomplete
without provision for adequate liaison with other countries.
Before the second world war, international scientific collaboration took place
through the exchange of university staffs, the awards of scholarships and fellowships,
the close relations existing between the learned societies in Britain and their equivalent
bodies abroad, and through international conferences and congresses.
The war and the post-war period saw the emergence of a number of new develop¬
ments in overseas scientific collaboration, including the exchange of scientific
information. Well-known examples are the specialised agencies of the United
Nations Organisation (the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organisation, the World Health Organisation, the Food and Agriculture Organisation)
and those concerned with nuclear energy (the International Atomic Energy Agency,
the European Organisation for Nuclear Research (CERN) and the European Nuclear
Energy Agency) in all of which the United Kingdom is playing a full part. The United
Kingdom is also represented on the Governing Committee for Scientific and Technical
226
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Personnel of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)
and on the Science Committee of the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO),
and collaborates bilaterally with a number of countries in nuclear energy. Besides
agreements between the UKAEA and other atomic energy authorities, including that
of the Soviet Union, there are inter-governmental agreements with eight countries,
including the United States, with which collaboration is now particularly close. There
are permanent representatives of the United States Atomic Energy Commission in
London and of the UKAEA in Washington. Controlled thermonuclear (fusion)
reactions and nuclear marine propulsion are two important subjects on which there are
regular discussions and exchanges of experts.
Among the various channels through which scientific liaison is conducted are:
The British Commonwealth Scientific Offices
A feature of the war-time pattern of scientific collaboration was the establishment
of scientific missions in London by the United States and Commonwealth countries,
and in Washington by the United Kingdom and Commonwealth countries. The latter
subsequently joined together as the British Commonwealth Scientific Office (North
America).
In 1946 a British Commonwealth Scientific Conference was held to see how the
war-time collaboration and co-operation could be continued and extended. Among
the recommendations of the Conference was the continuance of the British Common¬
wealth Scientific Office (North America) and the establishment of the British
Commonwealth Scientific Offices (London), a group of offices containing the scientific
representatives of Commonwealth countries with whom the Overseas Liaison Group
of the DSIR is closely associated.
The Standing Committee on Overseas Scientific Relations
This is a committee of the Advisory Council on Scientific Policy which was set up
after the second world war to consider and advise on United Kingdom Government
policy on overseas scientific relations. In view of the Government’s increasing interest
in international organisation for scientific co-operation, the committee was recon¬
stituted in 1958 as a small committee concerned primarily with questions of policy
and scientific co-operation. The chairman of the Advisory Council on Scientific
Policy acts as its chairman, and its secretariat is provided jointly by the Office of the
Minister for Science and the Overseas Liaison Group of the DSIR.
The Overseas Liaison Group of the DSIR
This group, which is part of the Information Division of the DSIR, is broadly
responsible for the overseas relations and activities of the department. In addition
to its executive work for the Standing Committee on Overseas Scientific Relations,
it is responsible for the administration of the scientific attaches, advisers and missions
at present stationed in Washington, Paris, Bonn, Stockholm, Moscow, Tokyo and New
Delhi. These representatives are accredited to a total of 12 countries (Austria, Canada,
Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, India, Japan, Norway, the Soviet Union,
Sweden, and the United States) and are also concerned with five others (Belgium,
Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands and Switzerland) as required. The group is
responsible for ensuring that information collected by representatives is effectively
disseminated in the United Kingdom. The attaches, advisers and missions and the
Overseas Liaison Group itself have inter-departmental responsibilities, although the
group is placed within the DSIR for convenience of organisation.
The group forms the United Kingdom element of the British Commonwealth
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS
227
Scientific Offices (London) and is also associated, through the United Kingdom
Scientific Mission in Washington, with the British Commonwealth Scientific Office
(North America). It is responsible for the DSIR interests in a number of international
organisations, such as OECD, NATO, UNESCO, ILO.
Commonwealth Agricultural Bureaux
The Commonwealth Agricultural Bureaux comprise three Institutes and ten
Bureaux, each concerned with a particular branch of agricultural science. Their
purpose is to act as clearing houses for the interchange of information of value to
research workers in agricultural science throughout the Commonwealth. This they
achieve by scanning and indexing all journals of scientific repute in all languages, by
keeping in touch with agricultural research in progress and by the dissemination of this
information by the periodic issue of Abstract Journals. Fifteen Abstract Journals are
published periodically and have a combined annual circulation of about 22,500 copies.
The Bureaux also issue monographs on particular subjects within their respective
fields and deal with inquiries received from research workers in all parts of the
Commonwealth. In addition, the Institutes provide taxonomic and identification
services.
The British Council
The aims of the British Council in the pure and applied sciences are to foster closer
co-operation between British scientists and scientists of other countries, and to
promote a better understanding of Britain among overseas specialists by disseminating
a knowledge of British activities and achievements. Under the first objective the
exchange of visits between scientists in the United Kingdom and other countries is of
prime importance. Besides arranging lecture or advisory tours overseas by eminent
British scientists, the British Council, among many activities of a similar nature, brings
to the United Kingdom every year a number of senior overseas specialists, post¬
graduate students and technologists on visits of varying duration, for the purpose of
study in British universities and other institutions, or for discussion with British
experts. In addition to publishing the British Medical Bulletin, a journal issued every
four months and intended primarily to keep overseas specialists informed of progress in
medical research in Britain, the council maintains an extensive and much used specialist
information service. In some 70 countries in which the British Council is represented,
libraries are maintained and in many instances these have strong sections of scientific
and technological literature.
The British Council maintains at its headquarters specialist departments for
medicine and science (including agriculture and engineering), and scientists serve
on the staffs of a number of its overseas offices. The British Council is advised by
eminent scientists who serve on its Science Advisory Committee and on specialist
panels for the different subjects.
Expenditure on Research and Development
The most recent survey of the pattern of the research and development effort in
Great Britain was published in the report of the Advisory Council on Scientific Policy
for 1959-60. It indicated that in the year 1958-59 Britain spent about £480 million on
research and development. The total cost of research and development carried out in
industry was £266 million, industry itself provides £136 million, most of the rest
being provided by the Government. Public corporations were estimated to have spent
£7-8 million.
228
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
These estimates, in so far as they concerned industry, were partly based on the
results of an inquiry conducted by DSIR, a description of which, with final results,
was published in December 1958. The largest expenditure was by the following
industries: aircraft (44 per cent), electrical engineering (18 per cent), chemicals (13
per cent) and shipbuilding (8 per cent). The survey also showed that, according to
the most reliable estimates available, about 46,600 professionally qualified scientists
and engineers were then engaged on research and development in industry, including
about 2,200 research workers in agriculture and medicine.
Communicatisig Results of Research
The dissemination of the results of research to other research workers and to ultimate
users has become a problem of some magnitude as the volume of information has
grown. The traditional method of scientific publication, in which results are written
up into papers and published in journals, is still the main means of communication
among scientists. The leading learned societies have for long been important agencies
for communicating scientific information.
Both the DSIR and the UKAEA devote considerable sums to information services.
Besides its own publications and services, DSIR gives financial support to ASLIB (the
Association of Special Libraries and Information Bureaux), which runs a technical
information department and maintains a panel of translators and a Commonwealth
Index of Translations covering scientific subjects. A new National Lending Library
for Science and Technology (NLL), which started operations under the DSIR at
Boston Spa, Yorkshire, in 1961, will come into full operation in 1962. It will cover all
subjects in science and technology other than some branches of medicine. It will also
be responsible for increasing the volume of translations of foreign (especially of
Russian and Chinese) scientific literature, in which work it collaborates with the
National Science Foundation of the United States.
Besides information services provided by its various groups, the UKAEA has an
information centre and an isotope information bureau at its London headquarters.
In agriculture, the Commonwealth Agricultural Institutes and Bureaux provide
abstracts and an information service in various branches of agricultural science. The
ARC publishes an Index of Agricultural Research in Progress, and gives an account of
current developments in its annual reports. The advisory services of the agricultural
departments bring research results directly to the farmer.
Medical research results are communicated mainly through journals and periodicals;
but the MRC issues special reports and includes special articles in its annual reports.
A national Reference Library for Science and Invention is to be formed out of the
Patent Office Library; it will be part of the British Museum Library. A new building
for it will be erected in London on the south bank of the Thames; to be started in
1963, it should be finished by the end of 1965.
THE PROMOTION OF THE ARTS
The preservation of Britain’s cultural heritage and the promotion of literature
and the arts are the active concern of a number of official and unofficial bodies.
There is no Ministry of Fine Arts or equivalent organisation to formulate or
administer policy in the arts, though bodies such as the Standing Commission on
Museums and Galleries and the Royal Fine Art Commissions for England and Wales
and for Scotland act in an advisory capacity. Government interest in the arts is
expressed mainly through the provision of grants to such bodies as the Arts Council,
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS
229
the British Council (see also footnote on p. 179), the British Film Institute, and the
Council of Industrial Design, and also to the national museums and art galleries.
Government expenditure on the arts (which, in 1938-39, amounted to a little more
than £900,000) is now over £8 million. Of this total, over £3 million is the cost of
upkeep of the national art collections in museums and art galleries, about £1-7 million
the amount of the grant to the Arts Council, and more than £1 million is expenditure
on preserving historic houses and their contents. In addition, under the Local Govern¬
ment Act, 1948, local authorities may use part of the revenue from the rates for the
encouragement of the arts. Local education authorities also make grants to some
schools of art, music and drama. In Northern Ireland, the Council for the Encourage¬
ment of Music and the Arts (CEMA) receives a grant from the Northern Ireland
Government of £29,000 plus up to a maximum of £7,500 on a £ for £ basis on
contributions from local authorities.
Unofficial institutions concerned with the promotion of the arts include many
charitable trusts and foundations, e.g., the Carnegie United Kingdom Trust, the
Pilgrim Trust, the United Kingdom branch of the Calouste Gulbenkian Foundation,
and a large number of societies, associations and other organisations concerned with
separate aspects of the arts, some of which are mentioned later in this chapter.
A development since the second world war has been the increasing support which
the arts are deriving from business firms. In recent years, such industrial patronage
has amounted to some £50,000 annually. In addition, the Independent Television
programme companies (see Chapter XVI) are spending jointly about £150,000 a year
on the encouragement of the arts. A co-ordinating committee ensures that the dona¬
tions of the individual companies do not overlap.
The Arts Council of Great Britain was established under a Royal Charter in 1946.
It consists of not more than 16 honorary members appointed by the Chancellor of
the Exchequer in consultation with the Minister of Education and the Secretary of
State for Scotland. Its main duties are to increase the accessibility of the fine arts to
the public, to improve the standard of execution in the fine arts, and to advise and
to co-operate with Government departments, local authorities and other organisations
on any matter connected with these aims. The corresponding body in Northern
Ireland is CEMA, the board of which consists of four members nominated by the
Minister of Education for Northern Ireland, four by the Senate of Queen’s University,
and eight elected by the Association of CEMA.
The Carnegie United Kingdom Trust was founded in 1913 by the late Andrew
Carnegie. It was incorporated under Royal Charter in 1917. The trust, which was
initially founded for ‘the improvement of the well-being of the masses of the people
of Great Britain and Ireland’, consists of 25 life trustees, six trustees nominated by
the Corporation of Dunfermline and three trustees nominated by the Fife County
Council. Its cultural policies include the support of adult amateur activities in music,
drama and the visual arts. It also assists non-national museums. Grants totalling
j£26.359 were made for these purposes during the year ended 31st December, i960.
The Pilgrim Trust was founded in 1930 by the late Edward Stephen Harkness, an
American citizen. The trust, which has an income of about £200,000 a year, is
administered by a body of trustees who are empowered to make grants towards
any legally charitable object within the United Kingdom. In fact, the greater part
of the trust’s income is at present being used to help to preserve the nation’s heritage
of architecture and history, and for the advancement of learning and the arts. The
grants made for these objects during i960 amounted to £186,000.
7 he Calouste Gulbenkian Foundation of Lisbon was established under the will of
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
230
the late Calouste Gulbenkian who died in 1955. The foundation has a branch in the
United Kingdom, which is responsible for the foundation’s activities in Britain and in
other Commonwealth countries. During i960 the Foundation made grants totalling
£174,680 for the arts in Britain, and continued to implement the policy proposed in
the report, Help for the Arts, prepared for the Foundation in 1959 by a small private
committee under the chairmanship of Lord Bridges.
VISUAL ARTS
There are at present a number of British painters and sculptors of international
repute as well as younger artists of great promise 5 and public interest in their work
and that of their contemporaries overseas, as well as in that of British and foreign
artists of the past, is increasing. This wider interest in visual art has not stopped
at appreciation. There is evidence of it in the large numbers attending evening art
classes, the growth of local art groups and local exhibitions, and the support given to
holiday painting schools.
The fine arts of painting and sculpture in Britain receive State support by grants
to national institutions and, indirectly, through grants made to the Arts Council,
to municipal art galleries and museums, and to local education authorities for art
schools and other means of promoting education in art.
In the year April i960 to the end of IVIarch 1961 the Arts Council arranged yt
separate art exhibitions in Great Britain; 382 showings of these exhibitions were
given in 154 different centres. In Northern Ireland, 23 exhibitions were arranged
by CEMA. Knowledge of Britain’s fine arts is fostered overseas by the British Council
by means of exhibitions, the dissemination of reproductions and photographs, lectures,
and the provision of information and advice to inquirers abroad and to visitors in
Britain. In the year ended March 1961, 37 fine art exhibitions organised by the council
were shown in 45 countries. The council was also responsible for British participation
in six international exhibitions. Since 1948, 33 international awards have been won
by British artists.
Museums and Art Galleries
There are in all about 900 museums and art galleries open to the public in the
United Kingdom, though many are only small collections or merely a few rooms
set aside’in a public building for the display of local tieasures.
The national museums and art galleries in London probably contain between
them the most comprehensive collection of objects of artistic, archaeological, scientific,
historical and general interest ever to exist within one city. The British Museum,
which celebrated its bicentenary in 1953, has unparalleled collections of archaeological
and ethnographical material from every part of the world, in addition to housing
the national library of printed books, manuscripts, newspapers and periodicals; its
Department of Prints and Drawings also possesses collections of the widest extent and
richness. The Victoria and Albert Museum contains works of fine and applied art
of all countries and periods, arranged mainly according to material, though since the
war primary collections have been arranged to bring together, by style, period or
nationality, masterpieces of all the arts. The National Gallery presents paintings by
almost all the greatest European masters. The Tate Gallery embodies two collections:
the British school from the eighteenth century onwards, with a few earlier works,
and modern foreign schools (since 1850). Both sections include modern sculpture.
Frequent loan exhibitions are held in the Tate Gallery.
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS
231
Other important collections in London are at the National Portrait Gallery, the
Imperial War Museum, the National Maritime Museum at Greenwich, the Public
Record Office Museum, which contains Domesday Book and other famous historical
documents, the London Museum (reopened in Kensington Palace in 1951), where
the collection illustrates the history of the capital, and Hertford House, where the
Wallace Collection (furniture, armour, objets d’art and paintings, mainly French
works of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries) is housed. Early in 1962 a small
but important art gallery is to be opened in part of Buckingham Palace, where pictures
from the extensive Royal collections will be exhibited.
The Ministry of Education is responsible for the administration of the Victoria
and Albert Museum and the Science Museum.1 The other national collections are
run by Trustee bodies. All are financed from Government funds. Besides meeting
the administrative costs, this finance takes the form of annual purchase grants, which
have recently been substantially increased, and of special ad hoc purchase grants. The
collections may also receive certain pre-eminent works of art acquired by the Treasury
in lieu of estate duty. The buildings are maintained by the Ministry of Works.
There are six national museums and art galleries in Edinburgh: the National
Museum of Antiquities of Scotland, the National Gallery of Scotland, the Royal
Scottish Museum, the National Portrait Gallery of Scotland, the Scottish United
Services Museum, and the Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art, which was opened
to the public in i960. The National Museum of Wales, in Cardiff, has a branch at
St. Fagan’s Castle where the Welsh Folk Museum is housed. A Northern Irish Folk
Museum has recently been established near Belfast. The Belfast Museum and Art
Gallery is at present owned and maintained by Belfast Corporation but will shortly
be transferred to a statutory body which will receive financial aid from the Government
of Northern Ireland. In addition, a small Belfast art gallery under the control of
CEMA was opened in May i960.
The Government is advised on questions relating to the most effective develop¬
ment of the national institutions as a whole, and on their co-operation with provincial
institutions, by the Standing Commission on Museums and Galleries, set up in 1931.
The Standing Commission publishes a report every five years.
Almost every city and large town has a museum devoted to art, archaeology and
natural history, usually owned by the municipal authority but sometimes by a local
learned society or privately by individuals or trustees to whom some wealthy collector
in the past has bequeathed his treasures. Both Oxford and Cambridge are rich in
museums—the Ashmolean Museum in Oxford, founded in 1683, 18 the oldest in the
country and the Fitzwilliam Museum in Cambridge has fine art galleries and a notable
collection of engravings, manuscripts and books bequeathed by its founder on his
death in 1861. Other universities have important collections, primarily for teaching
purposes but also open to the public. Other cities with important museums and art
galleries are Birmingham, Bristol, Glasgow, Leeds, Leicester, Liverpool, Manchester,
Norwich, Southampton, and York where the Castle Museum, with its complete
reconstruction of an eighteenth-century street of shops, offers a most interesting
historical display. The Herbert Art Gallery and Museum at Coventry, the first major
art gallery to be built in the provinces since 1939, was opened in March i960. In
recent years there has been a notable development of ‘period-house museums’, for
which outstanding examples of the private residences of former times have been
taken over by national and municipal authorities, as at Temple Newsam, Leeds; Aston
1 For information on the scientific museums, see page 225.
232
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Hall, Birmingham; and the Royal Pavilion, Brighton. Private art collections are to be
seen in the historic family mansions (including many in the ownership of the National
Trust) which are now open to the public at certain times.
In 1959, the first area museum council in Britain was inaugurated for the south-west,
and a similar organisation for the Midlands was started in 1961. The objects of such
councils are to promote closer co-operation between museums and art galleries in the
region, to improve technical facilities, and to provide financial assistance.
Financial assistance for improving the displays of the smaller museums is among
the functions of the Carnegie United Kingdom Trust, which has done much to
encourage the growth of the museum movement during the past thirty years, and at
present expends an average of ^10,000 a year for this purpose. The Victoria and
Albert Museum also administers an annual Government grant of £25,000 to help
local museums and art galleries to buy works of art for their collections.
The Museums Association, founded in 1889, is an independent organisation to
which museums and art galleries and their staffs throughout the country belong;
there are also many overseas members. The association serves as a central body
for the collection of information and the discussion of matters relating to museum
administration, and as a training and examining body for professional qualifications.
Temporary exhibitions produced by the Arts Council, the Art Exhibitions Bureau,
and the Circulation Department of the Victoria and Albert Museum are a regular
feature of many museums.
The various national art exhibiting societies include the Royal Academy, which,
in summer, holds exhibitions of works by members and non-members and, in winter,
exhibitions usually devoted to national schools of painting or to the art of a particular
period; the Royal Scottish Academy; the Royal Society of British Artists; the Royal
Institute of Oil Painters; the Royal Society of Painters in Water Colours; the Royal
Society of Portrait Painters; the Women’s International Art Club; and the London
Group (all the foregoing are associations of professional painters); and the Institute
of Contemporary Arts. Some of these societies, notably the Royal Academy at Burling¬
ton House, have their own galleries in London. There are, in addition, many regional
societies such as the Royal Ulster Academy of Arts and the Ulster Society of Women
Artists, while an increasing number of amateur art societies throughout the United
Kingdom hold local exhibitions and encourage local interest in the fine arts in a variety
of ways. The Contemporary Art Society uses its members’ subscriptions to buy
modern works which it presents to the public galleries.
Exhibitions of works by old masters and living artists are held throughout the
year in the galleries of the art dealers of Bond Street and other parts of the West
End of London. The Whitechapel Art Gallery shows a series of important exhibitions
in the East End of London; and the London County Council has shown an exhibition
of modern sculpture in one of its parks every third year since the second world war.
There are also exhibitions of children’s art, including the National Exhibition of
Children’s Art sponsored annually by the Sunday Pictorial.
Art Education
There are 15 regional colleges of art in the United Kingdom, all of which offer
courses in most branches of art and a varying range of crafts; and there are schools
of art in nearly all the larger towns. In London, the most notable of these schools and
colleges are the Royal College of Art (a national college) and the Central School of
Arts and Crafts of the London County Council, in both of which the emphasis is on
industrial design, and the Slade School of Fine Arts in the University of London. At
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS 233
the Royal Academy Schools, founded in 1768, all instruction is provided free by
Royal Academicians.
The leading academic institutions for the teaching and study of the history of art
are the Courtauld Institute of the University of London, the Department of Classical
Art and Archaeology in University College, London, and the Warburg Institute
(also a part of London University) which provides facilities for research on the
character and history of the classical tradition.
Art has a place in the curriculum of every type of school, and the Society for
Education through Art, among its other activities, encourages the purchase by schools
of original works of art, by organising an annual Pictures for Schools exhibition.
The Arts Council operates a loan scheme for reproductions of works of art which is
used extensively by schools.
Industrial Design
The Council of Industrial Design was set up in 1944 by the President of the Board
of Trade as a grant-aided body with the purpose of promoting the improvement
of design in the products of British industry. The council has 24 members, a majority
being prominent industrialists, and there is a separate Scottish committee.
The council runs a permanent exhibition, The Design Centre, in the Haymarket,
London. This is a selective, changing display of well-designed British consumer
goods in current production. To supplement this display, an illustrated record of
good design, known as Design Index, is maintained at the Centre. A maximum of
20 Design Centre awards are presented annually to the makers of outstanding products
shown in the Centre during the previous year. In 1959, an additional annual award
was instituted, the Duke of Edinburgh’s Prize for Elegant Design, presented to the
designer of a single product chosen from the Centre. Permanent design exhibitions
opened in Bristol in 1958 and in Nottingham in i960: both these function indepen¬
dently. The Scottish Design Centre opened in Glasgow in 1957. The council also
organises conferences, courses and exhibitions in Britain and overseas, and maintains
a record of designers and a photographic and reference library on industrial design. It
has an education section and a retail section and publishes a monthly magazine, Design.
Other bodies concerned with industrial design include the Royal Society of Arts
(see p. 209), the Society of Industrial Artists, which is the representative professional
body in Great Britain of designers engaged in industry and commerce, and the Design
and Industries Association (DIA), founded in 1915. The DIA is a voluntary association
of industrial companies, designers, and other bodies and individuals interested in the
promotion of good design in industry.
Architecture
The Government’s responsibility towards the nation’s architecture is concerned
with encouraging the best in new building and preserving, by legislation and in other
ways, the best that has been inherited from the past.
The Government departments chiefly concerned with domestic architecture are
the Ministry of Housing and Local Government, the Department of Health for
Scotland, and the Northern Ireland Ministry of Health and Local Government,
which are responsible in their respective countries for approving the layout and
design of local authority housing schemes, and which issue reports and circulars
setting standards for local authority housing. The education departments supervise
building for the public education service. The Ministry of Works is concerned with the
construction and maintenance of Government buildings and also with the preservation
234
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
of historic buildings and ancient monuments in Great Britain. In Northern Ireland
responsibility for the preservation of ancient buildings is vested in the Ministry of
Finance. All these departments have architects on their staffs, as have also the local
authorities concerned with housing and planning.
A number of professional, advisory and other societies and institutions exist to
further the interests of architecture and the preservation of buildings of aesthetic
value or historic interest.
Several State-sponsored organisations are concerned with special aspects of
architecture. The Royal Fine Art Commission (appointed in 1924) and the Royal
Fine Art Commission for Scotland (appointed in 1927), both bodies of experts
established by Royal Warrant, advise Government departments, planning authorities,
and other public bodies on questions of public amenity or artistic importance; many
large-scale modern buildings have had the approval of the commissions. The National
Buildings Record maintains a library (open to the public for consultation) of over
half a million photographs of English and Welsh architecture and an index of archi¬
tectural records in public and private possession. The Scottish National Buildings
Record, a department of the Ministry of Works in Scotland, carries out functions
similar to those of its English counterpart. The Royal Commissions on Ancient
and Historical Monuments for England, for Wales and Monmouthshire, and for
Scotland, record in detail all ancient and historical remains in their countries and
publish a series of surveys, designed ultimately to cover the whole of Great Britain.
The Ancient Monuments Boards for England, Scotland, and Wales, set up under the
Ancient Monuments Acts, consider which monuments should be listed in accordance
with those Acts and advise the Minister of Works on any questions concerning ancient
monuments. In Northern Ireland the Ministry of Finance administers the Ancient
Monuments Acts (Northern Ireland) and is advised by the Ancient Monuments
Advisory Council. The Historic Buildings Councils for England, Scotland, and Wales,
which were constituted under the Historic Buildings and Ancient Monuments Act,
1953, advise the Minister of Works on the provision of grants towards the repair and
maintenance of such buildings and their contents (see p. 198). The Historic Buildings
Council for Scotland also advises the Secretary of State for Scotland on the exercise of
his functions relating to buildings of architectural or historic interest under the
planning Acts. An Historic Buildings Bureau finds new uses for unoccupied historic
buildings of outstanding interest.
The leading professional architectural institution in the United Kingdom is the
Royal Institute of British Architects (RIBA) to which are allied 48 autonomous
architectural societies covering the whole of the United Kingdom and most of the
overseas Commonwealth. The Royal Institute has a membership of over 19,000, and
some 5,000 students. It has one of the largest and most important architectural
libraries in the world, housing over 65,000 books and periodicals and many thousands
of drawings. The RIBA holds an annual conference and is concerned with a wide
range of activities covering professional practice, science, technology, statistics,
architectural competitions, professional and public relations. It arranges lectures,
symposia and discussions on a variety of subjects, presents exhibitions and through its
Board of Architectural Education controls the training and examination of architects.
The Royal Gold Medal for Architecture is awarded annually by the Queen on the
recommendation of the RIBA.
Education in architecture is given at 28 Schools of Architecture in the United
Kingdom recognised for exemption from the RIBA Intermediate and Final examina¬
tions as well as at 15 overseas schools. There are also two Schools of Architecture
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS
235
in the United Kingdom where the intermediate examination is recognised and one
overseas. In addition, there are 41 schools of art and technical institutes (eight full-time)
with facilities for the instruction of intending architects, which prepare students for
the external examinations of the RIBA.
It is against the law for any person to practise or carry out work under any name,
style or title containing the word ‘architect’ unless he or she is registered. The statutory
body which regulates registration is the Architects’ Registration Council of the United
Kingdom. The principal professional associations of architects are the Incorporated
Association of Architects and Surveyors, the Institute of Registered Architects, the
Faculty of Architects and Surveyors, the Royal Incorporation of Architects in Scotland,
and the Royal Society of Ulster Architects. Other societies include the Architectural
Association, the Architecture Club, and a number of societies interested in particular
aspects of architecture, such as the Modular Society.
The Civic Trust, established in 1957, seeks to promote high standards in archi¬
tecture and civic planning and to encourage a wider interest in the appearance of
towns, villages and the countryside. In 1959 Trust introduced a system of awards
for good architectural design, to be given in two classes; the first for planning develop¬
ments, such as housing estates, the second for smaller projects, for example, shop fronts.
Among the preservation societies are the Georgian Group, which is a society
designed to awaken interest in Georgian architecture and to save Georgian buildings
from destruction; the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings; and the National
Trust in England, Wales and Northern Ireland and the National Trust for Scotland,
which together own more than a hundred houses of historic or architectural interest,
many of which contain pictures and other works of art. Most of these houses, and
other ancestral homes, are open to the public at a small charge and attract large
numbers of visitors. The Treasury also makes use of its powers to accept historic
houses and their more important contents in lieu of death duties. Such properties are
normally administered by the National Trust. The Historic Churches Preservation
Trust was formed in 1952 under the chairmanship of the Archbishop of Canterbury,
in order to raise £4 million to supplement the efforts of parishes to put their churches
into good repair. By the end of i960, it had made available sums totalling £491,269 to
1,156 churches and chapels of various religious denominations.
LITERATURE
A knowledge of literature is fostered in the United Kingdom by the schools,
colleges and universities of the country, in all of which English literature is taught
either as part of a general course or as a specialist subject. Interest in the subject is
thereafter maintained by the libraries, by the very large number of private literary
societies (both national and local), by book reviews in the press and on the radio, and
by the numerous periodicals concerned in whole or in part with literature, of which
the best-known critical weekly is The Times Literary Supplement. State support for
literature is given through the Arts Council, which assists poetry—especially poetry
readings in Great Britain. The British Council is active in encouraging a knowledge
of English literature abroad. Recognition of outstanding literary merit is given in the
form of literary prizes, a number of which are awarded annually, for instance, the
two James Tait Black Memorial prizes for biography and literature, the John Llewellyn
Rhys Memorial prize for young writers of promise, the Hawthornden prize for
imaginative writing, the Library Association Carnegie Medal for an outstanding book
for children, the Kate Greenaway Medal for the best children’s book illustration and
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
236
the Somerset Maugham award for young writers. The Arts Council makes triennial
awards for the best books of poetry published.
Libraries
The largest library in Britain is that of the British Museum in London (more than
5 million volumes). The National Library of Scotland (over 2 million volumes) is in
Edinburgh, and that of Wales in Aberystwyth (nearly 2 million volumes). Together
with the Bodleian Library in Oxford (2^ million volumes) and the Cambridge Univer¬
sity Library (about 2| million volumes) these comprise the ‘copyright’ libraries of the
country and are entitled to receive a copy of each new book published in Britain:
the British Museum Library must receive a copy, the other libraries may claim one.
Other great libraries include1: the University of London Library,2 3 the libraries of
the universities of Edinburgh, Glasgow and St. Andrews, and Queen’s University
Library, Belfast; the London Library (the largest public subscription library) and
the John Rylands Library, Manchester; the Science Museum Library, the Victoria
and Albert Museum Art Library and the British Museum (Natural History) Library;
the Patent Office Library, the India Office Library, the National Lending Library for
Science and Technology and the Public Record Office (which contains the non-current
records of the superior courts of law and of most of the Government departments);
the libraries of the Royal Institute of International Affairs, the Royal Commonwealth
Society, the Commonwealth Institute, the Royal Geographical Society, the British
Drama League, the Royal Institute of British Architects, the Royal College of Music
and the Royal Academy of Music; the Central Music Library; and the National
Library for the Blind. The Arts Council has founded a reference and lending library of
modern English poetry, which is housed with the National Book League. The National
Register of Archives, maintained by the Historical Manuscripts Commission in the
Public Record Office building, contains particulars of numerous local and private
records.
The public libraries of Britain maintain a service throughout the country,
administered by 569 public library authorities (county councils, county borough
councils, municipal borough councils, urban district councils and a few parish councils).
Together these authorities provide more than 39,496 service points; they hold over
73 million books and make more than 440 million loans a year. A feature of the service
in rural areas is the travelling van, which is an itinerant library. Over a quarter of the
total population are registered members of public libraries.
In addition to lending books, music scores and gramophone records, and providing
special libraries for, among others, children, patients in hospitals and prisoners,
public libraries engage in many other activities, such as play readings, lectures, film
shows, music circles and co-operation in university extension education.
A committee set up by the Minister of Education to examine the structure of the
public library service in England and Wales issued its report (known as the Roberts
report) in 1959. Its principal recommendations were that every public library authority
should have a statutory duty to provide an efficient library service; that the Minister
of Education should have general supervisory responsibilities and be assisted by an
advisory body in England and Wales; that non-county borough and urban district
1 This list provides only an arbitrary selection of some of the largest libraries. Unless
otherwise stated these libraries are in London, where there are more than 500 libraries; and
see also pp. 209, 225 and 228.
2 The total holding of all the libraries (college and special) of London University is about
3 million volumes.
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS
237
councils which cannot satisfy the minister that they are providing an efficient library
service should have their public library powers withdrawn; that greater co-operation
between libraries should be encouraged; and that libraries should be provided with
an increased staff of qualified and specialist librarians and, in many cases, with new
or improved premises. In 1961 two Working Parties were appointed by the Minister to
study the implications of these recommendations.
A feature of library services in Britain is the co-operation within the network of
libraries which greatly increases the value of the service. Library co-operation is
organised, in the first instance, through regional library bureaux, and is finally
centralised in the National Central Library with its widespread system of outlier
libraries (public, university and special), giving access to a total stock of
some 100 million books and many thousand sets of periodicals. The Scottish Central
Library carries out, in Scotland, functions similar to those of the National Central
Library.
The tv/o principal organisations to which librarians belong are the Library Asso¬
ciation, with the affiliated Scottish Library Association, and the Association of Special
Libraries and Information Bureaux (ASLIB) (see p. 228). The Library Association
endeavours to unite librarians and governors of libraries throughout the world and
through its many meetings, conferences, personal service and publications, including
its official journal The Library Association Record, to provide for their general and
specialised professional interests.
In addition to the services provided by public libraries, many bookshops maintain
lending libraries for their customers.
Books
New books constitute the large majority of all books published annually in Britain.
In the five-year period 1956-60, for example, British publishers issued an average
total of nearly 21,000 separate titles each year, of which an annual average of some
5,700 were reprints or new editions. A feature of recent years has been a great increase
in the number of books of all kinds, both original works and new or reprinted editions,
published with paper covers (‘paper backs’).
Some books are produced as Government publications by Her Majesty’s Stationery
Office, which is the largest publishing organisation in Britain; the great majority of
books, however, are produced by some 300 of the principal commercial publishers,1
including the university presses, notably the Cambridge University Press and the
Clarendon Press. The Clarendon Press is part of the Oxford University Press, which
also has a publishing department in London.
Leading organisations representing the interests of those concerned with book
production and distribution are the Publishers’ Association, the Booksellers’
Association, and the Society of Authors.
Literary and Philological Societies and Institutions
Societies and institutions concerned with the promotion of literature in its various
forms include: the National Book League, which encourages the reading of and an
interest in books, and which holds exhibitions, including annual exhibitions of book
design, and arranges exhibitions of books in some overseas countries; the English
Association, which aims at upholding the standard of English writing and speech;
and the Royal Society of Literature, which is concerned with the advancement of
1 For total sales and exports of books in i960, see p. 324.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
238
literature. The British Academy, which is an organisation concerned with humanistic
studies and has a section dealing with literature and philology, receives a grant
from the Treasury.
Interest in poetry is encouraged by the Poetry Society and by various bodies such
as the Apollo Society and the Company of Nine, which sponsor poetry readings and
recitals. Poetry also plays an important part in various annual festivals, including
the National Eisteddfod—the bardic festival held in Wales, the origins of which
date back to the seventh century—and the Stratford-upon-Avon Festival of Poetry.
Among the specialist societies are the Early English Text Society, the Biblio¬
graphical Society, the Halleian Society, the Saltire Society, and several societies
devoted to particular authors, of which the largest is the Dickens Fellowship. There
are also a number of clubs and societies, such as the Book Society and the Poetry
Book Society, which exist to distribute selected new books to their members.
DRAMA
State patronage of the drama is expressed through the Arts Council (in Great
Britain) and CEMA (in Northern Ireland), which grant subsidies to certain theatrical
managements operating on a non-profit-distributing basis (i.e. using profits to finance
future productions), provided that such managements have given evidence of serious
aims and of consistently high standards of practical competence; and through the
British Council, which is responsible for making the British theatre better known
abroad by organising and sponsoring international tours by important companies,
including the Old Vic Theatre Company and the Royal Shakespeare (formerly
Shakespeare Memorial) Theatre Company, and by sending overseas exhibitions of
theatrical design or of books dealing with the British theatre and lecturers on drama.
Professional Theatre
There are about 200 professional theatres in Britain. The centre of theatrical activity
is in London, where there are some 40 principal theatres in the ‘West End’ and several
more in the suburbs. With the exception of five theatres—Covent Garden, Sadler’s
Wells, the Old Vic, the Royal Court and the Mermaid—these are let to some 25 pro¬
ducing managements on a commercial basis for each production. The provincial
theatres are served by productions touring either before or after London presentation,
by companies specially formed for touring, and by local repertory companies. Since
the second world war several theatres in London and about a hundred in the provinces
have been closed. On the other hand, several new theatres have been opened in recent
years, both in London and the provinces. The Mermaid Theatre, the first to be built in
London for 25 years, was opened in 1959, as was the completely reconstructed Queen’s
Theatre, the original of which was destroyed by enemy action in September 1940; the
Royalty Theatre opened in i960 and another new London theatre, the Prince Charles
Theatre, opened in 1961. The first full-scale theatre to be built by a civic authority
since 1939, the Belgrade Theatre, was opened in Coventry in 1958, and smaller theatres
have been opened in Middlesbrough and Whitehaven (Cumberland). A new civic
theatre in Nottingham is to be completed by 1963, others are planned for Guildford,
Birmingham and Leicester, and a festival theatre, with an open stage, is being built
at Chichester (Sussex). The London County Council (LCC) is planning to build the
National Theatre on the South Bank site in London. Under the terms of the National
Theatre Act, 1949, the Treasury will provide £1 million towards the capital cost of
the building, while expenditure in excess of this sum will be met by the LCC. Both
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS
239
the Treasury and the LCC will provide an annual subvention towards the theatre’s
running costs.
In addition to managements which rent theatres, there are a number of companies
which produce plays in theatres of their own. Among the best known of these organisa¬
tions are the Old Vic Theatre Company in London and the Royal Shakespeare Com¬
pany at Stratford-upon-Avon and at the Aldwych Theatre in London; the latter
company celebrated its centenary in 1959. In 1956, the English Stage Company was
established at the Royal Court Theatre in London, where it presents contemporary
plays. Theatre Workshop, formed in 1945, has, since 1953, performed classical and
contemporary plays at the Theatre Royal, Stratford, London, some of which have been
staged subsequently in West End theatres. Local repertory companies (many of wrhich
are assisted financially and otherwise by the Arts Council or, in Northern Ireland, by
CEMA) may have the use of their own established repertory theatres (for example, the
Birmingham Repertory Theatre). A number of companies also exist especially to tour
the smaller towns and villages, playing from one to several nights in each place and
using any building which can be made suitable for the purpose. The English Children’s
Theatre, a non-profit-making organisation, presents children’s plays in London and the
provinces, while the Youth Theatre, consisting mainly of schoolboy actors, presents an
annual Shakespearian production. The Open Air Theatre in Regent’s Park, London,
has presented many summer seasons of repertory, mainly plays of Shakespeare and
other poetic drama. The Ulster Group Theatre in Belfast specialises in Irish drama;
the Belfast Arts Theatre, specialising in international drama, has now become the
Belfast Arts Theatre Trust and has moved to a new building where Irish plays will
also be presented. Both these theatres are subsidised by CEMA. Inevitably, the work
of repertory companies varies in quality but, generally speaking, the standard of both
production and acting is high; many of the leading dramatists, producers, actors and
actresses in the United Kingdom started their careers in repertory.
Theatre clubs for regular patrons are run in connection with some of the company-
owned theatres. Where seats are sold only to theatre club members (for instance, the
Arts Theatre, London), the plays are not subject to the provisions of the Theatres
Act, 1843. This Act deals with the licensing of theatres and plays, requires all new
plays to be approved by the Lord Chamberlain,1 who may forbid the presentation of
any play ‘for the preservation of good manners, decorum, or of the public peace’.
The number of plays for which a licence is refused amounts to under one per cent of
the total submitted.
Both in London and in the provinces, most managers and artists are members of
one or another of the professional organisations which exist to maintain the standards
of the professional theatre, to regulate the industry and to promote and safeguard the
welfare of those who work in it. Organisations of this kind include the London Theatre
Council, the Provincial Theatre Council, the Society of West End Managers, the
Theatrical Managers’ Association, the Council of Repertory Theatres, British Actors’
Equity (the actors’ trade union), and the League of Dramatists. The trade union of
theatre staffs is the National Association of Theatrical and Kine Employees.
The Society for Theatre Research brings together those interested in the history
and technique of the British theatre. The International Theatre Institute has a British
centre in London. Its headquarters are in Paris and there are 40 member countries.
The main purpose of the institute is to foster international goodwill and understanding
by interchange of students, theatrical companies, theatre personnel and all theatrcial
1 The Lord Chamberlain, whose office dates from the fourteenth century, is the senior officer
of the Royal Household.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
240
information. The British centre’s committee is composed of representatives of the
Arts Council, British Council, League of British Dramatists, British Drama League,
Conference of Repertory Theatres and representatives of the theatre.
Amateur Theatre
The amateur dramatic movement is widespread throughout the United Kingdom;
there are thousands of amateur dramatic societies, with an active membership of
some half a million. The movement is sponsored and fostered by local education
authorities, by other public bodies, and by five special organisations the British
Drama League, the Standing Conference of Drama Associations, the Scottish Com¬
munity Drama Association, the Ulster Drama League and the Association of Ulster
Drama Festivals. Amateur companies which stage productions in their own theatres
(for instance, the Maddermarket Theatre in Norwich) belong to the Little Theatre
Guild of Great Britain.
The British Drama League, which was founded in 1919, operates on a basis of
affiliation and individual membership. Its services include the arrangement of courses,
lectures and competitions in dramatic work; the provision of a library, which has the
largest collection in Britain of plays and books on the theatre, and an information
bureau; and advice on many matters connected with the stage, e.g., play-writing,
production, stage management and the organisation of drama festivals. The work of
the standing conference is mainly that of co-ordination between the various bodies
concerned in the amateur dramatic movement. Functions similar to those of the league
and the conference in England and Wales are fulfilled in Scotland by the Scottish
Community Drama Association, which receives some financial assistance from the
Scottish Education Department.
The Universities of Oxford and Cambridge have famous dramatic societies, and
there are drama clubs and societies in many other universities and colleges.
Dramatic Training
Dramatic training is provided mainly in the dramatic schools and institutions
established throughout the United Kingdom. Among the most important of such
institutions are the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art (which was founded in i9°4
is now grant-aided by the Treasury, and which provides a two-year course in all
branches of stage work), the Central School of Speech Training and Dramatic Art,
the Rose Bruford School and the London Academy of Music and Dramatic Ait, all
of which are in or near London; and the Old Vic School in Bristol.
Some form of education in drama is also provided in many schools and youth
clubs in Britain, and a varying degree of recognition is given to tne subject in the
universities. The University of London offers a Diploma in Dramatic Art; and Bristol
University has created a department of drama offering a course which an arts student
may take as part of a general degree course. In July i959> Bristol inaugurated the first
International Festival of University Theatre to be held in Britain.
FILMS
Although cinema attendance has been declining in recent years (attendances at
cinemas in the United Kingdom dropped from 1,101 million in 1956 t° 5*4 million in
i960) and the average number of cinemas in Great Britain decreased by about 1,19°
between 1956 and i960, there were, at the beginning of 1961, about 3>°70 cinemas in
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS 24I
Great Britain (with a total of 3 million seats) and another 118 cinemas in Northern
Ireland.
About 10 per cent of British first feature films are made by, and some 35 per cent
distributed by the two large amalgams, the Rank Organisation and the Associated
British Picture Corporation, which have companies for production, distribution
and exhibition. Most producers who are independent of either group make films in
association with other film distributors. There are numerous companies (many of
them small) which produce short films.
Cinematograph films were first shown to the public in Britain in 1896, and within
ten years Britain was in the forefront of film production. This early ascendancy did
not survive the impact of the first world war and, since 1914, British films have had
to contend at home as well as abroad with keen American competition.
During the second world war the British cinema re-emerged with new vitality and
began again to exert an important influence on film development by the production
of many notable feature films depicting Britain’s ordeals and achievements. These
films were based on the documentary technique which had been developed in Britain
from the early 1930s. British feature films in the post-war years were influenced
by this trend, and realistic treatment became a characteristic of British feature
production, both in dramatic films and in the light-hearted satirical comedies that
won international acclaim.
In recent years, this talent for realism has been successfully employed in feature
films reflecting current social problems and in those based on war experiences. Britain
is once again in the forefront of film production and London is one of the most
important centres for the making of films for international markets. British films,
actors and creative and technical talent are appreciated abroad as well as at home and
regularly achieve success at international film events. British films are widely distributed
abroad and export earnings are an important part of total earnings. The British Film
Producers Association and the Federation of British Film Makers are the two trade
associations to which many feature film producers belong.
The documentary film tradition in short film production in Britain goes back to
1929, when a group of directors began making factual films of a distinctive and
imaginative kind on behalf of the Government, and later for commercial organisations.
The war years saw a big expansion in this field and, since then, British documentary
technicians have continued to produce high quality factual films which have won
awards at numerous international film festivals. An interesting recent development
has been the attempt to re-interpret the documentary tradition in contemporary terms
by a group of young technicians—the Free Cinema movement—and by the television
film units of the British Broadcasting Corporation and the Independent Television
Authority contractors.
The Government has continued to sponsor a wide range of information films and
film material. These are produced through the film, television and newsreel services
of the Central Office of Information (COI), which commissions their production by
private companies belonging to the Association of Specialised Film Producers (the
trade association of documentary and specialised film-makers) and by the television
and newsreel organisations. Documentary films, television programmes and newsreels
are produced to inform audiences overseas about British life and achievement. These,
together with other films acquired from private industry and public bodies, are distri¬
buted throughout the world, in English and many foreign languages, by British
Information Services.
The films produced by the COI for Government departments have included
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
242
many specialised films on science, agriculture, health and industry. Films for industry,
produced by the Government, the British Productivity Council and private firms,
have helped to increase productivity; to the same end, many hundreds of industrial
films from other countries have been evaluated, and the best of them made available
to industrial audiences through the COI’s Central Film Library1 and other agencies.
The Films of Scotland Committee, set up in 1936 and revived in 1954 by the
Scottish Council (Development and Industry) in consultation with the Secretary
of State for Scotland, promotes the production of Scottish films covering the industries
and cultural traditions of Scotland.
Films from abroad made in languages other than English often draw large audiences
in London and a few other large cities, but are rarely shown throughout the country.
The development of the film as an art is promoted by the British Film Institute,
founded in 1933, which is financed partly by an Exchequer grant. The institute
encourages the making and showing of good films and helps the public to appreciate
good films. It administers the National Film Theatre in London and the National
Film Archive, runs an annual summer school, and maintains a film distribution library
from which films may be hired, a library of books on the film and an information
service. The institute also makes grants to the Scottish Film Council, the Scientific
Film Association, the University Film Council and the Society of Film Teachers,
and administers a fund for the production of experimental films.
The National Film Archive contains over 7,000 films, excluding newsreels and other
miscellaneous items, besides scripts, art designs, posters and 464,000 photographic
stills, selected to illustrate the history and the art of the film and as significant social
and historical records.
The National Film Theatre shows films of outstanding historical, artistic or
technical interest; it holds a unique position as a cinema offering regular programmes
which are unrestricted by commercial considerations or by the age or nationality of
the films shown. Its present building, erected on the south bank of the Thames, in
London, in 1957, is the first permanent national film theatre in the world.
The Society of Film and Television Arts, formed in December 1958, has as its
aim to improve the standard of film and television production and to stimulate public
appreciation of the arts. It was formed by the amalgamation of the British Film
Academy (founded in 1947 as a private organisation, representative of senior film¬
makers, to foster the making of creative films) and the Guild of Television Producers
and Directors, with which the British Film Academy’s aims and activities were
closely linked.
Assistance to British Film Producers
The art of film production is a costly one which depends upon a commercially
prosperous industry for its development and well-being, and needs adequate financial
backing combined with freedom for the film-maker to experiment and to express
his own ideas. There is no State-owned film production unit in Britain, but the
National Film Finance Corporation, a statutory body set up in 1949, is empowered
to lend money for film production. Its members—a chairman, a managing director
and three to five others—are appointed by the Board of Trade. Its funds (limited
by statute to £8 million) are provided up to £6 million by advances from the Board
of Trade; the remaining £2 million may be borrowed from non-Governmental
1 The Central Film Library also makes available on hire to schools, colleges and other institutions
films on many specialised subjects.
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS
243
sources. The corporation is financially concerned with about half the first feature
films being made in British studios.
There is a levy on cinema admissions to provide a film production fund. The money
raised by the levy is paid out as a percentage of a film’s takings, so that the more
successful a film is at the box-office, the more it receives from the fund. The fund was
started in September 1950 on a non-statutory basis as the British Film Production
Fund, known as the Eady Fund. In 1957, the voluntary scheme was replaced by a
statutory scheme: the Cinematograph Films Act, 1957, gave the President of the
Board of Trade powers to make regulations governing the collection, by the Board of
Customs and Excise, of a levy from exhibitors, and the distribution of the proceeds
for the benefit of British film production. The British Film Fund Agency undertakes
the distribution.
To help British films meet the keen American competition, legislation passed in
1927 introduced the quota system (continued by subsequent legislation), under
which a certain proportion of British films must be shown in British cinemas each
year. The proportion is fixed by the Board of Trade annually after consultation with
the Cinematograph Films Council, any change being effected by statutory instrument
approved by both Houses of Parliament. For first feature films it has stood at 30
per cent since 1950.
Cinema Licensing and Film Censorship
The State takes no part in the censorship of films in Britain, but, by virtue of
their power to grant licences, the local licensing authorities act as the final arbiters
of films proposed for showing in their areas. There are over 700 licensing authorities;
they are local authorities or, in some areas, magistrates. The Cinematograph Act
of 1909 required, for reasons of safety, that inflammable films should be shown only
on premises licensed for the purpose; it was subsequently established that licensing
authorities had the right to supervise the character of the films exhibited. In judging
the suitability of films for public showing, licensing authorities rely on the judgment
of an independent body, the British Board of Film Censors, to which are submitted
all films (other than newsreels) intended for public showing.
The British Board of Film Censors was set up in 1912 on the initiative of the
cinema industry, which wished to ensure that a proper standard was maintained
in the films offered to the public. It consists of a president, a secretary, and five
examiners; the latter, who include two women, are appointed by the president.
The president is elected by a trade committee and is usually a man prominent in
public life.
The board, which does not use any written code of censorship, may require cuts
to be made before it will grant a certificate to a film; more rarely, it will refuse a
certificate. Films passed by the board are placed in one of three categories: ‘U’
(suitable for universal showing); ‘A’ (more suitable for adults than children) and
‘X’ (suitable only for adults). A child or young person under 16 years of age may be
admitted to a cinema showing an ‘A’ film only if accompanied by a responsible adult,
and may not be admitted on any condition if an ‘X’ film is being shown.
Children and the Cinema
The Cinematograph Act, iqS2* which came into force in January 1956, extended
the scope of the 1909 Act and provided for the making of regulations by the Home
Secretary to protect the health and welfare of children attending film shows. Cinemas
BRITAIN : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
244
which give children’s shows require a special licence from the licensing authority,
which may impose special conditions. The British Board of Film Censors publishes at
intervals a list of films particularly suitable for children and for exhibition at children s
matinees. One of the women examiners is appointed for her special knowledge of
children’s needs.
Children’s cinema clubs, providing special children’s programmes on Saturday
mornings, are widely organised by the cinema groups and have become very popular.
An important contribution to these programmes is made by the Children’s Film
Foundation, which produces and distributes entertainment films specially designed
for children. The foundation is a non-profit-making body set up by the British film
industry in 1951 and provision is made in the Cinematograph Films Act, i957> ^or
the foundation to receive grants from the British Film Fund Agency.
MUSIC, OPERA AND BALLET
In Britain today, music in all its forms is drawing large audiences; and music
festivals, orchestral concerts, choral singing, brass bands, opera and ballet are
important features of British cultural life.
Tours abroad by British orchestras, soloists, and opera and ballet companies are
sometimes assisted financially by the British Council, which sponsors some record¬
ings of works by British composers, and maintains libraries of British music (scores
and records) in about 70 countries overseas. At the Council’s London headquarters
a reference library of records, scores, and books on music is maintained, and musicians
from abroad are sometimes invited to Britain as the Council s guests, to gain first¬
hand experience of British music-making.
Music '
Seasons of orchestral concerts are promoted every year in many of the large towns
and cities of Britain, some of which have well-known concert halls. In London, the
principal concert halls are the Royal Festival Hall on the south bank of the Thames,
which was opened in 1951 in connection with the Festival of Britain; the Royal
Albert Hall, Kensington, where the annual summer season of Promenade Concerts
is given; and the Wigmore Hall, which is the principal recital centre. In 1961 the
London County Council announced plans for a new, small concert hall to be built on
the South Bank by 1964. .u rmn
Among the leading British orchestras are the London Symphony, the BBC
Symphony, the London Philharmonic, the Royal Philharmonic, the Philharmoma,
the Halle (Manchester), the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic, the City of Birmingham
Symphony, the Bournemouth Symphony, the BBC Northern, the Scottish Nationa
and the BBC Scottish. There are also the specialised string and chamber orchestras
such as the Philomusica of London and the London Mozart Players; and a number
of new orchestras which have been formed during the past few years. Many of these
receive financial aid from the Arts Council and local authorities to help with the cost
of maintaining ensembles, of presenting new or unfamiliar works, and of improving
standards generally. The City of Belfast Orchestra is financed jointly by the Belfast
Corporation and the Council for the Encouragement of Music and the Arts (CLMA).
The principal choral societies in Britain are the Royal Choral, the BBC Chora ,
the Huddersfield Choral, the Halle Choir, the Liverpool Philharmonic Choir the
London Philharmonic Choir, the Philharmonia Chorus, the Bach Choir, and, in
Northern Ireland, the Belfast Philharmonic Society. These and many other choral
societies are associated with famous orchestras in major choral works; most of them,
PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS
245
together with hundreds of similar choral and orchestral societies and music clubs, are
affiliated to the National Federation of Music Societies, through which they are
supported with funds provided by the Arts Council. Membership of the National
Federation has risen to some 800 societies.
Music festivals in Britain, originating with the Three Choirs Festival held annually
in Gloucester, Worcester or Hereford in rotation, have been in existence for over
200 years. The festival idea has developed considerably in recent years, and festivals
ot music and other arts are now held annually in many cities and towns throughout
the United Kingdom. They range from the famous Edinburgh International Festival
of Music and Drama, which lasts three weeks and attracts many thousands of visitors,
to those, such as the King’s Lynn Festival, lasting a week or less. Among the better
known are the Royal National Eisteddfod of Wales; the Llangollen International
Eisteddfod; the National Gaelic Mod, held at a different place in Scotland each year,
the Cheltenham Festival, largely devoted to contemporary British music; the Aldeburgh
Festival; the York Mystery Plays and Festival; and the Leeds and Norwich Festivals
of choral music, which are held on a triennial basis. An annual international festival
of folk song and dancing is held by the English Folk Dance and Song Society.
Interest in amateur music-making is increasing. It is encouraged by the work of
County Music Committees,1 which are aided by the Carnegie United Kingdom
Trust and united in the Standing Conference for Amateur Music. The Rural Music
Schools Association is concerned with music-making by amateurs in country districts;
it brings together professional musicians, teachers, administrators and amateurs.
Professional organisations, which look after the interests of music and musicians,
include the Musicians’ Union, the Incorporated Society of Musicians, the Composers’
Guild, and the Songwriters’ Guild.
Specialised education in music is given at colleges of music, of which the most
prominent are the Royal Academy of Music and the Royal College of Music in
London, the Royal Manchester College, and the Royal Scottish Academy in Glasgow,
all of which receive grants-in-aid. There are also the Trinity College of Music, and the
Guildhall School of Music and Drama, both in London, and the School of Music in
Birmingham. Youth orchestras are strongly encouraged, and children’s concerts,
given by symphony orchestras directed by prominent conductors, are a regular feature
of the country’s musical activities and have helped to develop among the youth of the
community an appreciation of the world’s greatest music. The National Youth
Orchestra of Great Britain and the National Youth Orchestra of Wales, made up of the
most promising members of school orchestras, are noted for their high standard of
performance, and so is the London Schools’ Symphony Orchestra. A ‘Youth and
Music’ organisation, affiliated to the continental ‘Jeunesses Musicales’, was established
in I954 to encourage musical education and performances for young people. The
Students’ Orchestra of Great Britain, specially formed in 1958, 1959 and 1961 from
music students for performances abroad, has achieved great successes.
In schools, more children are learning to play musical instruments; and about
118,000 candidates a year (children and other students) take the examinations of
the Associated Board of the Royal Schools of Music, the largest proportion (over
81,000) choosing the piano as their instrument.
The increase in musical appreciation among the general public during recent
years is shown not only by the size of the audiences for concerts and for broadcast
music, but also by the fact that of some 80 million gramophone records sold each
1 Some of these are voluntary committees and some are local education authority
sub-committees.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
246
year, the proportion of classical music is about one-fifth. The National Federation
of Gramophone Societies has some 370 affiliated societies.
The City of Westminster houses the Central Music Library in its Buckingham
Palace Road library building, and many other public libraries have collections of
music that can be borrowed; some of them also lend out gramophone records.
Opera and Ballet
Regular seasons of opera and ballet are given at the Royal Opera House, Covent
Garden, London, leased by the Government1 to the Covent Garden Opera Trust,
which was formed in 1944 to make the famous opera house the home of a national
opera and ballet, and which receives a Government grant through the Arts Council.
The Royal Opera House has its own resident opera company and ballet company
which give performances both in London and elsewhere. The opera company, which
numbers about 200 and has a permanent orchestra, makes an annual tour of provincial
centres. The ballet company, incorporated in 1957 with the Sadler’s Wells Theatre
Ballet and the Sadler’s Wells School to form the Royal Ballet, has a high international
reputation gained in many overseas tours.
Seasons of opera and ballet are also given at the Sadler’s Wells Theatre in London;
a second Sadler’s Wells opera company has been formed to tour in the provinces. At
Glyndebourne in Sussex, an opera season, for which an international cast is specially
assembled, is held every summer. Other opera companies include the English Opera
Group, formed in 1947, and noted for its performances of operas by Benjamin Britten;
the New Opera Company, formed in 1957 by members of the Cambridge Opera
Group to produce new operas in London and give opportunities to promising amateurs
and young professionals; the Handel Opera Society; the Intimate Opera Company,
which performs works for very small casts in any hall available; and the Welsh National
Opera Company. Opera in Northern Ireland is promoted by the Grand Opera Society
of Northern Ireland. The Arts Council manages two small operatic groups (Opera for
All) which specialise in introducing opera to audiences in small towns who hitherto
have been unfamiliar with it. There are also a number of amateur opera clubs in
London and the provinces and in Northern Ireland. Among the ballet companies are
the Ballet Rambert, Britain’s oldest ballet company, which has discovered many
distinguished dancers and choreographers, London’s Festival Ballet and an important
new group, Western Theatre Ballet, that includes a large proportion of contemporary
works in its repertoire. The work of the Irish Ballet Company in Northern Ireland,
which is sponsored by CEMA, combines traditional music, dancing and mime.
The Royal (formerly Sadler’s Wells), the Arts Educational, and the Rambert Ballet
Training Schools and the Royal Academy of Dancing are among the teaching
institutions which have played an important part in raising British ballet to its
present high standard.
1 The Ministry of Works acquired a 42-year lease from Covent Garden Properties Limited
in 1949.
IX. THE NATIONAL
ECONOMY
BACKGROUND
The United Kingdom ranks about 75th in size among the countries of the world,
with about o-i8 per cent of the world’s land area. In population, with about 2 per
cent of the world s inhabitants, it ranks ninth. In density of population it is fourth:
of the major countries, only Japan, Belgium and the Netherlands are more crowded;
and there are nine times as many people to the square mile in the United Kingdom
as in the United States. In world trade, it ranks second, accounting for about one-
tenth of the total. It takes about a fifth of the world’s exports of primary products, and
provides about one-sixth of the world’s exports of manufactured goods.
The United Kingdom, from its own soil, provides only half of the food it needs;
and apart from coal and low-grade iron ore—it has few natural resources; thus it
is the world’s largest importer of such products as wheat, meat, butter, fodder grains,
citrus fruits, tea, tobacco, wool, and hard timber. In return, it is one of the world’s
largest exporters of aircraft, locomotives, motor vehicles, electrical equipment,
chemicals, textiles and most types of machinery. Few countries in the world have
such a high proportion of the population living in towns (80 per cent) or such a small
proportion of the working population engaged in agriculture (only slightly more than
4 per cent).
The United Kingdom is also the central banker of the sterling area, an area with
a quarter of the world s population. Many countries outside the sterling area use
sterling in their international transactions, and it is the currency in which about
two-fifths of the world’s trade is conducted.
The Economy before 1939
During the nineteenth century Britain secured a leading position as world manu¬
facturer, merchant, carrier, banker, and investor and so was able to support a rapidly
increasing population at a rising standard of living. It was Britain’s commerce in
cotton goods, above all, which gave it the leading position in world trade; cotton
cloth provided 40 per cent of its exports in 1851. It was in this period also that the
country became so largely dependent on imports of foodstuffs and raw materials.
During the period from 1870 to 1890 British industrial expansion had the clearest
lead over that of other countries. Between 1890 and 1914 growing industrial com¬
petition from Europe and North America began to make itself felt, but its effects on
Britain s staple export industries, particularly cotton textiles and coal, were offset by
the general rise in world trade, by the continued demand for British textiles from India
and other eastern countries, and by the continued high level of overseas investment.
The new problems confronting British industry and trade in the twentieth century
became apparent after the first world war. Textiles from India and Japan, where
labour costs were lower, established themselves firmly in the large eastern markets,
to a great extent replacing the more highly priced and often higher quality British
products. I he extension of the world demand for coal was slowed down by the
1
247
248
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
increasing use of oil, while coal from the newer European mines competed severely
with British coal.
In the old-established branches of the vehicles and engineering group of industries
(e.g., locomotives, ships and textile machinery) world demand fell away after a
brief post-war boom, and Britain failed at first to gain a compensating share of the
expanding world trade in the new types of engineering products (e.g., cars and electrical
goods). Most countries were tending towards self-sufficiency, and some sought
deliberately to protect nascent and even established industries by tariffs and (later)
quotas and exchange restrictions.
Income from overseas investments and a substantial improvement in the terms of
trade (the price of exports relative to the price of imports) cushioned the effect of a
fall in the volume of exports, and imports remained high. The loss of export markets
led, however, to a contraction of Britain’s staple industries—coal, cotton, iron and
steel, and the older branches of engineering. The result was heavy unemployment,
the general rate of which averaged 14 per cent of the working population in the years
1921-39, reaching a peak of 22 per cent in 1932, when the slump in world trade was
at its worst. In districts relying mainly on one or other of the staple industries, the rate
was much higher. _
After 1932 an improvement in the levels of production and employment took
place, stimulated by an increase in home investment, by some revival in world trade
and, after 1935, by the armament programme.
Effects of the Second World War
The second world war is estimated to have run down British domestic capital by
about £3,000 million, through shipping losses, bomb damage, and arrears of industrial
maintenance and replacements. It also resulted in considerable alterations in Britain s
financial and trading position. These included the sale of £1,000 million worth of
overseas investments, nearly half in North America, and the accumulation of new
external debts of £3,000 million. Exports had fallen by 1944 as a result of the war
effort to less than one-third of their 1938 volume while there had been a sharp adverse
movement in the terms of trade as a result of the shortage of imported raw materials.
Post-war Developments
Since the war, the United Kingdom has experienced, with few interruptions, a
steady growth in output of goods and services and a high level of employment.
Invention and technological advance and shifts in world demand have helped to
produce some radical changes in the British industrial scene. Industries in which new
techniques have predominated, notably the electrical engineering, aircraft, motor and
chemicals industries, and new branches of machinery construction, are now con¬
tributing a significantly larger share of the total output and of total exports and
providing wider employment opportunities for an increasingly skilled labour force.
Expenditure on industrial and scientific research has increased steadily and facilities
for technological education have been greatly enlarged.
At the same time, the United Kingdom has had to deal with some persistent
economic problems; in particular, to fulfil its overseas obligations and to maintain
its traditional role in world commerce and finance it has needed to achieve and
maintain a substantial balance of payments surplus. In the initial post-war years
Marshall Aid and loans from the United States and Canada helped to overcome the
serious deficit in the balance of payments pending the full recovery of exports.
Exports of both goods and services have maintained an upward trend, but in some
THE NATIONAL ECONOMY
249
years the rate of increase has been insufficient to pay for a rising volume of imports
(almost all restrictions on imports having been removed) and to provide for overseas
investment and economic assistance to developing countries. Nevertheless on external
capital account as a whole, the United Kingdom is again a net creditor country.
The persistent rise in prices, a problem shared with most other countries, was a
feature of the post-war period until 195^’ It stemmed primarily from an excessive
pressure of demand exports, investment both at home and abroad, defence, and
personal consumption—on the nation’s resources, so that money incomes rose faster
than production. From 1958 to mid-1960 prices remained relatively stable; the Govern¬
ment has since taken strong measures to prevent the re-emergence of inflationary
tendencies and to seek to hold any increase in check.
THE STRUCTURE OF THE ECONOMY
The following sections sketch briefly the salient features of the national income
and expenditure of the United Kingdom in recent years. The sources of Tables 8
to 12 are National Income and Expenditure, 1960, and Economic Survey, 1961, Cmnd.
Output and Employment
Between 1949 and i960, the United Kingdom gross national product (the measure
of total goods and services produced at home and net income from abroad) is estimated
to have doubled from £11,136 million to £22,291 million. In real terms, that is after
allowing for price changes, the increase has amounted to about 33 per cent over the
same period; this is equivalent to an average annual advance of about 2| per cent.
From 1956 to 1958 the need to restrain demand reduced the rate of increase, but in
1959 and in i960 there was again a strong upward movement. In terms of national
income per head the United Kingdom ranks appreciably below the United States
and Canada and slightly below Australia, New Zealand, Sweden and Switzerland,
but above nearly all other European countries.
The total working population has risen relatively slowly; in the twelve years to the
middle of 1961 it increased by slightly over if million (or some 8 per cent) to about
25 million, of which slightly more than two-thirds were males. The expansion of the
national income over the same period has, therefore, been mainly the result of higher
productivity. During this period unemployment remained very low, on average less
than 2 per cent of the working population being out of work, compared with 14 per
cent between the two world wars, and only once since 1947—at the end of 1958—has
the total in Great Britain exceeded 500,000. When resources were stretched to the
utmost, as for example, in 1951 and again in 1955, the number of unfilled vacancies
was double that of registered unemployed. There are, however, districts in which
unemployment is persistently higher than average; in i960 the Government acquired
additional powers to steer new industrial development towards such areas, and their
relative position is improving.
During the 1950s there was an average annual increase of about 2 per cent in the
output of goods and services per head of the labour force, the chief factor in the growth
of the gross national product. With industrial investment being maintained at its
present high level, the capacity for further growth is readily available, and Government
policy is designed to encourage industrial re-equipment and expansion, for example
by special investment allowances. The Government is also committed to maintaining
full employment; this provides an assurance to both capital and labour that measures
250
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
will be taken to prevent the recurrence of the severe trade recessions of the pre-war
years. Nevertheless, considerable fluctuations in demand may be encountered from
time to time, and the Government is therefore obliged during such periods to influence
the level of demand either upwards or downwards.
CHANGES IN NATIONAL EXPENDITURE
I960 compared with 1954 at average 1954 prices
Consumers’
expenditure
Public authorities’
current expenditure
Gross fixed capital
formation
.Stocks and work
in progress
Exports of goods
and services
Total
£ million
INDEX OF
PRODUCTION
PRODUCTION AND
NATIONAL INCOME TRENDS
1900
1905 |9I0 1915 1920 1925 1930 1935 1940 1945 1950 1955 I960
THE NATIONAL ECONOMY
251
Table 8 shows the distribution of total supplies of goods and services since 1949, at
current prices, divided between consumers, public authorities, investment and
exports; while the diagrams on p. 250 show the changes in national expenditure in
i960 compared with 1954 at average 1954 prices, and production and national income
trends since 1900.
Manufacturing industry contributes nearly 40 per cent to the total output of
goods and services, and together with mining and quarrying, building and contracting
and public utilities (gas, electricity and water) makes up just under half the total;
agrictlture, forestry and fisheries account for less than 5 per cent; transport and
communications, together with the distributive trades, for slightly more than 20 per
cent. The remainder, about one-quarter of total output, includes public administration,
education, health and financial services.
Industrial prodt ction as a whole has risen over the eleven years by over two-fifths,
and in the six years from 1954 to i960 by about one-quarter in manufacturing industry.
Rising output has made possible an appreciable advance in living standards, the
raising of investment progressively to record levels, and a notable but not fully adequate
expansion in exports.
TABLE 8
Distribution of Total Supplies of Goods and Services
Percentages
Consumers’ expenditure
Public authorities’ current expenditure
Gross fixed capital formation
Investment in stocks
Exports of goods and services
Total Final Expenditure
1949
59-9
13-4
10-9
0-4
15-4
lOO'O
1954
56-2
14-6
12-1
0-2
16-9
100-0
1959
55-8
13-7
13-1
0-6
16-8
100-0
1960
54-4
13-7
13-3
1-9
16-7
100-0
Defence expenditure has made heavy calls upon resources at certain periods; in
peak years it absorbed nearly 10 per cent of the gross national product. In real terms,
between 1949 and i960, gross fixed capital formation rose by nearly 71 per cent,
consumption by 30 per cent, and public authorities’ current expenditure by nearly
23 per cent. (Corresponding increases between 1954 and i960 were 35 per cent and
20 per cent for fixed capital formation and consumption; public authorities’ current
expenditure remained almost unchanged.)
Investment
. Since the end of the war, and particularly since 1953, gross fixed investment has
risen markedly. In 1938 fixed investment in the United Kingdom was about 12^ per
cent of the gross national product; in 1948, 14 per cent. From 1957 to 1959 it averaged
over 17 per cent, and it rose to 18T per cent in i960. In some years, such as 1951 and
i960, the level of economic activity has been influenced by a high and rising investment
in stocks and in work in progress. Up to 1953 investment in oil refineries, chemicals
and iron and steel, and in the housing programmes of local authorities increased
particularly rapidly. Since 1954 industrial development as a whole, and especially in
manufacturing, transport and communications, and distribution has expanded greatly,
252
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
PUBLIC AND PRIVATE INVESTMENT 1954 AND I960
(L million at 1954 prices)
while investment in housing tended to decline until 1958, but has since risen strongly.
In i960 the volume of fixed capital formation by manufacturing industry was about
44 per cent higher than in 1954. It has been at higher than average levels in the food,
drink and tobacco, chemicals, motor vehicles and electronics industries. A further rise
in investment in manufacturing was expected in 1961.
More than 40 per cent of the total fixed investment is carried out by the central
Government, the local authorities and the public corporations, the last accounting
for slightly more than two-fifths of public investment, and the central Government
for about one-fifth. Each year the Government considers proposals for capital expendi¬
ture in the following financial year put forward by the authorities concerned, and in
the light of the overall position of the economy approves the total level. Public investment
in i960 amounted to about £1,670 million, an increase of about £80 million over 1959.
It is likely to be somewhat higher in the financial year 1961-62, but thereafter may be
at reduced levels. The diagram above shows the division between public and private
fixed investment and the pattern of investment according to type of asset in 1954 and
i960. Table 9 shows the division into industrial groups of gross fixed investment in
1956 and i960.
Savings and the Financing of Investment
The marked growth of investment since 1954 has been greatly facilitated by a sub¬
stantial increase in personal savings (see Table 10). During the early post-war years,
personal savings were very small, partly because people were making good the
war-time arrears of expenditure on necessities such as clothing and household goods;
most of the saving, therefore, was carried out by the Government through its Budget
THE NATIONAL ECONOMY
253
TABLE 9
Gross Fixed Investment
(At 1954 prices)
Industrial Groups
Dwellings . .
Manufacturing industry . .
Gas, electricity and water
Transport and communications (a)
Distribution and other services (b)
Other (including roads)
Totals
(a) Excludes road goods transport.
(b) Includes road goods transport.
£ million
1956
561
757
306
329
542
353
2,848
1960
(Preliminary)
655
834
375
407
747
468
3,486
Index Numbers
of Volume
(1956 = 100)
1960
117
110
123
124
138
133
122
surpluses and by companies. But the next few years brought a remarkable growth in
private savings, which in i960 reached a record total, provisionally estimated at about
^1,480 million net, more than double the 1954 level and equivalent to nearly one-third
of total savings. In the period 1948-51, on average only about 2 per cent of dis¬
posable personal income was saved, but the proportion in recent years has fluctuated
between 7 and 9 per cent.
The rise in personal savings has taken various forms. Over one-third has come
from life assurance premiums and other forms of contractual savings, such as super¬
annuation funds. The National Savings movement (which in 1959 reached the record
peace-time level of £390 million) and building societies have also been significant
sources of savings.
TABLE 10
Savings in the United Kingdom (a)
Persons
Companies
Public corporations
Central Government and local authorities
Totals
1956-58
(Average)
971
1,878
179
644
3,672
1959
1,033
2,149
185
686
4,053
£ million
1960
(Preliminary)
1,483
2,428
274
482
4,667
div?de^d°and Interest reserves6 prOVidin8 for depreciation and stock appreciation and for tax
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
254
The most important contribution to savings, however, comes from companies,
which provide about half the total; about the same proportion (i.e. half), of the gross
trading profits of companies is allocated to savings.
Public Authorities
Expenditure by the central Government, local authorities and the National Insurance
funds has expanded appreciably in comparison with pre-war years although since the
end of the war less rapidly than the gross national product. The main factors in this
change have been the growth of the social services and of defence expenditure. In
recent years the proportion absorbed by defence has tended to fall, accounting for
about 19! per cent of the expenditure of the public authorities in i960 against 27 per
cent in 1953. Government current expenditure (excluding National Insurance funds),
as a percentage of the gross national product, has dropped from 30 per cent in 1948 to
25 per cent in i960.
The expansion of the national income has enabled central Government tax revenue
to increase by about one-third since 1953, despite several reductions in taxation rates.
Revenue from taxes on expenditure and especially from purchase tax on cars and
durable goods, has risen slightly faster than that from taxes on income, partly because
of income tax reductions. Increases in the rates of contributions for the national
insurance and health schemes have produced increased revenues since 1957. Revenues
from rates imposed by local authorities increased by about 75 per cent between 1953
and i960.
Table 11 shows how the public authorities collected and spent their revenue,
including national insurance and health contributions, in i960.
TABLE 11
Combined Revenue Accounts of Public Authorities in 1960
Revenue
Taxes on income and capital
Taxes on outlay—alcohol,
tobacco, purchase tax,
etc.
National insurance and
health contributions . .
Rates
Rent, dividends, interest,
etc.
Gross trading income . .
Totals
f
million
2,961
2,641
912
761
670
181
8,126
Per
cent
36|
32!
11
8f
2
100
Expenditure
Central Government current
expenditure on goods and
services:
Military defence
Health services . .
Other
Local authorities’ current
expenditure on goods and
services
Subsidies and grants
Interest on national and local
debt
Surplus
Totals
million
1,602
733
529
1,323
2,294
1,035
610
8,126
Per
cent
19!
9
61
16!
28!
12!
7!
100
Personal Incomes and Consumer Expenditure
Incomes from employment in i960 totalled £ 14,99° million (compared with £9,112
million in 1952) and accounted for slightly over 70 per cent of total personal incomes
THE NATIONAL ECONOMY
255
(against 60 per cent in 1938); for rent, dividends and interest the corresponding
percentages are n| and 22^. The diagram below shows the composition of personal
incomes and expenditure in i960.
The distribution of incomes after payment of income tax and surtax is characterised
by the absence of very large differentials. In 1959 there were only about 3,000 people
with incomes after tax of more than £6,000 a year. Nearly one-third of incomes
PERSONAL INCOME AND EXPENDITURE, I960
(In £ million at current prices)
Income
Expenditure
after tax were in the £250-500 range and slightly fewer (77 million) in the next range
of £5OI-75°- About 56 per cent of the yield from the above taxes came from persons
with annual incomes of £1,000 a year and above, although the total incomes before
tax of this group accounted for only 22 per cent of all personal income.
While consumer expenditure nearly doubled between 1949 and i960, to reach a
TABLE 12
Consumer Expenditure in the United Kingdom
(At 1954 Market Prices)
Category
Food
Alcoholic drink
Tobacco
Housing, fuel and light
Clothing and footwear . .
Cars
Other durable goods
Other goods and services
Totals
Expenditure
£ million
1954
3,778
818
855
1,539
1,205
221
603
3,168
12,187
1960
4,275
1,008
981
1,690
1,537
529
731
3,664
14,415
Increase
£ mill on
1954-60
497
190
126
151
332
308
128
496
2,228
Per cent
1954-60
13
23
15
10
28
139
21
16
18
256 BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
total of £16,640, in real terms (i.e. after discounting the effect of price changes), the
increase has been slightly less than one-third. In the six years between 1954 and i960
it rose by 18 per cent (as shown in Table 12), including an increase of over 3! per cent
in i960. The proportion of this larger expenditure devoted to food has been falling
slightly and now accounts for just over 30 per cent; outlays on manufactured foods
and on beverages, however, have risen appreciably. Housing absorbs only Per cent
of total expenditure. Spending on motor cars and other personal transport has shown
a steep rise since 1951, and there has also been a sharp growth in spending on house¬
hold electrical equipment. In real terms outlays on cinema-going have dropped by
half since 1954, while those on running costs of vehicles have risen by nearly three-
quarters.
Incomes and Prices
Between 1945 and the middle of 1958, the cost of living in the United Kingdom
rose almost without interruption, though at varying rates of increase. The most
rapid rise in retail prices, roughly 10 per cent, was between 1950 and 1951; the lowest,
about 2 per cent, between 1953 and 1954. After two years of stability, retail prices
began to move upwards again in the middle of i960. Over the period 1949 I9^°>
the rise in retail prices was between 50 and 60 per cent. Wage rates over the same
period rose by about 75 per cent and average weekly industrial earnings doubled.
In the first six years after the war, the general upward movement of costs and prices
was in part the result of the rapid increase in import prices, no less than 50 per cent
between 1948 and 1951, although controls held in check the extent of the upward
trend in food and some other prices. This upward trend continued, however, after
1951, although import prices fell. Over the whole period since the war, it is clear that
the main immediate cause of the rise in prices has been the tendency of money incomes
to rise faster than production.
Steps have been taken by the Government throughout the period to counter this
gradual inflation. The main weapons used since 1955 have been the prevention of
excessive demand by monetary measures and appeals for voluntary restraint in
increases in wages and profits.
Following severe but generally successful measures in the autumn of 1957 to halt
the upward drift in costs and prices, a policy of expansion again became feasible. In
1959 and the early months of i960 there was a rapid growth in demand and output,
and it became necessary to restrain the pressure of demand by a series of moderate
disinflationary measures.
In the middle of 1961 the prosperity of the previous two years was continuing, with
consumption and investment at very high levels, but there were signs that the economy
was becoming overloaded: the weakness of the balance of payments position and the
failure of costs and prices to remain stable indicated the need for additional measures
of restraint. The Finance Act of 1961 had given the Government powers to make certain
limited changes in taxation at any time if they appeared necessary to influence the course
of the economy, and in July 1961 a number of remedial measures were announced.
These included a 2 per cent increase in Bank Rate (to 7 per cent); a general 10 per
cent surcharge on indirect taxes (made possible by the Finance Act, 1961), and further
restrictions on the volume of bank advances.
Balance of Payments
A strong balance of payments is vital to Britain because of its exceptionally high
degree of dependence on international trade, its many overseas commitments, and its
THE NATIONAL ECONOMY
257
position as banker to the sterling area; therefore, one of the foremost objectives of the
Government’s economic policy must always be to preserve this strength.
Britain’s overseas liabilities in the form of sterling balances held by other countries
are substantial, amounting to £4,436 million at the end of i960. (A considerable
proportion are long-term holdings.) Gold and foreign currency reserves at the end of
July 1961 stood at £876 million. As a second line of reserves, the United Kingdom
has drawing rights on the International Monetary Fund (IMF), which it can exercise
with the permission of the Fund. In August 1961 it drew $1,500 million (£536 million)
in nine different currencies from the Fund, plus a further $500 million held by the
Fund under stand-by arrangements, to strengthen the reserves. Taking into account
external assets and liabilities as a whole, long-term as well as short-term, the United
Kingdom is a net creditor country.
In normal times it is necessary for the United Kingdom to earn a substantial surplus
on current account to cover its heavy outgoings on capital account, both in the form
of private investment and of Government loans. Net private investment abroad has
been running at a rate of £i25-£i5o million a year, reflecting the traditional role of
the United Kingdom as a source of capital for overseas development. In addition,
there has been a substantial increase in recent years in Government loans to help
finance development in the less developed territories. The United Kingdom also has to
make repayments of capital and interest on post-war loans from the USA and Canada:
the total service of these loans requires about £66 million a year. The total net United
Kingdom annual outlay on capital account, which reflects many of the factors described
above, has been about £200 million.
There are also, however, important commitments which the United Kingdom has
to meet within the current account. The most important of these are the cost of
overseas military expenditure, which rose from £182 million in 1958 to £215 million
in i960, and grant assistance to less developed territories, mainly the United Kingdom
dependent territories. Total bilateral grant aid of this kind is now running at about
£60 million a year; in addition, there is United Kingdom multilateral assistance,
which during i960 required a further £25 million in the form of contributions to
international agencies such as the International Bank. Total United Kingdom aid,
including grants as well as loans, rose to about £150 million in i960 from £81 million
in 1957-58.
For a fuller account of the balance of payments, see Chapter XIV.
X. INDUSTRY
ORGANISATION AND PRODUCTION
The United Kingdom was the first country in the world to become highly
industrialised. Eleven people work in mining, manufacturing and building for every
one in agriculture. The United Kingdom is one of the world s largest exporters of
manufactured goods per head of population and the range of its industrial manufactures
reflects its position as one of the most important workshops of the world.
Location
The factors that have influenced the location of industry in Britain are many and
various. During the rapid industrialisation of the nineteenth century one of the most
important influences was the proximity of coal, the major source of power, particularly
when it was associated with ease of access to other raw materials such as iron ore in the
West Midlands and salt (for chemicals) in Cheshire, and to the coast, which in turn
offered easy access to imported raw materials and a quick outlet for exports. In the course
of the past hundred years, the pull exercised by coal has been progressively weakened
as improved means of communication and an alternative source of power in electricity
have been developed and have enabled advantage to be taken of other sites—for example,
those near to big consumer markets and plentiful supplies of labour. The main areas of
industrial concentration are still, with one exception (London), the areas which saw the
beginning of Britain’s industrial greatness and which, with two exceptions (London and
Belfast), are on or near coalfields; but many smaller and more widely dispersed centres
of industry have grown up, notably in southern England.
During the inter-war period there was a tendency for the ‘new’ industries, such as
those manufacturing motor vehicles, electrical goods and rubber products, to develop
rapidly in the south (especially in and around Greater London) and in the Midlands.
On the other hand, this period was one of acute depression and mass unemployment
for the older industrial areas which specialised in the great staple industries coal¬
mining, steel, shipbuilding, marine engineering and cotton manufacture. These
conditions prompted official action (which has been intensified since the second world
war) aimed at encouraging the development and diversification of industry in the areas
where labour and other unused resources are to be found and discouraging further
industrialisation in congested areas, and these policies, allied to the war-time dispersal
of industry and the widespread demand for new factory premises over the past decade,
have had a considerable effect.
A brief description follows of the location of British industry, grouped according to
broad geographical areas.
Greater London and the South-eastern Region
London, situated at the head of ocean navigation on the Thames estuary, is Britain’s
capital and main communication centre, probably still the world’s most important
financial centre, one of the world’s three largest cities (with Tokyo and New York)
and one of the world’s three largest ports (with New York and Rotterdam). Greater
London (see p. 21), including the urbanised fringe areas within 40 to 45 miles of
258
INDUSTRY
259
iClvdeside
Tyneside
Mersevside,
Potteries
, T Vi/ (
West Midlands)
South Wales V
Home Counties
Industrial
Employment
NATURAL RESOURCES
Coal
Iron Ore
WORKERS IN INDUSTRY
400,000
200,000 $
100,000 •
50,000 •
25,000 •
10,000 •
r Northern Ireland
MILES
0 20 40 60
0 20 40 60 80 100
KM.
z6o
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Charing Cross, has a working population of over 5 million, of whom nearly a half are
in manufacturing industry. London is the main centre in Britain of the clothing and
food and drink industries, of printing, of cinema film production, and of the manu¬
facture of furniture, materials for the arts, precision instruments and many other
specialised products. Small firms predominate in many of these industries and the
average size of manufacturing firms (particularly in the County of London) is well
below the national average. London, especially its outer ring, is also an important area
for light engineering, chemicals and consumer goods and has some heavy engineering
plants. Towards the periphery of the London conurbation and in the new urban
development outside it, industry, particularly the electronics and a variety of con¬
sumer goods industries, has been expanding rapidly; some of the largest aircraft
plants are in this area, as well as the factories, at Dagenham, Luton and Dunstable,
of two of the five main motor vehicle manufacturers. Along the lower Thames and
Medway estuaries there are large oil refineries as well as shipyards and a variety of
other engineering works.
West and South-west England
The largest city, Bristol, is both a leading port and an industrial centre with aircraft,
tobacco, food processing, paper, paint and other industries. Gloucester has aircraft
and engineering plants; Swindon, in Wiltshire, has railway and engineering works. The
port of Southampton is served by the largest passenger liners and has ship-repair
yards, oil refineries and other industries. Plymouth has an important naval dockyard
and several light industries. The noted West of England woollen and worsted cloths
come from factories in the Cotswold valleys.
East Anglia and Lincolnshire
Besides being one of the most productive agricultural regions, the eastern counties
possess some sizeable towns. Ipswich and Grantham are renowned for agricultural
machinery and implements, and Norwich for footwear and food manufacture. Food
canning and freezing, based mainly on locally grown produce, have developed rapidly.
Scunthorpe, in Lincolnshire, is an important steel-making centre, and the ports of
Grimsby and Yarmouth have extensive fish processing plants.
Midlands
The main industrial area of the Midlands consists of the great conurbation centred
on Birmingham and Wolverhampton (which includes portions of Staffordshire,
Worcestershire and Warwickshire) where there is a wide variety of industry, including
notably the manufacture of metals, electrical and engineering products of all kinds,
and also jewellery, rubber products and domestic metalware. The smaller conurbation
of North Staffordshire, centred on Stoke-on-Trent, is devoted chiefly to the manu¬
facture of pottery and china and to coalmining. The largest concentration of motor
vehicle manufacture in the United Kingdom is situated in the Midlands, at Coventry
and Birmingham and, further to the south, near Oxford.
Industrial cities and towns lying outside the main industrial area include Leicester
(hosiery, clothing, footwear and footwear machinery), Derby (general engineering,
locomotives, aero-engines), Nottingham (light engineering, lace, drugs, tobacco),
Rugby (electrical engineering), Northampton (footwear, engineering) and Kidder¬
minster (carpets). Corby, in Northamptonshire, has an expanding steel industry
originally based on local deposits of iron ore, and at Peterborough there are several
large engineering works. The richest coalfield in Britain, with the highest output per
man, lies in the north-west of the area and continues into Yorkshire.
INDUSTRY
26l
Lancashire
Besides being the commercial hub of the cotton textile industry, Manchester is
one of the chief centres of electrical and heavy engineering, machine tools and dye¬
stuffs in Britain. Most of the cotton yarn is spun in Bolton, Oldham, and Rochdale,
and at Stockport (in Cheshire); further to the north lie the weaving towns of Burnley,
Nelson, Blackburn, Colne, Accrington and Darwen; Preston and Bury have both
spinning and weaving plants. Engineering industries, notably the manufacture of
printing, textile and electrical machinery and commercial vehicles, are, however,
more important to the area today than cotton. The Lancashire coalfield also lies in
the Manchester-Wigan area.
The Manchester Ship Canal, which carries a substantial volume of overseas trade,
links Manchester with Merseyside. It passes through the important industrial towns
of Warrington with its metal industries (such as wire-drawing), Widnes with its chemi¬
cals, and Ellesmere Port with its oil refinery installations, before reaching the Mersey
estuary. St. Helens, to the north of the canal, is famous for glass manufacture. Liverpool
is the second port of Britain, a great commercial and insurance centre and, after London,
the greatest centre for processing imported foodstuffs and raw materials, especially
flour milling, soap manufacture, sugar refining and rubber products. Among its older
industries is ship repairing; shipbuilding is a major industry across the river at Birken¬
head. Many new industries, including electrical engineering and the manufacture of
other heavy industrial equipment, have been established in the Liverpool area, particu¬
larly on industrial estates. Barrow, in the north-west of the county, is a well-known
shipbuilding area.
Yorkshire
Most of the county’s industry is located in the West Riding, where about 90 per
cent of the United Kingdom’s worsted industry and the greater proportion of its
woollen industry are found. Bradford is the main city for worsteds and also the com¬
mercial centre of the whole wool trade; Morley and Leeds specialise in cheaper cloths,
and Batley, Dewsbury and Cleckheaton in heavy cloth. Huddersfield has a reputation
for fine woollens and Halifax for carpets. Leeds, the commercial capital of the area,
has a large ready-made clothing industry and manufactures a range of engineering
products. Further south is the heavy engineering centre of Sheffield, famous for its
high quality steels, cutlery and tools. The area’s extensive coalfields provide about
one-fifth of Britain’s coal. York, noted for chocolates and confectionery manufacture
and with important railway shops, and Hull, one of the world’s largest fishing ports and
with many manufacturing industries, including engineering, vegetable oil processing,
paints and sawmilling, are other important industrial towns in Yorkshire.
North-east England
The coal industry is of great importance in Northumberland and Durham. Tyneside
and Wearside together are second only to Clydeside for shipbuilding and ship repairing,
and ships are also built at the Hartlepools and on Tees-side. Iron and steel plants are
situated at Consett, in County Durham, and in the Middlesbrough area, which is also
the most important centre for chemicals in Britain. Tyneside is particularly noted for
the manufacture of heavy electrical equipment. Other industries of the area, whose
manufactures have been greatly diversified since 1937 as a result of the establishment
of large industrial estates, are mining and other machinery, rolling mill plant, machine
tools, ropes, glass, clothing and scientific instruments.
262
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Wales
Although coalmining, including the extraction of special coals such as steam coal
and anthracite, remains the chief industry of South Wales, the area today produces
many categories of capital and consumer goods. Its steel industry, with some of the
most modern plants in Europe, supplies almost all Britain’s output of tinplate and a
large proportion of sheet steel. In the past 25 years a number of new industries have
been established, including plastics, synthetic fibres, clothing, electronics and hg it
engineering; many of the new factories are on industrial estates. The largest cities are
Cardiff and Swansea. In North Wales a number of light industries are located in the
seaside resorts and other towns, particularly Wrexham.
Scotland
The thickly populated, industrial area of Clydeside, which includes the city of Glasgow,
is Britain’s largest shipbuilding and marine engineering centre. The steel industry
specialising in plate and heavier products, is mainly in the North Lanarkshire area. A
variety of engineering products, such as earth-moving equipment, locomotives, air-
conditioning plant, industrial valves, food-processing machinery and commercial
vehicles, are manufactured on Clydeside. The Scottish coalfields of the Lothians, 1 e,
Ayr, and Lanark produce about one-tenth of Britain’s coal, but the seams in the last-
named field are gradually becoming exhausted.
Edinburgh, the capital of Scotland and its second largest city, has printing, brewing,
rubber, and engineering industries. The United Kingdom jute industry is concentrated
in Dundee, which also provides many other products, such as office machinery, clocks
and watches, refrigerators, and food manufactures. Aberdeen, the third city of Scotland
and a famous fishing port, has several light industries. Kirkcaldy, in Fife, is the centre
for the manufacture of linoleum. The border towns in the south are especially renowned
for high quality tweeds and knitwear. The north of Scotland possesses Britain s onl\
significant resources of hydro-electric power. In north-east Scotland is the largest
concentration of whisky distilleries.
Northern Ireland
In the capital city, Belfast, is located the largest shipyard in the United Kingdom,
and one of the largest in the world. Marine engineering and aircraft construction are
also important. Besides the traditional industries of the area linen, shirt-making,
ropes, tobacco and general engineering—new industries, such as the production o
man-made fibres, electrical equipment and food canning, have been introduced in
recent years.
Distribution of Industry Policy
While the Government has no power to direct an individual firm to set up a new
factory or plant in any particular area or site, it has sought, on both economic and
social grounds, to control the expansion of industry in some areas and to encourage
it in others. , r . , , , •
Under the Town and Country Planning Acts, the consent of the local planning
authority is, in general, necessary for any new building, any extension of a building or
any change in the use of an existing building. Where industrial floor space of more
than s 000 square feet is to be created, such consent cannot be sought without a
certificate from the Board of Trade that the development is consistent with the proper
distribution of industry. One object has been to try to limit the expansion of industry
in congested areas, such as Greater London or Birmingham. . c
The main aim of the Government’s positive measures has been the alleviation of
INDUSTRY
263
local unemployment. The first Act dealing with this problem, the Special Areas
(Development and Improvement) Act, was passed in 1934, a time of acute economic
depression; its aim was to help certain large industrial regions, in which over a third
of the working population were unemployed. Under this Act and an amending Act of
1937, these regions—West Cumberland, the north-east coast of England, South Wales
and the Clyde Valley—were designated ‘special areas’ and special commissioners were
made responsible for their development and improvement. Industry was attracted to
the areas by various inducements, mainly the lease of factories built by Government-
financed non-profit-making estate companies and also certain loan facilities and
Government grants.
Under the Distribution of Industry Acts, 1945 and 1950, the original special areas
were renamed ‘development areas’ and enlarged, and the Government’s powers of
assistance were strengthened. The Board of Trade took over the special commissioners’
powers to build and let factories in these areas and, in addition, could and did designate
additional areas, while the Treasury had powers to make loans or grants to undertakings
unable to secure finance through normal channels.
Partly as a result of this Government action the special problems of some parts of
the development areas have now largely disappeared; and the general employment
position remains much better than it was before the war. On the other hand, employ¬
ment problems emerged in a number of new, and often quite small and isolated,
districts. To enable them to deal more flexibly with changes in the pattern of unemploy¬
ment, the Government acquired in July 1958 new powers under the Distribution of
Industry (Industrial Finance) Act, 1958, which permitted the Treasury to give
financial assistance to undertakings which would provide employment in places with
high and persistent unemployment, whether or not they were within development
areas.
The legislative basis of the Government’s powers to alleviate local unemployment
was simplified and strengthened by the passing of the Local Employment Act, i960,
which came into effect on 1st April, i960. Under the Act, the Government’s powers
of assistance are centred in one department, the Board of Trade, which can name as
‘development districts’ places where high and persistent unemployment exists or is
expected, and can offer a number of inducements to industrialists to settle or expand
there. Specifically, the Board can build factories for leasing or sale on favourable terms;
make a capital grant towards the cost of an industrialist’s own factory; and make loans
or grants towards working capital or the cost of initial equipment. The appropriate
Government departments can also make grants to local authorities for clearing derelict
or neglected sites and for improving basic services.
Under the Act, the Government-controlled industrial estate companies, which
under the Distribution of Industry Acts had run the industrial estates in the develop¬
ment areas, have been replaced by three industrial estate management corporations,
one for England, one for Wales and one for Scotland. These corporations are controlled
and financed by the Board of Trade.
The Local Employment Act does not apply to Northern Ireland because, under
the Northern Ireland constitution, the matters it deals with are the concern of the
Northern Ireland Parliament, which has passed its own legislation to encourage
industrial expansion and diversification. The Northern Ireland Government builds
factories for renting or purchasing on favourable terms and provides grants and
loans for new industrial undertakings, and the Board of Trade gives Northern Ireland
priority as if it were a development district for the purposes of encouraging and guiding
new or expanding industrial development. As a result, since 1945, 162 firms have
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
264
started production for the first time in Northern Ireland and 106 schemes of expansion
have been put into effect. These new firms and expansion schemes are already providing
employment for over 40,000 people. The United Kingdom Government also gives
manufacturers in Northern Ireland, as in development districts in Great Britain, some
preference in placing Government contracts.
Encouragement is given to the development of rural industries. In England and
Wales, there is the Rural Industries Bureau, which, on the recommendation of Rural
Community Councils, provides technical advice and instruction to craftsmen and
small rural businesses; it also provides loans from the Rural Industries Loan Fund,
started in 1940, for the acquisition of equipment and the purchase or improvement of
workshops. In Scotland the corresponding body is the Scottish Country Industries
Development Trust, founded in 1935, which exercises local and national responsibilities
for the development of rural industries.
Development Organisations
In Northern Ireland, Scotland and Wales there are national organisations devoted
to encouraging the expansion and diversification of industry. The Northern Ireland
Development Council, established in 1955, makes more widely known in Great
Britain and elsewhere the facilities offered by Northern Ireland to new undertakings;
and advises the Northern Ireland Government on matters connected with industrial
development. The chairman of the council is appointed by the Prime Minister of
Northern Ireland and the other members are appointed by the Prime Minister in
consultation with the chairman. In Scotland, the Scottish Council (Development and
Industry), with a wide membership including local authorities, trade associations,
trade unions, chambers of commerce, co-operative societies and banks, is concerned
with the economic development of Scotland. It assists the expansion of existing
industry, fosters the growth of new industries, especially in areas requiring develop¬
ment, encourages exports, organises exhibitions and publicises Scottish trade and
industry. In Wales there are several voluntary associations concerned with the needs
of Welsh industry as a whole, but the most similar in aims and constitution to the
Scottish Council is the Development Corporation for Wales, founded in 1959.
In England certain regions and cities have established industrial development
associations which are concerned with studying local industrial needs and with trying
to attract suitable industry. These associations are sponsored mainly by local authorities
and trade associations, but may also include firms, financial and commercial interests,
and individuals in their membership.
The Structure of Industry
The pattern of ownership and organisation in industry is varied. Personal, corporate,
co-operative and public enterprise all assume a number of different forms, and all
are important in the economy. Industrial enterprises vary from the many small work¬
shops to vast organisations such as the National Coal Board, a public corporation with
over 650,000 employees; Imperial Chemical Industries Ltd., a limited liability com¬
pany which, with its subsidiaries, employs about 110,000 persons in the United
Kingdom; and the Co-operative Wholesale Society Ltd., a co-operative society with
some 50,000 employees.
Role of Public Enterprise
Throughout the first half of the twentieth century, the growth of the social services,
especially health, education and housing, led to the progressively greater influence
INDUSTRY
265
of the public sector of the economy. There was also an increase in the State’s direct
participation in productive economic activities, particularly in the decade 1940-50.
State participation is effected mainly through special statutory bodies set up to deal
with a particular activity. Such bodies, though not part of a Government department,
are under a considerable but varying degree of public control (see p. 270). The most
important of these statutory bodies are the public corporations which operate major
industries and services in the public interest.
The public corporation in its twentieth-century form is, generally speaking, a
public body having a clearly defined and specific task. Its board of directors and its
staff are chosen for their experience and competence in a particular field; they are
not civil servants, and although they are accountable to Parliament for their actions
in a variety of ways, it is they and not the ministers of the sponsoring departments
who are responsible for the management of the corporations. Certain of the corporations
are self-supporting; others receive Exchequer grants to help them in carrying out the
duties with which they have been charged.
Before the second world war, a number of public corporations were established1
in those industries and services where it was considered that the national interest
required co-ordination or control by a public authority. Their constitutions had no
standard pattern and their governing bodies differed in the method of appointment
and in composition.
Immediately after the second world war, the nationalisation Acts set up public
corporations to run certain major industries and services, including coalmining,
inland transport, gas supply, electricity generation and supply, and civil air transport.
These post-war corporations are less varied in the structure of their governing bodies,
which are appointed by the responsible minister.
The following corporations, the organisation and functions of which are described
in later chapters, are now operating or controlling large-scale industries or services:
The Bank of England.
The British Broadcasting Corporation.
The British Transport Commission.2
The Ulster Transport Authority.
The British Overseas Airways Corporation.
British European Airways.
The National Coal Board.
The Gas Council and Area Gas Boards.
1 The principal corporations appointed before the second world war were: (1) the Central
Electricity Board, established by the Electricity Supply Act, 1926, to rationalise electricity
generation and build and operate a main transmission system; (2) the British Broadcasting
Corporation, established in 1927 by Royal Charter to provide a national broadcasting service;
(3) the Electricity Board for Northern Ireland, established by the Electricity (Supply) Act
(Northern Ireland), 1931, to develop electricity supplies in Northern Ireland outside the two
county boroughs, Belfast and Londonderry; (4) the London Passenger Transport Board,
established by Act of Parliament in 1933, to operate the public transport system of the London
metropolitan area; (5) the Northern Ireland Road Transport Board, established by the Road and
Rail Transport Act (Northern Ireland), 1935, to acquire public road transport services in Northern
Ireland outside the county boroughs; (6) the British Overseas Airways Corporation, established
by the British Overseas Airways Act, 1939, to take over the operation of the two main existing
air transport companies—Imperial Airways and British Airways.
2 Plans to dissolve the British Transport Commission under a general reorganisation of the
State-owned rail, road, and associated undertakings are described on p. 373.
266
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Electricity Council, the Central Electricity Generating Board and the Area
Electricity Boards.
The Electricity Board for Northern Ireland.
The North of Scotland Hydro-Electric Board.
The South of Scotland Electricity Board.
The United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority.
The Independent Television Authority.
Mining and Quarrying
Much the most important of the British extractive industries is coalmining. The
coalmining industry of Great Britain (see p. 276), is operated as a single co-ordinated
enterprise under the direction of the National Coal Board.
Nearly all other mining and quarrying (iron ore, sand, gravel, chalk, limestone, salt,
tin, slate, oil shale and china clay) is undertaken by private enterprises, usually owned
and operated by limited liability companies. About 70,000 workers are employed in
mining and quarrying, excluding coalmining.
Manufacturing
Most manufacturing is in the hands of private enterprise. Some exceptions are
locomotives and rolling-stock for use on British Railways, built in workshops owned
and operated by the British Transport Commission, a considerable quantity of arms
and military equipment made in Royal Ordnance factories and other factories operated
by the War Office and the Ministry of Aviation, and some fighting ships built in naval
dockyards operated by the Admiralty. The staff of the Stationery Office do some print¬
ing and bookbinding, while the repair, and to a limited extent the construction, of
post office equipment is carried on in factories run by the Post Office.
Surveys of the size of all manufacturing establishments employing more than
10 persons are made periodically by the Ministry of Labour; the results of the most
recent of these surveys, based on returns rendered by employers in April 1959, show
that nearly a third of all employees in such establishments are in those employing
from 100 to 499 persons, while slightly over a third are in establishments employing
1,000 or more persons. A high proportion of the biggest establishments are in the heavy
industries, while the average size of establishments in industries making consumer
goods is smaller than in manufacturing industries as a whole. Comparisons with results
obtained in earlier surveys on similar lines suggest that there is a slow but significant
trend towards an increase in the average size of manufacturing establishments: in
1959, establishments with 1,000 or more employees were found to employ 2,610,000
persons, over ten per cent more than in 1953 and more than twice as many as in 1935.
In addition, there are estimated to be some 150,000 manufacturing establishments
with fewer than 11 employees and in these a total of about 1 • 1 million workers are
employed.
There are no general surveys of the size of manufacturing firms comparable with the
survey of establishments. The size of establishments is not in itself an indication of the
size of manufacturing firms, as a single firm may own several establishments, not all
of them necessarily engaged in the same or similar activities. Moreover, one firm
can control a number of subsidiary companies. There are in all some 370,000 registered
companies in the United Kingdom, of which about 11,000 are public companies;
a large proportion of these companies are engaged in manufacturing. Evidence suggests
that nearly half of all manufacturing employees are in the ten per cent of all manu¬
facturing establishments operated by some 2,000 public companies quoted on the
INDUSTRY
267
stock exchanges. In some industries a small number of big companies and their sub¬
sidiaries are responsible for most of the total production. Examples are oil refining,
steel making, the manufacture of motor vehicles and components, aircraft and aero¬
engines, heavy electrical equipment, bicycles, cement, and basic chemicals. Shares in
these companies are usually distributed among a great number of holders and it is
rare for a few large holders to have a controlling interest. For example, five of the
largest public companies each have more than 100,000 shareholders. The trend is
towards merging into larger units of control; and especially in brewing, pharmaceuticals,
aircraft, electrical products and newspaper and magazine publishing there have been
several movements in this direction in recent years.
The way in which the work of production is divided within and between different
firms varies from industry to industry. In the cotton industry, for example, it is
usual for different firms to undertake the various main processes of production
(spinning, weaving, finishing), while in the woollen section of the wool textile industry
all these processes are commonly undertaken within the same firm. Some of the leading
establishments in the vehicles group of industries are primarily engaged on the assembly
of parts, many of which have been manufactured for them under contract by specialist
firms.
An account of some of the principal manufacturing industries is given on pp. 297-325.
Building and Civil Engineering
In building and civil engineering, large-scale work is usually carried out by private
contractors. From the end of the second world war to 1958, most new houses were
built by firms under contract to local authorities, but the majority are now built on
private orders, or for sale (see p. 294).
Building firms may be divided into those undertaking general building and civil
engineering work and those concerned with highly specialised work, many of which
operate outside as well as inside the building industry. Building is an industry of
small firms; more than half of the firms employ fewer than 20 employees. For a fuller
account of the building and civil engineering industries see p. 293.
Industrial Association
From the middle of the nineteenth century, private industrial undertakings have
increasingly entered into voluntary association for a number of different purposes.
Some of the more important of these purposes may be classified as follows:
1. The provision of common services, the exchange of information, liaison
with the Government, and representation of their members’ point of view.
2. The regulation of trading practices, sometimes including the regulation of
prices (see p. 274).
3. Negotiation with trade unions on wages and conditions of work.
Associations for the first and third of these purposes cover, with varying com¬
pleteness, most of British industry, but there are wide sectors of industry where there
are no collective agreements to regulate trading practices. Associations which deal with
labour matters usually consist of firms engaged in the same type of operation or manu¬
facturing process. Organisations mainly concerned with representations to the Govern¬
ment, provision of common services or the regulation of trading practices are built up
round a product or an allied group of products. In an industrial sector concerned wholly
with an allied group of products, a single association may undertake all the required
functions.
268
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
There are about 270 national federations and probably about 1,600 other employers’
organisations (mostly regional or local, and members or branches of the national
federations) all concerned with negotiation of wages and conditions of work. Most
of the national federations are in turn affiliated to the British Employers' Confederation,
the national body representing employers on labour questions affecting industry
generally (see p. 473).
The number of manufacturers’ associations concerned with providing common
services is not known precisely, but according to a survey carried out by Political and
Economic Planning (an independent research organisation) between 1953 and 1956,
some 1,300 were in existence, varying greatly in importance, structure and activities.
Membership of the Federation of British Industries (FBI), the national body recognised
as the spokesman for British industry on economic, commercial and production (as
distinct from labour) matters, consists of some 8,000 individual firms and nearly
300 national trade organisations, with a total affiliated membership of some 40,000 to
45,000 firms. The FBI has offices in the main industrial centres in the United Kingdom
and is widely represented abroad. It has a wholly owned subsidiary company, British
Overseas Fairs Limited, which is responsible for organising British trade fairs
overseas.
A number of the organisations affiliated to the FBI also deal with labour matters
and are affiliated to the British Employers’ Confederation. The two organisations work
closely together on matters of common interest.
Other important national associations of employers are the National Union of
Manufacturers (NUM) and the Association of British Chambers of Commerce. The
members of NUM are over 5,000 manufacturing firms, mainly small or medium
sized, and some 66 trade associations are affiliated to it. Like the FBI it has regional
branches. The Association of British Chambers of Commerce is the central organi¬
sation to which 98 local chambers of commerce (together with 15 British Chambers
of Commerce operating in foreign countries) are affiliated. The Association celebrated
its centenary in i960. In Scotland, there is also a central organisation, the Council of
Scottish Chambers of Commerce. These bodies are open to all kinds of producers and
traders and exist to promote the interests of local industry and commerce. The FBI, the
NUM and the Chambers of Commerce often act jointly in matters of common concern.
Relations with Government
The Government is able to influence industry in a number of ways—through fiscal
and monetary policy, by means of physical controls and inducements, as well as by
providing information and advice.
A system has grown up whereby a particular Government department acts as the
main point of contact, or ‘production department’, for each major industry.
The department through which the Government’s relations with trade and industry
are chiefly conducted is the Board of Trade (which has regional offices in the principal
industrial centres) and its responsibilities cover a wide range of industries and
materials. Certain industries and services, however, are the responsibility of other
departments, as production departments:
Ministry of Aviation   Aircraft, aero-engines, electronics
industries and civil aviation.
Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food Farming, horticulture, agricultural
machinery and fisheries in England
and Wales; food processing in Great
Britain.
INDUSTRY
269
Ministry of Power
Ministry of Transport
Ministry of Works ..
Ministry of Housing and Local Govern¬
ment
Coal, oil, gas, electricity (including
nuclear power), iron and steel.
Transport services (excluding air
transport), shipbuilding and ship
repairing, roadmaking, and certain
sections of the quarrying industry.
Building, civil engineering and build¬
ing materials.
Housebuilding in England and Wales.
Ministry of Health .. .. .. Medical and surgical goods.
Department of Agriculture and Fisheries Agriculture and horticulture in Scot-
for Scotland .. .. .. .. land; Scottish fisheries.
Scottish Home Department .. .. Scottish economic development
generally in conjunction with the
Board of Trade and other Great
Britain departments.
Department of Health for Scotland .. Housebuilding in Scotland.
The Treasury is responsible for economic policy, and specifically for fiscal and
monetary policy, through which it is able to influence the level of economic activity
and the utilisation of the nation’s resources. The Ministry of Labour is the channel
through which manpower policy is conducted. The Department of Scientific and
Industrial Research (DSIR) undertakes research in the national interest and encourages
and assists industrial research and the application of scientific knowledge to industry.
There are separate departments of the Northern Ireland Government for matters
within the competence of the Northern Ireland Parliament. The Ministry of Commerce
deals with industry, including the encouragement of industrial development.
During and after the second world war, many operations of industry and commerce
were subject to Government control. Very few controls now remain; of those in force
probably the most important is the power of the Board of Trade to influence the
location of industry. The housing departments, acting through local planning authorities,
have powers to control the use of land. The export and import of a small range of
products still require Board of Trade approval.
The Central Statistical Office, which is attached to the Cabinet Office, was established
in 1940 to provide a comprehensive statistical service to assist the authorities in
framing economic and financial policy.
Although departments themselves compile statistics relating to their particular
responsibilities, and may publish them in their own standard publications, the com¬
prehensive statistical publications are prepared by the Central Statistical Office, which
collects the main departmental statistics and compiles its own series from depart¬
mental and other information. Statistics relating to industry may be found in its
regular publications: the Monthly Digest of Statistics, Economic Trends (monthly),
The United Kingdom Balance of Payments (published half-yearly), the Annual Abstract
of Statistics, the Preliminary Estimates of National Income and Expenditure (published
annually before the Budget) and the fuller National Income and Expenditure Blue Book
issued later in the year. The Digest of Scottish Statistics is published half-yearly by the
Scottish Statistical Office, a Digest of Northern Ireland Statistics at half-yearly or
yearly intervals by the Ministry of Finance of the Northern Ireland Government,
270
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
and an annual Digest of Welsh Statistics by the Ministry of Housing and Local
Government.
To ensure that industry is fully aware of Government policy and that policy is
framed with a full knowledge of industry’s needs and difficulties, a number of con¬
sultative bodies have been set up representing Government, employers’ associations
and trade unions. Among the most important of these are the National Production
Advisory Council on Industry (NPACI) and the National Joint Advisory Council
(NJAC). The NPACI, which covers the wider problems of industrial production, is
under the chairmanship of the Chancellor of the Exchequer and includes representa¬
tives of the Regional Boards for Industry (see below) and of certain Government
departments as well as of employers and workers. Northern Ireland sends two repre¬
sentatives to meetings of the NPACI as observers. The NJAC consists of representa¬
tives of private employers, the nationalised industries and trade unions, under the
chairmanship of the Minister of Labour, and is concerned with matters affecting the
relations between employers and workers.
An important body, which is advisory to the Government rather than a channel
of communication with industry, is the Economic Planning Board. It was established
in 1947 to advise on economic policy; its proceedings are confidential. The chairman
of the board is one of the joint Permanent Secretaries to the Treasury, and its member¬
ship includes representatives of the Treasury, the Board of Trade, the Ministry of
Power, the Ministry of Transport and the Ministry of Labour, and nominees of the
Trades Union Congress, the Federation of British Industries and the British Employers’
Confederation.
These consultative bodies approach the study of problems from a broad national
point of view. There are, in addition, consultative bodies concerned with the special
problems of Scotland and Wales and of the English regions. The most important
of these are the nine Regional Boards for Industry and the corresponding Scottish and
Welsh Boards for Industry, whose main functions are to keep the Government informed
on industrial conditions in the English regions and in Wales and Scotland either by
direct reference to Government departments or through representation on the
NPACI, and to provide a link between central Government and local industry. The
regional boards have set up district advisory committees wherever they considered
that the geographical grouping of industry justified such a step.
Government and the Nationalised Industries
The extent to which the responsible minister has power over the working of the
boards which have been set up to run the nationalised industries varies from industry
to industry, but two features are common to almost all of them. First, the minister
appoints (and may dismiss) the chairman and members of each board, and secondly,
he has power to give general directions as to how the industry should be run, but does
not interfere in day-to-day management. It is usually also laid down that the board
shall give to the minister any information, statistics and financial accounts which he
may require. In practice, as the responsible minister is kept fully informed and major
policy decisions are reached in consultation with him, there is very seldom occasion
for him to issue a formal directive.
The minister also has financial powers and responsibilities. The usual financial
arrangement is that the board is required to conduct its business so that receipts
at least balance outgoings taking one year with another. The responsible minister is
usually empowered (subject to Treasury approval) to say what shall be done with any
surplus revenues which may accrue. As regards finance of capital expenditure, the
INDUSTRY
271
present system is that such finance as cannot be met from internal sources is mainly
provided, in the form of interest-earning loans, by the minister from the Exchequer;
bank advances being used only for normal requirements of short-term capital.
The minister responsible for each nationalised industry must take steps to see
that the interests of the industry’s customers are protected. This is usually done
by the establishment of representative consumers’ councils to consider complaints
and suggestions made to them, and to advise the board or the minister on the changes
they think desirable. It is recognised that these arrangements are still to a great extent
experimental.
Government policy towards these industries is subject to the approval of Parliament.
Opportunities for parliamentary discussion are afforded by debates, including debates
on their annual reports and accounts, and by answers to parliamentary questions,
which, in principle, are admissible only if concerned with policy rather than details of
administration.
In a White Paper {Cmnd. 1337) issued in April 1961 the Government outlined
certain general principles which it believed had to be applied for the administration
of the nationalised industries to be efficient. Among them were a balancing of revenue
accounts over a five-year period, a closer definition of the financial and economic
obligations of the industries, and greater freedom in price policies.
In order to ensure that parliamentary discussion of the nationalised industries is
informed and effective, a House of Commons Select Committee on the Nationalised
Industries was established in March 1957 to examine the reports and accounts of the
nationalised industries and to report to Parliament. Reports issued by the committee
have so far dealt specifically with the two Scottish electricity boards, the National
Coal Board, the airways corporations, British Railways and the gas industry (August
1961). These reports have discussed problems of ministerial control, organisation and
finance.
Production and Productivity
Industrial production (mining and quarrying, manufacturing, building and con¬
tracting, and gas, electricity and water) increased rapidly in the immediate post-war
years as industry was turned over from war production and manpower was released
from the armed forces. It had regained the pre-war level by 1946, was 14 per cent
TABLE 13
Production and Employment in Industry, 1954-60
(1954=100)
Year
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959
1960
Industrial Production.
All Industries
105
106
108
106
113
120
Manufacturing
Industries
106
108
108
107
114
123
Employment in
Industry
102
103
103
101
101
104
272
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
greater by 1948, and by 1954 it had exceeded the 1948 level by a further 27 per cent.
The course of production and employment from 1954 t0 I9^° *s shown in Table 13.
Partly because of measures taken to check inflationary trends, production from 1955
to 1958 showed only small changes. The volume and efficiency of industrial equipment
and plant, however, increased steadily during this period in consequence of the high level
of investment, and output rose rapidly in 1959 to reach a peak of 21 per cent above the
1954 level early in i960. In some of the capital goods industries capacity was almost
fully utilised. Re-equipment and extensions to plant are being undertaken in many
industries, thus giving scope for a further rise in output over the next few years.
Between 1954 and i960 output in the chemicals industry rose by 45 per cent; in
vehicles, by 39 per cent; and in the engineering and allied industries as a whole, by
27 per cent. Glass (35 per cent), paper, printing and publishing (33 per cent), non-
ferrous metals (28 per cent), and drink and tobacco (26 per cent), also expanded
considerably. The only important industries to show a drop in output were textiles,
which fell by 5 per cent; mining and quarrying, down by 11 per cent; and shipouilding
and marine engineering, down by 8 per cent. Consumption of electric power over the
period rose by over 60 per cent.
The promotion of productivity is regarded as primarily a matter for industry
itself. Employers’ associations and trade unions are engaged in activities to raise
industrial productivity. The former often provide technical assistance and conduct
market surveys. The National Union of Manufacturers (NUM) has established an
advisory service to enable small firms to obtain advice on production problems. The
trade unions in many industries organise special schemes for training young people,
and also a variety of courses designed to give trade unionists an understanding of
modern management techniques. Private consultants specialising in management
and work study are available to give advice to firms on measures to increase their
productive efficiency; there are also many specialist institutions, both public and
private, concerned with various aspects of productivity.
The British Productivity Council (BPC) has been established by both sides of
industry to stimulate interest in methods of raising productivity. The BPC was
set up in November 1952 to continue and develop the work of the Anglo-American
Productivity Council which, between 1948 and 1952, sent productivity teams, made
up of representatives of management, technicians and operatives from many British
industries, to study progress and techniques in the United States. It is an independent
body on which are represented the British Employers’ Confederation, the Federation
of British Industries, the Trades Union Congress, the Association of British Chambers
of Commerce, the National Union of Manufacturers and the nationalised industries;
its work is financed by contributions from these bodies and by a Government grant-
in-aid. Advisory committees have been set up to promote productivity in the building
trades, in agriculture and in retailing. Much of the BPC’s work is done through over
100 local productivity committees and associations throughout the country. These
local organisations arrange meetings, inter-factory visits, courses, conferences, film
shows and exhibitions. To assist them, and the many other national and industrial
bodies with which it co-operates, the BPC produces booklets, pamphlets, case studies,
films and a monthly bulletin, and arranges work study demonstrations.
The British Standards Institution (BSI), is a voluntary non-profit-making body
incorporated by Royal Charter. It prepares and promulgates standards in respect
of, inter alia, quality, performance, dimensions, testing methods and codes of practice.
Voluntary acceptance of such standards by manufacturers, buyers and sellers reduces
unnecessary variety and simplifies the specification of requirements, thus promoting
INDUSTRY
273
industrial efficiency. The BSI is governed by a council consisting of representatives
of the main organisations of employers and workers, professional institutions and the
larger Government departments.
The Board of Trade is the department responsible for general aspects of the
promotion of productivity and it administers the Government grants to the BPC,
the BSI, and the Council of Industrial Design.
A number of other departments have responsibilities which bear on productivity.
The Ministry of Labour has an Industrial Relations Service, which advises firms on
personnel management and industrial relations. The Department of Scientific and
Industrial Research is also concerned directly with research into such factors as
productivity measurement techniques, production engineering and operator fatigue;
it also provides technical advisory services. The Ministry of Education is responsible
for the technical colleges, at which courses are available in such subjects as work study
and industrial engineering. The Ministry of Works provides a Technical Information
Service for the building industry; and the Ministry of Power and the British Produc¬
tivity Council sponsor the National Industrial Fuel Efficiency Service. The Ministry
of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food provides a number of advisory services which aim
at encouraging the efficiency of the British farming industry; these include the
National Agricultural Advisory Service, the Agricultural Land Service, and the
Veterinary Service.
Management
A factor contributing to the growth of productivity in British industry has been
the development of new methods of management. During the present century, and
particularly during and since the second world war, there has emerged in the United
Kingdom, as elsewhere, a growing awareness of the importance of management
as a subject requiring special skills and knowledge. This has been stimulated by the
increasing pace of technical, organisational and social change, and by the need to
compete successfully in world markets in the face of rising production costs. In
addition, increased attention is being paid to human relations in industry, and to the
importance of communication between management and labour.
Many organisations are contributing to the growing knowledge and appreciation
of the wider functions of management. They include institutes, societies and firms con¬
cerned with specialist subjects of interest to managers, such as industrial psychology,
industrial welfare or aspects of industrial efficiency; associations of those who work in
particular fields of management, such as sales managers; industrial associations of all
kinds, including such central bodies as the FBI, the NUM, the BEC and the TUC;
and professional bodies whose members may be managers or directors or those who
work closely with them, such as accountants or engineers. The professional engineering
institutions, for example, include industrial administration in the syllabus of their
qualifying examinations.
The British Institute of Management (BIM) was founded in 1947, with Government
support, to study and promote improved standards of management throughout industry,
commerce, and public administration. It is now entirely financed from industrial
and professional subscriptions. The main objects of the BIM, which combined in
1957 with the Institute of Industrial Administration, are to provide information on,
and undertake research into, management practices and techniques, and to encourage
the development of education and training for management on a national scale.
Facilities for management training at all levels have been much extended. Education
for management is developing mainly in four ways:
274
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
(1) a national scheme, for the syllabus of which the BIM and the Ministry
of Education are jointly responsible, operated through technical and com¬
mercial colleges. The scheme has been revised and under new arrangements,
started in the autumn of 1961, ordinary and higher national certificates in
business studies and, at a much higher level, diplomas in management, are
to be awarded on the basis of examinations;
(2) independent courses organised by universities, other educational establish¬
ments, professional organisations, industrial consultants, and certain centres
specialising in management training (such as the Administrative Staff College,
at Henley-on-Thames, and Ashridge College, in Hertfordshire);
(3) training courses organised by employers’ associations and various voluntary
bodies, such as those provided at the British Iron and Steel Federation’s
college at Ashorne Hill, in Warwickshire; and
(4) formal courses and informal training within individual firms, some of which
have their own residential centres.
There are probably between 400,000 and 500,000 persons who hold managerial
posts in industry and commerce in the United Kingdom, and only a minority of
them are as yet members of any management body or have received systematic training
in the principles of management.
The growing number of firms and individuals working as management consultants—
more than 1,500 in i960—and the use of the services of independent management
selection firms in the appointment of senior staff are indications of the interest in
the science of management in Britain.
Monopolies and Restrictive Practices
Competition in trade and industry is sometimes restricted either by agreements
(formal or informal) between suppliers, or by monopolies which dominate the market;
legislation in force in the United Kingdom for dealing with these problems is described
below.
The Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1956, provides for the registration and judicial
examination of restrictive agreements. It requires the entry in a public register of the
particulars of a wide range of restrictive agreements (including those relating to
common prices, approved lists of dealers and the limitation of production) which
affect the supply or processing of goods for the United Kingdom market. The Registrar
of Restrictive Trading Agreements is responsible for keeping the register and for
bringing the agreements before the Restrictive Practices Court set up under the Act.
The court, which includes laymen but is presided over by one of Her Majesty’s
judges, is, in effect, responsible for deciding whether or not an agreement is in the
public interest. If the parties to an agreement fail to satisfy the court that any restriction
in their agreement produces one or more of seven beneficial effects set out in the
Act, and that the restriction is not unreasonable, having regard to the balance between
the benefit it confers and any public detriment likely to result from its operation, that
restriction must be found contrary to the public interest. Agreements are void in
respect of restrictions so found. The court can make orders preventing the parties
from operating their agreement, or from making new arrangements having the same
effect. Agreements relating exclusively to exports are not subject to this procedure
but have to be notified to the Board of Trade.
The first full hearing before the court took place in October 1958. By the end of
i960 some 2,340 agreements had been registered. Of these, over 1,090 had been
INDUSTRY
275
abandoned or had had all restrictions removed from them, while 65 agreements had
been referred to the court. In 52 cases the agreements had not been defended and the
restrictions were, therefore, found contrary to the public interest. Of the 13 agreements
defended, ten had been found contrary to the public interest.
One form of restrictive practice, the collective enforcement of resale price main¬
tenance by the use of stoplists or boycotts, was prohibited outright by the 1956 Act.
On the other hand, the Act strengthened the powers of individual suppliers to enforce
their resale prices through the civil courts.
Monopolies and kindred arrangements which are not within the scope of the
Restrictive Practices Court in the circumstances indicated in the Monopolies and
Restrictive Practices (Inquiry and Control) Act, 1948, may be referred by the Board
of Trade to the Monopolies Commission for investigation and report. Production
departments take appropriate action on the basis of these reports but no order can be
made without the approval of Parliament. Prior to the passing of the 1956 Act the
commission had investigated a number of industries, several of which modified their
practices in accordance with its recommendations. The 1956 Act excluded from the
scope of the commission’s work agreements which had to be registered under the new
legislation. It is now mainly concerned with the investigation of monopolies. Since
1948 the commission has presented some 25 reports.
FUEL AND POWER
The main primary sources of energy currently used in Britain are coal, petroleum
and, to a small extent, water power and nuclear energy; secondary sources produced
from these are electricity, gas and coke.
Coal, mined within the country, supplies nearly three-quarters of primary energy and it
will remain the principal source for many years to come. For supplies of crude
petroleum Britain is virtually dependent on imports. Water power resources are small.
A large-scale programme is in hand for the construction of nuclear power stations.
The pattern of primary energy consumption has shown marked changes in recent
years, as shown in Table 14. While consumption of coal has tended to fall, that of oil
has risen considerably—from 15 per cent of total inland energy consumption in 1956 to
25 per cent in i960. Of the primary fuels consumed, nearly half the coal and one-sixth
of the oil are converted into secondary fuels.
TABLE 14
Inland Consumption of Fuel and Power
(in terms of primary sources of power)
Million tons coal equivalent
Coal
Oil
Hydro-power . .
Nuclear energy
Total ..
1956
214-0
38-0
1-3
253-3
1957
207-6
37-2
1-5
0-2
246-5
1958
198-7
47-6
1-4
0-2
247-9
1959
186-9
56-1
1-4
0-6
245-1
1960
195-7
65-6
1-7
1-0
264-1
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
276
The fuel and power industries, with the exception of petroleum, are under public
ownership. General responsibility for ensuring the effective and co-ordinated develop¬
ment of fuel and power resources lies with the Minister of Power. Fuel research is
undertaken by the fuel and fuel using industries. The Minister of Power has an
Advisory Council on Research and Development.
The Government’s long-term policy, based on freedom of choice for consumers and
economic competition between the fuel industries, has two principal objectives:
to ensure that fuel and power supplies are adequate to meet fully and at minimum
cost the rapidly growing demands of industry and of the domestic consumer in a
country with an expanding national income; and to make the best use of indigenous
resources.
COAL
Coal has been worked in Britain for over 700 years and an organised coalmining
industry has been in existence for over 300 years, some 200 years longer than in
any other European country. British coal exports dominated the world market until
about 1910. By 1913—the peak production year—the industry was producing 287
million tons of coal, exporting 94 million tons and employing over a million workers.
The very fact that the British industry was developed so early has meant that many
of the best seams of coal are now worked out; every year coal has to be mined from
deeper and thinner seams and productivity can be maintained only by a high level
of investment. ,
The industry declined during the first world war owing to shortage of manpower
and of the plant and materials necessary for undertaking any mechanical improvement.
Moreover, alternative sources of energy and lower prices in other countries led to a
later decline in exports, which had fallen to 67 million tons by 1925.
Attemots to secure economies through amalgamation date from the Sankey Com¬
mission of 1919. In 1930 a Coal Mines Act established commissioners to bring about
the formation of larger and more efficient units. The Coal Act of 1938 transferred
ownership of royalties from mineral coal to the State. During the second world war the
industry was under Government control.
The National Coal Board
The Coal Industry Nationalisation Act, 1946, brought the industry under public
ownership; by this Act, all its assets—coal mines, mineral rights and ancillary under¬
takings—were vested on 1st January, 1947, in the National Coal Board, which
became responsible for the industry’s management, compensation being paid to the
former owners. Under the Coal Industry Act, 1949, the board, which is appointed
by the Minister of Power and is responsible through him to Parliament, consists of a
chairman and not fewer than eight or more than 11 other members; the number of
full-time members must not exceed eight and there must be one, and may be two,
deputy chairmen. . .
The National Coal Board has the exclusive monopoly to mine coal in Great Britain,
though it may license privately owned undertakings to work small mines not employing
more than 30 underground workers, and also to work opencast sites where the total
output is not expected to exceed 25,000 tons. The board has statutory duties to develop
the industry efficiently and to ensure the safety, health and welfare of its employees.
Its policies must be directed to ensure that on an average of good and bad years its
outgoings do not exceed its revenues.
The board is responsible for its own regional organisation. The main collieries,
INDUSTRY
277
numbering about 690, are grouped into 47 areas which are the basic units for com¬
mercial management; their size varies according to geological, geographical and other
technical considerations. The areas are grouped into nine divisions which roughly
correspond to the main coal-bearing regions. A divisional board for each division
supervises and co-ordinates the work of the areas (except in the small south-eastern
division, which is administered by a general manager), formulates divisional policy,
and is answerable to the National Coal Board, which is responsible for questions of
national policy, finance and the co-ordinating of major schemes of development. The
day-to-day work of running the collieries is under the direction of colliery managers.
The board, however, has no monopoly of sales or distribution. It makes some direct
sales to large consumers and also retail sales in a few areas. Most retail distribution is in
the hands of private firms.
In its first year, 1947, the board had a deficit of £23-3 million, and since then
has made surpluses in some years and deficits in others. The cumulative deficit at
the end of i960 amounted to £77'9 million.
Production and Manpower
It has been estimated that Britain’s workable reserves of coal will last for about
400 to 500 years at current rates of consumption. But certain types such as high-quality
coking coal will be exhausted long before then unless they are eked out by blending
with other types of coal.
The main coal-bearing areas are: (1) the Yorkshire, Derbyshire and Nottingham¬
shire field, which produces about 45 per cent of the total output, (2) the Durham
and Northumberland field, (3) the South Wales field, and (4) the Scottish field.
Other important coal-bearing areas are those of Lancashire and the West Midlands
(Staffordshire and Warwickshire). There are no coal-bearing areas in Northern
Ireland. Prospecting for coal continues both inland and off the north-east coast of
England.
In the early years following nationalisation, the National Coal Board was able
to secure quick increases in production and productivity by reorganisation, by a
wider application of improved working methods and by increased mechanisation.
As a result, deepmined production increased from 187 million tons in 1947 to 214
million tons in 1954. It remained roughly stationary until 1957, but declining demand
caused a fall to 186-1 million tons in i960. Output in tons per manshift worked at the
coal face has increased gradually and in i960 reached 3-97 tons compared with 3-36
tons in 1954 and 3-07 tons in 1938. The comparable figure in i960 for the division
with the highest output per manshift—the East Midlands division—was 5 -96 tons.
To meet the fall in demand, the board reduced opencast production (from 14 million
tons in 1958 to 8 million tons in i960) and accelerated the closure of uneconomic pits.
Future plans are directed towards bringing efficient new mines into production,
developing machines for power-loading the coal at the face on to face-conveyor belts,
and reorganising the haulage systems. The National Coal Board is engaged on a pro¬
gramme of major reconstruction and new sinkings.
During the post-war years until 1957, the industry suffered from a shortage of
manpower. However, because of falling demand and rising stocks the numbers
employed fell to 583,000 (of whom 221,000 were employed at the coal face) at the end
of i960, compared with 704,000 (with 296,000 at the coal face) at the end of 1953.
Recruiting was temporarily restricted, but has been resumed in full in most areas
since mid-1960.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
278
Consumption and Overseas Trade
Coal consumption in Britain increased by an average annual rate of 3 million
tons between 1947 and 1956 and, to cover requirements in certain years, supplies
had to be imported from the United States. Inland sales fell sharply between 1956
and 1959, and large stocks of coal accumulated at pit heads; in i960, however, demand
(197 million tons) exceeded production and stocks were drawn upon. The same trend
has been in evidence in 1961. Growing competition from oil and increasing efficiency
in the use of coal have largely contributed to the fall in demand for coal.
Table 15 summarises the pattern of coal consumption in Britain in the years 1958-60.
The electricity authorities took about one-quarter of total supplies, much of it in the
form of small coal not suitable for other uses. Electric power and the steel industry
are likely to require increasing quantities, and domestic consumption is being stimu¬
lated by the marketing of improved smokeless fuels.
TABLE 15
Inland Coal Consumption in the United Kingdom, 1958-60
Million tons
Type of User
1958
1959
1960
Gas
Electricity
Railways (including briquettes)
Coke ovens ..
Iron and steel
Engineering and other industries
Domestic and miscellaneous
Totals ..
24-8
46-1
11-3
27-8
4-2
29-5
58-7
202-4
22-5
46-0
10-2
25-7
3-7
27-9
53-5
189-5
22-3
51T
9-5
28-5
3-8
27-3
54-4
196-9
Source: Ministry of Power.
Coal exports have fallen heavily in relation to pre-war levels, due, at first, partly
to increased internal consumption and, more recently, to keener competition in a
diminishing market. In i960 exports of coal, coke and briquettes amounted to 6-8
million tons valued at £28-4 million, the principal markets being Denmark, the Irish
Republic, the Netherlands, Norway and Sweden.
Consumers’ Councils
Two Coal Consumers’ Councils were set up under the 1946 Act: the Industrial
Coal Consumers' Council, members of which represent the National Coal Board, con¬
sumers, merchants and bulk suppliers of coal, coke and manufactured fuel for indus¬
trial and other purposes, involving supply in bulk; and the Domestic Coal Consumers'
Council, members of which represent similar groups concerned with these fuels for
domestic use. These two councils have the duty of considering and where necessary
reporting to the Minister of Power on any matter affecting the sale or supply of these
fuels.
Air Pollution
The Clean Air Act, 1956, which came fully into force on 1st June, 1958, was an
important step in the reduction of air pollution. The Act made it an offence to emit
r?|rr^fnir!ir!IP
11
Reconstruction of a war-damaged city: St. Andrew’s Cross, Plymouth.
Modern housing in Birmingham: the City Council’s Lyndhurst Estate at Erdington
The rebuilt Coventry Cathedral, designed by Sir Basil Spence, to be consecrated in 1962:
model showing the high altar with rear tapestry designed by Graham Sutherland.
INDUSTRY
279
dark smoke or fail to provide industrial premises with equipment to arrest grit and
dirt, and empowered local authorities, subject to the approval of the Minister of
Housing and Local Government or the Secretary of State for Scotland, to declare
‘smoke control areas’, in which the emission of smoke from chimneys constitutes an
offence; grants may be made by local authorities and by the Exchequer towards the
costs incurred by owners and occupiers of premises in these areas in making necessary
changes in their appliances. A Clean Air Council, to review progress and to advise the
Government, was set up in 1957. By the end of March 1961, 486 smoke control areas
had been confirmed by the ministers.
Capital Investment and Development
Contraction and curtailment of development in the industry since the peak year,
1913, had led to a position in which, by 1950, less than one-third of current output
was being obtained from pits started in the twentieth century. Large-scale development
was therefore essential.
The National Coal Board raises capital by long-term borrowing direct from the
Exchequer. There is a statutory limit of £750 million at present on such borrowing
and borrowing above ^700 million must be authorised by Order in Council. In
addition, the board may, with the permission of the minister, borrow temporarily, by
way of overdraft or otherwise, up to £20 million.
The National Coal Board’s long-term plan of development for the industry involves
both the reorganisation and increased mechanisation of existing mines and the sinking
of new ones. First published in 1950, it was considerably revised in 1956; and three
years later, in October 1959, a further revision was announced. The last plan provides
for the investment of ^511 million in the period 1960-65 and an output of 200-215
million tons of coal from all sources in 1965, by which date 80 per cent of coal output
will be coming from new and reconstructed collieries. Capital expenditure by the
industry totalled £462 million from 1947 to 1955, and about £5°° million in the five
years 1956 to i960. Expenditure plans were modified in i960, £92 million being spent
in 1960-61 instead of the £120 million estimated. An expenditure of £99 million is
forecast for 1961-62.
The great progress made in mechanisation has been mainly responsible for the
increase in productivity of 12 per cent between 1957 and i960. All but a small propor¬
tion of coal output is now mechanically cut and conveyed. In i960, 61 per cent, or
114 million tons, was mechanically cleaned; each man at a mechanically worked
coal face produced an average of 5-7 tons per shift; and 38 per cent was power-loaded.
(In i960 the average number of manshifts needed to produce 1,000 tons of coal was
174 on power-loaded faces and 277 on conventional faces.)
Research
In 1948 the National Coal Board established a central research organisation, the
Coal Research Establishment, at Stoke Orchard, near Cheltenham, Gloucestershire,
to provide facilities for fundamental research. A second central research organisation,
for the investigation of underground problems, the Mining Research Establishment,
was formed in 1952 at Isleworth, Middlesex. A Central Engineering Establishment for
developing new machines and testing equipment is operating near Bretby, Derbyshire.
In 1959 the board set up a new department concerned primarily with the development of
new processes for the making of smokeless briquettes from small coal. Research at the
Coal Research Establishment at Stoke Orchard had already led to a promising new
process.
J
28o
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The board also subscribes to a number of autonomous research associations in
receipt of grants from the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research (DSIR),
including the British Coal Utilisation Research Association, the British Coke Research
Association and the Coal Tar Research Association. In addition, much of the work of
other bodies, such as the Safety in Mines Research Establishment of the Ministry
of Power, is closely related to the board’s problems. In 1947 the National Coal Board
took over, with other assets, the Coal Survey, a national organisation for surveying
coal resources within Britain, and 70 laboratories (in the various coalfields), which it
has since extended and modernised.
PETROLEUM
The petroleum industry in Britain dates back to 1850, when Dr. James Young, a
Glasgow chemist, succeeded in obtaining lamp oil and lubricants from natural mineral
oil occurring in the Derbyshire coal measures. The Scottish shale deposits, yielding
similar products, were first worked in 1858.
Indigenous Production
Sources of crude oil within Britain (including oil extracted from shale) supply
altogether less than one per cent of total United Kingdom requirements, the remainder
being imported from overseas.
Crude oil is extracted from shale at five shale mines and one opencast quarry
and retorted in two crude-oil works. Output of shale reached a peak of 3-4 million
tons in 1913; production amounted to some 670,000 tons in i960, yielding about 60,000
tons of crude shale oil. From the latter, some 56,800 tons of refined products were
obtained. Some 290,000 tons of refined benzole were derived from coke ovens and gas¬
works. Prospecting for crude petroleum has so far led to the establishment of several
small oilfields, notably in Nottinghamshire (Eakring, Egmanton and Bothamsell), in
Leicestershire (Plungar), in Lincolnshire (Gainsborough), in Lancashire (Formby) and
in Dorset (Kimmeridge). Annual production of crude oil from indigenous oilfields totals
about 85,000 tons.
Indigenous crude oil both from shale and from oil wells is refined at Pumpherston,
near Edinburgh.
International Trade
British and British-Dutch oil companies have been responsible for developing
the oil resources of many countries to mutual advantage, especially in the Middle
East, Far East and Caribbean areas.
Today these companies produce about one-third of all oil entering into international
trade, with a tanker fleet (partly owned by them and partly on charter) amounting to
nearly one-third of the world’s tanker tonnage. (United Kingdom registered tanker
tonnage is nearly one-sixth of the world’s total.)
In i960 the United Kingdom imported 44-9 million tons of crude oil, valued at
£333‘9 million; nearly half came from Kuwait, the other largest suppliers being
Iraq, Venezuela, and Iran, in that order.
Consumption
Inland consumption of petroleum products in the United Kingdom, apart from a
slight drop in 1957, has been expanding rapidly and in i960 reached 42-7 million tons.
An outstanding feature has been the continued rapid advance in use of black oils.
Fuel oil consumption rose from 6-9 million tons in 1957 to 17-4 million tons in i960;
INDUSTRY
28l
the chief factor is the large increase in power station usage, but the steel industry and
heating of industrial premises are also absorbing increasing quantities; the use of
gas and diesel oil (excluding that used in road vehicles) rose to about 3-5 million tons.
Sales of motor spirit have been rising by about half a million tons a year and reached 7-6
million tons in i960.
Refineries
Before 1939 three-quarters of the United Kingdom’s supply of petroleum products
was refined overseas, as it was considered more economical to refine at the source of
production. Since the second world war, however, the industry has come to favour the
siting of refineries in the consuming areas. The expansion programme in the United
Kingdom carried out by the major oil companies since 1947 cost more than £300 million.
By the end of i960, refinery capacity in the United Kingdom amounted to some
49 million tons a year. Of the 16 refineries then in operation, six have a capacity of
under 0-2 million tons. The largest, all of which have been considerably extended,
are situated at Fawley, near Southampton (over 12 million tons), Shellhaven (8 million
tons), Isle of Grain (8 million tons), both on the Thames Estuary, Stanlow (5 million
tons), in Cheshire, and Milford Haven, in Pembrokeshire (5 million tons).
Output of refined products (excluding refineries’ own consumption) rose from
4 million tons in 1948 to the record total of 40-3 million tons in i960. There is a
substantial external trade in refined products which tends to follow trading and seasonal
requirements and the commercial arrangements of the oil companies. United Kingdom
exports, mainly in the form of heavier products to European countries, were valued
at £107 million in i960; imports of refined products were valued at £149 million.
Oil Pipelines
Three major oil pipelines are at present in operation in Britain. Two of these—one
in Scotland (from Finnart on Loch Long to Grangemouth) and one in South Wales
(from Angle Bay, Milford Haven, to Llandarcy)—carry crude oil from harbours
capable of berthing very large tanker^ to refineries; and one, from Walton-on-Thames
to London Airport, carries aviation fuel. In addition a pipeline from the Shellhaven
refinery to Romford gasworks carries refinery gas and gas-making products. The major
oil companies are planning pipelines to take refined products from refineries to major
marketing areas, where the volume transported is sufficient to justify the capital cost.
A pipeline has been constructed to carry refined products between Stanlow, Cheshire,
and Urmston, near Manchester; another is to take petroleum feedstock from Fawley
refinery to the £100 million petroleum chemicals project at Sevemside, near Bristol;
and another is to transport aviation spirit and aviation turbine fuel from Fawley to Lon¬
don Airport. Meanwhile, parts of the system of pipelines laid during the second world
war are being used by the petroleum distributing companies. The Government has
announced its intention of introducing legislation to secure the orderly development of
privately owned industrial pipelines.
Research
Research into problems of petroleum technology is carried out mainly by the
leading oil companies, which have also endowed research at the universities on a
substantial scale. Research centres are situated at Sunbury-on-Thames (the British
Petroleum Company), Thornton, in Cheshire, and Woodstock, in Kent (Shell),
and Abingdon, in Berkshire (T sso). Research covers the evolution of new and improved
282
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
lubricants and the development of new uses for oil and of new products based on oil,
especially chemicals.
ELECTRICITY SUPPLY
Public supply of electricity was first provided in 1881, at Godaiming, Surrey>
though there were earlier demonstrations of its use to consumers, such as the lighting
of the Thames Embankment by the former Metropolitan Board of Works. From
its earliest days a measure of public control has been a feature of the industry, and
the Electric Lighting Act, 1882, authorised the Board of Trade to grant licences
for the establishment of electricity undertakings by local authorities or by companies
(which the local authorities might compulsorily purchase after a given period of time)
to supply consumers in given areas. By the turn of the century, technical developments,
including the introduction of the electric motor as a source of motive power, had led
to a large increase in the scale of distribution of electricity, and a variety of independent
supply systems had grown up all over the country.
After the first world war steps were taken to reorganise the industry on a national
scale in order to realise the benefits of concentration, integration and standardisation
in electricity supply. In 1919 the Electricity Commissioners were set up as a supervisory
body and to promote reorganisation through voluntary agreement. Then, in 1926, the
Central Electricity Board was established to co-ordinate more efficiently the generation
of electricity. Its main duties were to concentrate the output of electricity in certain
stations, selected for their efficiency and low operating costs, and to connect these
selected stations with one another and with local distribution undertakings by means
of a national system of main transmission lines, known as the ‘grid’. Steady progress
was made in putting this plan into effect and, by March 1948, 143 selected stations,
out of some 300, were supplying 95 per cent of the electricity generated for public
supply.
Organisation under Public Ownership
Under the Electricity Act of 1947, a central authority, then known as the British
Electricity Authority, and 14 Area Electricity Boards took over in April 1948 the
assets of former municipal and private electricity supply undertakings throughout
Great Britain, except in the area already served by the North of Scotland Hydro-
Electric Board (see p. 283). Under the Electricity Reorganisation (Scotland) Act of
1954, the authority’s functions in Scotland were taken over in April 1955, by the
South of Scotland Electricity Board (see p. 283). The name of the authority was
changed from British Electricity Authority to Central Electricity Authority and the
number of area boards was reduced to 12.
On 1st January, 1958, under the Electricity Act, 1957, the Central Electricity
Authority was dissolved and replaced by two new bodies, the Electricity Council
and the Central Electricity Generating Board.
The present organisation of the electricity supply industry, in which more than
210,000 people are employed, is described below.
England and Wales
The Electricity Council, the central body of the industry, is composed of a chair¬
man, two deputy chairmen, not more than three other persons, and the chairman
and two other members of the Central Electricity Generating Board, and, ex officio,
the 12 chairmen of the Area Electricity Boards. The main functions of the council
are to advise the Minister of Power on matters relating to the electricity supply
INDUSTRY 283
industry. The council is responsible for a number of common services, including
capital financing and research.
The Central Electricity Generating Board consists of a chairman and not fewer
than seven, nor more than nine, other members. The board has taken over certain
of the executive functions of the former Central Electricity Authority in England
and Wales: i.e. to generate or acquire supplies of electricity and to provide bulk
supplies to the area boards.
The Area Boards (of which there are at present 12) are responsible for the distribution
and sale of electricity. Each consists of a full-time chairman and deputy chairman
and four to six members (mostly part-time), appointed by the Minister of Power.
Area Consultative Councils were set up under the Electricity Act, 1947, in the area
of each board to represent the interests of consumers.
The most important functions of the Minister of Power in England and Wales
under the new arrangements are: to appoint the chairmen, deputy chairmen and
members of the Electricity Council, the Central Electricity Generating Board and the
Area Boards; to approve each area board’s capital development plans and the industry’s
research programme; and to approve, in consultation with the Treasury, the boards’
borrowing requirements, having regard to the development programmes submitted
by the industry.
The Central Electricity Authority (and its successors the Electricity Council and
the Central Electricity Generating Board) together with the area boards, have made
a consolidated net surplus on their operations in each of the years since they were
established. Up to and including the financial year 1959-60, these surpluses amounted
in the aggregate to over £150 million. Under the 1957 Act, each electricity board, not
merely the industry as a whole, must pay its own way, taking one year with another.
Scotland
The North of Scotland Hydro-Electric Board was set up in 1943 as a public corpora¬
tion to develop the water-power resources of the Highlands and Islands and to distribute
electricity in the more sparsely populated parts of Scotland not covered by existing
undertakings. The board consists of a chairman, a deputy chairman and not fewer
than four nor more than eight other members, appointed by the Secretary of State
for Scotland.
The Act of 1947 made the North of Scotland Hydro-Electric Board solely responsible
to the Secretary of State for Scotland for all generation and distribution in its area.
This area was extended under the Act to include that part of Scotland north and west
of a line running roughly from Dumbarton on the Firth of Clyde to Newburgh on
the Firth of Tay.
On 1 st April, 1955, the South of Scotland Electricity Board, answerable to the
Secretary of State for Scotland, took over the then British Electricity Authority’s
functions in Scotland, and also the functions of the two area boards in the south
of Scotland, which were dissolved. The board consists of a chairman, deputy chairman,
and not fewer than four nor more than eight other members, appointed by the Secretary
of State for Scotland.
A consultative council has been appointed for the district of each board by the
Secretary of State, to represent the interests of consumers.
Northern Ireland
In Northern Ireland electricity is generated at power stations in Belfast and
Londonderry and at Ballylumford, Larne and Coolkeeragh. Those in Belfast and
284 BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Londonderry are owned and operated by the city corporations and the remainder by
the Electricity Board for Northern Ireland. Generation at these stations is co-ordinated
by the Northern Ireland Joint Electricity Committee, set up by statute in i94^> which
purchases their output and resells it to distributors the Belfast Corporation, foi
Belfast and district, the Londonderry Corporation for the City of Londonderry, and
the Electricity Board for the rest of Northern Ireland.
Generation
Most of Britain’s electricity is produced in coal-fired steam generating stations.
The country has abundant supplies of coal, together with good rail and water transport
for moving it, while water-power resources are relatively small and in remote areas.
The development of hydro-electricity on any scale is comparatively recent.
The installed generating capacity of the electricity authorities (including the North
of Scotland hlydro-Electric Board) in Great Britain at the end of i960 totalled 31,858
megawatts (MW), an increase of about 42 per cent since 1955- each year recently
about 2,000 MW of new plant have on average been brought into commission.
Sales of electricity in Northern Ireland (where of the total installed generating
capacity of 598 MW, 57 MW is in oil-fired and the remainder in coal-fired thermal
stations) amounted to 1,364 million kilowatt-hours in i960.
In i960 over 116,000 million kilowatt-hours, or slightly under 98 per cent of the
public supply in Great Britain, was generated at conventional thermal stations,
and almost all the remainder from water-power. The high rate of expansion of output,
which has been a feature of the industry since its earliest years, has been continued
since the war. Total production in i960 was nearly 11 times that of i93°> anc^
increased by 50 per cent since 1955.
To meet increasing demands for electricity, generation from primary energy sources
other than coal is being developed. The chief alternatives are oil and nuclear energy.
There are twelve oil-burning power stations, or parts of stations, operating in Great
Britain. Dual-firing apparatus, able to use either coal or oil, is, or could be, installed in
all but one of these stations. They are mainly situated on river estuaries and thus able to
be fed conveniently from nearby oil refineries. Another alternative, used in Scotland,
is peat; a pilot gas-turbine project at Altnabreac, Caithness, has been in experimental
operation since June 1958-
Conventional Thermal
The electricity authorities are the largest consumers of primary fuel in Britain,
and although 85 per cent of their electricity generation is based on coal, oil consumption
rose from a negligible quantity in 1955 to nearly 5^ million tons in i960. Average thermal
efficiency of conventional steam stations in England and Wales (i.e. the ratio of power out¬
put to the fuel consumed) rose from 2i‘9 per cent in 1947 to Per cent I9^° as
new plant was brought into use. Twenty stations containing much of the newest plant
had an average efficiency of 31‘49 Per cen* ^a^ year-
At present, the largest generating set in operation is the 200 MW set at High
Marnham, in the east Midlands. The Central Electricity Generating Board will have
in commission by 1962 a set of 275 MW capacity at Blyth ‘B station in Northumber¬
land, and a year later a 550 MW set is due to come into use at Thorpe Marsh, near
Doncaster. These large machines will show substantial economies in capital cost, in
fuel consumption and in operational costs. Station capacities are also increasing, the
largest station under construction is the West Burton station, near Gainsborough,
INDUSTRY 285
Lincolnshire, which will have an ultimate capacity of 2,000 MW and will use generating
sets of 500 MW.
Hydro-Electric
The setting up of the North of Scotland Hydro-Electric Board in 1943 marked the
beginning of an era of intensive water-power development in the Highlands of Scotland.
A development scheme drawn up by the board in 1944, showing the water-power
resources which it proposed to examine, listed 102 hydro-electric projects with an
estimated annual output of 6,274 million units of electricity. In i960, 2,096 million
units were generated from water-power compared with 322 million in 1949. At the
end of i960, there were 50 full-scale hydro-electric stations in operation in the north
of Scotland with a total capacity of 998 MW and the largest—the Loch Sloy station—
had a capacity of 130 MW; further hydro-electric schemes with a total capacity of
555 MW were under consideration and of 572 MW at the constructional stage. (The
board also had 178 MW of coal and diesel-fired capacity.) In addition, there are stations
generating electricity by water-power in the south of Scotland (123 MW) and in Wales
(59 MW).
Nuclear Power Stations
As an extension of its experimental work and to produce plutonium, the United
Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority (UKAEA) has built two stations which also
produce electricity—at Calder Hall, Cumberland, and Chapelcross, Dumfriesshire,
both of about 150 MW output capacity. The first started operating in May 1956
and was officially connected to the grid by the Queen in October that year; the second,
Chapelcross, started supplying electricity in February 1959. Up to the end of i960
these two nuclear power stations had produced over 4,000 million units of electricity
for the national grid.
The main commercial stations under the Government’s nuclear power programme
are being built for the electricity authorities by groups of engineering firms specially
organised for the construction of nuclear power plants.
Special factors have to be taken into account in the siting of the nuclear power
stations, notably the need for firm rock foundations to bear the weight of the reactors
and their supporting structure, a location distant from heavily built-up areas, and
plentiful supplies of water for cooling.
Seven stations are under construction and another has been approved; all eight,
with a total output capacity of some 3,500 MW, should be completed before the end
of 1966. In i960 the Government announced modifications in the earlier programme,
to take account of the fact that coal had become plentiful and oil supplies had also
improved. The intention now is to place orders for about one station a year. As it is
expected that it will be possible to increase the capacity of stations over the years,
there will be a steady rise in the rate of commissioning nuclear generating capacity,
which should total about 5,000 MW in 1968.
The stations at Bradwell (300 MW output capacity), in Essex, and at Berkeley
(275 MW), in Gloucestershire, begun in January 1957, are due to be brought into
use towards the end of 1961. Hinkley Point (500 MW), in Somerset, Hunterston
(300 MW), in Ayrshire, and Trawsfynydd (500 MW), in North Wales, should all
be in operation in 1963. Dungeness (550 MW), in Kent, is due in 1964) and Sizewell
(580 MW), in Suffolk, in 1965. Consent has been given for a 550 MW station at
Oldbury-on-Severn, Gloucestershire, due for completion in 1966, and application for
consent made for a ninth station at Wylfa, in Anglesey. Sites for additional stations
286
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
are being considered. The Northern Ireland Electricity Board is planning to build a
station on a site yet to be determined.
Pumped Storage
In order that nuclear power stations with their higher capital costs and lower
operating costs should be run as continuously as possible, pumped storage schemes
are being developed. A 300 1VTW pumped storage scheme at Blaenau Ffestiniog, near
Trawsfynydd, in North Wales, should be opening before the end of 1961} sod suitable
sites for other schemes are being investigated. The first large-scale pumped storage
works in Scotland, comprising a 400 MW combined pumping and generating plant
costing some £24-5 million, forms part of the Loch Awe project, work on which
started in 1959.
Sites in Northern Ireland suitable for this type of project have been surveyed.
Transmission and Distribution
Main electricity transmission lines—the National Grid cover most of the country.
In i960 those of the Central Electricity Generating Board totalled some 7,000 route
miles (11,500 circuit miles), of which 1,215 miles were operated at 275>000 volts?
miles were operated at 132,000 volts and the remainder at 66,000 volts and below.
In Scotland there were 2,971 circuit miles of main transmission lines at the end of
1960, of which 225 circuit miles operated at 275,000 volts and the remainder at 132,000
volts. Energy movements on the grid in England and Wales are controlled through the
seven operational areas, set up for that purpose and distinct from the divisions in
which the generating side of the industry is organised; each area has a separate control,
and the operations are co-ordinated by a National Control in London. The grid in
Scotland is operated from the control centres at Tummel Bridge (North of Scotland)
and at Kirkintilloch (South of Scotland).
The new ‘supergricT of main transmission lines at 275,000 volts, later to be raised to
400,000 volts, will help to meet the growing demand for electricity during the next
20 years and will make the British system the most closely integrated power network
in the world. A link interchange of energy by direct current by means of twin cross-
Channel cables laid between Dungeness and Boulogne, costing £4 million, and capable
of transmitting up to 160 MW at 200,000 volts (direct current) came into operation in
1961. Its object is to take advantage of the differences between France and Britain in
the timing of peak loads. . .
In England and Wales the Area Electricity Board distribute to consumers electricity
acquired mainly from the Central Electricity Generating Board, but in part from
other sources, such as collieries and the nuclear power stations of the UKAEA.
There are nearly 16 million consumers, an increase of about 6 million on those supplied
in December 1939. Industrial concerns are the biggest users of electricity and their
demands are increasing rapidly. The principal domestic uses of electricity are for
lighting, cooking, and for space and water heating, but the demand for numerous
other domestic purposes is rising steadily.
The North of Scotland Hydro-Electric Board has also pressed ahead with the
distribution of electricity to consumers in the north of Scotland. At the end of i960
it had 393,000 consumers of electricity, many of them in remote areas, and four-fifths
of the farms and crofts had a supply of electricity. At the same date the South of
Scotland Electricity Board supplied 1-4 million consumers, including about 94 per
cent of the farmers in the area.
INDUSTRY
287
Capital Investment
About 9 per cent of the annual gross fixed capital formation of the United Kingdom
is attributable to the electricity supply industry. Future needs of capital are likely to be
heavy. In England and Wales the Electricity Council estimates that the consumption
of electricity will rise by an annual average of 7-5 per cent.
The long-term capital of the electricity authorities is obtained from both internal
resources and borrowing. Under the Finance Act, 1956, as amended, the authorities
have power to raise money by means of Exchequer advances from the Minister of Power
and the Secretary of State for Scotland. Since 1956 issues of stock have been suspended
and the authorities have had recourse to Exchequer advances.
Total capital expenditure of the electricity supply industry in Great Britain from
the time of its nationalisation (in 1948) to 31st March, i960 (in the case of the council)
and 31st December, 1959 (in the case of the boards) amounted to about £2,600 million,
of which nearly two-fifths had been financed from internal resources, and about £1,700
million by borrowing. The Electricity (Borrowing Powers) Act, 1959, authorised an
increase in maximum borrowings from £1,675 million to £2,150 million and the
minister is authorised, under certain circumstances, to raise this ceiling to £2,735
million.
Research
The Electricity Council, in consultation with the Minister of Power, is responsible
for drawing up a general programme of research, comprising: direct research carried
out by the Electricity Boards themselves; sponsored research undertaken for the
supply industry by universities and colleges; and co-operative research with other
organisations, in particular the industrial research associations, such as the British
Electrical and Allied Industries Research Association, to which the supply industries
subscribe. The council itself is empowered to conduct research. It is advised by the
Electricity Supply Research Council.
The main research establishment of the industry is the Central Electricity Research
Laboratories at Leatherhead, Surrey. Research laboratories of the CEGB concerned
with nuclear power were opened in 1961, adjacent to the Berkeley nuclear power
station in Gloucestershire.
The United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority’s research into improved types
of nuclear power reactors includes work on fast breeder reactors at Dounreay, Caithness;
on advanced gas-cooled reactors at Windscale, Cumberland; and on high-temperature
gas-cooled reactors at Winfrith, Dorset.
Both Scottish electricity boards are empowered to carry out research and experi¬
mental work either on their own or in co-operation with other electricity authorities.
The North of Scotland Hydro-Electric Board undertakes a wide range of research
and development work both independently and in conjunction with the British Electrical
and Allied Industries Research Association, colleges of science and technology, univer¬
sities and manufacturers. The South of Scotland Electricity Board has recently
extended its own research activities and is associated fully with those of the Electricity
Council and Central Electricity Generating Board in England.
GAS SUPPLY
Public supply of gas in Britain dates from 1807, when Pall Mall, London, was
first lighted with gas. In 1812 the London and Westminster Gas Light and Coke
288
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Company received a Royal Charter to supply gaslight in London. In the early years
of the industry, gas was used almost exclusively for lighting and was provided by
a growing number of company and municipal undertakings. After the invention of
the Bunsen burner in 1855, gas was used increasingly as a source of heat for many
purposes, such as domestic cooking and space and water heating, in addition to a
number of industrial uses. In the last 20 years of the nineteenth century, however,
gas for lighting purposes was subjected to competition from the new electricity supply
industry, but the invention of the Welsbach incandescent mantle in 1887, which raised
the efficiency of gas lighting very considerably, enabled the industry to hold its own,
while the use of gas for purposes other than lighting increased.
The gas industry in its present form developed in the main during the period
between the two world wars when increasing competition from electricity had to be
met and when changes in social habits and outlook were taking place. The inaustry
undertook a large-scale programme of modernisation of production and distribution
and launched widespread sales promotion campaigns, especially for the numerous uses
of gas in the home. By 1939 the industry had become mainly a supplier of heating
instead of lighting.
Organisation under Public Ownership
The Gas Act of 1948 brought the industry in Great Britain, in which about 130,000
persons were employed, under public ownership and control on 1st May, 1949’ The
assets of 991 undertakings, of which 269 belonged to local authorities, were vested in
12 Area Gas Boards. The central body is the Gas Council, appointed by the Minister
of Power. It is a co-ordinating council, not a trading body, consisting of a full-time
chairman and deputy chairman and the 12 chairmen of the area boards. Its general
duties are to advise the minister on questions affecting the industry and promote the
efficient performance of their duties by the area boards. It has also specific duties
relating to finance, labour relations and research.
The Area Gas Boards, which have a large measure of financial and operational
responsibility and are similar in most respects to the central bodies of the other
publicly owned corporations, are responsible for manufacturing gas and distributing
it to consumers. Each of the Area Gas Boards, appointed by the Minister of Power,
consists of a full-time chairman and deputy chairman, in some cases one or more full¬
time members, and usually five or six part-time members, including the chairman of
the Area Consultative Council. There is no common pattern of organisation; each
board is fully independent and has devised its own subordinate stiucture. Each is
required to pay its way, taking one year with another. The operations of the area
boards have resulted, in the 11 years up to 31st March, i960, in an aggregate disposable
surplus of approximately £20 million, before taxation.
When the industry came under public ownership, a link between it and the con¬
suming public was established by the creation of a Consultative Council in each board
area. These councils consist of not fewer than 20 and not more than 30 members, of
whom between 50 and 75 per cent are chosen from panels of persons nominated by the
local authority associations.
In Northern Ireland the gas supply industry remains in the hands of a number
of municipal undertakings and statutory and non-statutory companies.
Production
In i960, in Great Britain, 22-5 million tons of coal were carbonised by gas under¬
takings and 28-5 million tons by coke ovens operated outside the gas industry. Nearly
INDUSTRY
289
one-third of the output of gas from coke ovens is sold to gas undertakings for general
distribution; the remainder is mainly consumed at the ovens or at collieries or steel¬
works.
In 1921, 250,300 million cubic feet of gas was manufactured by authorised gas
undertakings or acquired from coke ovens, and the number of consumers was 7-6
million. By i960 gas manufactured and acquired from coke ovens and other sources
for distribution had risen to 600,000 million cubic feet and the number of consumers
had risen to almost 13 million.
In i960 the quantity of gas produced in Northern Ireland was almost 7,000 million
cubic feet, most of it for household use.
Consumption
Half of all gas is sold by gas boards for household use and the remainder for industrial
and commercial purposes. Total consumption has been static in recent years, the level
in i960 showing little change from that of 1955.
Domestic Use. About 70 per cent of the domestic load is used for cooking, the
remaining 30 per cent being spread over space heating, water heating and other
installations. Most homes in Britain are now supplied with gas, except in some rural
areas where, owing to difficulties in storage and transmission, gas is not economic.
Bottled gas, derived from petroleum, is widely used in rural areas.
Industrial and Commercial Use. Gas is used extensively in industries which require
the control of temperatures to a fine degree of accuracy, for example, in the pottery
industry and in certain processes in the manufacture of iron and steel products. In
i960 sales of gas to industry totalled 180,000 million cubic feet.
Coke and By-products
Production of coke at gas works in i960 was 9'8 million tons, and at coke ovens
187 million tons. The gas industry and coke ovens jointly produce about 3 million
tons of crude coal tar and over 100 million gallons of crude benzole a year. These latter
by-products yield materials widely employed in the newer branches of the chemical
industry and also in other industries.
Capital Investment
Under the Gas Act, 1948, borrowing by the Gas Council and the Area Gas Boards
was limited to £250 million. In 1954 the industry’s borrowing powers were increased
to £450 million, and in i960 to £500 million (or up to £525 million if authorised by
Order in Council) in the period up to 31st March, 1966.
The industry in recent years has been spending about £50 million a year on capital
investment. Between vesting day (1st May, 1949) and March 1961, about £550 million
had been invested in fixed assets. Expenditure of ^47 million has been approved for
1961-62.
Development and Research
The post-war structure of the industry has already permitted considerable integration
by the linking of undertakings for the transmission of gas (through gas grids and long¬
distance mains), enabling production to be concentrated in the most efficient units.
Progress is also being made in interconnections for the reception of gas from coke
ovens, notably in Wales, Durham and Yorkshire.
The industry is investigating processes of gasifying coal of inferior quality. At
Westfield, in Fife, Scotland, a gas plant, costing ^6-6 million, and using low-grade
290
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
coal, began production in December i960 and, when completed in 1962, will be produc¬
ing 30 million cubic feet of gas a day, about one-fifth of the total gas requirements of
Scotland. The plant marks a change from conventional carbonisation of coal to the use
of chemical processes. Because the gas will be made at high pressure, it will be possible
to pipe it through a 133-mile grid-main covering industrial Scotland. Further advan¬
tages of this method are low costs and the production of by-products such as tar,
ammonia and benzole. A similar plant is being erected at Coleshill, near Birmingham.
Alternative sources of gas are being developed by the Gas Council. Gases from oil
refineries (butane or propane) are used in several installations in smaller towns remote
from large gas works or the grid systems. Progress has also been made with the use
of methane, drained from coal mines, and of surplus gases from oil refineries.
A number of oil gasification plants have been built. These include a plant constructed
by the South Eastern Gas Board adjacent to the British Petroleum Company’s refinery
at Isle of Grain, Kent, which converts some 70,000 tons of petroleum products a year
and has a daily output of 45 million cubic feet of gas.
Experimental shipments of liquid natural gas were made in 1959 an(^ I9^° fr°m
the United States Gulf Coast. Seven trial runs were made and the gas, after being
stored at Canvey Island, Essex, was modified at the Romford gas works for public use.
Consideration is being given to the import of natural gas on a larger scale from the
Sahara.
The Gas Council’s research organisation consists of a research committee which
advises on the initiation and implementation of research policy, two research stations,
one in London and one at Solihull, and the Watson House Centre at Fulham, London,
for the design, testing and development of appliances. Research is also carried out on
behalf of the Gas Council at Leeds University and at other universities and colleges.
FUEL EFFICIENCY
Efficiency in the use of fuel, among both industrial and domestic users, has been
assisted by various bodies representative of producers and consumers and by the technical
advisory services of the fuel and power industries.
The Coal Utilisation Council consists of representatives of the National Coal Board,
coal distributors and coal appliance manufacturers and distributors. Originally formed
in 1932, it informs and advises domestic users on the best use of solid fuel, including
the choice of installation and the operation of solid fuel appliances.
A non-profit-making company, the National Industrial Fuel Efficiency Service,
was formed in 1954 by the fuel and power industries to promote fuel saving in industry.
It provides advice and services to all non-domestic fuel users in a variety of forms, from
‘spot’ inspection to full-scale heat and power surveys and regular visits on a contract
basis.
WATER SUPPLY
Britain’s water resources are, in general, sufficient for domestic and industrial
requirements. The sources of water are often distant from the areas where supplies
are needed, however, and water undertakings are therefore mainly concerned with
abstraction, storage, treatment and distribution. Supplies are obtained partly from
surface sources such as mountain lakes, streams impounded in upland gathering
grounds and river intakes, and partly from underground sources by means of wells,
adits and boreholes. Unlike other public services in Great Britain, such as electricity
INDUSTRY
29I
and gas, water supply remains in the hands of a large number of undertakings of
different kinds. Ministerial responsibility for national water policy rests with the
Minister of Housing and Local Government in England and Wales, with the Secretary
of State for Scotland in Scotland and with the Minister of Health and Local Government
in Northern Ireland.
Development of Water Supply in England and Wales
It was not until the nineteenth century that the provision of water supplies became
a general public service and then only after long and bitter controversy. It was largely
due to the efforts of Edwin Chadwick and his colleagues, who demonstrated the dangers
arising from inadequate water supply and sanitation, that the Public Health Act, 1848,
became law in England and Wales and laid the basis for a long series of statutes dealing
with public health.
From the middle of the nineteenth century onwards a number of separate large
water undertakings were set up to provide adequate supplies of pure water to the
expanding urban population, and the water supply system developed rapidly, although
in piecemeal fashion and with some overlapping and waste.
Organisation of Water Supply in England and Wales
Local authorities have a duty as sanitary authorities to ensure that water supplies
are adequate for the needs of their areas, and they may do this either by operating
water undertakings themselves or by ensuring that other bodies are providing adequate
supplies. The householder receives his domestic water supply at a comparatively small
charge, varying in different areas, which he usually pays by way of a water rate levied,
like other rates, on the value of his house.
By the Water Act, 1945, the Minister of Housing and Local Government has a
duty to promote the conservation and proper use of water supplies in England and
Wales. The same Act provided for a statutory Central Advisory Water Committee
(replacing the previous non-statutory committee) to advise the minister on general
questions relating to water and to deal with the local organisation of water supplies
and the powers and duties of local authorities and other water concerns. Local
authorities were required, in extension of the duties placed on them under the Public
Health Acts, to secure piped wholesome water in every part of their districts where
there were houses or schools, unless it was impracticable to do so at reasonable cost.
In the years between the passing of the Water Act and 1961, 497 smaller water
authorities in England and Wales were absorbed by larger authorities or by the
creation of joint boards. The principal object of such amalgamation is the constitution
of more efficient units in the water supply industry, and efforts to reduce the number
of separate undertakings have recently been intensified.
In March 1961 there were in England and Wales 584 local authority water under¬
takings, 83 joint water boards (including bulk supply boards) and 10 joint water
committees, 59 statutory water companies, 13 non-statutory water companies, and 3
private proprietors with statutory powers. A considerable number of private proprietors
without statutory powers also provide small supplies. Water undertakings vary greatly
in size; about half the population is served by the 30 largest undertakings, and the
other half by over 700 smaller ones.
The Metropolitan Water Board, which is probably the largest single water under¬
taking in the world, supplies about 340 million gallons daily to about 6-5 million
people in the London area. It consists of 88 part-time members who are the elected
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
292
representatives of the various local authorities within the board s area of operations,
together with one representative each from the Thames and Lee Conservancies.
Present Supplies in England and Wales
Today, piped water reaches over 95 per cent of the total population of England
and Wales and about 90 per cent of the rural population.
Between £40 and £50 million a year is spent on capital investment, financed mainly
by loans, the interest on which, together with running costs, is paid by the water
undertakings from annual income. This income is derived from local water rates levied
on domestic consumers and from charges for supplies as recorded by meter in the case
of most industrial users. In addition to supplies from water undertakings, large
quantities of water are taken by industry from rivers or underground sources.
The provision of piped supplies for rural districts has been assisted by grants
under the Rural Water Supplies Act, 1934, and under the Rural Water Supplies
and Sewerage Acts, 1944 to 1955. By March 1961, schemes costing £86 million had
been completed or were in progress with the aid of grants under these Acts.
The steady growth of towns in England and Wales has meant increased demands
for water, the needs of industry having grown so much that in many areas they now
exceed domestic demand. The use of water in irrigation of farm land is also growing;
it is estimated that the area of land under irrigation is increasing by 15 per cent a
year. On the other hand, improved methods of purification in recent years have expanded
supplies by allowing greater use to be made of water drawn from the lower reaches of
rivers. In 1955 a sub-committee was set up by the Central Advisory Water Committee
to study the growing demand for water in England and Wales and the problems
involved in meeting it. In its first report, 1 he Growing Demand for Water, published
in 1959, the sub-committee stated that in spite of an expected 23 per cent increase in
consumption of water in the ten years ending i965> development schemes prepared
by the public water suppliers should enable them amply to meet likely demands. After
1965, the country’s rainfall would be sufficient to ensure an adequate supply of v/ater to
meet growing needs, provided that the proper means of conservation and distribution
developed. The danger of serious depletion of the natural flow of many rivers
and streams by abstraction of water for such purposes as irrigation was the subject
of the sub-committee’s second report, published in June i960, and a recommendation
was made that private abstractions should be controlled. In a report on the water resources
of Wales of the Welsh Advisory Water Committee, published in 1961, it is estimated
that Wales has an exploitable surplus of between 235 million and 800 million gallons
of water a day (depending on the system of development used in the future) after
taking into account the expected increase in demand by 1990.
Proposals for the establishment of new water conservation authorities in England
and Wales, in order to make the best use of water resources, are under discussion
between the Minister of Housing and Local Government and water authorities.
Water Supply in Scotland and Northern Ireland
In Scotland public water undertakings are carried on entirely by local authorities*
either separately or in combination with each other; they supply over 95 per cent o
the total population. The water problem in Scotland is broadly similar to that in
England and Wales save that less reliance needs to be placed on underground sources.
The Water (Scotland) Acts, 1946 and 1949, among other provisions, impose a general
duty on the Secretary of State to promote the conservation of water resources in
Scotland; require local authorities to provide supplies of wholesome water everywhere
INDUSTRY
293
in their districts, where this can be done at reasonable cost; and provide for a uniform
system of rating for water throughout the country. The Rural Water Supplies and
Sewerage Acts, 1944 to 1955, make available to Scottish local authorities grant
assistance up to a maximum of £30 million towards the cost of water supplies and
sewerage schemes in rural areas. By December i960 the total value of work done on
new and improved water supplies since 1945 amounted to j£54’i million, of which
£25-4 million represents works aided by grants under these Acts.
Northern Ireland has abundant supplies of water. The Water Supplies and Sewerage
Act (Northern Ireland), 1945, in addition to making provision for the payment of
Government grants to all water supply authorities, places upon them statutory obliga¬
tions with regard to the supply of water to houses and schools. Since 1945 a piped
water supply has been, or is being, provided for every town, and in rural areas piped
water supplies are being extended. Progress has been very rapid, and by 31st March,
1961, £27-2 million had been expended, including grants totalling million.
Measurement of Water Resources
Information on the yield, behaviour and quantity of the nation’s surface water
resources is provided in the Surface Water Year Book of Great Britain, published
annually by H.M. Stationery Office. This publication contains particulars of the run¬
off and related rainfall from a large number of rivers, streams and reservoired areas.
The Surface Water Survey Centre of the Ministry of blousing and Local Government
is responsible for the promotion of gauging, the collection of hydrological information,
and the publication of the year book. The field work of surface water measurement is
carried out by river boards, water undertakings and other bodies. General information
on rainfall, published annually in British Rainfall, is the responsibility of the
Meteorological Office, while the subject of ground water is dealt with by the Geological
Survey and Museum. In special cases the Hydraulics Research Station of the Depart¬
ment of Scientific and Industrial Research carries out research into problems of the
design and calibration of gauging weirs and flumes for the measurement of surface
water.
A report by a sub-committee of the Central Advisory Water Committee on Informa¬
tion on Water Resources, published in 1959, proposed that steps should be taken to
review current research work and to determine how such work should be co-ordinated.
Water Pollution
It is an offence for any person to permit any polluting matter, solid or liquid, to
enter a river. The Rivers (Prevention of Pollution) Act, 195!) revised and strengthened
previous legislation for the prevention of river pollution in England and Wales.
Enforcement of the Act is vested in the river boards (see p. 347), the Thames and Lee
conservators, and, in London and adjacent areas, in the councils of the metropolitan
boroughs, counties, and county boroughs concerned. There is a similar Act for
Scotland under which nine river purification boards have been set up to promote
the cleanliness of the rivers in their areas.
The Water Pollution Research Laboratory of the Department of Scientific and
Industrial Research is engaged in investigating problems connected with the treat¬
ment of water for domestic and industrial supply, the treatment and disposal of
sewage and industrial waste water, and the effects and prevention of pollution of
surface water and underground water. Research is carried out with general supervision
and advice from the Water Pollution Research Board of the Department of Scientific
and Industrial Research.
294
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
CONSTRUCTION
The construction industries are concerned primarily with the building and repair
of houses, hospitals, schools, offices, shops and factories, and with civil engineer¬
ing works such as bridges, docks, harbours, railways, roads, airports, power stations,
hydro-electric schemes, irrigation systems, and atomic energy establishments. The
industries employ some i| million persons (including about 70,000 women) and provide
about 6 per cent of the gross domestic output of goods and services. They also make
an important contribution to overseas development.
Structure
Over four-fifths of all constructional work is done by private concerns. The majority
of firms are small or medium sized. Nearly 30 per cent of the firms in the industry are
one-man businesses engaged in such trades as house painting or plumbing, and over
60 per cent employ fewer than 19 persons. At the other end of the scale there are fewer
than a dozen firms of building and civil engineering contractors employing more than
5,000 persons each on the permanent staff. Some of these are integrated concerns owning
quarries as well as workshops, extensive stocks of mechanical plant, and the standard
stores and tackle of builders’ yards; they also undertake large-scale constructional
contracts overseas. Some firms are prepared to offer a ‘package’ service comprising
complete responsibility for projects from design to finished building.
There are also about 200 United Kingdom firms of consulting engineers which
undertake detailed investigations of constructional projects, report on the type of
work recommended and materials required, provide estimates of the time and cost of
construction, obtain competitive tenders from contracting firms and supervise the
carrying out of the work by the contractor. In addition, there are hundreds of firms of
architects and quantity surveyors which are concerned with the design, planning and
costing of building and civil engineering projects.
A growing proportion of construction work, in Britain and overseas, is being under¬
taken by ‘consortia’, i.e. organisations in which several firms group together to secure
large contracts—such as the building of nuclear power stations—which are beyond
the technical or financial resources of a single firm.
Value of Output
The value of the annual output of the industry has been rising fairly steadily since
1945, and the total for Great Britain in i960 is estimated to amount to £2,581 million.
Of this total, £435 million represents work carried out by the staffs employed directly
by the public authorities (including Government departments, local authorities and
certain public utilities), while the balance of £2,146 million represents the output
of private firms (new work, £1,653 million, and other work, £493 million).
Housing Construction
In the post-war period most new houses in Britain have been built by private
firms working under contract to local authorities, but the proportion built by private
firms for private owners has increased appreciably since 1951. About 14 per cent of
local authorities employ direct labour in housing construction, while about 73 per
cent use their own labour for repair and maintenance. In i960 the value of new
housing built in Great Britain by private firms was £629 million, of which £389
million was for private owners and £240 million for public authorities.
Between 1945 and the end of i960 some 3,778,000 new permanent houses and other
INDUSTRY
295
dwellings were built in the United Kingdom (including over 88,000 in Northern
Ireland), besides some 160,000 temporary houses constructed in the immediate
post-war years with extensive use of prefabrication techniques.
Civil Engineering and Industrial Building
Britain was the first country to develop civil engineering as a large-scale modern
industry and the first to provide techniques, finance and equipment to carry out
major civil engineering projects throughout the world. Prominent figures in the
early development of civil engineering included: James Brindley (1716-1772), builder
of canals; John Loudon McAdam (1756-1836), pioneer in road construction; Thomas
Telford (1757-1834), builder of roads, docks and bridges; and George Stephenson
(1781-1848), Robert Stephenson (i8o3-i859)> Joseph Locke (1805-1860), Isambaid
Kingdom Brunei (1806-1859) and Thomas Brassey (1805-1870), builders of railways.
Within the United Kingdom the industry has been occupied since the war with
large-scale reconstruction and development schemes. These have included work
on the repair, modernisation and electrification of railways, road and dock develop¬
ment schemes, airports, sea defence works, thermo-electric and hydro-electric power
stations, improved water supplies, and drainage and sewerage systems.
Among important civil engineering projects under construction in the United
Kingdom in 1961 were: the Whiteinch Tunnels, under the river Clyde at Glasgow,
the Dartford-Purfleet Tunnel under the Thames; and large steelworks in England,
Wales and Scotland (see p. 299). Some million will be spent in 1961-62 on new
motorways and road reconstruction (see p. 379). Large-scale bridge-building projects
in hand include road suspension bridges across the Firth of Forth and the river Severn,
which will be the longest in the world outside the United States; and the Medway
bridge with the world’s largest pre-stressed clear span (500 ft.). The Runcorn-Widnes
bridge with a single-span steel arch of 1,082 ft. was completed in 1961. Investment
programmes of the nationalised industries in coal, hydro-electric development,
nuclear power stations and rail transport also involve constructional work on a large
In Great Britain since the war, more than 20,000 industrial buildings of over 5,000
sq. ft. (with a total area of almost 447 million sq. ft.) and many smaller factories have
been erected.
Output in Northern Ireland
Developments in the building and civil engineering industries in Northern Ireland
have followed much the same pattern as in Great Britain.
The output of these industries has been relatively higher in Northern Ireland
since 1946 than before the war, as considerable leeway had to be made up. Progress
has been particularly marked in housing, hospitals and schools, water supply and
sewerage, road reconstruction schemes, arterial drainage and harbour schemes. An
extensive programme of factory construction has been under way since 1947 with the
object of attracting new industries to Northern Ireland.
Overseas Constructional Work
Constructional work carried out overseas by British firms has included railways
in most parts of the world; large-scale irrigation works in India, Pakistan, Egypt,
and Greece; and canals, roads, docks, harbours, power stations, airfields, hydro¬
electric schemes and industrial and housing estates in several countries. British
conditions of contract for international civil engineering work have been widely adopted
as standard throughout the world.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
296
Examples of large contracts in recent years include: office blocks in Salisbury
(Southern Rhodesia), the tallest in Africa, in Toronto (Canada), valued at £i-8
million, in Wellington (New Zealand) and Freetown (Sierra Leone); the equipment
for the geothermal power station at Wairakei (New Zealand); the Auckland Harbour
(New Zealand) bridge and one across the Jhelum River in Pakistan; oil refinery
installations at Kwinana (Western Australia) and Port Harcourt (Nigeria); road works
valued at £2-7 million in Jordan; jetty and port facilities at Salaverry Harbour (Peru);
housing work, at a cost of £3 million, in connection with the Kariba Dam (Federation
of Rhodesia and Nyasaland); large chemicals processing plants at Bashkiri (USSR),
Altona (Australia) and Bulsar (India); the Guma Valley Dam construction, costing over
£2 million, in Sierra Leone; the installation of large-scale industrial plants, among
them a jute mill valued at over £1 million near Bangkok (Thailand), a bakery plant at
Moscow, and a complete paper mill in Yugoslavia.
It has been estimated that the value of work done during the year ended March
1961 by 62 principal British building and civil engineering firms, operating in some
63 countries, was nearly £135 million, compared with £124 million in the previous
year; the value of contracts obtained, however, fell from £131 million in 1959-60
to £98 million in 1960-61. Most of the work done was in the sterling area, although
about 30 per cent was in the dollar area.
Among the major projects on which British consulting engineers have been engaged
in recent years are the hydro-electric scheme at Kariba and the power development,
irrigation and flood control project in Shire Valley (both in the Federation of Rhodesia
and Nyasaland), the Kuwait International Airport, and the trans-Iranian pipeline
survey.
Research and Development
The Department of Scientific and Industrial Research (DSIR) set up the Building
Research Station in 1921, and thus made Britain the pioneer of organised building
research. Work affecting the construction industries is also carried on in several of the
other research laboratories connected with the DSIR. Other bodies concerned with
such research include the Admiralty, universities and colleges of technology, trade
associations and individual firms.
The largest building firms’ practice of maintaining their own research and develop¬
ment groups has developed chiefly during the past decade or so. These groups are
mainly concerned with the control of site operations and the development of particular
systems of production. Advances in the design and construction of special types of
building have been made by specialised development groups, such as the Ministry
of Education’s development group on schools. Such groups work in close collaboration
with the Building Research Station.
An example of fruitful collaboration is the research on concrete manufacture
conducted over more than 20 years by the Building Research Station and the Road
Research Laboratory in conjunction with universities and the Cement and Concrete
Association.
Some major advances in technology and materials have been made in recent years,
for example, in the mechanisation of earth excavating and site clearance, in the develop¬
ment of mobile hoists, in road-making techniques, in methods of welding, in concrete
mixing and by the introduction of unit construction processes for bridge building.
New materials and new techniques, including prefabrication, are being developed and
applied in the construction of schools, hospitals, factories, offices and shops, as well
as in the building of permanent houses.
INDUSTRY- 297
The principal professional body in the civil engineering industry is the Institution
of Civil Engineers, incorporated by Royal Charter in 1828.
MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES
The United Kingdom’s manufacturing industries provide a wide range of products,
many of which play a major role in world trade. In terms of net output (the value
added by the productive activity of firms in the industry) and exports, the most
important groups of industries are those concerned with the manufacture of metals
and metal products, together with the chemical and textile industries. Some impression
of the relative importance of the different groups in terms of the value of net output is
given in Table 16, which is based on the results of the census of production for 1954
and the provisional results for 1958.
The 1959 census of production does not give the value of net output, but in that
year the sales of all manufacturing industries had a total value of some ^22,376 million,
and in the same year the combined value of their capital expenditure was some
£854-9 million. The number of employees in manufacturing industry (including the
unemployed and those absent from work through sickness and other causes, but
excluding employers and the self-employed) was about 9 million at the end of May
i960.
TABLE 16
Value of Net Output of Industry Groups in 1954 and 1958
Food, drink and tobacco
Chemicals and allied industries
Metal manufacture ..
Engineering and electrical goods
Shipbuilding and marine engineering
Vehicles
Metal goods (not elsewhere specified)
Textiles, clothing and footwear
Paper, printing and publishing
Other manufacturing industries
Totals 
1954
1958
£ million
655-8
538-6
528-9
1,287-5
187-2
644-5
355-8
892-4
443-3
655-8
6,189-8
940-0
734-9
703-6
1,698-4
227-6
799-5
434-2
892-0
561-4
780-4
7,772-0
Percentage
of total
12-1
9-5
9-0
21-9
2-9
10-3
5-6
11.5
7-2
10-0
100-0
Source: Board of Trade Journal.
The pattern of manufacturing industry has changed markedly in response to
technological progress, new demands from home and export markets and the intro¬
duction of new and improved materials. The rate of expansion has been especially
rapid in electronics and in most sections of electrical engineering, in almost all branches
of the chemical industry and in the aircraft and motor vehicle industries.
Several industries, such as oil refining, steelmaking, motor vehicles, electronic
298
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
components and chemicals, have grown rapidly, partly because of their use of auto¬
mation equipment. This includes transfer machines, linked machine tools in automatic
production lines, electronic control equipment and electronic data processing machines.
METAL MANUFACTURE
The metal manufacturing industries employed over 620,000 persons in May i960.
Nearly three-quarters of these were engaged in the iron and steel industry, including
iron founding.
Iron and Steel
Britain pioneered the application of coal to the smelting of iron ore from the seven¬
teenth century onwards and British inventors were responsible for the discovery of the
processes which led to the great expansion of steelmaking in the second half of the
nineteenth century. Today Britain is the world’s fourth largest steel producing nation.
Output of crude steel, which in 1946 totalled 12-7 million ingot tons, rose to 21-7
million ingot tons in 1957, but fell to 19-3 million ingot tons in 1958. Production
increased to 20-2 million tons in 1959 and reached the record level of 24-3 million tons
in i960. Pig iron production rose from 7-8 million tons in 1946 to 15-8 million tons
in i960. Direct exports of iron and steel products amounted to the equivalent of
4-1 million tons with a value of £221 million and, in addition, exports of the products
of other industries were estimated to contain the equivalent of over 4-3 million tons
of crude steel; these include ships, motor vehicles, railway rolling stock, construction
equipment, machinery and domestic kitchen equipment.
The main steel producing districts in Britain are: South Wales (23 per cent of total
United Kingdom output of crude steel); the north-east coast of England (20 per cent);
Sheffield and district (13 per cent); and Scotland (n per cent). Other important
producing areas are Lincolnshire, Lancashire, Yorkshire, Staffordshire, Northampton¬
shire, and the north-west coast of England. South Wales concentrates on the manufacture
of flat products, especially sheet steel and tinplate; the output of the north-east coast
is predominantly of heavy steel products (plates, sections and rails); Sheffield is
responsible for 70 per cent of United Kingdom alloy steel production.
Britain possesses some of the most up-to-date plants in Europe. Recently completed
plant includes a new iron and steel works at Ravenscraid, Scotland, and a medium-
width strip mill near Sheffield (in 1957); a combined universal beam and heavy section
mill near Middlesbrough (in 1958); a modernised steelmaking plant at Shotton, in North
Wales, in which electric furnaces have replaced open hearth furnaces (in 1959); a
modernised billet plant at Motherwell (i960); and two new plate mills on the north-east
coast (i960).
The iron and steel industry has been subject to some form of public supervision
since 1932, when a Government-appointed body, the Import Duties Advisory Com¬
mittee, gave special attention to the reorganisation of the industry. In February 1951
the greater part of the industry came under public ownership by virtue of the Iron and
Steel Act, 1949. The 1949 Act was repealed by the Iron and Steel Act, 1953, which
established an Iron and Steel Holding and Realisation Agency with the duty of return¬
ing the companies to private ownership. The number of companies in which the
Agency has a controlling shareholding has been reduced from 81 in July 1953 to 8 at
the end of i960 (including one major company and one company in voluntary
liquidation).
The 1953 Act also provided for the establishment of the Iron and Steel Board to
exercise a general supervision over the iron and steel industry. Members of the Board
INDUSTRY
299
are appointed by the Government and it is financed by levies which it has power to
make on firms in the industry. The major trade association in the iron and steel
industry, excluding iron founding, is the British Iron and Steel Federation.
During the period 1953-60 over £680 million was spent on development and
modernisation. Schemes recently announced will involve the expenditure of over
£600 million between 1961 and 1965. Steelmaking capacity may exceed 34 million
tons in 1965. Consumption of home-produced ore is expected to increase from
17 million tons in i960 to at least 21 million tons by 1965 and to expand throughout
the 1960s. Consumption of overseas ore is expected to rise from 16 million tons in
i960 to between 24 and 27 million tons by 1965 and the industry’s programme
provides for a fleet of 73 special ore carriers by 1962, of which 69 were in service at the
end of i960.
Notable developments in steelmaking include: the increasing use of oxygen both
in conventional processes and in special converters; the continuous casting of steel,
which removes the necessity for primary rolling plant; an extension of electric steel¬
making; experiments in the direct reduction of iron ore, avoiding the use of blast
furnaces; and improved processes for finishing and coating steel. The growing demand
for flat-rolled products will be met by the construction of wide strip mills in Wales
and Scotland by 1962 and a new universal plate mill near Middlesbrough by 1965.
Over 350,000 persons were employed in May i960 in the manufacture of iron and
steel and steel tubes (but excluding the manufacture of iron castings).
Iron Founding
Output of iron castings rose to 3‘97 million tons in i960, compared with 3-5 million
tons in 1959 and 2-54 million tons in 1946. Over 1 million tons are used annually in
the general engineering industry, over 700,000 tons in the motor vehicle industry,
about 600,000 tons each in the manufacture of pressure pipes and fittings and some
700,000 tons in the steel industry. An important part of total output consists of grey
and malleable iron castings for use in motor vehicles, tractors, machine tools, engines
and all kinds of power unit.
There are some 1,500 firms in the industry, ranging from small units to large
foundries employing over 1,500 persons; the labour force numbers about 127,000.
Non-Ferrous Metals
The United Kingdom non-ferrous metals industry is the largest in Europe and as
a consumer of aluminium, copper, lead and zinc Britain is second only to the United
States among western countries. The value of sales given in the 1959 census of pro¬
duction was £568-3 million, and output in i960 included: aluminium, 28,900 tons of
virgin metal and 109,200 tons of secondary metal; refined copper, 110,400 tons of
virgin copper and 104,400 tons of secondary metal; lead, 90,000 tons of refined metal;
zinc, 74,300 tons of slab metal; and tin, 27,700 tons. In almost every case output in
i960 was above the levels of previous years. Mining in Britain is confined to the
working of lead, tin and tungsten ores on a small scale.
In i960 exports of non-ferrous metals were valued at £98 million, compared to £113
million in 1959. The main products exported were copper and copper alloys (£48
million), aluminium and its alloys (£17-2 million), nickel and its alloys (£18-4 million)
and tin and its alloys (£7-4 million). These totals include the value of semi-finished
products. The United States (£11-2 million) and West Germany (£ii'2 million)
were the largest purchasing countries. There were also substantial exports of finished
300
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
products incorporating non-ferrous semi-finished products and of non-ferrous metals
in many finished forms.
Nearly half of the industry is situated in the Midlands; other centres include South
Wales, London, Tyneside and Avonmouth. It consists mainly of factories for smelting,
casting and fabrication by rolling, extrusion and drawing of aluminium, copper, lead,
zinc, tin, nickel and magnesium. The techniques of powder metallurgy and pressure
diecasting are also employed where appropriate. Some non-ferrous metals such as
nickel, molybdenum, tungsten and vanadium are largely used in the making of high
speed and tool steels. New uses for non-ferrous metals with special properties have
emerged with the growth of new industries having particular requirements, as, for
example, production of nuclear energy (uranium, zirconium, beryllium), jet aircraft
(niobium, magnesium, titanium) and electronic apparatus (selenium, silicon, germanium,
tantalum), and the United Kingdom industry has some of the most advanced plants
in the world for the preparation of zirconium and beryllium.
In May i960 the industry had some 143,000 employees.
SHIPBUILDING, SHIP REPAIRING AND MARINE ENGINEERING
Britain has for centuries been one of the most important shipbuilding countries.
Modern shipbuilding dates from the middle of the nineteenth century, when the
iron-clad steam-driven vessel replaced the earlier sailing ship. Britain led the way
in the substitution of steel for iron and in the development of the steam turbine.
Between 1890 and 1913 Britain produced more than half the world’s new tonnage,
and in 1920 launched over two million tons, still the peace-time record for the industry.
In the inter-war years the problem of surplus capacity, common to all shipbuilding
countries, caused a substantial fall in activity and periodic heavy unemployment.
During the second world war the industry was fully occupied in the building and
repairing of warships and merchant ships and a high level of activity in the building
and repair of merchant ships has been maintained since 1945-
Between the beginning of 1946 and the end of i960, 5,114 merchant ships totalling
19-7 million gross tons were constructed, including 646 tankers, 1,224 dry vessels,
215 passenger and passenger cargo vessels, 77 ore carriers and 2,952 miscellaneous
craft of some 20 different types. The value of this output is estimated at £2,135 million.
In addition, United Kingdom companies completed more than £300 million worth
of naval ships and undertook merchant and naval ship repairs to a value of considerably
more than £900 million.
Ships totalling over 1-3 million gross tons were launched from United Kingdom
shipyards in i960, compared with 1-4 million gross tons in 1959; Britain maintained
its position as the second largest shipbuilding nation, after Japan. About 11 per cent
of the tonnage launched was for registration overseas. Oil tankers accounted for about
46 per cent of total launchings.
The United Kingdom shipbuilding industry is concentrated in four main areas:
the river Clyde in Scotland, the north-east coast of England, the north-west coast of
England, and Belfast in Northern Ireland. Ships are also built in the Southampton
area, in the Isle of Wight, and along the estuaries of the rivers Forth and Tay in
Scotland; while numerous places along the coast build fishing vessels, yachts, harbour
craft and barges. Repair yards and dry docks are situated in all the great ports. The
majority of the largest firms engaged in repair work also carry on shipbuilding work,
and about one-quarter of ship repairing activity is concentrated in the north-east coast
of England area.
Over the past twenty years, traditional methods of shipbuilding have undergone
INDUSTRY
301
radical changes, primarily due to advances in welding technique. These have led
to the production of ships in large units, 50 to 60 tons in weight, prefabricated under
cover and rapidly assembled for launching. In the period 1946-60 over £120 million
has been spent on the modernisation of shipyards, including the construction of berths
for the building of tankers of up to 100,000 gross tons. The annual rate of investment
has risen considerably in recent years. The British Shipbuilding Research Association
(BSRA) is engaged in all aspects of shipbuilding research, and the Parsons and Marine
Engineering Turbine Research and Development Association (Pametrada) are
developing gas turbines and improving the efficiency of diesel and steam units.
Launchings during i960 included the 45,000 ton Canberra, the largest liner built
in the United Kingdom since the second world war, the 27,300 ton Empress of Canada
and the 20,362 ton Arlanza. The largest tanker ever built in Britain, the 65,000 dead¬
weight ton SS Serina, was launched in October i960. In May i960, 210,600 persons
were employed in shipbuilding and ship repairing, and a further 81,200 in marine
engineering.
MECHANICAL ENGINEERING
Mechanical engineering comprises a very wide range of industries, including agri¬
cultural machinery, machine tools, engineers’ small tools and gauges, industrial
engines, textile machinery and accessories, office machinery, refrigeration machinery,
ordnance and small arms, construction plant and quarrying machinery, mechanical
handling equipment, industrial plant and steel work, scientific, surgical and photographic
instruments, and watches and clocks. The total number of persons employed in
mechanical engineering in i960 was almost 1,300,000, and the value of exports
exceeded £759 million.
Agricultural Machinery and Tractors
In i960 output of agricultural machinery and tractors was valued at the highest-ever
total of £169-4 million. This output included 184,000 agricultural-type and 45,000
market garden-type tractors, 16,400 mould-board ploughs, 16,500 mowers, 14,700
pick-up balers, 6,200 disc harrows, 8,400 milking machines and 3,200 combine
harvesters. Exports in i960 were again a record and totalled almost £130 million. Of
this total, agricultural and earth-moving tractors and parts accounted for £ih-2
million and machinery and implements £18-5 million. The largest markets for British
tractors are in Scandinavia (including Finland), North America, Australia and South
Africa.
Some 85 per cent of total output is concentrated in the hands of seven firms, all
of which manufacture agricultural tractors. Manufacture takes place in several areas,
though there is some concentration in Lincolnshire, East Anglia, the Midlands and
the north of England. About 36,400 persons are employed in the industry, excluding
those employed in the manufacture of tractors.
Metal-working Machine Tools
Britain was the birthplace of the modern machine tool industry, and by the early
1830s had developed to an advanced stage the boring machine and screw-cutting lathe,
as well as other machine tools. The industry’s output today ranges from watchmakers’
lathes weighing a few pounds to machines weighing hundreds of tons, including
transfer lines for motor vehicle manufacture and electronically controlled machine
tools giving accuracies of one ten-thousandth part of an inch.
A substantial expansion in output and exports took place in i960. The value of
deliveries of metal-working machine tools rose to £95 million, the same as that of the
302
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
peak year, 1957. Deliveries for export in i960 totalled £28-2 million, and the value
of orders on hand at the end of December i960 was nearly £106 million, of which
25 per cent was for export.
There are about 350 separate firms making machine tools, but over 90 per cent of
the industry’s output comes from about 150 firms. The high degree of specialisation
makes it possible for the small firm to flourish. The industry is centred mainly in the
Midlands, Yorkshire and Lancashire, and to a lesser extent near London and Glasgow.
The Machine Tool Trades Association of Great Britain is the representative body
of most of the machine tools manufacturers and importers, and is responsible for the
International Machine Tool Exhibitions held in Britain every four years; the most
recent exhibition took place in i960. The industry is also served by its own research
body, the Machine Tool Industry Research Association, which was incorporated in
December i960.
Substantial expenditures on plant and buildings have been made in recent years;
it is estimated that the value of the capital employed in the industry trebled between
1948 and 1957, and in i960 amounted to almost £100 million. About 87,000 persons are
employed in the industry.
Industrial Engines
The United Kingdom manufactures a wide range of engines which are renowned
for their reliability and endurance. The value of deliveries of complete internal
combustion engines, including small marine engines, rose from £27 million in 1948 to
£62 million in i960, including about £23 million for direct export. In addition,
indirect exports accounted for a further £10 million. The number of engines delivered
in i960 was 383,000. Production of parts and accessories accounted for a further
£18 million. The industry had about 40,000 employees in i960.
Textile Machinery
One of the oldest of Britain’s mechanical engineering industries is the textile
machinery industry, which developed rapidly after the introduction of mechanical
spinning and weaving towards the end of the eighteenth century. It enjoys a world¬
wide reputation, not only for the high quality of its products but also because it
offers a complete and modern range of equipment consisting of: spinning machinery,
including machinery for all the preparatory processes; winding machinery and
machinery for other processes prior to weaving; weaving machinery; knitting, hosiery
and lace machinery; printing, dyeing and other finishing machinery; and all types of
mill stores and textile machinery accessories.
The industry comprises about 450 firms, situated mainly in Lancashire, Yorkshire,
Northern Ireland, Dundee, Leicester and Nottingham, making a wide range of
machines and accessories for the manufacture and processing of yarns and fabrics from
all types of natural and man-made fibres, including bast and leaf fibre machinery of
which the United Kingdom is still by far the world’s largest supplier. There are some
59,000 employees in the industry. In i960 deliveries (including accessories) totalled
£83-6 million. Exports were valued at ^52 million, and the largest overseas markets
were the Soviet Union, India, West Germany, the United States and Australia.
Mechanical Handling Equipment
Almost every industry makes use of mechanical handling equipment; the products
of the industry range from individual units and accessories to complete operating
systems. The value of deliveries in i960 was some £86-9 million, the main constituents
INDUSTRY
3°3
being: cranes and bridge transporters (about 40 per cent by value); lifts and escalators
(about 20 per cent); conveyors, elevators, hoists and other mechanical handling
equipment (about 40 per cent).
Exports in i960 were valued at £i9'5 million; in addition, exports of fork-lift trucks
and other industrial and works trucks and tractors had a value of £4-1 million. The
most important overseas customers were India, Australia, Canada and South Africa.
There are some 245 companies in the industry, but only 150 of these employ over
25 persons. There were some 50,700 employees in May i960.
Construction Equipment and Quarrying Macninery
Production of construction equipment in the United Kingdom before the second
world war was mainly concerned with small excavators, concrete mixing machinery
and road surfacing plant, including road rollers. Today almost the whole range of plant
is manufactured, including crawler tractors, motor graders, scrapers, trenchers, dozer
equipment, dumpers, rippers, rooters, and crushing, pulverising and screening plant.
The annual value of the industry’s output has increased from about £2-5 million in
1939 to about £100 million in i960. Of this, almost half was for export, the most
important items were earth-moving machinery, excavators and track-laying tractors.
There were some 27,000 employees in the industry in i960.
Office Machinery
The United Kingdom office machinery industry is now second in size only to that
of the United States, and since 1946 has expanded rapidly. In i960 the value of
deliveries of office machinery (such as accounting machinery, punched-card machinery
and some types of electronic computers, typewriters, dictating machines, and
duplicating and copying machinery) was £657 million. Deliveries in i960 included
173,000 standard typewriters, 181,000 portable typewriters, 39,000 accounting machines
and 19,000 other office machines. Exports were valued at £28 million and the most
important overseas purchasers were Australia, South Africa and the United States.
British subsidiaries or associates of United States firms are prominent in the office
machinery industry. There are about 51,000 employees.
Refrigeration Machinery
The United Kingdom industry malms a wide range of equipment and appliances,
extending from refrigerators of varying sizes suitable for domestic and commercial
use to industrial refrigeration equipment for cold stores, manufacture of chemicals
and other products, ice-making plant and refrigeration plant for ships. Production
of commercial and industrial refrigeration machinery was well established before
the second world war, but the present large production of domestic refrigerators has
been built up since 1946.
The value of deliveries of refrigeration machinery in i960 totalled over £66-4 million,
of which domestic refrigerators accounted for £38 million, commercial refrigeration
machinery for £18 million and industrial refrigerators for £7 million. Export deliveries
were valued at £14-2 million and represented about one-fifth of the output.
Pumps and Industrial Valves
Industrial valves controlling the movement of liquids and gases are a vital component
in many industrial processes, particularly in the chemicals, oil and electric power
industries. The value of deliveries in i960 was estimated at £91-6 million. Exports of
pumps were valued at over £17 million and exports of industrial valves at £12-5 million.
304 BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Boilers and Boilerhouse Plants
Boilers and boilerhouse plant manufactured in the United Kingdom have many
industrial applications. Water tube boilers of advanced design and large steam-raising
capacity are produced by the industry for home power stations and for export. Firms
in the industry are members of the groups formed for the purpose of building nuclear
power stations, both in the United Kingdom and overseas. Shell boilers are used for
steam raising and heating purposes in factories and in buildings. Items of steam-raising
plant accessories produced include plain and corrugated boiler furnaces, forced draught
boiler furnaces and grates, stokers, fuel economisers and preheaters, superheaters and
desuperheaters, pulverisers, coal and ash handling plant, soot blower equipment, steam
pipework, and feed water heaters.
In i960 production of shell boilers and boilerhouse plant, much of which is used
in the construction of complete installations, was valued at £30-8 million, and production
of water tube boiler installations at £57-8 million. Exports in the same year were valued
at -£15 million, of which ^8-4 million was accounted for by water tube boilers. Over half
the exports went to Commonwealth countries; the largest markets were South Africa
and India.
Nuclear Power Station Plant
The design and construction of nuclear power stations is one of the outstanding
present-day enterprises of British industry. Five major groups of firms were formed
for this purpose, consisting of leading firms in the heavy electrical engineering, civil
engineering, boiler, instrument, and associated industries. Some of the original groups
have since joined forces, and there are now only three. In addition to the nuclear power
stations being built for the United Kingdom electricity authorities, these groups are
building such stations in Italy and Japan. Design teams from the companies concerned
have been trained by the United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority in the design
of gas-cooled graphite-moderated reactors, and the authority grants them non¬
exclusive manufacturing licences and keeps them informed of the results of further
research and development work. Industrial firms themselves are also engaged on
research into a range of problems relating to nuclear energy.
Other concerns have also joined together to carry out research into nuclear develop¬
ments and to supply nuclear power plant. Several companies have designed, or have
designs under study for, small nuclear power stations to be used for electricity generation.
A number of designs have also been produced for reactors for marine propulsion.
Companies have also been established for the manufacture, machining and preparation
of graphite for use in reactors. The services of United Kingdom firms of consulting
engineers are being utilised for specification planning, inspection and advice.
The Nuclear Energy Trade Associations’ Conference (NETAC) was formed towards
the end of 1956 to establish a permanent means of liaison and to pool more effectively
the experience of nuclear development among the firms and trade associations concerned.
Iron, Steel and Non-ferrous Metal Works Plant
As a major steel-producing country, Britain has an expanding industry for the
manufacture of steelworks plant. Up to 1939 production fell considerably short
of internal requirements. The post-war modernisation and expansion of the United
Kingdom steel industry have led to the rapid development of the steelworks plant
industry, which today provides about nine-tenths of Britain’s requirements for steel¬
making equipment and can supply complete plant as efficient and economical in
operation as any in the world.
INDUSTRY
3°5
The value of deliveries of steel and non-ferrous metal works plant, including
rolling mills, amounted in i960 to £54-6 million. Exports were valued at £11 -5 million.
Some 40 firms produce equipment for making steel in all its stages. In 1945 six
of these firms, together capable of supplying the entire range of steelmaking plant,
formed the Metallurgical Equipment Export Company Limited (MEECO) to
co-ordinate export operations and to facilitate the placing of foreign orders in the
United Kingdom for complete steelworks. This group of firms has carried out a
number of large contracts for equipping steelworks in Sweden, Norway, Spain
and France. It forms part of the consortium of British engineering firms constructing
the £100 million steel plant at Durgapur, in India.
Chemical Plant and Petroleum Equipment
Some 250 firms are engaged in the highly specialised chemical engineering industry,
which designs and supplies all types of plant and equipment for use in the manu¬
facture of chemicals. The range of activities includes the manufacture of distillation
columns, heat exchangers, high vacuum drying equipment, and plants for the manu¬
facture of fertilisers, petroleum chemicals, sulphuric acid and other basic chemicals.
The value of deliveries of chemical plant in i960 was about £43-8 million.
Before the second world war the production of specialised equipment for the
oil industry was on a small scale, but the rapid expansion in oil production and refining
throughout the world has given rise to a substantial export business in British fittings
and plant. The range of products supplied by the engineering industries includes
specialised equipment for oil drilling, valves, pumps, meters and gauges, equipment
for oil refineries, and storage tanks. Britain ranks second to the United States as a
supplier of equipment for the petroleum industry.
Scientific and Industrial Instruments
Scientific instruments have been made commercially in Britain for over three
centuries, early products being chiefly navigational and optical instruments. The last
twenty years have brought a large-scale expansion of capacity in every branch of the
industry to meet defence needs during the war and, later, the expanding world demand
for all types of instruments (optical, mechanical, pneumatic, electrical, electronic and
nucleonic), for both pure and applied science. The sector which is expanding most
rapidly is that making industrial instruments—an essential element in the movement
towards full automation in industry. British scientific instrument manufacturers can
supply all types of instrumentation for research, and of control or automatic devices.
In i960 total deliveries of scientific and industrial instruments amounted to £95
million, including: optical instruments with a value of £6-8 million; electrical
measuring equipment with a value of ^7’2 million; electronic computers w ith a value
of jTS-2 million; industrial process measuring and control instruments with a value of
£44-5 million; and nautical, aeronautical and gunnery control instruments valued at
£10-4 million. Manufacturers in the office machinery and electronics industries
contribute a large proportion of the deliveries of electronic computers.
Exports of scientific instruments were valued at some £45 million in i960. There
were some 126,000 employees in the industry.
Clocks and Watches
Britain was at one time the world’s leading producer of clocks and watches, but by
the end of the nineteenth century production had virtually died out. The present
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
306
industry is largely a post-war development. It employs about 15,000 people, the
great majority skilled craftsmen, and many of the factories are located in the develop¬
ment districts and particularly in Scotland. In i960, 9-4 million clocks and watches,
together with time switches and recorders, had a total value of £i4'3 million. Exports
were valued at about £2 7 million.
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
The United Kingdom electrical engineering industry is engaged in the manu¬
facture and installation of a wide variety of electrical equipment, including all types
of generating, transmission and distribution equipment; motors and equipment for
traction and industrial applications; telecommunications apparatus; domestic appliances;
and specialised laboratory and electronic equipment. The total value of its output has
risen from about ^155 million in 1938 to nearly £1,600 million in i960. Products are
exported all over the world; the value of exports of all types of electrical equipment in
i960 was £233-8 million, compared with the previous record of £231-4 million in 1959.
In terms of value the United Kingdom is one of the largest exporters of electrical goods
and sends overseas about one-quarter of its output. Large quantities of power station
equipment, valves and tubes, telegraph and telephone equipment and cables are exported.
The most important overseas markets are Australia, South Africa, India, Canada, the
United States and New Zealand.
Altogether the industry employs a labour force of more than 790,000, including
218,000 engaged in the manufacture of electrical machinery, and 237,000 in the
production of radio and other electronic equipment. The leading organisation of the
industry is the British Electrical and Allied Manufacturers’ Association.
Electrical Machinery
British scientists and engineers have been responsible for many of the basic advances
in the generation and transmission of electric power. The experiments of Michael
Faraday pointed the way to the production of electricity as a source of cheap and
abundant power; Sir Charles Parsons produced and patented the first turbo-dynamo,
the forerunner of the giant turbo-generating sets of today. The industry has provided
the plant required for the large-scale post-war expansion programme of the United
Kingdom electricity authorities, and has built all types of equipment for overseas
countries.
In i960 the output of electrical machinery was valued at £312 million, including
£134 million worth of rotating electrical machinery (motors, generators and rotary
converters), £43 million worth of transformers for lighting, heating and power, £116
million worth of switchgear and control gear and £19 million worth of other electrical
machinery. Exports of electrical machinery in i960 had a value of £62-7 million and
included generating sets, generators and motors with a value of £34’5 rnillion.
In order to meet the growing volume of orders, extensions to capacity have been
carried out by the principal manufacturers. Manufacture takes place in many areas,
among the most important being Manchester, Rugby, Tyneside, Stafford and Larne
(in Northern Ireland). Among the orders on hand are a 550 MW two-shaft generating
set for commissioning in 1964 and a 500 MW single-shaft generating set for com¬
missioning in 1965.
Radio and Other Electronic Apparatus
Production of electronic equipment is an expanding British industry. United
Kingdom scientists and inventors have made many basic contributions to electronics
INDUSTRY
3°7
—the thermionic valve, the development of radar (a British firm has fitted nearly half
the world’s radar-equipped ocean-going ships), the first public transmission television
service, and the ‘printed circuit’ which has led to far-reaching changes in methods
of production in the radio industry. Over 600 different types of transistor and semi¬
conductor devices are marketed by British manufacturers.
Its wide range of activities fall into three broad groups: radio and television receivers,
telecommunication equipment; and electronic capital goods (sound and television
broadcasting equipment, radio navigation, radar, electronic computers, industrial
control equipment and many types of electronic instruments). The value of the
industry’s output has been estimated at about £420 million in i960; 2*5 million radios
and radiograms, and 2*2 million television sets were produced including 276,000 and
35,000 for export respectively. Exports in i960 had a value of ^65 million, which included
£19-5 million worth of telegraph and telephone equipment, j£i7’2 million worth of
navigational aid equipment, and almost 5^7 million worth of nucleonic and electronic
valves and tubes. Among the most important overseas markets are the United States,
Canada, the Netherlands, Sweden and Australia. Indirect exports of equipment on
other products, such as ships, aircraft and machinery are considerable. It is estimated
that there are 237,000 employees in the electronics industry and a further 61,600 in the
telegraph and telephone apparatus section.
Insulated Wires and Cables
This industry is concerned with the manufacture of cables and wires for the
distribution of electric power, for telegraph and telephone networks and for many other
purposes; it includes submarine cables and those insulated by materials such as cotton,
silk, man-made fibres, enamel, glass, asbestos, paper, rubber and thermo-plastics.
The total value of deliveries in i960 was some £131-6 million. Exports, which had
reached the level of £3^ million in i957> declined in value to £22-6 million in i960, in
some degree as the result of lower prices. India, the United States, New Zealand and
Hong Kong were the most important purchasers.
There are about 40 manufacturers of general wiring cables in the United Kingdom,
but two companies account for some 60 per cent of total output. The industry has a
labour force of about 61,600 persons.
Electrical Goods and Domestic Electrical Appliances
Deliveries of electrical goods were valued at over £342-5 million in i960 and com¬
prised: domestic electrical appliances, £131 million; electrical equipment for motor
vehicles, cycles and aircraft, £63 million; batteries and accumulators, £40 million,
electric lamps, £23 million; and other electrical goods, £85 million. Deliveries of
domestic appliances included: 1-4 million electric blankets, 1-3 million vacuum
cleaners, 986,000 dry shavers, 1 million domestic washing machines and 2-4 million
electric irons. Exports in i960 had a total value of £81 million.
The industry has a labour force of 210,000, of whom 66,000 are employed in the
manufacture of domestic appliances.
VEHICLES
The industries which manufacture vehicles are among the largest United Kingdom
exporters; overseas deliveries were valued at almost £526 million in i960. Their
combined labour force is over ^2^,000 and comprises 437’®®® employees in motor
vehicle manufacture, 4B9®® ^ motor cycle and pedal cycle manufacture, 2(^^.,ooo in
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
3°8
aircraft construction and repair, 72,000 in the construction of locomotives and railway
track equipment, 72,400 hi the manufacture of railway vehicles and y,ooo in the produc¬
tion of perambulators and hand trucks.
Motor Vehicles
In both size and value the largest section of the vehicle industry comprises the
manufacture of cars and commercial vehicles. Expansion has been rapid since 1945
and in i960 output reached the record total of i-8 million units: i-35 million cars and
taxis and 458,000 commercial vehicles were produced. Exports also reached record
levels in terms of both value and quantity: 570,000 passenger cars and taxis and
146,000 commercial road vehicles were exported. Production and exports of cars were
considerably lower in the second half of i960 than in the first half of the year.
Export of passenger cars in i960 were valued at jf224'6 million; the largest market
for cars was the United States (£61 million), followed by Canada, South Africa, New
Zealand and Australia. The Irish Republic is also an important market. Exports of
commercial vehicles had a value of ^102‘8 million, and parts and accessories were
valued at an additional £160-3 million.
The industry is at present located mainly in the Midlands and the London area;
it consists of a relatively small number of assembly firms headed by the Big Five
(British Motor Corporation, Ford, Rootes, Standard and Vauxhall), backed by a
large number of specialist body and component manufacturers. It has been estimated
that over 50 per cent of the ex-works value of passenger cars consists of components
purchased from the latter. The ‘Big Five’ are responsible for about 90 per cent of the
output of complete vehicles of all kinds; the balance of the industry s motor production
(other than tractors) is in the hands of specialist producers of omnibuses, coaches,
trolleybuses, heavy commercial vehicles, and sports and other specialist cars. The
principal trade association in the industry is the Society of Motor Manufacturers and
Traders (SMMT), founded in 1902, which holds a Motor Show annually in London,
and a Commercial Motor Exhibition every two years.
Research is carried out at Lindley, Warwickshire, by the Motor Industry Research
Association, an autonomous body founded in 1946 and partly financed by the Depart¬
ment of Scientific and Industrial Research, but mainly by the industry itself. Individual
firms also have their own research and development facilities.
The industry, having recently completed a series of large-scale investments costing
£150 million, embarked in i960 on a furtner substantial expansion of capacity,
provisionally estimated to cost even more. In addition to developments in existing
centres of production, new plants are being established on Merseyside and in Wales
and Scotland.
Motor Cycles and Pedal Cycles
In i960 output of motor cycles totalled over 202,000 models, with a value of £24
million; this included 30,000 scooters, 33,600 motorised bicycles (mopeds) and 9,600
three-wheeled motor vehicles. Exports were valued at some £4 million and comprised
44,000 complete vehicles and £1-3 million worth of parts and accessories.
The production of pedal cycles is concentrated mainly in a single group of com¬
panies which is responsible for three-quarters of total production. There are several
smaller companies, some making specialised models, such as racing cycles. Output
is becoming increasingly concentrated in the Nottingham area. In i960 some 1-5
million of the total production of 2-3 million cycles were exported; the value of exports,
INDUSTRY
309
including accessories, was £20-3 million.The United States, Nigeria and the Federation
of Rhodesia and Nyasaland were the most important overseas markets.
Aircraft
The science of aerodynamics was founded by Sir George Cayley in the early
nineteenth century; more recently, Sir Frank Whittle developed the gas turbine
aircraft engine, and its first applications to scheduled airline sendee were the turbo-jet
Comet and the turbo-prop Viscount, the latter probably the most successful post-war
civil aircraft now in service all over the world. The larger Britannia, which entered
into scheduled service in 1957, was the first gas-turbine airliner to be used on North
Atlantic services. The Comet which went into service in i95^> being used by
several British and foreign airlines. The Vanguard, a turbo-prop aircraft with
exceptionally low operating costs, entered into service with British European Airways
(BEA) in 1961. Other gas-turbine aircraft in production in Britain are the Armstrong
Whitworth Argosy, the Handley Page Herald and the Avro The British Overseas
Airways Corporation (BOAC) has ordered the Vickers VClO and BEA the de Havilland
Trident; both aircraft will come into service in the mid-1960s. Britain is also the
largest producer in Europe of rotary v/ing aircraft, and produces about 10 per cent of
world output. Orders have been placed for the world’s first vertical-take-off airliner,
the Rotodyne, which made its maiden flight in 1957. Other important research work
on vertical take-off and landing has been undertaken by the Hawker Siddeley group
and by Short Brothers and Harland.
Since 1946 the industry has exported over ^1,100 million worth of products, of
which £360 million represents sales of aero-engines and parts. The value of exports in
i960 was j£i42'3 million, somewhat below the peak total of £156 million recorded in
1959. The largest markets for aircraft and parts were the United States, Canada, India
and France. Patent and royalty payments from abroad are also important. Licence
agreements have been made for about twenty types of British aero-engines to be built
abroad and a number of foreign aircraft have been designed to use British aero-engines
and equipment.
As a result of mergers and reorganisation in the winter of 1959-60, the industry is
now dominated by five large groups, two being mainly concerned with airframe
manufacture, two with aero-engines and one with helicopters. There are also a few
smaller companies outside these groups. Chief centres for the industry are London
and the Home Counties, Derby, Coventry, Bristol and the West of England, Northern
Ireland and Scotland. The aircraft industry is also engaged on the development and
production of guided missiles. The representative body of the aircraft industry is the
Society of British Aircraft Constructors. Its annual exhibition and flying display at
Farnborough is one of the most important of its kind.
The growth of the aircraft industry has been strongly influenced by defence require¬
ments; at the peak of war-time activity the number of those actually working in the
industry rose to nearly 2 million, compared with some 35,000 in 1935- In May i960
the industry had a labour force of about 294,000.
Besides extensive research work by the industry, research on a substantial scale
on problems of aircraft and their engines is carried out by the Ministry of Aviation,
chiefly at the Royal Aircraft Establishment and the National Gas Turbine Establish¬
ment, both at Farnborough, and the Royal Aircraft Establishment at Bedford. This
work is done in collaboration with the industry and results are made known to
manufacturers. In addition, the National Physical Laboratory undertakes research
on aerodynamics.
3IQ
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Railway Vehicles
Britain was the first country to build railways, and British engineers pioneered
railway development in most parts of the world. The industry is organised to meet
the conditions resulting from the replacement of steam locomotives by other forms of
traction on most of the world’s railways. Its products in i960 included 172 electric
and 1,027 diesel and diesel-electric locomotives, 3,335 coaching vehicles and 8,394
wagons.
Exports in i960 were valued at ^20'4 million, and included 122 electric and 272
diesel locomotives; South Africa, the Sudan, India and Nigeria were the most
important markets.
Locomotive, carriage and wagon production in the United Kingdom is derived
from both public and private enterprise. British Railways have their own railway
workshops, engaged in the production of miscellaneous railway components for their
own use. Private firms build locomotives and carriages and wagons of all types for
both British Railways and industrial users in Britain and for export markets. Private
firms and British Railways workshops are sharing in the construction of equipment
ordered under the railways modernisation programme (see p. 376); the latter use
engines supplied by electrical equipment manufacturers.
About 72,000 people were employed in i960, making locomotives and railway track
equipment and about 72,400 in making and repairing railway carriages and wagons.
MISCELLANEOUS METAL PRODUCTS
The group of industries manufacturing metal products not coming within those
described above consists of a large number of companies with sales of over £1,339
million according to the 1959 census of production. The industries range from the
refining of precious metals, including the making of intermediate products such as
nuts, bolts and screws, to the production of finished goods such as cutlery. In i960
there were some 551,000 employees in these industries; the main groups were tools
and implements (24,900), cutlery (10,200), bolts, nuts and screws (45,300)) wire and
wire manufactures (43,400), cans and metal boxes (37,600), jewellery, plate, and
refining of precious metals (29,300), also other metal industries (360,000).
Capital expenditure by these industries is valued at over £30 million each year.
Cutlery and Flatware
The production of cutlery and flatware is centred in the city of Sheffield. The
industry has been built up on the skill of its craftsmen; and while modern machinery
has largely replaced hand forging, and mass production methods are used today by
some firms in producing the cheaper range of products, the highest quality wares are
still produced by skilled craftsmen. Although in recent years there has been some
increase in the size of the production units, they remain mainly small and, of some 400
establishments manufacturing cutlery and flatware, over 200 still employ fewer than
ten persons.
The annual output of the cutlery and flatware industry is now valued at about
£11 million, of which nearly £3-6 million represents exports, mainly to Australia, the
United States and South Africa.
Domestic Hollow-ware
This industry, located mainly in the Midlands, Lancashire, Yorkshire, South Wales
and London, produces a wide range of domestic utensils, such as saucepans, buckets
Fixed aerial of the radio
star interferometer at
Mullard Radio Astro¬
nomy Observatory,
Cambridge University
(see p. 220).
The advanced gas-cooled reactor at Windscale, Cumberland, during construction (see p. 219)-
Benjamin Britten’s opera, ‘A Midsummer Night s Dream, at Covent
Garden, 1961, with decor by John Piper: Tytania (Joan Carlyle) and fairies.
INDUSTRY 311
and dustbins, mainly from wrought steel and aluminium. Increasing quantities of plastic
hollow-ware are being produced.
The value of annual production is about £20 million, of which nearly one-fifth
represents exports. The principal markets are the United States and Commonwealth
countries, especially West Africa. Aluminium manufacturers comprise the largest
single group, both in the value of total production and in exports.
Engineers’ Small Tools and Gauges and Hand Tools
There are over 1,100 enterprises manufacturing engineers’ small tools and gauges
of all kinds, and the labour force of the industry is some 49,400. In i960 the total
value of its output was £64-5 million.
The manufacture of hand tools is one of the oldest British industries. Over 400
important companies provide over 400 different kinds of tools and implements;
Sheffield, Birmingham and other midland towns are the most important centres.
The value of exports of implements and tools, other than machine and powered
tools, was some £27 million in i960.
Jewellery, Gold and Silver Ware
The making of jewellery, gold and silver ware is an industry in which British
craftsmen are heirs to a great tradition. The quality of the metal in gold and silver
wares made or sold in the United Kingdom is guaranteed by a ‘hall-mark’. The law
requires that gold and silver plate shall not be sold until it has been hall-marked at one
of the six Assay Offices situated in London, Birmingham, Chester, Sheffield, Edinburgh,
and Glasgow. The Birmingham office, located in the main centre of the jewellery
industry, probably hall-marks as much gold and silver as the rest together. A depart¬
mental committee has recommended, in a report published in March 1959, that the
number of assay offices should be reduced to four, that hall-marks should also be
applied to platinum, and that statutory regulations should be strengthened.
The importance of maintaining definite standards of fineness for wares of gold and
silver has always been recognised, and the Goldsmiths’ Company in London has
carried out the assay and hall-marking of such wares since 1327 when Edward III
gave the company its first charter.
CHEMICALS
It is difficult to give a precise definition of the chemical industry as, with new
discoveries and the increasing use of synthetic materials, its scope is continually
widening. The inorganic chemistry industry dates back to the middle of the nineteenth
century, when sulphuric acid and alkali were in increasing demand for the growing
heavy industries. Over 2-7 million tons of sulphuric acid were produced in Britain in
i960, about the same tonnage of ammonia and ammonia salts is produced and large
quantities of chlorine and alkali are manufactured. About 70 per cent of the ammonia
is made into nitrogenous fertilisers. The most rapidly growing outlets for chlorine
are in the manufacture of solvents and the plastics material polyvinyl chloride (PYC).
The earliest organic chemicals were dyestuffs and explosives. Over 94,000 tons of
dyestuffs were produced in i960. Pharmaceutical products, veterinary and pesticidal
chemicals are rapidly increasing sectors.
Newer chemicals with organic structures which are manufactured in bulk by
modern synthesis include nitrogen and nitric acid, alcohol, plastics, synthetic rubber
and synthetic fibres. These are among the most rapidly expanding sections of the
industry.
312
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
In i960 there were almost 500,000 employees in the chemical industry, subdivided
as follows: coke ovens and manufactured fuels, 19,100; chemicals and dyes, 219,900;
pharmaceutical and toilet preparations, 72,500; paint and ink, 33,900; vegetable oils,
soap and detergents, 49,300; synthetic resins and plastics, 45,400; polishes and gelatines,
14,200.
Capital expenditure (excluding that in mineral oil refining and man-made fibres)
has averaged about £150 million per annum since 1957, and research expenditure has
been of the order of £22 million annually.
Petroleum Chemicals
Since 1949 output of petroleum chemicals in Britain has increased by an average of
37 per cent each year; their share of total organic chemical output has risen from about
one-fifth in 1953 to over 50 per cent at the present day, and is expected to reach 70 per
cent by 1965. It is estimated that by the end of 1962 total investment in petroleum
chemicals will have reached £200 million; there were about 30 projects in hand at
the end of i960 directly concerned with this section of the industry. Most of the
important plants are adjacent to the oil refineries. Production of feedstock for the
petroleum chemicals plants totalled about 450>000 tons in i960 compared with
302,000 tons in 1958. In addition, consumption of coke and tar distillation products
(such as phenol used in the manufacture of organic chemicals) has also increased in
recent years. Large quantities of industrial ethyl alcohol, which was formerly all
produced from molasses, are now manufactured from petroleum.
Plastics
The first plastic celluloid was produced in Britain in 1865 by Alexander Parkes;
other British discoveries include polyethylene. Britain was the first country to
manufacture plastic coated steel, in 1957-
Manufacture of plastics is one of the most rapidly growing sections of the economy.
Output since 1954 has increased by over 50 per cent. Expansion in recent years has
mainly been in thermoplastic materials, of which the most important are polyethylene
(used in coverings, packaging—notably for foodstuffs—and domestic mouldings),
polyvinyl chloride (known as PYC and used for industrial conveyor belting and
a wide range of consumer goods) and polystyrene (a cheap non-inflammable material
used for toys, light mouldings and many consumer goods). Capacity for the production
of polypropylene (a versatile material for use mainly in electrical components, mouldings,
and domestic appliances) is being expanded substantially.
Sales of plastics in i960 amounted to 17 million tons, of which thermoplastics
accounted for over 1 million tons. Exports were valued at £42-9 million. The industry
is currently undertaking large extensions to productive capacity.
Synthetic Rubber
The first general purpose synthetic rubber to be manufactured on a commercia
scale in the United Kingdom was marketed in 1958. Since then capacity for production
of this and other rubbers has increased rapidly. A new plant for the production of
neoprene was opened at Maydown, Northern Ireland, in i960, and plans have been
announced for the construction of other plants. Types of specialised synthetic rubber
already in production include high styrene rubbers for shoe soles and flooring, and
nitrile rubbers for use where oil resistance is required. Production in i960 amounted
to 90,000 tons, of which by far the greater part came from the styrene-butadiene plant at
Hythe, near Southampton.
INDUSTRY
3I3
Fertilisers
The production of fertilisers owes much to the pioneer work of the British scientists,
Sir John Lawes and Sir Joseph Gilbert, and the research now carried on at Rothamsted,
Hertfordshire, and at the Macaulay Institute, Aberdeen, is of world-wide importance.
Two firms predominate in the production of fertilisers, and both have established in
recent years new large-scale manufacturing facilities. In addition, there are about
one hundred firms marketing compound fertilisers from the principal constituents—
nitrogen, phosphates and potash. To encourage use, sales on the home market are
assisted by Government subsidies paid to the farmer. Output of nitrogenous fertilisers
(in terms of nitrogen content) in i960 totalled 394,000 tons, over three times the
pre-war volume, and 396,000 tons of phosphatic fertilisers were produced (in terms
of phosphate content), more than twice the pre-war figure. Sales in the form of com¬
pound fertilisers in granulated form are increasing; production of these was 2-8 million
tons (gross weight) in 1959. The use of ammonium nitrate (35 per cent nitrogen) and
urea (45 per cent nitrogen) is resulting in much more concentrated fertilisers.
The value of exports of manufactured fertilisers, almost all in the form of ammonium
sulphate, totalled ^2-8 million in i960, the principal markets being Ceylon and other
Commonwealth countries.
Pesticides, Fungicides and Herbicides
Important British discoveries in recent years have led to major developments in
the production of selective weedkillers such as chloromethyl phenoxyacetic acid
(MCPA), and of insecticides based on benzenehexachloride (BHC). British companies
also produce other chlorinated hydrocarbon insecticides, and organo-phosphorus
insecticides, organo-mercury and organo-sulphur compound fungicides. Overseas
markets take the major proportion of United Kingdom production of these and other
pesticides; exports reached a value of some £6-8 million in i960.
Paints
Sales of paint during i960 amounted to some 92 million gallons, worth about
£120 million, almost equally divided between the domestic and industrial markets.
Production has risen steadily from about 69 million gallons in 1953* About one-third
of the exports are in the form of ready-mixed paints, which command a growing market
overseas. The industry’s indirect contribution to exports in the form of surface coatings
for finished goods is also considerable. Exports in i960 amounted in value to £28-g
million.
In recent years the application of improved techniques has resulted in rapid
development, in particular the use of important new ranges of synthetic resins and
various types of titanium oxide pigment.
Pharmaceuticals
The pharmaceutical industry has expanded greatly since the second world war.
The value of its gross output, which was some £60 million in 1946, was well over
£160 million in i960. The whole range of drugs is produced in the United Kingdom,
including sulphonamides, anti-malarial drugs, anti-histamine products, anaesthetics,
vaccines, sera, and naturally occurring drugs. Over £6 million per annum is currently
being spent on research; most of the major firms have large projects in hand to expand
production.
Notable British contributors to the development of new products include: the
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
314
discovery of penicillin by Sir Alexander Fleming, its evaluation by Sir Howard
Florey and E. B. Chain; the evaluation of sulphapyridine (M & B 693) by Sir Lionel
Whitby; the introduction of the anti-malarial proguanil; the production of griseofulvin;
and most recently, the isolation of the penicillin nucleus. A promising development is
the Medical Research Council’s discovery of ‘interferon’ for the treatment of virus
diseases. Many of the larger pharmaceutical companies in Britain are subsidiaries of
overseas firms. In i960 exports were valued at ^44'4 million. Commonwealth countries
were the largest purchasers.
Toilet Preparations, Soap and Cleaning Preparations
The market for detergents has grown rapidly since the war. Petroleum is the
principal raw material in the manufacture of organic surface-active agents in detergents,
the other main constituent, polyphosphates, is derived from inorganic sources. Dry
cleaning and degreasing solvents are finding increasing use. Sales of detergents
amounted to 938,000 tons in i960. Production of soap was some 102,000 tons. Exports
of perfumery and toilet preparations, soap and cleansing and polishing preparations
were valued at £26-5 million in i960.
TEXTILES
The textile industries in i960 had a labour force of about 920,000 persons including
employees engaged in the production of man-made fibres. Over 148,200 were in the
spinning and doubling of cotton, flax and man-made fibres, over 136,500 in the wearing
of cotton, linen and man-made fibres, some 203,500 in the woollen and worsted trades,
about 126,000 in hosiery and knitted goods and 86,400 in textile finishing. Over half
the employees are women.
Cotton
The invention of mechanical spinning and weaving in the second half of the
eighteenth century led to cotton becoming Britain’s chief consumer goods industry
and cotton piece-goods its largest export during the nineteenth century. In the
twentieth century, increasing foreign competition and the tendency of many countries,
notably India, to set up their own textile industry have cut progressively into British
markets.
Though it remains one of the largest consumer goods industries, the cotton industry
has continued to decline in employment and output in recent years. Output in i960
consisted of: 640 million lb. of single yarn, 155 million lb. of spun man-made fibre
and mixture single yarn, 257 million lb. of doubled yarn, 1,294 million linear yards
of woven cotton cloth, and 617 million linear yards of man-made fibres and mixture
cloth. Exports have suffered under increased world competition, and the tendency for
home industries to be established in former markets. In i960 exports of cotton yam
and woven fabrics amounted in value to ^63 million. Australia, South Africa, New
Zealand and Nigeria were the most important markets.
Agreements have been negotiated with industries in certain Commonwealth
countries to fix temporary ceilings on their exports to the United Kingdom. Imports
of cotton yam and fabrics, with a total value of over £6y million in i960, included
almost 596 million square yards of grey cloth, mainly from India and Hong Kong.
Most of the industry is located in Lancashire, the north-east of the county being
mainly concerned with weaving and the south-east with spinning. Manchester is the
commercial centre. The Cotton Exchange, which deals in raw cotton, is situated
in Liverpool.
INDUSTRY
315
Legislation to assist the reorganisation of the industry was introduced in 1959.
Exchequer funds are paying for two-thirds of the cost of removing surplus capacity,
and will also provide a grant of about one-quarter towards the costs of modernisation
and re-equipment. The reorganisation schemes, which have been introduced for the
spinning, doubling, weaving and finishing sections of the industry, are administered by
the Cotton Board, a statutory body with the constitution and powers of a development
council. The scrapping of machinery under these schemes has left the industry, before
re-equipment, with about 12-9 million mule equivalent spinning spindles, 1 million
doubling spindles and 155,000 looms.
Scientific and technical research for the industry is carried out by the Cotton, Silk
and Man-made Fibres Research Association formed in April 1961 by a merger of the
British Cotton Industry Research Association (Shirley Institute) with the British
Rayon Research Association. Drip-dry and crease-resisting materials are becoming
an increasingly important part of total output.
Wool
The United Kingdom wool textile industry, the largest in the world, is the most
ancient of Britain’s staple industries and has been important since medieval times.
There are two main branches—woollen and worsted. While about 85 per cent of
woollens and 95 per cent of worsteds are made in the West Riding of Yorkshire,
Scotland and the West of England have retained their importance as specialised
producers of high quality woollen cloth.
Output in i960 consisted of 198 million square yards of woollen fabrics, 170 million
square yards of worsted fabrics, 242 million lb. of worsted yarns, and 303 million lb.
of woollen yarns. Production of blankets totalled over 31*3 million square yards.
Exports of wool products were valued at nearly £130 million in i960, and the three
most important markets were: Canada, the Federal Republic of Germany and the
United States. Raw wool imports, at 647 million lb., were the smallest since 1951, and
exports of raw wool, hair and waste were 118 million lb., with a value of some £30
million. There are also considerable exports of wool in the form of carpets and clothing.
One of the most notable features of the industry in recent years has been the increase
in the blending of man-made fibres with wool. In i960 the man-made fibre content of
tops increased by 76 per cent above the 1959 level. Research is carried on mainly by
the Wool Industries Research Association, and a National Wool Textile Export
Corporation, financed by a statutory levy on the industry, is responsible for assistance
to exporters and the development of new markets.
Small firms, employing fewer than 300 workers, predominate in the industry. In
recent years on the worsted side there has been a tendency towards the formation of
holding companies controlling a number of subsidiaries which combine all the worsted
processes within one organisation. Firms on the woollen side are normally organised
to include the full process of manufacture from raw material to finished article.
Man-made Fibres
Man-made fibres produced from cellulose were first made commercially available
in the United Kingdom in 1905, and much of the early development of viscose rayon
and acetate took place in Britain. Large quantities of chemicals are consumed in their
production, which is spread throughout the Midlands and Lancashire, with outposts
in other areas. There are seven companies engaged in the production of rayon, four
producing only viscose, two producing only acetate, and one both viscose and acetate.
One company accounts for over four-fifths of total output, and also has extensive
3x6
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
manufacturing interests throughout the world. By weight rayon is responsible for
70 per cent of total output of man-made fibres, and the annual production of cellulose
fibres is about 200,000 tons. , . , . ,
Since the second world war, output of a variety of fully synthetic fibres derived
predominantly from mineral rather than vegetable sources has been expanding at a
rate previously unsurpassed in a major chemical product. Production of nylon, the
first fully synthetic fibre, started in Britain in 1941; large-scale production began
at Pontypool, in Wales, in 1948, and new factories were opened in 1955 and 1960.
Capacity is expected to reach 60 million lb. in 1961. It has been decided to produce
another'type of nylon (nylon 6) in the United Kingdom and a factory to produce it
is planned at Antrim, Northern Ireland. Nylon is used extensively in the manufacture
of clothing fabrics and stockings, and has many industrial uses.
‘Terylene’, a polyester fibre, discovered in the United Kingdom, followed nylon.
It is resistant to fading and is particularly suited to blending with wool. Annual
capacity is about 50 million lb. A plant has been set up in Canada, and firms in many
overseas countries undertake its manufacture under licence. . . ..
A group of fibres of growing importance are known as acrylic or polyacrylomtri e
fibres Two important examples are ‘Acrilan’ and ‘C our telle’, and it is expected t at
polypropylene fibre will shortly be marketed. These fibres are soft and warm and have
particular applications to the wool textile industry. Polyethylene has been developed
as a monofilament yarn for industrial uses. , . , f _
Other fibres produced in Britain include lFibrolane’, a protein fibre derived fro
casein, and ‘Alginute’ from seaweed. _
Since the advent of rayon and the newer man-made fibres, British textile manufacturers
have been developing a number of ways of blending these with natural fibres and with
each other. By this means they can produce economically fabrics and garments with
attractive and useful new combinations of texture, colour and finish, and with moisture-
absorbent, hard-wearing, drip-dry and crease-resisting properties. . nnH
Exports of all types of man-made fibres were valued at £38-5 million in 1960 and
included £18-5 million worth of yarn and £10-5 million worth of woven fabrics. e
industry has a labour force of 43,980 persons.
Hosiery and Knitwear
The hosiery and knitwear industry is organised predominantly on a small scale.
About 80 per cent of the 1,100 firms in the industry employ fewer than 50 workers,
and only three manufacturers have more than 4,000 employees. The industry is
widely distributed throughout Great Britain, with Scotland and the east Midlands as
the two most important centres. Annual consumption of yarns totals about 80,000 tons,
nearly half of which are woollen yarns, and a growing proportion are of fully synthetic
fibres Exports of stockings and socks in i960 were worth £3-8 million, and those of
knitted underwear and outerwear totalled £8-2 million; the largest buyers were the
United States and Canada. Exports of knitted fabrics amounted to £3-3 million,
mainly to Commonwealth countries. . . , , , ^
The Hosiery and Allied Trades Research Association, with laboratories at
Nottingham, undertakes collective research, and is particularly concerned with the
improvement of quality.
Other Textiles
Linen has been made in Britain for more than a thousand years and it is believed
that the art of linen weaving was being practised during the seventh century. Today
INDUSTRY
317
it is an industry mainly of comparatively small firms, chiefly in Northern Ireland (the
greatest linen manufacturing region in the world), with most of the remainder in
Scotland. The principal raw material of the industry is flax, which is almost wholly
imported (the chief supplier is Belgium), but considerable quantities of man-made
fibres and cotton are also used, and a certain amount of soft hemp and jute, particularly
in Scotland. Broadly speaking, the Northern Ireland industry concentrates on the
lighter types of fabrics, while in Scotland production is largely, but not exclusively, of
coarse linens and canvas. In the ten years to i960, the industry’s investments in new
plant and machinery amounted to £12 million. The Northern Ireland Government
has given financial aid for re-equipment. Exports were valued at £17 million in i960,
including £8-8 million worth of linen fabrics, £3 million of flax yarns and linen thread
and £1 million of damask table linen. Technical problems are investigated by the
Research Institute of the Linen Industry Research Association, formed in 1919.
Jute is manufactured on a large scale in Dundee—the centre of the world’s oldest
jute industry. About 40 per cent of jute yarn production is utilised in the manufacture
of carpets, cordage, ropes and other products. The balance is woven into fabrics for a
wide range of uses, but principally for packaging material. Annual production of jute
tissues averages about 80,000 tons. Some 18,800 workers are employed. The value of
exports in i960 totalled about £4*5 million (including second-hand sacks and bags).
Research facilities are concentrated at the laboratories of the British Jute Trade
Research Association. About £14 million has been spent on a post-war modernisation
programme, and productivity in the industry is estimated to have risen by 40 per cent
in the past ten years.
Silk exports were valued at about £0-7 million in i960. Raw silk is supplied mainly
from Japan, China and Italy. Production and exports of manufactures of silk have been
expanding in recent years and about 900,000 square yards were exported in i960.
Carpets
In i960 total sales of all types of carpets made in the United Kingdom amounted
to 76 million square yards with a value of £97-7 million, of which £10-6 million was
exported. In addition to the manufacture of carpets, the United Kingdom carries on
an important trade in the processing of imported hand-made knotted carpets. Exports
of these oriental carpets amounted to million in i960.
There are some 70 manufacturers in the United Kingdom of the traditional
Axminster and Wilton carpets, ranging in size from enterprises with several thousand
employees to very small firms with only a few workers. In addition, there is an
expanding branch of the industry engaged in making tufted carpets, a form of carpeting
in which the pile, usually containing a high proportion of artificial fibres, is inserted
into a pre-woven backing. There are some 37,000 employees, and the principal
manufacturing centres include Kidderminster (in Worcestershire), Halifax and
Dewsbury (in the West Riding of Yorkshire), Durham (in north-east England),
Glasgow and Kilmarnock (in Scotland). Wool accounts for about 90 per cent of the
raw materials used in the surface yarns in carpet manufacture and, in fact, more than
two-thirds of the traditional carpets produced are of a pure woollen or worsted pile.
CLOTHING, LEATHER AND FOOTWEAR
There are over 660,000 employees in the clothing, leather and footwear industries.
Some 454,500 are in the clothing industry, 117,300 in the leather footwear trade,
64,000 in leather, leather goods and fur manufacture, and 16,000 in the hats, caps and
millinery trades.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
3l8
Clothing
The British clothing industry is the largest in Europe. The value of its sales in 1959
was over £556 million.
Although there are some large firms employing mass production methods on an
increasing scale, the typical firm is small. Unofficial estimates suggest that five-sixths
of the concerns in the industry employ fewer than 100 workers. The principal manu¬
facturing centres are London, Leeds and Manchester, but several firms are also
situated on the industrial trading estates.
Fashion is important in the production of haute couture models and throughout the
ready-to-wear industry. Fashion shows are arranged by the Apparel and Fashion
Industry’s Association and the Fashion House Group of London.
Leather
Leather tanning is one of Britain’s oldest industries. In i960, 26,000 tons of heavy
leather and 461 million square feet of upper, lining and other finished leathers were
produced. The United Kingdom is the world’s leading exporter, with exports in i960
valued at £17 million. The United States, Canada, West Germany, Italy and Sweden
took the majority of the exports.
Tanneries are situated in most parts of Britain, but there are important concen¬
trations in Lancashire, Cheshire, Yorkshire, the north Midlands and the London
area. Many different types of leather are produced, ranging from the heavy types for
industrial uses such as machinery belting and car upholstery, to high quality leather for
footwear and for leather goods, and to gloving and clothing leather.
Research into tanning processes and the improvement of the quality of finished
leather is undertaken by the British Leather Manufacturers Research Association, the
foremost association of this type in the world.
Leather Footwear
The British footwear industry is among the largest in the world. In i960 output
totalled 157 million pairs, of which 8-3 million pairs, valued at over ^n-i million,
were exported. The United States and Canada were the most important markets.
Factories are located throughout the United Kingdom. Some areas concentrate on
production of particular types; for example, the Rossendale Valley region of Lancashire
for slippers, Bristol for heavy industrial footwear for miners and agricultural workers,
Northampton for men’s and youths’ footwear, and Leicester and Norwich for women s
and girls’ shoes. There are about 430 firms in the industry, producing footwear of all
types. The British Boot, Shoe and Allied Trades Research Association enjoys a world¬
wide reputation in all matters connected with shoemaking.
FOOD, DRINK AND TOBACCO
The food, drink and tobacco industries employ over 827,860 persons in the production
of a great variety of goods. The value of their combined exports in i960 was £197
million, of which exports of alcoholic and other beverages accounted for £76 million,
sugar and sugar preparations for £28 million, coffee, cocoa and tea for £12 million and
dairy produce for £11 million.
Bread and Flour Confectionery and Biscuits
The average weekly household consumption of bread per head of population in
Great Britain in i960 was about 2§ lb., about § lb. less than in 1954- England
INDUSTRY
319
and Wales particularly, the small ‘family’ type of baker, producing bread by hand or
by semi-mechanical methods, is still numerous, but there has been an uninterrupted
trend towards concentrating production in large mechanical bakeries; about two-thirds
of the bread is made in these bakeries, which specialise in sliced and wrapped loaves;
four firms have a dominant position. In the smaller bakeries, numbering about 12,000,
production of cake and other flour confectionery is usually allied to bread production.
There are some 144,700 employees in the bread and flour confectionery industry, and
a further 44,000 employed in grain-milling.
Production of biscuits, of which there are about 130 independent manufacturers
with some 57,000 employees, is estimated to be about 75 per cent higher than in the
immediate pre-war period. Annual output has been about 520,000 tons in recent years.
Weekly consumption of biscuits per head in Britain was about 5^ oz. in i960. British
biscuits have gained a world-wide reputation, and despite the problem of import
restrictions in several overseas markets, exports in i960 were valued at ^6-4 million.
Cocoa, Chocolate and Sugar Confectionery
The chocolate and sugar confectionery industry, which has some 103,700 employees,
is composed of a small number of very large manufacturers and many hundreds of
medium-sized and small manufacturers. The industry’s products are highly competitive
and highly advertised. Over 90 per cent of the production of chocolate and sugar
confectionery is in the hands of about 100 firms, while the more specialised products—
cocoa powder, cocoa butter and chocolate covering—are manufactured by about
50 firms.
The main ingredients used by the industry are sugar, cocoa beans, glucose, milk,
nuts and fats. Production of chocolate and sugar confectionery for home and export
sale totalled about 670,000 tons in i960. Consumption of chocolate and sugar con¬
fectionery in the United Kingdom is far higher than in any other country, being
equivalent to about 8-i oz. per head per week in i960, compared with 7 oz. per head
before the war.
The value of exports of sugar confectionery and chocolate reached the record figure
of £13-8 million in i960 and exports of other chocolate products were valued at £2-6
million. The total value of the industry’s exports was just over £17 million; Canada
and the United States were the main markets.
Jams and Marmalades
The jams and marmalades industry in the United Kingdom is highly competitive,
with the three largest manufacturers accounting for some two-thirds of the total output.
Changes in the pattern of consumer expenditure on food in the past ten years have
led to a gradual fall in production—from 329,000 tons in 1949 to 210,000 tons in
i960. Strawberry, raspberry and blackcurrant jams have the largest sales. There is a
sizable export trade in high-quality products, especially marmalade, and £i-6 million
worth was exported in i960.
Canned Foods and Quick-Frozen Foods
The British Navy was using canned foods as long ago as 1813, but it was not until
the present century that a considerable industry developed. Rapid expansion has
taken place since 1935, and the annual sales of the industry are now believed to be
worth some £200 million.
By far the largest product of the canning industry is vegetables, of which 555,000
tons were produced in i960; over one-third is processed peas, while output of beans
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
320
in tomato sauce is almost as large. About 90,000 tons of fruit are canned annually.
Plums are the most important home-produced fruit canned, but there is also a large
production of fruit salad from imported fruit. Canned soup production has increased by
over three-quarters since 1953, totalling 201,000 tons in i960, although it is meeting
increased competition from packaged soups. Canned meat production has also risen
sharply, the i960 total of 50,400 tons being double that of 1954. About 75,000 workers
are employed in preserving fruit and vegetables. Exports of canned vegetables in i960
reached a value of £1-4 million. Basic research is undertaken by the British Food
Manufacturing Industries Research Association, and the Fruit and Vegetable Canning
and Quick Freezing Research Association. .... . ,
The quick-freezing of foods has been expanding rapidly in Britain, particularly since
1954. The most important products are white fish—some 52,000 tons were quick-
frozen in i960—and vegetables, about two-thirds being peas. There are about 600
varieties of quick-frozen foods available, including fruit, poultry, meat and icady-
prepared foods; they are sold through some 80,000 retail outlets.
Whisky
Scotch whisky, which was first distilled at least as long ago as the fifteenth century,
enjoys world-wide popularity. Whiskies are blends of twenty or more different kinds,
some made from malted barley, some from other grains. Whisky requires several years
to mature, and the 69 million proof gallons (a record) produced in i960 will not be on
sale for some years. Stocks of whisky amount to about 280 million proof gallons, of
which over one-third has been in stock for more than three years. Nearly three-quarters
of annual sales are to overseas buyers. In i960 exports reached the record level of over
23 million proof gallons, with a value of £65-6 million. The United States, with
/3 c-9 million, accounted for over half the exports. Other valuable markets include
Australia, Canada, New Zealand, South Africa, West Germany, Belgium and France.
Gin
Production of gin in the United Kingdom has risen steadily since 1952, and in
i960 amounted to over 7 million proof gallons (an increase of nearly half since 1952),
over one-third of which was exported. The main distilleries are situated in London,
and one group of companies accounts for about half the total output. Although most
of the larger manufacturers also have distilleries overseas, exports have expanded,
and in i960 were worth £4-9 million>the United States being by far the larg6St market'
Brewing and Malting
Brewing. There are some 350 separate breweries located throughout the United
Kingdom of which the main centres are London, south Lancashire, Burton-on-
Trent (Staffordshire), Birmingham, and Edinburgh. In the main, brewers distribute
their beer for consumption within 40 miles of the brewery, but in recent years there
has been a strong tendency towards the creation of larger brewery units, one of the
purposes of which is to secure wider distributive outlets for the products of the bigger
brewing groups. Many of the larger groups distribute throughout the country. Much
of the beer is consumed in draught, but in recent years the demand for bottled beer
has increased and is now probably about two-fifths of total consumption, compared
with one-quarter before the war. Bottling is carried out by both brewers and indepen¬
dent bottling establishments. The industry’s raw materials are malt (made almost
entirely from home-grown barley), sugar and hops. Consumption of beer has declined
appreciably from the exceptional levels of the immediate post-war years; the drop was,
INDUSTRY
321
however, largely halted in 1951, and demand in 1959 and i960 was higher than for
some years. Canned beer, light ales and lager are becoming increasingly popular. Sub¬
stantial capital investment, estimated at about £8 million a year, is being undertaken,
together with a similar sum for the installation of bottling equipment. Since the war
the industry has maintained a sizable export trade, which in i960 was valued at ^2-3
million.
Malting. There are several hundred malting units in the United Kingdom. Some
of these are operated by brewers who make all or part of their own malt. The remainder
are operated by maltsters whose product is sold principally to brewers at home and
abroad, though some malt is supplied to distillers and vinegar brewers and to the
manufacturers of malt extract for use in the baking, confectionery and textile industries.
The popularity of British malt has been established with brewers throughout the world,
and in i960 malt exports were valued at £1-9 million. Malting units are mainly situated
in the barley-growing areas which lie east of a line drawn from Edinburgh, through
Burton-on-Trent (Staffordshire), to Lyme Regis (Dorset).
The brewing and malting industries together had a labour force of about 97,000
in i960.
Soft Drinks
The rapid expansion of the soft drinks industry in the years since the second
world war, and especially since 1954, reflects both changes in public taste and rising
standards of living. The industry’s output in i960 was estimated at 416 million gallons
in terms of ready-to-drink liquid, about equally divided between concentrated and
unconcentrated drinks. The post-war trend has been towards increasing consumption
of carbonated squashes, sales of which are seven times greater than in 1939.
Though there has been some amalgamation in recent years, there are still several
hundred firms supplying regional markets. There are three very large firms among
the twenty producing widely advertised brands which are marketed on a national
scale. There is also some degree of specialisation by firms in the production of various
types, such as carbonated drinks, cola-based drinks, squashes and cordials, tonic
waters and ‘mixers’, and comminuted drinks (in which the whole fruit is used).
Tobacco
The United Kingdom tobacco industry manufactures almost all the cigarettes and other
tobacco goods sold in the country. In i960 personal expenditure on these goods
amounted to ^1,140 million (of which over two-thirds was tax revenue) and, in
addition, exports worth £18-2 million (over 90 per cent of which were cigarettes)
were shipped to a large number of overseas markets. The main centres of production
are in and around Bristol, Liverpool, London, Manchester, Newcastle, Nottingham,
Glasgow and Belfast. The two largest manufacturing groups now account for about
90 per cent of output, compared with 80 per cent some eight years ago. The industry
has some 49,100 employees.
The tobacco industry used about 320 million lb. of unmanufactured tobacco in i960,
all of which was imported. The main sources are the United States, Rhodesia, India
and Canada, in that order. Most of this tobacco goes to make cigarettes (nearly seven-
eighths) and pipe and cigarette tobaccos. Production of cigarettes for the home market
is estimated at 110,000 million per annum, about 16 per cent of sales being in the form of
filter-tipped brands, and the demand for ‘king-size’ (i.e. larger) types has risen markedly.
Cigars account for some \ per cent of tobacco consumption, but sales doubled between
1954 and i960 to about 300 million. Although the great majority are made in Britain,
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
322
many of the most expensive grades are imported, mainly from Cuba, Jamaica and the
Netherlands.
BRICKS, POTTERY, GLASS AND CEMENT
This group comprises the manufacture of bricks, fireclay, refractory goods, pottery,
glass, cement abrasives, asbestos and other building materials. The total value of its
exports in i960 was j£69’5 million. The industries have a combined labour force of
343,900, which includes 78,100 in the bricks, fireclay and refractory goods trades.
Brickmaking
Introduced by the Romans, brickmaking is one of Britain’s oldest industries, and
something like 2,000 different varieties of building bricks are produced in the United
Kingdom today. These are made in some 800 works which range from small seasonal
yards using traditional hand methods to highly mechanised plants. More than two-
fifths of production consists of the Fletton type of brick, demand for which is steadily
increasing; it is made mainly in the Peterborough and Bedfordshire areas. The chief
producer is the largest brick manufacturing company in the world. The high level of
activity in the building industry in i960 brought production up to nearly 7,300
million bricks.
Refractory Goods
Refractory construction materials are essential in the operation of blast furnaces,
steel furnaces and other metallic furnaces and are used extensively in many other
industries. The chief raw materials required for their manufacture are indigenous
except for magnesite (which is obtained partly from overseas and partly from production
of sea-water magnesia) and chrome ore.
The main centres of the industry are in the Midlands, west Yorkshire, north-east
England, Scotland, and Wales. Production has averaged about 2 million tons a year
since 1948, mainly for home use. Exports of refractory goods in i960 were valued at
about £4 million.
Domestic Pottery
The domestic pottery industry is one of the oldest craft industries in Britain;
the making of domestic pottery dates back to before the Roman occupation. The
chief raw materials, china clay, ball clay and china stone, come from Devon, Cornwall
and Dorset, where known deposits of high quality are expected to last for about
The Stoke-on-Trent area in Staffordshire, comprising the six towns of Stoke,
Burslem, Tunstall, Hanley, Fenton and Longton, is the centre of the industry and
95 per cent of production capacity is concentrated in that area. Other important
factories are at Worcester, Derby, Bristol and Poole. The industry has about 68,000
employees, of whom many are engaged in the production of table and ornamental ware.
Of the £34 million worth of pottery produced in i960, over £14 million worth
was for export. About three-quarters of bone china exports go to Canada and the
United States, and the largest markets for decorated earthenware are Canada,
the United States and Australia.
The modern industry benefits from a tradition of good design and craftsmanship
(made world-famous by a long line of great British potters) which, with the excellent
technical qualities of its products, is the basis of the large overseas and domestic
INDUSTRY 323
demand. Among the famous makes of British pottery are: Wedgwood, Spode, Royal
Worcester, Royal Doulton and Royal Crown Derby.
Early in i960 the pottery industry started production of felspathic-type pottery
under the name of English Translucent China.
Glass
Britain’s glass industry, the third largest in the world, has some 67,000 employees.
The section of the industry devoted to the manufacture of plate and sheet glass in
their various forms is organised for quantity production, and the development of
modern methods has enabled the industry to diversify its products. Glass can now
be supplied in sheets of great size and can be made almost unbreakable. Its use for
internal decoration and as a finish for internal and external walls has greatly increased
in recent years. Large quantities of safety glass are produced for the motor industry.
A British firm has developed, at a cost of £4 million, a revolutionary glass-making
process for producing ‘float glass’.
Rapid technical progress has led to the large-scale production of tubular glass,
optical glass and also glass insulators for use in electricity transmission. Glass fibres,
used for insulating purposes and as reinforcement for plastics, are thought to offer
great scope for further development. They are being used in the manufacture of a
wide range of products including travel goods, boats and perambulators. Bottles and
jars, table ware and lamp bulbs are now made by completely automatic machinery.
The advance of the industry is shown by the increase in exports of all glassware from
a negligible level in 1938 to a value of almost £20 million in i960; this total included
j£ii million worth of plate and sheet glass which was exported mainly to Australia,
Canada, the United States and South Africa.
A traditional product is hand-made lead-crystal glassware of very high quality;
a high proportion is exported, mostly to Australia, South Africa, New Zealand,
Canada, and the United States.
Collective research is undertaken by the British Glass Industry Research Asso¬
ciation, and much research work is also carried on by the Department of Glass
Technology at Sheffield University, the first of its kind in the world.
Cement
The cement industry of the United Kingdom is chiefly concerned with the manu¬
facture of Portland cement. Invented by Joseph Aspdin and patented in 1824, this
material and the methods of its production have been the subject of continuous
technical improvement and intensive research. The capacity of the industry, which
has some 17,000 employees, has increased substantially since the war to meet the
growing demands of the building industry. About one-third of production comes
from plants situated in the Dartford-Gravesend district of Kent. Annual output,
which reached 77 million tons in 1938 had risen to 13-3 million tons in i960. One
group of companies is responsible for about two-thirds of total output. In i960
1-i million tons (valued at £7-2 million) were exported, half to West Africa, compared
with a peak total of 2-06 million tons in 1952; the fall reflects the expansion of
production in overseas countries.
PAPER, PRINTING AND PUBLISHING
The paper, printing and publishing industries had a labour force in May i960 of
over 606,200, including 94,400 in the manufacture of paper and board, 66,900 in the
production of cardboard boxes and packing cases, 137,100 in the publishing of
324
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
newspapers and periodicals and 240,600 in other types of printing and publishing.
The value of exports in i960 was £73-3 million.
Paper and Board
The manufacture of paper in Great Britain was not firmly established until 1678,
but records show that some paper was produced as far back as the year 1492.
Nearly three-quarters of the many different materials used by the industry (totalling
some 4 million tons in i960) comes from abroad. The balance consists mainly of waste
paper recovered from domestic sources.
Total production in i960 of all types of paper and board (including newsprint)
amounted to 4 million tons—the highest ever reached double the pre-war figure of
2 million tons. Of this, newsprint accounted for 740,000 tons, against 800,000 tons
pre-war; since 1953, output of wrapping and packaging paper and board has risen
by nearly two-thirds, mainly as a result of its growing use as packaging material.
Exports of paper, board and manufactured paper items were valued at £40-8 million
in i960 and included 46,500 tons of newsprint, valued at £2-8 million and ^6-i million
worth of other printing paper. The bulk of the export trade is to sterling area countries,
mainly Australia, South Africa, New Zealand, the Irish Republic and India.
The industry comprises some 200 mills producing almost every type of papei and
board together with many firms engaged in the conversion of paper and board for
various purposes. Considerable interests are held abroad, including pulp and pap^r
producing mills in the United States, Canada and other parts of the Commonwealth,
and in Europe.
Printing and Publishing
Printing is essentially an industry of small enterprises. At least two-thirds of the
6,000 firms have fewer than 25 employees. The main sections of the industry are concen¬
trated in the larger towns, notably London, although firms engaged in more general
printing are also located in smaller centres. The shortage of skilled workers has
led firms to introduce the latest developments in high-speed printing equipment,
including electronic engraving machines and advanced processes of photograpaic
reproduction. Capital investment on plant and machinery is about £20 million
a year. The annual turnover of the general printing, bookbinding and publishing
industries exceeds £300 million, and the turnover of newspaper and periodical
printers and publishers is also about £300 million.
Book publishing1 is predominantly an industry of small firms, mostly concentrated
in London. Excluding H.M. Stationery Office, which is responsible for Government
publications, only 10 of the several hundred publishing firms bring out more than 200
new titles each year, and a further 13 between 100 and 200. Amalgamations ha\e
led to the establishment of larger units in recent years. Popularity of paper-backed
books has increased rapidly and sales, some 70 million copies in i960, have more
than trebled since 1953; total sales of books in i960 amounted to about ^75‘4 million,
of which about £29-8 million worth was exported. According to official figures,
exports of printed matter, manuscripts and typescripts were valued at ^34 million
in i960, including books (j£i5'5 million), newspapers and periodicals (£5‘4 million),
and pictures and designs (£5-2 million); but since these figures do not include parcel
post, exports are considerably higher. Australia, the United States and South Africa
are the most important overseas markets.
1 For further information on publishing see p. 237.
INDUSTRY
325
OTHER MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES
Other manufacturing industries include the timber and furniture group, with some
296,600 employees, rubber manufacture, with 123,700 employees, and a group of
miscellaneous manufactures which together embrace some 178,000 employees.
Rubber
The United Kingdom rubber manufacturing industry is the oldest in the world,
dating from 1819 when Hancock, the inventor of the first method of processing
raw rubber on a commercial scale, set up a factory in London. He afterwards collaborated
with Macintosh, the inventor of waterproof garments, and it was another Scotsman,
Dunlop, who in 1888 devised the pneumatic tyre. At the present day, tyres and tubes
represent more than half the total output of the industry. More recently, British
firms have pioneered cellular rubber and latex foam products, and they also make
a great variety of other rubber manufactures, the most important being rubber
footwear, conveyor belting, cables, hose and thread.
The industry is the third largest, after the United States and Russia. There are some
600 firms employing about 123,700 people located throughout the country, and in
i960 their consumption of rubber totalled 315,000 tons, including 170,000 tons of
natural rubber, 109,000 tons of synthetic rubber and 36,000 tons of reclaimed rubber.
There are 14 tyre manufacturers, including several subsidiaries of United States
companies. In i960 they produced some 32 million tyres, of which 13 million were
for cars and 13 million for bicycles. Exports of manufactured goods in the same year
were valued at £43-9 million, two-thirds in the form of tyres and tubes. This figure
does not take into account the large indirect exports on motor vehicles.
Domestic Furniture
Although the domestic furniture industry in Britain still contains small firms,
in the last decade the total number of firms has dropped by about one-third to under
2,000, and the tendency has been for the large units to grow even larger. London is the
largest centre for furniture manufacturing, but nearly one-tenth of the total output
comes from High Wycombe, in Buckinghamshire.
The value of deliveries was nearly £122 million in i960. A Furniture Development
Council was established in 1949, under the Industrial Organisation and Development
Act, 1947, to improve the efficiency of the industry. It undertakes research, training
and study in technical and artistic subjects and design, provides a technical information
service and publishes statistics.
Toys
The toy industry in Britain, the largest in Europe, has expanded greatly in the last
ten years. There are over 300 manufacturers, most firms being small; the dozen largest
are responsible for half the output, which in i960 amounted in value to about ^40
million. Exports in that year were valued at about £7-7 million, compared with ^0-5
million in 1938: Australia, Canada and the United States are the leading markets.
The industry estimates that annual expenditure in the United Kingdom on toys
averages £5 per child. Current trends are towards increased production of small-
scale precision models of equipment and vehicles and a greater use of plastics materials,
but demand for traditional lines, such as toy soldiers, train sets and dolls, remains
unaffected.
XI. AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES
AND FORESTRY
AGRICULTURE
Although Britain is a densely populated, industrialised country relying on imports
for half its food supply, agriculture remains one of its largest and most important
industries. It occupies nearly one million people, or over 4 per cent of those in civil
employment, provides about 4 per cent of the gross national product, and uses 49
million of the 60 million acres of land.
THE LAND AND ITS USES
Land used for farming is conventionally divided into improved land suitable for
cultivation (crops and grass) and rough grazing, nearly all of which is hill or mountain
land with a native herbage of coarse grasses, rushes, bracken, heather or scrub trees.
Rough grazing has a low potential output—usually assessed at about one-sixth of that
of agricultural land—but is valuable for sheep. In England and Wales only about one-
sixth of the 29-4 million acres of farming land is classified as rough grazing, but in
Scotland the proportion is about three-quarters (12-5 million out of 16-9 million
acres). In the United Kingdom as a whole there are 30-9 million acres under crops and
grass. Improved land and rough grazing together represent 83 per cent of the land
area. The rest is mountain and forest, or put to urban and kindred uses. The area
available for farming is being gradually reduced to meet the needs of housing and
industry; however, the loss is outweighed by the increase in output from what
remains.
The soils of the country are extremely varied. Many of those in the west and north,
overlying hard rocks, are poor and thin. The lowlands and river valleys are usually
fertile, varying in texture from clay to sandy loam, silt and peat. Clay soils everywhere
necessitate under-drainage, and as all are constantly leached by rainwater, lime has to
be applied at regular intervals. In hill country the area of improved land is often small,
but is usually supplemented by grazing on a comparatively large area of hill.
Size and Ownership of Farms
For many centuries the bulk of land in Britain lay in estates ranging in size from a
few hundred acres upwards, comprising farms of varying sizes let to tenants. At all
times the tenanted holdings were interspersed with some owned by the farmers who
occupied them, and with some peasant or cottage holdings. Social changes of the past
half-century have completely changed the pattern of rural life in England and Scotland.
Estates duties have been a principal factor in the breaking up of estates. Most surviving
estates are still owned by private individuals or family trusts, but the Crown, the
Church Commissioners, local authorities, the National Coal Board, and other corporate
bodies hold considerable areas. Of the farms sold, many have been bought by the
tenants already in occupation. Nearly half the farms in Great Britain today are
owner-occupied.
Although the average size of farms in Britain is about 68 acres of crops and grass,
326
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY 327
many of the smaller holdings do not provide a full livelihood for the occupier. Esti¬
mates indicate that in England and Wales about 155,000 of the 351,000 agricultural
holdings provide only part-time work. However, they account for only a little over 5 per
cent of the area under crops and grass. Of the 200,000 full-time holdings, about
two-fifths are over 100 acres and about 56,000 in the range of 50 to 100 acres. In
Scotland the crops and grass area of the 24,000 farms worked part-time average
only 11 acres, but for the 31,000 full-time farms the average is 132 acres.
Scotland has two distinct farming zones: most of the good land lies in the east and
south of the country, while in the Highlands and Western Islands agriculture is quite
distinct from that of the rest of Britain, there being an exceptionally high proportion
of rough grazing to improved land. Numerous small occupiers are grouped in scattered
villages, each with a tiny area of enclosed land and rights of grazing on an adjoining
hill. The Highlands are thus divided between a few large holdings and a great many
very small crofts.
In Northern Ireland there are only a few large estates. Almost all the land is divided
into holdings varying from a few acres to 300-400 acres. Most of these holdings are
occupied by the owner.
Types of Farming
Most British farms produce a variety of products; the pattern varies from farm to
farm. In many districts the mosaic of farms is dominated by one type and the bias
towards one product or group of products is so marked that the whole area takes on a
distinctive character. In England the farms devoted primarily to arable crops for sale
are in the eastern part of the country, in East Anglia, Kent, Lincolnshire, and the
East Riding of Yorkshire. Potato and vegetable growing on a substantial scale marks
the farming of the Fens (south Lincolnshire and Cambridgeshire) the alluvial areas
around the rivers Thames and Humber and the peaty lands in south Lancashire.
Elsewhere, horticultural crops are widely dispersed amongst agricultural crops. In
Scotland, the rich lowlands of the east coast, the Lothians and a fringe of land around
the Moray Firth are also primarily arable.
Interspersed between these arable areas, and also in the south-east of England,
there are large tracts where, although much of the land is kept under the plough, the
rearing and fattening of cattle is an important enterprise. In the south-west of Scotland
dairying is extensively practised, but most of the north-west is devoted to rearing
sheep on rough hill land. The parts of England bordering the Pennine hills and most
of Wales are also sheep rearing areas, though a good deal of dairying, based on purchased
feedingstuffs, is also done there. Dairy farming is widely practised throughout much
of the rest of Britain. In Northern Ireland dairying and mixed farming are practised
throughout the country; stock raising is in general confined to the hill districts.
Tillage and Grassland
Traditionally, in England and Wales old grass is regarded as the property of the
landlord; many leases still specify the fields which may not be ploughed, except under
penalty. But the tenant is free to sow other fields to grass if he wishes and to plough
them out whenever he wishes; so two types of grass came into existence old or
permanent grass, the property of the owner, and temporary grass or ley, a rotational
crop of the tenant, its lease of life depending on the system of farming. The ley farming
system had its origin in the use of grass in the cereal rotation to restore soil fertility
and structure.
In Scotland, which has never had the same tradition, the tenant is free to plough as
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
328
he chooses, although in practice very high-lying fields are ploughed with the main
object of renewal of the grass. The area under temporary grass has always been high.
The situation during the 1939-45 war called for a widespread ploughing out of
grass. Since the end of the war, in all parts of the United Kingdom there has been a slow
return to permanent grass; but not all of the gain in tillage has been lost and there
has been an increase of 27 million acres in the area of temporary grass, so that the
total arable area remains some 5*2 million acres more than it was pre-war. On the
arable land of England and Wales the old-style rotations have been abandoned, and
a cropping system has been adopted which allows a high proportion of cereals, sugar
TABLE 17
Use of Agricultural Land in the United Kingdom 1939-60 (a)
Million acres
Wheat
Barley
Oats
Mixed corn
Rye
All cereals . .
Potatoes
Sugar beet
Fodder crops
Fruit
Vegetables ..
Other crops
Bare fallow
Total tillage
Temporary grass (b)
Total arable land . .
Permanent grass . .
Totals : Crops and Grass
Rough Grazings
1939
1-8
1-0
2-4
0-09
0-02
5-3
0-7
0-3
1-3
0-3
0-3
0-2
0-4
8-8
4-1
12-9
18-8
31-7
16-5
1944
3-2
2-0
3-7
0-4
0-1
9.4
1- 4
0-4
2- 0
0-3
0-5
0-4
0-2
14-6
4-7
19-3
11-7
31-0
17-0
1959
1- 9
3-1
2- 0
0-2
0-01
7-3
0-8
0-4
M
0-3
0-4
0-2
0-4
10-9
6-8
17-8
13-1
30-9
18-3(c)
1960
2-1
3-4
2-0
0-2
0-02
7-7
0-8
0-4
1-2
0-3
0-4
0-1
0-2
11-2
6-8
18-0
12-8
30-9
18-3(0
Source: Monthly Digest of Statistics.
{a) At the annual June census.
(b) Includes lucerne, except in 1939 when it was included in ‘other crops’.
(c) Includes the total area of deer forests in Scotland, and is therefore not comparable with
figures for earlier years.
beet and potatoes, with short or medium term leys. The western counties of England
and Wales show a heavy bias towards cereal crops with longer leys, and over the
country as a whole there has been a tendency for leys to lengthen with improved
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY 32C)
management of grass. In Northern Ireland, while the greater proportion of the grass¬
land is under permanent grass, medium length leys are a common feature. Scotland,
with its choice of crops restricted by soil and climate, has returned to its pre-war
pattern of rotational cropping, in which leys occupy more than half the arable ground.
Thus, in England and Wales nearly one-half of the 24 million acres of arable and
grassland is under permanent grass, about one-quarter under cereals and one-sixth
under temporary grass; of the 4-3 million acres in Scotland, only just over one-fifth is in
grass seven years old or over, against about two-fifths in grass under seven years old;
while in Northern Ireland over a half is permanent grass and about one-quarter
temporary grass.
AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION: CROPS AND LIVESTOCK
Farmers everywhere are exposed to the vagaries of the weather, of pests and diseases,
and of the market; but during the present generation much has been done in Britain
to mitigate the risks. In part this has been effected through the advance of science, in
part through self-help by farmers’ organisations, but in greatest measure by Govern¬
ment action. The role of the Government, successively as financial supporter, as
war-time controller, and as guarantor and provider of technical and advisory services,
is described on pp. 338-352.
In the year 1930 the bottom of a long depression in British agriculture was reached.
Yet already the industry was becoming organised: separate National Farmers’ Unions
had been set up in England and Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland to give farmers
a collective voice; breed societies had been established to watch over the interests of
stock breeders; young farmers’ clubs were becoming numerous; a chain of research
stations had been constituted; and a comprehensive system of university, college and
farm institute education was in being.
By the outbreak of war in 1939, the long depression from which the industry had
suffered had resulted in a general decline in agricultural activity. Much land once in
arable cultivation had been allowed to revert to permanent grass. During the war
7 million acres of the permanent grass were ploughed, the area under potatoes was
doubled, and that under wheat and barley nearly doubled. The total number of cattle
TABLE 18
Livestock in the United Kingdom 1939-60 («)
Millions
Dairy cattle
Other cattle
Sheep
Pigs
Poultry
Horses
1939
3-9
5-0
26-9
4.4
74-4
M
1944
4.4
5-1
20-1
1-9
55-1
0-9
1959
4-7
6-6
27-6
6-0
106-6
n.a.
1960
4- 8
6-9
27-9
5- 7
103-0
0-2(6)
(«) At the annual June census.
(6) Great Britain only,
n.a. not available
Source: Monthly Digest of Statistics.
33°
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
increased slightly, chiefly owing to larger dairy herds; sheep and poultry stocks declined;
and the number of pigs fell by more than half.
Since the end of the war, and particularly since the easing of the balance of payments
position permitted freer importation of feedingstuffs, the general trend has been
towards the building up of cattle and sheep stocks, and the number of pigs and poultry
has greatly increased.
Agricultural Production
The effect of these changes may be judged by reference to the total production of the
major agricultural commodities, shown in Table 19.
TABLE 19
Agricultural Production in the United Kingdom
{Years beginning 1st June)
Product
Unit
Pre-wrar
average
1946-47
1959-60
1960-61
(forecast)
Crop Production:
Wheat
Rye
Barley
Oats
Mixed corn
Potatoes
Sugar beet
Livestock Products
Milk
Eggs {a) ..
Beef and veal
Mutton and lamb
Pigmeat {a)
Wool (clip)
’000 tons
mill. gals.
’000 tons
1,651
10
765
1,940
76
4,873
2,741
1,556
385
578
195
435
34
1,967
39
1,963
2,903
350
10,166
4,522
1,653
322
537
141
211
27
2,785
13
4,016
2,187
259
6,916
5,510
2,307
753
747
236
693
38
3,019
18
4,268
2,064
222
7,016
7,183
2,444
722
786
239
684
36
Agricultural net output all
holdings (a)
New index (average of
1954-55tol956-57=100)
Old index (pre-war average
= 100) 
100
124
(prov.)
114
169
114
172
(a) Includes estimated production from units under one acre.
Source: Cmnd. 1311.
The general pattern since the end of the war shows a very large increase in all the
main crop products (except oats and potatoes), and in mutton and lamb, beef and milk.
Compared with pre-war, the 1959-60 output of pigmeat and of eggs had increased by
59 per cent and 96 per cent respectively, this increase, and also the 48 per cent increase
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
331
in sales of milk off farms, being partially attributable to heavier imports of feeding-
stuffs in recent years. It was estimated that about 6 million tons of concentrates would
be imported in 1960-61, more than double the volume in 1952-53, and a further
2 million tons are available as by-products of imported grain and oil-seeds.
In terms of a new index of agricultural net output (average of 1954-55 to I95^_57
= 100) introduced at the i960 annual review, the forecast for 1960-61 was fractionally
above the revised figure for 1959-60 of 114. On the old index (pre-war average = ioo)
the forecast figure for 1960-61 was 172.
Food Supplies
Since 1939 the population of the United Kingdom has increased by nearly 5 million,
or approximately 10 per cent; yet the total proportion of the nation’s food supplied from
home sources has increased. Before the war Britain produced (in terms of value) about
one-third of its food. It now produces about half; or two-thirds of all that can be
grown in temperate climates. The percentages by weight of total supplies of the
principal foods provided by home production in relation to the pre-war average are
shown in Table 20.
TABLE 20
Percentage of Total U.K. Food Supplies Provided by
Home Agriculture
Food Product
Pre-war
average
1945
1951
1959
1960
(prov.)
Wheat and flour for human con¬
sumption (as wheat equivalent)
Oils and fats (crude oil equivalent)
Sugar (refined value)
Carcase meat and offal
B aeon and ham (excluding canned)
Butter
Cheese
Condensed milk
Dried milk (whole and skimmed)
Shell eggs
Milk for human consumption (as
liquid) ..
Potatoes for human consumption
12
16
18
51
32
9
24
70
59
71
100
94
32
7
32
50
38
8
10
59
49
87
100
100
24
10
23
65
49
4
18
63
43
86
100
97
20
15
26
64
41
5
39
95
35
99
100
88
24
12
26
63
34
9
45
95
60
97
100
93
Source: Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food.
Table 21 shows how, for selected items, total food supplies have changed since
before the second world war and since food rationing ended (in 1954).
The Table reflects certain well-known trends. In general, consumption of bulky
foods (carbohydrates), such as flour and potatoes, has been declining since 1946,
while that of high-protein foods, such as milk, eggs and fruit, has increased with
greater availability and rising living standards. Though supplies of bacon and ham
are still slightly below the pre-war average, meat supplies as a whole are larger,
mainly because more is consumed in canned form.
332
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
TABLE 21
Food Consumption in the United Kingdom
(selected items)
lb. per head per annum
1934-38
average
1946
1954
1959
1960
(prov).
Flour
Sugar1
Fresh and frozen meat
Bacon and ham
Fresh, frozen and canned fish
Liquid milk
Cheese
Eggs in shell
Butter
Margarine
Dried and fresh fruit
Canned and bottled fruit
Potatoes ..
Tomatoes and other fresh vege¬
tables ..
194-5
102-9
90-7
28-1
21-8
217-1
8-8
25-9
24-7
8-7
86-5
10-3
181-9
115-3
221-2
79-5
70-8
15-1
26-3
312-7
10-0
18-0
11-0
15-1
60-0
2-4
281-2
130-7
187-2
105-1
83-9
25-0
18-4
333-6
9-4
28-2
14-0
18-3
79-5
10-5
221-9
113-5
169-3
113-0
89-8
25-3
17- 9
322-2
9-3
30-8
18- 5
14-5
84-6
17-5
207-7
117-2
166-7
112-3
91-5
26-1
18-2
323-9
9-7
31-6
18-1
15-2
83-0
17-5
212-5
120-6
Source: Annual Abstract of Statistics.
1 Including sugar in all home-produced and imported manufactured foods and in brewing.
Crops
Wheat
The possibilities of wheat growing, which is mainly confined to England, have been
changed out of all recognition by the advent of new strong strawed and heavy yielding
varieties, mainly from the continent of Europe but some home-bred. These permit the
liberal use of fertilisers, and spring dressings of nitrogen have become accepted
practice. Crop yields of 2 tons per acre are no longer unusual.
The widespread use of combine harvesters has necessitated the installation of drying
and storage facilities on a large number of farms. In addition, such equipment is often
used on a co-operative basis or by a contractor.
Barley
There are two distinct markets for barley—for malting and for feeding to stock.
Malting barley has in the past commanded a much higher price than feeding grain,
but the disparity has now decreased. New varieties have greatly enlarged yields. Over
the past four years the barley acreage has risen by 45 per cent and production by more
than half.
Oats
There has been a decline of about one-third in the total area under oats in the past
decade, and even in Scotland, where it is by far the most important cereal, the area
has decreased by one-quarter. No longer needed for horses, oats cannot compete in yield
of grain with modern barleys. Yet the crop thrives on acid and high-lying soils and
endures damp harvests; and no other can equal it in the fodder value of the straw.
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
333
Fodder Roots
In England the turnip crop is giving way to kale and cabbage. The acreage of
fodder roots (except kale) has, however, been declining steadily over the last decade
because in many cases farmers can provide winter feed more economically by increased
grass production and improved methods of conservation. In Scotland the decline
in turnips has been less rapid and the acreage under this crop is now greater than in
England. The area under mangolds—grown almost entirely in England—has fallen
by 50 per cent in the past decade, while fodder beet, after a promising start, is now
grown on only a small scale. Rape retains a modest place as sheep fodder.
Sugar Beet
Beet is grown mainly in East Anglia and Lincolnshire where most of the beet sugar
factories are situated. The crop is grown under contract to the British Sugar Corpora¬
tion, which takes the entire output at guaranteed prices and also provides technical
advice and assistance. Yields per acre are increasing and the i960 crop of 7-2 million
tons was the largest ever harvested, with a yield of 17-4 tons per acre. Precision drilling
is the usual method and more than half the crop is mechanically harvested.
Potatoes
The English crop of early potatoes is grown in numerous, widely scattered districts
with favourable soils and climate. It supplies the market during the summer months
and reaches the consumer within a few days of lifting. Main crops, which are normally
stored before sale, are grown chiefly in the Fen counties, Essex, Lancashire and York¬
shire. In Scotland early potatoes are grown in a small district in Ayrshire, but a
substantial part of the industry is concerned with supplying seed potatoes to English
growers. In Northern Ireland both ware and seed potatoes are produced, and a large
part of the crop is exported to Great Britain and foreign countries.
Cultivation and raising of the crop is almost entirely mechanical, picking (and some
setting) being done by hand.
Dairy Farming
Milk is much more valuable when sold on the liquid milk market than when con¬
verted into cheese, butter or other milk products. In Great Britain milk is produced
primarily for liquid consumption, but in Northern Ireland the greater part of the milk
is used for manufactured products. Production and liquid sales are now much greater
than before the war. Sales promotion by the industry is helping to maintain these
higher liquid sales. The average consumption per head is now about 4-9 pints per week.
Average yields per dairy cow are still rising steadily; in England and Wales they have
increased during the last decade by nearly 18 per cent and now average 735 gallons a
year. Freedom from tuberculosis has reduced herd wastage, and through the artificial
insemination (AI) centres, operated by the Milk Marketing Boards and other organi¬
sations, the influence of a small number of high-potential bulls is widely disseminated.
The Friesian breed now dominates both AI centres and farms on which bulls are
maintained in England and Wales; the Ayrshire breed is still most in demand in
Scotland; and in Northern Ireland the Shorthorn still predominates although Friesians
are on the increase. Milk production has also been stimulated by advances in grassland
management, intensive grazing techniques and new methods of making high quality
hay; new methods of conversion into silage are being exploited. Most dairy farmers
practise some degree of intensive grass management, but hay of traditional type
remains the basic winter feedingstuff; it is supplemented with purchased concentrates.
334
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Clean dairy farming methods and hygienic standards for equipment and buildings
used in milk production are enforced by regulations. The Ministry of Agriculture,
Fisheries and Food’s Milk Service has a general responsibility for enforcing the
regulations and for advising farmers on clean milk production.
Livestock
Beef Cattle
Although home production of beef is considerably greater than it was pre-war,
imports are lower and consumption per head has not yet overtaken the pre-war
level. Taste is changing and the public no longer wants joints from fully fattened
beasts. Normally, it does not pay to feed large amounts of concentrates to fatten cattle,
so they are maintained on grazing and the by-products of arable cash crops. In upland
regions herds of pure-bred, nearly pure-bred, or cross-bred beef stock are kept on
‘natural’ lines, the cows calving in early spring and grazing with their calves through
the summer. If there is sufficient lowland pasturage the calves may be retained on the
same farm for life; otherwise, they are sold at weaning to farmers with arable fodder
and good grazing. Nowadays much beef derives from the dairy herds, some females
(usually the first calf heifers) being mated to beef sires, and suitable breeds of bull
being maintained at AI centres. The cross-bred calves make useful beef animals;
so too do the pure-bred male calves from Friesian, Shorthorn and some other types of
herds. There is a large and complex trade in store cattle, increased by young animals
imported from the Irish Republic, whose general movement is from the upland west
to grazing areas in the Midlands and arable areas of the east.
Sheep
Britain has outstandingly good pastures for sheep. Moreover, veterinary researches
have provided vaccine and sera protection against nearly all the epidemic diseases
to which sheep are subject. More than thirty breeds and innumerable crosses are to be
found in Britain, each breed having originated within a circumscribed area. The basic
stocks are everywhere maintained by local selection, but lowland flocks are continually
reinforced by fresh blood from the hills.
In the hills, and especially in the Highlands, winter conditions are usually severe.
Draft ewes and lambs are brought from the hill areas every autumn to swell the lowland
flocks, usually in two stages: firstly, to farms at intermediate altitudes, where they are
mated with rams of a larger and more rapidly maturing breed; then, the cross-bred
progeny pass on in due course to the more genial conditions in the Midlands and in
the south and east of England, where they become crossed again with a variety of sires.
The hill breeds bring in hardiness and the first-cross sires fecundity and early maturity.
Wool, at one time of relatively little value, has recently acquired some importance
in the sheep farmers’ budget; research into breeding for fleeces is being undertaken,
notably among Welsh flocks. But the prime purpose of British sheep farming today is
the production of fat lambs, in response to the change in the preference of consumers
away from mature sheep. Leys are largely relied on for fodder, although in Scotland
the turnip crop is still of considerable importance.
Pigs
Pig production is a complex enterprise, owing to the varying uses to which the carcase
is put. Britain has always used the carcase in three different ways: for curing as bacon,
for sale in fresh condition as pork, and for sausages or other processed forms, in that
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY 335
order of importance. For the several trades, pigs of three different weight ranges seem
to be called for but one feature common to all is the desirability of leanness.
Breeders, in the main, aim at the long type required by bacon curers, for which there
is a grading system based on weight, carcase measurements of length and back-fat. The
native Large White breed yields carcases conforming closely to these requirements.
Some breeders in search of extra length have infused Landrace blood, imported from
Scandinavia. Others have turned to pure Landrace herds. For the trade in pork and
meat for processing, the Large White boar is generally used.
Apart from type, breeders’ attention is now focused on utility qualities, such as
size and weight of litters, and on food consumed per pound of liveweight gain. Litter
recording and the progeny testing scheme operated by the Pig Industry Development
Authority are providing basic data. This authority, set up under the Agriculture Act,
I957> promotes improvements in the production of pigs and the processing and
distribution of pigmeat.
Poultry
Most farmers keep some poultry, but about a quarter of the birds in the country are
kept on non-agricultural holdings, whether in backyards or on a commercial scale.
In the past twenty or thirty years specialist techniques have been used increasingly
and the industry has become more intensive. By 1958 about five-sixths of laying birds
on farms were still in flocks of one thousand or less, but the number of larger flocks
is increasing. With the rise in the poultry population and the yield of eggs per bird,
by 1957 nearly all eggs consumed in the country were home produced. The estimated
total output in 1959-60 was about double that of pre-war years.
Within the industry the trend is towards specialisation in the breeding and supply
of stock and in the production of eggs and table poultry. A voluntary scheme of
accreditation of breeders and breeding stock, known as the Poultry Stock Improve¬
ment Plan, is administered by the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food with
the advice of the Poultry (Stock Improvement) Advisory Committee and provides
for technical and veterinary supervision of breeding farms in England and Wales;
the corresponding Scottish Poultry Improvement Scheme is administered by the
Department of Agriculture and Fisheries for Scotland with the advice of an advisory
committee. There are similar schemes in Northern Ireland. A completely new branch
of the industry has grown up in the mass production of so-called broilers, i.e. chickens
of eight to eleven weeks of age. It is estimated that over 100 million birds were sold in
i960, and the industry, which receives no subsidy, continues to expand throughout
the country.
Horticultural Crops
Horticultural crops occupy only a tiny fraction of the cultivated land of the country
—roughly 2^ per cent of the agricultural area—but their value in terms of output per
acre is very high. The total value of horticultural crops sold in 1960—61 is estimated
at about £133 million, compared with some £260 million for farm crops. About
410,000 acres are under vegetables and about 286,000 acres under fruit.
Market gardening has grown up around all the large centres of population, and in the
Thames valley, for example, some very large capital investments have been made. It
has also flourished in more rural areas with favourable soil or climatic conditions in
Bedfordshire, Cambridgeshire, Hampshire and Kent, and in the Avon valley in a
concentration of smallholdings around Evesham. Districts with mild climates, such
as the Penzance region of Cornwall, have been favoured for the production of selected
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
336
early crops. More recently, selected vegetable crops have been grown in increasing
quantities by farmers as an alternative to potatoes: this applies particularly to brassicas
and to peas for canning, drying and quick-freezing.
Specialised horticultural holdings range from a few acres up to about 300 acres,
and many have glasshouses, frames or forcing houses. Use of fertilisers, particularly
of an organic nature, is very heavy, and much of the field work is mechanised. The
larger holdings normally have specialised packing sheds, with washing and grading
machinery, and irrigation plants. More and more growers, however, are coming
together in co-operatives for marketing their produce and many of these co-operatives
provide grading and packing facilities for members.
Britain has some 4,000 acres of glasshouses, more than half of the area being used
primarily for the cultivation of tomatoes, the main centres of which are the Lea Valley
in Essex and Hertfordshire, and the Worthing district in Sussex. In the Lea Valley, on
a narrow belt of gravel and brick earth, over 800 acres are covered with glass. Total
production of tomatoes in the country is estimated at 80,000 tons, and the value of all
glasshouse crops at about £25 million per year.
Hard fruits grow well in many parts of England and Wales, the chief risk associated
with their culture being late frosts. The main centres are in the south, south-west and
east of England, and Kent in particular. Production of apples is about equally divided
between cooking and dessert varieties, with Cox’s orange pippin heading the latter
group. About 40,000 acres of varieties of cider apple are grown mainly in Devon,
Herefordshire and Somerset for the cider-making industry. In Northern Ireland
there are 8,900 acres of cooking apples—Bramley Seedlings—concentrated in County
Armagh. Plums and soft fruits are grown in many counties; concentrations of plums
are found in Kent and Worcestershire, of blackcurrants in Norfolk, of cherries in
Kent and of strawberries in Norfolk, Kent and Hampshire. Raspberries are excep¬
tional in that of the 10,000 acres grown in Britain some 8,000 are in Scotland, mainly
in the Blairgowrie district (in Perthshire and Angus).
Hop-growing for the brewing industry is confined to two areas, in Kent and Sussex,
and in Herefordshire and Worcestershire. Capital outlay and cultivation costs are very
high, but returns average about 12 cwt., worth some £390, per acre. The total annual
value of the crop is about ^7 million.
FARM EXPENDITURE AND EARNINGS
Estimates of farm expenses and sales and the aggregate net income of agricultural
producers are prepared annually by the agricultural departments. A summary of the
estimates forecast for the year ended 31st May, 1961, is given in Table 22.
The estimates show that Britain’s farming is based on livestock; fully two-thirds of
farmers’ income in Britain is derived from the sale of animals or their products. In
recent years the aggregate net income of farmers has been of the order of ^35° mfifi°n
per annum. The annual cost of Government support to the industry has ranged
between approximately £240 million and £280 million.
Until 1953-54 labour costs were the largest item in farm expenses, but since then,
feedingstuffs have accounted for the highest proportion. Although the number of farm
workers has dropped by about a quarter since 1949, the responsibilities of those
remaining have correspondingly increased and rising wages have caused labour
costs to increase by one-third in the same period.
Since 1945 rents have lagged behind other costs. This has been due partly to the
reluctance of landlords to put up the rents of satisfactory tenants, and partly to the
terms of reference given to arbitrators by legislation repealed in 1958. In recent
337
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
TABLE 22
Farm Expenses and Sales in the United Kingdom, 1960-61
(As forecast for the Annual Review, 1961)
Expenses
£ million
Sales
£ million
Labour
Rent and interest
Machinery
Feedingstuffs ..
Fertilisers
Other ..
Total ..
Net income
Total
3121
105
343
115
178
1,269
359
1,628
Milk and milk products
Fatstock
Eggs and poultry
Farm crops
Horticultural products
Other 
Total
Production grants, sundry re¬
ceipts and other credits . .
Increase in value of farm stocks
and work in hand
Total
3491
435
251
258
133
54i
1,481
121
26
1,628
Source: Cmnd. 1311.
years, however, many farms have been let by tender at highly competitive rates—
often £5 to £6 per acre.
Capital Requirements
The capital required for land and buildings may be provided by the farmer, if he
is an owner-occupier, or by the landlord, if the farm is let to a tenant. Each year
‘fixed capital’ totalling some £25 million is added to the value of land and buildings.
The bulk of the capital required to stock and run the farms is provided by the occupiers.
Bank advances are an increasingly important source of outside capital, both fixed and
working; about half the total bank advances to agriculture are believed to be for short¬
term purposes. Agricultural merchants are also an important source of short-term
credit.
Accounts of some 2,300 farms in England and Wales, analysed by university agri¬
cultural economists, show average valuations of occupiers’ capital ranging from £20
to £50 per acre. In Scotland a similar sample of 900 accounts shows a wide range in
tenants’ capital per acre, from about £2 on hill sheep farms with extensive rough
grazings to between £40 and £50 per acre on lower ground farms. Dairy farms are
usually more heavily capitalised than other types of stock farms. On all types of farms
machinery is a heavy item; on dairy farms it is often £15 per acre and on arable farms
up to £20 per acre; even on stock rearing farms it may amount to £5 per acre.
Mechanisation
The best single measure of mechanisation is perhaps the rate at which horses
have been replaced by tractors. In Great Britain the number of farm horses fell from
338 BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
about 649,000 in 1939 to 54,000 in i960; tractor numbers rose from 117,000 in 1942 to
474,000 in i960. Britain now has one of the heaviest tractor densities in the world:
one to every 35 acres of arable land. Power-take-off implements now characterise
arable farming; and some 48,000 combine harvesters were in use in the i960 harvest.
A wide variety of machines for harvesting and preservation of grass are employed.
Milking machines are installed on all except the smallest farms, many with mechanical
means of handling milk. Three-quarters of the farms in Great Britain have an electricity
supply and accompanying equipment. There are over 100 farm machinery syndicates
through which farmers have the use of expensive equipment without tying up their
own capital (see p. 343).
Net Income
The range of profits between individual farms is very wide, varying with the size of
farm, quality of land, and managerial ability of the occupier. Farms do not lend them¬
selves readily to exact classification by type, so even averages must be treated with
caution. Nearly all group averages of recent years, however, show profits of £5 to
£10 per acre: there is a marked tendency for small farms to show higher profits
per acre than large ones, owing principally to the higher proportion of profit represented
by personal work on the small farm.
Profits on arable farms have, with occasional seasonal exceptions, been maintained
at a higher level than on other types; dairy farming has shown consistent but moderate
profits, while those on stock-raising farms have usually been low, except where arable
sale crops are also grown or pedigree stock is bred. The profitability of pedigree stock
breeding can be assumed from the rise in prices for breeding animals throughout the
period. Exports of livestock other than horses were valued at over £5-4 million in i960
and exports of horses at ^6-3 million.
THE ROLE OF THE GOVERNMENT
During the last hundred years the Government has played an ever-increasing
part in British agriculture. Since the opening up of the great primary-producing
countries of the New World and the Antipodes in the latter part of the nineteenth
century, producers of food had been at a disadvantage because supplies tended to
exceed effective demand. One answer to the problems posed for British farmers by this
situation would have been to discourage imports of primary products, but Britain,
being a great trading nation, was always reluctant to impose import duties in defence
of its agriculture—by then a relatively small part of the nation s economy, such a
course would have cut back trade, handicapped exports of manufactured goods and
raised the price of food. By the beginning of the 1930s, however, the need for some
form of State assistance to agriculture had become pressing; during the following
decade and subsequently, the main object of the Government’s agricultural policy
was to find methods of supporting domestic agriculture without prejudice to Britain’s
position as a world trading nation.
During the 1930s the Government initiated various forms of protection and financial
assistance for agriculture. Commodity commissions were set up for wheat and live¬
stock, with responsibility for administering Government subsidies or other forms of
direct financial assistance for the production of those commodities. the British Sugar
Corporation took over the sugar beet factories, and producer-controlled marketing
boards were established with powers to regulate the marketing of milk, pigs and bacon,
hops and potatoes. In 1934 subsidy payments were introduced to encourage the
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
339
production of beef cattle, and in 1937 the Government assumed powers to pay
acreage subsidies to assist producers of barley and oats.
During the second world war and the immediate post-war years, agricultural
production was closely controlled by the State, with County War Agricultural Executive
Committees, composed of local representatives of agricultural interests, acting as the
Government’s local agents. As a result of Government control, purchase and rationing,
the functions of marketing boards and commodity commissions were largely suspended.
To ensure a reasonable standard of living for farmers and farm workers, while at the
same time keeping the cost of living steady, most of the basic farm products were
purchased at fixed prices on Government account and sold at controlled prices, often
below the cost of procurement; the difference in price was borne by public funds.
This practice continued as long as rationing lasted.
Post-war Policy
Government policy today is founded on the Agriculture Act of 1947. The main
objective, as set out in Section 1 of the Act, continues to be ‘a stable and efficient
agricultural industry capable of producing such part of the nation’s food and other
agricultural produce as in the national interest it is desirable to produce in the United
Kingdom, and of producing it at minimum prices consistent with proper remuneration
and living conditions for farmers and workers in agriculture and an adequate return
on capital invested in the industry’. To this end, the Government is empowered
to provide, for the main agricultural products, guaranteed prices determined in the
light of annual reviews.
Post-war policy falls broadly into two periods, with the dividing line about 1954.
During the first, the chief aim was to encourage expansion and a return to something
like the traditional pattern of British farming. ‘Production objectives’ were set for each
of the main commodities, as they had been during the war, though the Government
gradually ceased to direct farmers what to grow. By means of additions to the prices
fixed at annual reviews, £40 million per annum were injected into farm incomes to
provide additional working capital for expansion. The Hill Farming Act of 1946
offered grants for the rehabilitation of hill farms and, by encouraging investment in
fixed equipment, set the pattern for later legislation.
As world supplies of food and Britain’s own agricultural production and trading
position improved, the Government gradually restored to private business both the
importing of food and domestic trading in food. The last remnants of consumer
rationing of food were abolished on 3rd July, 1954. Since the ending of the period of
scarcity, policy objectives have changed: stress has been laid on more economic
production of food of the kinds and qualities demanded by the market, rather than on
indiscriminate expansion of production. By 1957 the immediate objective of a 60 per
cent increase in production had been achieved, and attention was turned to long-term
measures. The Agriculture Act of that year assured farmers that the prices guaranteed
under the Act of 1947 would not be steeply reduced, and at the same time provided
grants towards the cost of bringing fixed equipment up to date. In 1959 the problem
of the small farm business was tackled. In the following year, grants were made
available for buildings and equipment for horticulture, primarily with the object of
improving the presentation and marketing of horticultural produce.
Machinery of Government
The functions of Government in relation to agriculture are mostly exercised by the
agricultural ministers, that is to say, for England and Wales the Minister of Agriculture,
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
340
Fisheries and Food, for Scotland the Secretary of State for Scotland, and for Northern
Ireland the Home Secretary, who is the minister responsible for United Kingdom
aspects of Northern Ireland agriculture, local aspects being the responsibility of the
Northern Ireland Minister of Agriculture. The agricultural ministers are assisted by a
number of advisory committees composed of general agriculturists and specialists.
The headquarters of the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food is divided
functionally, each division being responsible for a particular subject or service. Its
relations with individual farmers are conducted mainly through its local offices,
grouped in eight regions, each administered by a regional controller working in close
collaboration with the regional heads of the technical services. County Agricultural
Executive Committees—successors of the War Agricultural Executive Committees ■
have a number of duties, including that of promoting technical development and
advising the minister on local aspects of policy.
In Scotland most of the agricultural functions of the Secretary of State are discharged
through the Department of Agriculture and Fisheries, which has its headquarters
in Edinburgh, with the help and advice of 11 Agricultural Executive Committees.
The Secretary of State also appoints the members of two commissions: the Crofters
Commission, which has powers to deal with the unique and difficult circumstances of
crofting in the Highlands and Islands, and the Red Deer Commission, which has the
general functions of furthering the conservation and control of red deer and of keeping
under review all matters relating to them.
The Northern Ireland Ministry of Agriculture in Belfast has in each county an
agricultural executive officer who is responsible for carrying out the Government’s
agricultural policy.
CURRENT SUPPORT POLICY
Annual Review
In February each year, in accordance with the Act of i947> agricultural ministers
review the economic condition and prospects of the industry. Between annual reviews,
a special review may be held if the ministers consider it warranted, but this has seldom
been necessary. In holding reviews, the ministers are required to consult with repre¬
sentatives of agricultural producers—in practice, the three farmers’ unions in the
United Kingdom. The ministers consider such factors as production trends and market
requirements, world market prospects, the cost of subsidies, the trend of profits in the
industry as a whole, the increasing efficiency of the industry and changes in production
costs, trading relations (especially with the Commonwealth) and the national economic
situation. In the light of their conclusions, they determine guaranteed prices for fat
cattle, fat sheep, fat pigs, eggs, wool, milk, cereals, potatoes and sugar beet. These
guarantees apply to livestock and livestock products for the ensuing twelve months,
and to crops to be harvested in the current year. Various grants in aid of particular
kinds of production or farming practice (known as ‘production grants’) are also
considered. Any changes in ‘relevant’ production grants (broadly, those payable to
occupiers rather than landowners) are taken into account. The Government’s con¬
clusions and its decisions on changes in guaranteed prices and relevant production
grants are published as a White Paper.
The long-term assurances provided for in the 1957 Act require the total value of the
guaranteed prices and relevant production grants in any year to be maintained at not
less than 97! per cent of their value in the preceding year, after allowing for changes
in costs. In addition, the guaranteed price (adjusted for any change in the basis of the
guarantee) for each commodity must be not less than 9b per cent of that of the previous
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
341
year. For livestock and livestock products—where farmers’ decisions need time to
take effect—there is a further provision that reductions in the guaranteed price for
any product must not total more than 9 per cent in any period of three years.
The general policy of the Government is to avoid direct intervention in the market
and therefore to use methods of agricultural support that allow the ordinary channels
of trade to flow freely. The form of guarantee most generally used is the deficiency
payment, which means that the Government makes payments to producers, related
to the differences between the average market price realised and the guaranteed price,
for output eligible for the guarantee.
Price Guarantees
The deficiency payments schemes for cereals and fatstock are administered directly
by the agricultural departments. Payments for wheat and rye are based on the quantity
of millable grain sold and delivered by the grower. For barley and oats, much of which
is consumed on farms, payments are based on the acreage grown. For the 1961-62
season, new arrangements provide growers with an incentive to hold barley until later
in the season. Deficiency payments for fatstock are made weekly to individual producers
on certified sales on a liveweight or deadweight basis. The weekly standard prices
for fat cattle and fat sheep vary on a seasonal scale; for pigs there is no seasonal scale
but the weekly prices are adjusted for changes in feed costs and, under a new flexible
guarantee arrangement introduced after the 1961 annual review, adjustments may
also be made quarterly by reference to a forecast of the number of pigs likely to receive
the guarantee payment during a period of 12 months.
For most of the remaining commodities the Government makes a payment to the
appropriate marketing board, which takes account of any subsidy payments from the
Government in deciding what to pay producers for their produce. In the case of milk
there are five such boards, and the full guaranteed price applies only to a ‘standard
quantity’ which includes all milk sold for liquid consumption, together with part of
that going for manufacture. For milk in excess of its standard quantity a board receives
only a lower guaranteed price, but there is a profit and loss sharing arrangement between
the Government and each board, to encourage the boards to get the best prices they
can for milk for manufacturing. For eggs a flat rate subsidy (also subject to a profit
and loss sharing arrangement) is paid to the British Egg Marketing Board on all eggs
sold to the board through packing stations. The Potato Marketing Board receives
payment from the Exchequer for any deficiency that arises when the average market
price obtained by growers for potatoes for human consumption falls below the
guaranteed price. The board uses such funds as it thinks fit in the interests of growers.
For wool a fixed price is guaranteed to the British Wool Marketing Board for every
pound of fleece wool it buys from producers. This enables it to fix in advance a schedule
of producers’ prices, based on types and quality, after making allowance for its
marketing costs.
Under the Sugar Act, 1956, and the Agriculture Act, 1957, the British Sugar
Corporation contracts to buy the whole of the sugar beet crop produced from a
specified acreage (at present 414,600 acres) at a scale of fixed prices, determined as a
result of the annual review and related to sugar content. Refined sugar produced by the
corporation is sold, under market-sharing agreements with the refiners, at a price
based on the world price.
The Sugar Board buys Commonwealth sugar under the Commonwealth Sugar
Agreement and sells it commercially. The deficits or surpluses which result from the
transactions of both the corporation and the board are ultimately reflected in the
342
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
board’s accounts. When these accounts show a deficit, a levy is charged on all sugar
and molasses, imported or home-produced, entering the United Kingdom market,
including the sugar content of composite sugar imports, and when there is a surplus,
a distribution payment is made correspondingly, so that taking one year with another
the board balances its account.
Production Grants
The following are the main grants and subsidies which are ‘relevant production
grants’ for the purposes of the Agriculture Act, 1957, and the annual review.
Fertilisers and Lime
Schemes under the Agriculture (Fertilisers) Act, 1952, provide grants to assist
farmers in the purchase of nitrogenous and phosphatic fertilisers. Farmers can also
obtain a refund of more than half their costs of liming the land to improve soil
fertility.
Ploughing up Grass
Ploughing grants are available for land that has been continuously under grass for
not less than three years, to encourage the regular ploughing up and extended use of
leys.
Silo Grants
Grants amounting to about half the cost of approved projects, up to a maximum
of £250 a farm, are available under the Agriculture (Silo Subsidies) Act, 1956, for
constructing and improving silos for conserving grass and fodder.
Calf Subsidy
To stimulate the breeding and rearing of calves suitable for beef production, a
subsidy is paid to the rearer of suitable calves at the rate of £9 5s. a head for steers and
£7 10s. a head for heifers.
Hill Cow Subsidy
To encourage the production of breeding-cattle on hill farms, a subsidy of £12
per head is paid on breeding cows in regular breeding herds maintained on hill and
upland farms.
Small Farmers
To establish on a firm economic basis small farm businesses whose main handicap
is lack of working capital, grants are offered to small farmers who carry out three-,
four- or five-year improvement plans approved by the agricultural departments. The
limit is £1,000 for any one business. In England, Wales and Northern Ireland an
additional scheme, to help the small farmer for whom an improvement plan is not yet
practicable, supplements the existing lime and fertiliser subsidies, ploughing and
ditching grants. The Marginal Agricultural Production Scheme performs a similar
function in Scotland.
Destruction of Rabbits, Wood Pigeons and other Land Pests
The principal mammals and birds in Great Britain harmful to farming are rabbits,
wood pigeons, rats, mice, moles and, in the north, carrion crows. Occupiers are
responsible for dealing with pests on their land and for seeing that they do not spread
to neighbouring properties. To encourage co-ordinated action, the Government pays
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
343
a grant of half the expenditure incurred by pest clearance societies in the systematic
destruction of rabbits and wood pigeons; over 500 rabbit clearance societies have been
registered in the United Kingdom. A similar grant is paid for the control of coypu,
which have been spreading in East Anglia. Contributions are paid to ‘fox destruction
societies’ to encourage organised control of foxes in open country where there is no
hunting.
Grants for Long-term Improvements
In addition there are several types of grants for long-term improvements which
are not ‘relevant production grants’. Among them are the following:
Farm Improvement Scheme
Under the Agriculture Act, 1957, grants are available to the owners and occupiers of
agricultural land towards the cost of improving certain kinds of fixed equipment,
including farm buildings, roads and fences, and the supply of electricity. The rate of
grant is one-third of the cost. Grants are also available towards the incidental costs of
amalgamating uneconomic holdings.
Hill Farming
Under the Hill Farming and Livestock Rearing Acts, 1946-59, grants are available
to the owners and occupiers of upland farms suitable only for rearing livestock as
their main enterprise. (The Acts also apply to some lowland areas in the north of
Scotland where conditions are similar.) Grants amount to 50 per cent of the cost of
comprehensive schemes for putting the farms in sound working order.
Horticulture Improvement Scheme
Under the Horticulture Act, i960, grants are available to horticulturists, to the
landlords of land used for horticulture and, in some cases, to horticultural marketing
co-operatives. The range of improvements towards the cost of which grants of one-
third may be made includes plant and equipment designed to improve the storage
or preparation of produce for the market.
Farm Drainage and Water Supply Schemes
The State contributes towards the cost of land drainage and water supply. In
England and Wales, for example, grants for farm drainage may be up to 50 per cent
of the approved cost. Farm water supply grants are at the rate of 25 per cent of the
approved cost where the connection is to a public main, and 40 per cent where a
private source is utilised. Grants of up to 50 per cent are available in Scotland for
farm drainage and towards the cost of installing and improving farm water supplies.
Separate legislation provides grants for these services in Northern Ireland.
Farm Machinery Syndicates
At the 1961 annual review, the Government announced its intention of making a
one-third capital grant towards expenditure incurred in future by landowners or
farmers in providing buildings to house machinery and grain drying and storage
equipment for use by farm machinery syndicates.
Horticulture
Horticultural produce, because it is perishable and is liable to great variations in
quantity and quality from season to season, does not lend itself to a system of guaranteed
344
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
prices. Instead, horticulture enjoys through import duties a measure of protection
comparable to that afforded to agriculture by the guarantee system. Where appropriate
the tariff on horticultural produce is varied through the year so as to allow imports to
enter freely at times when they do not compete with the home crop. Certain of the
production grants are available to growers on the same terms as to farmers. Marketing
arrangements are described on p. 348.
OTHER GOVERNMENT ASSISTANCE AND ACTION
Land Use
It is an integral part of the Government’s planning policy (which is administered
in England and Wales by the Ministry of Housing and Local Government, and in
Scotland by the Department of Health for Scotland) that the better agricultural land
should not be taken if there is less valuable land that would serve the purpose. The
Ministry of Agriculture assists in carrying out this policy in England and Wales by
providing expert advice to planning authorities and other departments on the impli¬
cations, from the standpoint of the public agricultural interest, of all substantial
proposals to take agricultural land for other purposes. Appropriate arrangements exist
for the ministry to be consulted about such proposals. In Scotland similar arrangements
exist for the Department of Agriculture and Fisheries to give advice.
Agricultural Credit
The Government has never pursued a general policy of making credit available to
agriculture on easy terms. Nevertheless, a number of facilities for specific purposes
enjoy government encouragement and support.
In England and Wales finance for the purchase or improvement of agricultural
property is available from the Agricultural Mortgage Corporation Ltd.; this may take
the form of a loan on first mortgage or of an improvement loan. The corporation’s
funds are derived mainly from public issues of stock, but it receives a measure of
government support. In Scotland, loans for agricultural purposes secured on
agricultural land in Scotland are granted by the Scottish Agricultural Securities
Corporation Ltd.; this corporation also receives support from the Government.
Improvement loans are also available to landowners from the Lands Improvement
Company, whose funds are provided privately. An improvement loan may be obtained
for the purpose of carrying out improvements to agricultural land and buildings. The
amount of the loan is charged on the land improved in the form of a terminable rent
charge. This type of loan requires the sanction of the ministers.
In Northern Ireland loans are available to farmers for a wide range of purposes from
the Agricultural Loans Fund administered by the Ministry of Agriculture and financed
out of public funds. The bulk of the loans issued are short-term and are for such
items as agricultural machinery, but in the case of buildings the period may be extended
to thirty years. No loans are advanced for purchase of land.
Smallholdings
Since 1892 county councils and county borough councils in England and Wales
have had powers to provide smallholdings. Current legislation imposes on county
councils an obligation to provide smallholdings and enables the minister to contribute
towards their losses. The aim was at first to foster a peasant economy, but later to
provide holdings for ex-Servicemen of the 1914-18 war, and then for the unemployed.
Now, under the Agriculture Act, 1947, the object is to give opportunities for persons
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
345
with agricultural experience, particularly agricultural workers, to become farmers
on their own account. In England and Wales, about 17,000 smallholdings are provided
by local authorities and about 1,300 by the ministry.
Of the smallholdings provided by the ministry, approximately 1,000, situated
on 18 different estates, are managed by the Land Settlement Association Limited,
which was originally formed in 1934 for the purpose of developing smallholdings for
unemployed men from industrial areas. The association provides centrally on each
estate various services for the tenants’ use, including the supply of agricultural stores
and requisites, the operation of a machinery pool, and the packing and marketing of
produce.
The minister has power under the 1947 Act to make loans for working capital to
tenants of statutory smallholdings. In this way they can be helped to obtain livestock,
machinery, implements and other necessary items; the tenant must, however, have
available at least 25 per cent of the capital required.
Land settlement in Scotland has always been carried out by the central Government,
which now owns and maintains some 432,000 acres of land settlement estates, with
over 4,000 holdings.
Some economists have questioned the value of this smallholdings policy on the
grounds that many of the smallholdings are too small to provide a reasonable livelihood
and that the average size of the holding in Britain needs to be increased rather than
diminished. The policy under the 1947 Act, however, is to encourage county councils
to provide well-equipped viable holdings capable of providing a reasonable livelihood
and a full-time occupation for the smallholder and his family. About half the small¬
holdings comply with this standard. Most of the remainder are part-time holdings
and some of these are being amalgamated or sold. It is of course difficult for persons
without considerable capital or financial backing to enter farming, and the smallholdings
policy does provide an opportunity for the experienced farmworker.
Crofting
In the seven Scottish counties known as crofting counties—Argyll, Caithness,
Inverness, Orkney, Ross and Cromarty, Sutherland, and Shetland—much of the land
is farmed by crofters, tenant farmers whose holdings are generally either rented at a
cost of not more than £50 a year or have an area not exceeding 75 acres.
In these counties there are about 20,000 crofts, which produce about one-quarter
of the total agricultural output of the area. The special problems of the crofting counties,
which had for some time been suffering from a declining population and falling agricul¬
tural production, led to the setting up, in 1955 of a Crofters Commission whose
functions are to reorganise, develop and regulate crofting in the crofting counties, to
promote the interests of crofters and to keep under review matters relating to crofting.
The commission’s powers, embodied in the Crofters (Scotland) Acts of 1955 and
1961, include that of carrying out reorganisation schemes in ‘townships’ (crofting
communities) if a majority of the crofters agree, by reallocating the land in a way
which, in the commission’s opinion, would lead to the proper and efficient use of the
land and the general benefit of the township. The commission has also powers over
the letting and sub-letting of crofts and it is responsible for approving regulations
governing the use of common grazings. It acts as agent for the Secretary of State
for Scotland in the administration of schemes of loans and grants for the develop¬
ment of agricultural production on crofts, and collaborates with other bodies in
carrying out measures for economic development and social improvement in
crofting areas.
346
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
TABLE 23
Estimated Cost of Exchequer Support to Agriculture
Financial years beginning 1st April
I. Implementation of price guarantees
Cereals—
Wheat and rye
Barley
Oats and mixed corn
Potatoes
Eggs, hen and duck . .
Fatstock—
Cattle
Sheep
Pigs
Milk (excluding school and welfare milk)
Wool 
Total I
II. Farming Grants and Subsidies
Fertilisers subsidy
Lime subsidy
Ploughing grants
Field drainage grants
Water supply grants . .
Grants for improvement of livestock rearing
land
Marginal Production Assistance grants
Bonus payments under the Tuberculosis
(Attested Herds) Scheme . .
Calf subsidy . .
Hill cattle and hill cow subsidies
Hill sheep subsidy
Silo subsidies . .
Grants for farm improvements
Grants to small farmers
Other grants . .
Total II
Totals I and II ..
Administrative expenses applicable to above
III. Other services
Arrangements for the benefit of agricultural
producers in Northern Ireland financed
from the U.K. Exchequer
Total Estimated Cost of Agricultural
Support
£ million
1959-60
20-4
25-2
12-8
3-4
25-3
22-2
58-4
1-0
33-1
50-9
8-5
2-8
154-7
29-4
11-0
9-4
2-6
0-7
1-5
1-7
9-0
16-5
4- 1
1-4
6-6
M
0-1
95-1
249-8
5- 9
255-7
1-2
256-9
1960-61
18-1
33-8
11-8
11-7
13-9
18-6
63-7
7-4
23-5
44-2
10-9
2-8
152-5
32-2
9-0
10-7
2-8
0-8
1-6
1-0
8-9
18-0
4-6
0
0
8
6
0
105-9
258-4
6-1
264-5
1-1
265-6
Source: Cmnd. 1311.
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
347
Arterial Drainage and Sea Defence
Land drainage in England and Wales is administered by 34 river boards1 and 400
internal drainage boards. Each river board area comprises a major river system. They
cover the whole of England and Wales, apart from the London area. There are no
comparable boards in Scotland, where drainage is the responsibility of owners and
occupiers of land. River boards have powers to maintain and improve watercourses
scheduled as main rivers. Their work is concerned with the improvement of land
drainage by increasing the capacity of rivers and erecting pumping stations, the
prevention of inland flooding—both urban and agricultural—and the erection of
defences to protect low-lying areas from coastal flooding. River boards also have powers
relating to freshwater fisheries and river pollution.
Internal drainage boards are concerned with very much smaller areas and their
work is chiefly in low-lying agricultural areas. Their main function is to keep the land
drained in their area by improving the main drains and, where necessary, by pumping
from low-lying land.
The boards derive their income directly or indirectly from rate-payers. The Govern¬
ment pays grants towards the cost of the improvement schemes carried out by both
types of board. Grants to river boards vary from 20 per cent to 80 per cent according
to the financial position of the board. Internal drainage boards receive grants at a
flat rate of 50 per cent.
The gross capital expenditure of drainage authorities on new and improved works
is now over £7 million a year. Government grants, including grants towards the
repayment of loans raised in previous years, amount to nearly £4 million. Drainage
authorities’ expenditure on maintenance is estimated at about £2^ million a year and
is rising steadily.
The Land Drainage Act, 1961, extended the powers of river boards to deal with
arterial watercourses. The Act also improved the administrative provisions of the Land
Drainage Act, 1930, and extended the land drainage powers of local authorities.
In Northern Ireland the Ministry of Agriculture is the drainage authority in respect
of determined main watercourses, with the exception of the Erne and Lower Bann
which are the responsibility of the Ministry of Finance. The cost is met by the
Exchequer in the first place, offset by contributions from the county and county
borough councils. Joint land improvement schemes on smaller watercourses may be
promoted by the riparian owners and receive Government assistance. Urban drainage
schemes, towards which an Exchequer grant is available, can be promoted by local
sanitary authorities.
Land Tenure
The traditional form of tenancy in England and Wales runs from year to year; in
Scotland leases for terms of 10 to 14 years are more common. The tenancy agreement
may be either written or verbal and may (but need not) include provisions about such
matters as rights of cropping, liability for repair and maintenance, and compensation
for tenant’s improvements.
In order to protect the respective interests of landlords and tenants and to eliminate
uncertainty as to their rights and liabilities, a code of landlord and tenant relationships
1 River boards are composite bodies representing local government, agricultural and fisheries
interests. The Thames Conservancy Board and Lee Conservancy Catchment Board are similar
in constitution and powers to the river boards; because London draws most of its water supplies
from these two rivers, however, they have long been regulated under the powers granted by Acts
of Parliament of purely local application.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
348
has been written into legislation. The Agriculture Acts of 1947 and, for Scotland,
1948, lay down the basic rules of good estate management and good husbandry for
owners and occupiers respectively. The Agricultural Holdings Acts of 1948 and 1949
contain more detailed provisions, some of which apply to all tenancy agreements
(i.e. the parties may not contract out of them) and some of which apply only in the
absence of specific provision in the tenancy agreement.
Among the compulsory provisions are those relating to security of tenure. The
Acts provide for any tenancy of agricultural land, with the exception of certain short¬
term lettings to which exemption can be given by the minister or secretary of state, to
continue in force from year to year until determined by a valid notice to quit. Except
where the notice to quit is given on account of a breach of covenant by the tenant (for
instance, failure to pay rent or carry out repairs), the tenant can contest it; the notice
then becomes inoperative unless the landlord can satisfy an independent body (in
England and Wales the Agricultural Land Tribunal and in Scotland the Scottish
Land Court) that his claim for possession is in the interests of sound estate manage¬
ment or good husbandry or that the land is required for certain purposes specified in
the Acts.
The Acts lay down a code of compensation to which the tenant is entitled on
termination of the tenancy. Compensation is normally payable both for disturbance
(between one and two years’ rent) and for improvements which the tenant has carried
out during the tenancy. The landlord is normally entitled to counter-claim for
dilapidations, and machinery is provided for the settlement of claims by arbitration
in default of agreement between the parties. Rent is a matter for negotiation between
landlord and tenant and may be varied by agreement at any time or, failing agreement,
by arbitration at intervals of not less than three years in England and Wales and five
years in Scotland. A landlord is entitled to claim additional rent for improvements
carried out at his expense. The Acts also forbid provisions in tenancy agreements
which would unduly restrict the tenant’s farming operations.
MARKETING
Most agricultural products are now disposed of through the normal channels of
trade, e.g. corn merchants, livestock auctions and markets, and bacon factories;
or through producers’ own co-operative marketing organisations. For certain com¬
modities, however, there are marketing boards operating under the Agricultural
Marketing Act, 1958 (which consolidated earlier legislation). These boards are
producers’ organisations with statutory powers to regulate the marketing of particular
products. The schemes under which they are constituted and operate must be approved
by Parliament and confirmed by a poll of the producers. Most of the members of the
board are elected by the producers but a minority are appointed by the minister or
ministers concerned. Other safeguards are provided for the protection of consumers
and the public interest.
Marketing boards fall into two categories: first, the full trading board with power
to become the first selling agency for virtually all producers; and second, regulatory
boards which exercise control over marketing by producers themselves. The boards
for eggs, hops, milk and wool fall into the first category and those for potatoes and for
tomatoes and cucumbers in the second.
A Horticultural Marketing Council representing all those concerned in the marketing
of horticultural produce—producers, wholesalers and importers, retailers and organised
labour—was set up in May i960 under the Horticulture Act, i960. The task of the
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
349
council is to improve the marketing and distribution of, and develop the trade in,
horticultural produce. Its functions include giving information about supply, demand
and prices; encouraging better grading and standardisation; and carrying out research
into marketing and distribution methods. It is intended that the council’s activities
should eventually be financed by the horticultural industry; the Horticulture Act,
however, authorises the financing of the council from public funds during its first
three years of operation. A Covent Garden Market Act, authorising the setting up of a
Covent Garden Market Authority, was passed in 1961. The Authority has powers
to reorganise and modernise the largest of London’s five horticultural wholesale
markets.
At the 1961 annual review, the Government proposed to the farmers’ unions that,
as part of the review settlement, some funds (up to £500,000 a year) should be provided
for market research and development for an experimental period of three years. The
grant should be on a percentage basis, roughly half of the cost of approved projects
being borne by the industry itself. The unions will enter into discussions on the
subject and it is hoped to introduce the grants at the 1962 review.
CONTROL OF DISEASES AND PESTS
Animals
The day-to-day work of treating animal disease is the responsibility of the veterinary
profession. The State veterinary service, which was inaugurated in 1865, deals with
situations beyond the control of the individual practitioner. The service for the whole
of Great Britain is now controlled from London, wdiere the ministry’s Animal Health
Division is manned day and night to deal promptly with outbreaks of infectious disease.
Britain has now been free for many years from eight serious animal diseases includ¬
ing rinderpest, sheep scab, glanders and rabies.1 Northern Ireland, in addition, is free
from fowl pest and swine fever. On 1st October, i960, the plan to eradicate bovine
tuberculosis throughout the United Kingdom was completed successfully, within the
space of ten years. On that day the whole of Great Britain became an attested area,
virtually free from the disease; Northern Ireland became so in November i960. Any
cattle reacting to the tuberculin test are slaughtered and compensation is paid to the
owner. Strict movement and isolation controls are applied to all imported cattle not
of fully attested status.
To supplement the work of private veterinary surgeons and practitioners in England
and Wales, a Government-operated Veterinary Investigation Service carries out
investigations requiring specialised knowledge or facilities beyond the range of the
general practitioner. In Scotland this is not a Government service but is linked with
agricultural teaching institutions.
The work of the State veterinary service is backed by applied research carried on
at the State veterinary laboratories at Weybridge, Surrey, and Lasswade, Midlothian,
and at Stormont, in Northern Ireland.
Plants
Advice to growers on the general control of plant pests and diseases is given by the
advisory services. In addition, the State plant health service is responsible for statutory
controls designed to limit the spread of plant pests and diseases present in Britain and
prevent the introduction of new ones from abroad. It also issues the health certificates
required by other countries to accompany plant material imported from Britain.
1 For quarantine regulations for animals entering the United Kingdom, see Appendix.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
350
Voluntary certification schemes are operated to encourage the development of
healthy, vigorous and true-to-type planting stocks, particularly of crops subject to
degenerative diseases.
AGRICULTURAL ADVISORY SERVICES
The National Agricultural Advisory Service
In England and Wales free technical advice on all agricultural and horticultural
matters is available to every farmer and grower through the Ministry of Agriculture’s
National Agricultural Advisory Service (NAAS). Every county has a county advisory
officer in charge of advisory work and is divided into districts, in each of which there
is a district advisory officer who can call on an extensive system of specialist advisers.
In Scotland the advisory services, similar in scope to the NAAS, are based on the
three agricultural colleges. Northern Ireland has its own separate advisory service.
Facilities are provided at the NAAS experimental farms and horticultural stations in
England and Wales and at agricultural college centres in Scotland for field-scale
extensions of research work and investigations of local problems.
The Agricultural Land Service
The main functions of the Agricultural Land Service, which operates in England
and Wales, are:
(1) to advise owners of agricultural land on estate management matters, including
farm buildings;
(2) to provide professional advice and services to the Minister of Agriculture,
Fisheries and Food and his agents on all matters relating to farm land and
buildings;
(3) to provide expert professional advice to the minister and department on the
agricultural land use implications of planning proposals, including the
possibilities of reclaiming to agriculture, land worked for minerals by opencast
methods; and
(4) liaison with other departments and planning authorities about such proposals.
In Scotland similar duties are carried out by officers of the Department of
Agriculture and Fisheries but advisory work regarding farm buildings is undertaken
by the agricultural colleges.
The work of the advisory and veterinary services is supplemented by numerous
technical publications.
RESEARCH AND EDUCATION
Research
Agricultural research in Britain is planned and co-ordinated by the Agricultural
Research Council (see p. 217) and is largely financed by the State. The council has
23 research stations and units under its direct control and is responsible for the
administration of Government grants to 14 independent research institutes in England
and Wales; in Scotland, eight independent research organisations receive grants
through the Department of Agriculture and Fisheries for Scotland. The Ministry
of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food and the Department of Agriculture and Fisheries
for Scotland also have their own research laboratories (see p. 221). Grants are also
made by the Agricultural Research Council (ARC) to universities and to other
recognised research institutions.
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY 351
The Rothamsted Experimental Station at Harpenden, Hertfordshire, founded in
1843, was the first such institute in the world and is still a leading authority for research
on soils, fertilisers and crop husbandry. Others of outstanding importance include the
Macaulay Institute for Soil Research, Aberdeen; the Rowett Research Institute,
Aberdeen, which specialises in the study of animal nutrition; the Research Institute
at Pirbright, Surrey, for animal virus diseases; the East Mailing Research Station, in
Kent, and the Long Ashton Research Station, Bristol University, for fruit research;
the John Innes Horticultural Institution, Bayfordbury, Hertfordshire; the National
Institute for Research in Dairying, Reading, Berkshire; the Grassland Research
Institute, Hurley, Berkshire; and the Welsh Plant Breeding Station at Aberystwyth.
Research on stored products pests is done at the Pest Infestation Laboratory,
Slough, and the subsequent development and control work at the ministry’s laboratory
at Tolworth, where research on the control of harmful mammals and birds is
also centred.
Information on research is exchanged with other Commonwealth countries through
the machinery of the Commonwealth Agricultural Bureaux and Institutes (ten Bureaux
and two Institutes in the United Kingdom and one Institute in Canada).
In England and Wales, research and advice on farm economics are combined in the
Provincial Agricultural Economics Service, which comprises ten university Depart¬
ments of Agricultural Economics and which is not co-ordinated by the ARC. In
Scotland, agricultural economists are on the staff of the three agricultural colleges.
The agricultural departments in both England and Wales and Scotland have economics
and statistics units.
The Northern Ireland Ministry of Agriculture, which also has its Farm Economics
Branch, has, in addition, its own research divisions investigating problems of animal
and crop production.
Industrial concerns manufacturing weed-killers, insecticides, fertilisers, feeding-
stuffs and agricultural tractors and implements undertake research on a considerable
scale and in most cases maintain experimental farms and estates. They have been
responsible for developing a wide range of new, improved and safer products.
Agricultural Education
There are four types of institutions which provide full-time training in agricultural
subjects: universities, agricultural colleges, county farm institutes (in England and
Wales), and farm schools (in Scotland). Eight universities in England and Wales
(Cambridge, Durham, Leeds, London, Nottingham, Oxford, Reading, and the
University of Wales at Aberystwyth and Bangor), and three in Scotland (Edinburgh,
Glasgow, and Aberdeen) provide degree courses in agriculture. The University of
Bristol offers postgraduate diploma courses. In Northern Ireland, a degree course is
provided at Queen’s University, Belfast. A National College of Agricultural Engineer¬
ing is to be built next to the National Institute of Agricultural Engineering at Silsoe,
Bedfordshire. This will be the eighth of the national colleges (see p. 177) established
to train people for highly specialised industries whose needs cannot be met at local
technical colleges.
Two-year diploma courses are given at five agricultural colleges and at two of the
county farm institutes in England and Wales; three agricultural colleges in Scotland
give two-year to three-year diploma courses. They are intended mainly for farmers
and farm managers, and lead to diplomas in agriculture, dairying, horticulture,
poultry husbandry and agricultural engineering. In Scotland the three colleges
also offer two- or three-term certificate courses. In Northern Ireland there are two
352
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
agricultural colleges, which provide three-year diploma courses in poultry husbandry
and dairying and one-year certificate courses.
There are 31 county farm institutes in England and five in Wales run by local
education authorities. They provide residential courses in general agriculture, dairying,
horticulture and poultry husbandry. These courses, which are usually for one year
of about 36 working weeks, are designed for those wishing to become skilled workers
in the industry. Local education authorities also provide a wide range of short courses
and classes for farmers, farmworkers, horticulturists and domestic producers.
There are seven farm schools in Scotland, run by local education authorities,
providing courses—mainly residential—of from one to three years’ duration for boys
and girls of from 12 to 16 years. There is one residential agricultural school in Northern
Ireland, which provides short courses for boys and girls over 15 years of age.
Courses in land management are available at the Universities of Cambridge and
London and at the Royal Agricultural College, Cirencester.
A comprehensive review of the educational provision for agriculture was undertaken
by the Committee on Further Education for Agriculture provided by Local Education
Authorities, which reported in 1958. Plans for the implementation of the report have
been worked out by an Advisory Committee of the Ministry of Education. Steps are
being taken to extend education for agriculture and horticulture in farm institutes and
technical colleges.
FISHERIES
Although Britain’s sea fishing industry contributes only about £ per cent of the
United Kingdom’s gross national product, it is of greater importance to the economy of
Scotland. It is also by far the most important source of employment in many of the
major fishing ports. The industry falls into two main divisions, concerned respectively
with white fish and herring. White fish, such as cod, haddock, plaice, turbot and sole,
are demersal fish which live on or near the sea bed. Herring and similar species,
such as pilchard, mackerel and sprats, are pelagic fish which live in intermediate
waters or near the surface.
The white fish section of the industry is made up of three distinct groups: the
distant water, the near and middle water, and the inshore fisheries. The distant waters
are those off Iceland, Greenland and the north coast of Norway, and the Barents
Sea; the middle water grounds lie around the Faroe Islands; and the near water
grounds are those in the North Sea, the Irish Sea and in the coastal areas around
Britain. The herring fishing grounds are mainly within 60 miles of land. The inshore
waters also yield considerable quantities of shellfish.
Fishing Ports
The principal fishing ports in England and Wales are Hull, Grimsby, Fleetwood,
Milford Haven and Lowestoft for white fish, and Great Yarmouth and Lowestoft
for herring; in Scotland the chief centres for white fish are Aberdeen, Granton,
Fraserburgh, Peterhead, the Moray Firth ports, Shetland, the west coast and the
Clyde, and for herring they are Fraserburgh, Peterhead, Aberdeen, Shetland, and
Stornoway, Ullapool, Mallaig and Oban on the west coast, and Ayr and Campbeltown
on the Clyde; in Northern Ireland the herring fishing ports are Ardglass, Portavogie
and Kilkeel.
Methods of Sea Fishing
The chief methods of catching fish are by trawling, seining, lining, and ring and
drift netting. In trawling, a funnel-shaped net of heavy twine is towed along the
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
353
sea bed. In seining, a funnel-shaped net with long wings is slowly hauled towards the
vessel, the long manila warps driving the fish into the path of the net. In lining,
long lines are made up with baited hooks at regular intervals and are laid over si
considerable area; deep sea lining can be carried out on grounds too rough for trawling,
as well as on smooth grounds. A limited number of Scottish vessels are engaged in this
fishery. Lining also provides employment, in autumn, winter and early spring, for a
large number of inshore fishermen fishing for cod, whiting and haddock. Ring netting,
mainly used by Scottish fishermen, is an efficient method of encircling shoals of pelagic
fish, such as herring or pilchard. In drift net fishing, a number of finely meshed nets,
attached to each other, form a vertical curtain of netting so that fish swimming against
them are caught by the gills. The vessel drifts with the wind and tide for a few hours,
usually starting at dusk, before hauling.
Trawling is carried out in the distant, near and middle waters for all species of
demersal fish throughout the year.
Seining is also used for demersal fish all the year round; an increasing number of
English, Scottish and Northern Irish vessels depend on seining for a living, the main
areas of operation being in the North Sea, the Minches, the Firth of Clyde, and the
Irish Sea. There are about 800 Scottish and Northern Irish seiners, and about 200
operating from English ports.
The pelagic fisheries are seasonal. There is a summer fishery for herring based on
the Shetlands, the east coast ports of Scotland, and the north-east coast ports of
England, and an autumn fishery off East Anglia based on Lowestoft and Yarmouth.
Other seasonal fisheries take place off the west coast of Scotland and off Southern
Ireland. The inshore fisheries comprise a great diversity of types of vessels and methods
of capture; trawling, seining, lining, and drift and ring net fishing are employed;
in addition, there are extensive fisheries for crabs, lobsters, shrimps, mussels, cockles
and oysters, and, off Scotland and Northern Ireland, there is a fishery for ‘Norway
lobsters’ (nephrops).
The Fishing Fleet
Distant water vessels, which operate mainly from Hull, Grimsby and Fleetwood,
numbered 229 at the end of i960. They are over 140 feet and up to 220 feet in length
and make voyages of 17 to 23 days to fishing grounds in the Arctic Circle although
in the past few years there has been an increasing tendency to fish the waters bordering
Newfoundland, Labrador and Greenland. The increase in fishing in these areas is
due in part to the introduction of factory trawlers of up to about 260 feet in length
which spend up to three months at sea and fillet and freeze much of their catch
immediately it is taken. At the same date, near water vessels numbered 445; they are
under 130 feet long and most of them work near home, making voyages of three to ten
days, although some of the larger vessels fish regularly off the Faroes and seasonally as
far afield as Iceland. Middle water vessels numbered 83; they are 130 to 140 feet in
length and undertake voyages of about two weeks. Included in the near water group
are vessels engaged in drift net fishing, which usually make daily voyages. The inshore
group consists mainly of vessels of under 70 feet which are seldom at sea for longer
than two or three days and more usually make daily landings, often fishing within sight
of land.
In the United Kingdom fishing industry in i960 there were about 22,000 fishermen
in regular employment and some 6,000 were occasionally employed; 9,000 of the
former and 2,500 of the latter were from Scottish ports. In Northern Ireland there
were 500 regular fishermen.
354
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Supplies
In the year which ended on 31st December, i960, landings of fish, both demersal
and pelagic, in the United Kingdom by British fishing vessels totalled 802,000 tons
(682,000 tons of demersal fish and 120,000 tons of pelagic), valued at about £51
million. Landings at British ports by foreign vessels totalled about 123,000 tons of
fresh and frozen fish (including 60,000 tons brought direct from the fishing grounds),
valued at about £12 million. British landings of shellfish yielded ^2-08 million. Cod
accounted for 41 per cent of the total value of wet fish (i.e. fish other than shellfish)
landed by British vessels; haddock (19 per cent) and plaice (9 per cent) were the other
most important sources of earnings to the industry.
Net imports of all types of fish (fresh, frozen, salted or canned) into the United
Kingdom in i960 amounted to about 203,000 tons valued at £48 million, including
32,000 tons of canned salmon to the value of £21 million and other canned fish worth
£8-3 million.
Weekly consumption of fresh, frozen and cured fish (excluding shellfish and imported
canned fish) in the United Kingdom averaged 15,900 tons landed weight in i960.
On an edible (fillet) weight basis, United Kingdom consumption has been estimated
provisionally at 18-2 pounds per head in i960, compared with 28-7 pounds in 1948
and an annual average of 21-8 pounds from 1934-38.
Northern Ireland uses for human consumption and animal feeding two-thirds of
the catch landed there by British vessels (7,000 tons in i960) and exports the rest to
Great Britain.
Sea Fish Processing
Processing and packaging of fish—-curing, kippering, canning and quick-freezing
for consumer packs—are the subject of continuing research and development. For
example, the production of quick-frozen fish has increased about sevenfold since 1952.
With the increase in quick-freezing, new export outlets have opened up for white
fish, which in i960 accounted for about half the total British exports of fish and fish
products, valued at £6-3 million. Markets abroad for quick-frozen fish, mainly in
Europe, and the Commonwealth, have been expanding steadily, but exports of
herrings, for which Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union have been large customers,
have continued to decline.
By-products
A valuable by-product of the industry is the manufacture of fish meal for animal
food and to a much lesser extent for fertilisers. Home production of white fish meal
and herring meal has over the past three years remained constant at around 78,000
tons per annum. A large percentage of the fish meal is obtained from offal and most of
the remainder from unsold catches. Imports of fish meal of all kinds in i960 totalled
168,000 tons. The preparation of vitamin oils from fish livers is also a source of addi¬
tional earnings. The oil is extracted at sea as soon as the fish are caught, and is later
refined ashore.
Freshwater Fisheries
The main commercial freshwater catches are salmon, sea-trout and eels. In Scotland
and Northern Ireland, fixed nets along the coast and sweep or draught nets in rivers
and estuaries are used; in England, drift nets are used for catching salmon in the
sea, and draught nets and fixed traps in estuaries. In England and Wales the value of
the salmon catch is approximately £300,000 a year, in Scotland it amounts to over
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
355
£i million, and in Northern Ireland to some ,£170,000. In Northern Ireland, eels,
worth £150,000 a year, are captured by long lines and by eel nets placed in river weirs.
Fishing for sport by rod and line in rivers, lakes, streams and canals is wide¬
spread. Salmon grilse and sea-trout are the most important catches, and the fishing
rights command high rentals. There are also extensive fishings for brown trout and other
freshwater fish, e.g. roach, rudd, perch and dace; figures of catches are not available.
Distribution System
The principal inland wholesale distributing centre for fish is Billingsgate Market
in London, which handles about 350 tons a day, but other large cities also have
central fish markets. The principal method of distribution is through wholesalers,
located at the ports, who buy at the auctions and sell to inland wholesalers; the port
wholesalers prepare the fish for onward shipment. Some sixty special express fish
trains transport the catch daily from the ports to inland centres, but increasing use
is being made of road transport. Retail sales are handled by some 15,000 fishmongers
and nearly 15,000 fish friers; the latter use about a third of the landings of white fish.
Recent developments include the entry of trawler-owning companies into the
system of distribution. This process is being speeded by two factors: one is the
growing popularity of quick-frozen consumer packs, which are sold by other retail
outlets as well as by fishmongers (over 10 per cent of fish sold in i960 was estimated
to be quick-frozen); the other is the decline, from about 25,000 in 1950, in the number
of fried fish shops.
Promotion and Regulation of the Industry
Laws in Britain relating to fisheries and fish are principally directed to the following
purposes: (1) protection of supply by measures against over-fishing, such as the Sea
Fisheries Regulation Act, 1888, the Sea-Fishing Industry Act, 1933, the Sea Fish
Industry Act, 1938, and the Sea Fish Industry Act, 1959; (2) promotion of the pros¬
perity of the industry, by means of such legislation as the Herring Industry Acts,
!935 to 1957, the White Fish Industry Acts, 1951 to 1957, the Fisheries Act, 1955, the
Sea Fish Industry Act, 1959, and the White Fish and Herring Industries Act, 1961;
(3) protection of the quality of the product, under the Food and Drugs Act, 1955.
The Government departments mainly responsible for the administration of laws in
the first two categories and for the development of every branch of the fishing industry
are the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, the Department of Agriculture
and Fisheries for Scotland and the Ministry of Commerce for Northern Ireland; the
Ministry of Health and the Department of Health for Scotland are concerned with
questions of nutrition and hygiene affecting fish and fish products. The safety and
welfare of crews of fishing vessels are provided for under the Merchant Shipping Acts,
which are administered by the Ministry of Transport.
The authorities concerned with fisheries research are the Ministry of Agriculture,
Fisheries and Food, the Department of Agriculture and Fisheries for Scotland,
the Northern Ireland Ministry of Commerce, the White Fish Authority, the Herring
Industry Board, and the Development Commissioners; and, on food investigation, the
Department of Scientific and Industrial Research.
The Herring Industry Board
The Herring Industry Board was set up under the Herring Industry Act of 1935
to reorganise, develop and regulate the herring industry; subsequent amending
Acts have also been passed. The board consists of a chairman and two other members,
356
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
all part-time and independent of the industry, who are appointed jointly by the
Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, the Secretary of State for Scotland
and the Home Secretary. The board, whose activities are financed partly by Govern¬
ment grants and loans and partly by levies and licence fees, is advised by the Herring
Industry Advisory Council, consisting of representatives of the catching and shore
sections of the industry.
The functions of the board include the promotion of sales of herring, both at
home and abroad, and the provision of financial assistance for the purchase of new
boats, nets and gear, and the reconditioning of existing boats. The board is particularly
active in developing new and wider markets for herring, and applying the benefits
of technical progress to the industry, including the adoption of new fishing methods,
and the construction of new processing plants for quick-freezing and kippering. The
board buys all herring not sold for other purposes for reduction to oil and meal, and,
with the aid of Government grants, has built processing factories for this purpose.
The White Fish Authority
The White Fish Authority and the Scottish Committee of the Authority were set up
under the Sea Fish Industry Act, 1951. The function of the authority is to reorganise,
develop and regulate the white fish industry, and that of the Scottish Committee to
advise the authority about the exercise and performance of its functions in Scotland.
The authority is composed of five independent members, and the Scottish Committee
of four under the chairmanship of a member of the authority. They are appointed
jointly by the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, the Secretary of State for
Scotland and the Home Secretary. The White Fish Industry Advisory Council was
also set up under the Sea Fish Industry Act, 1951, to advise the authority about the
exercise and performance of its functions. It consists of 51 members representing the
various interests of the fishing industry.
The White Fish Authority administers Government grant and loan schemes for
the purchase of new fishing vessels and engines and loans for the purchase of nets
and gear and processing plants. Up to 31st March, 1961, £29-8 million in loans and
£11-7 million in grants were approved for these purposes by the authority. Its other
activities are financed by a levy on first-hand sales of fish.
Report of the Committee of Inquiry, 1961
A Committee of Inquiry into the Fishing Industry which was appointed in 1957
to assess, in relation to developments in fishing and the marketing of fish, the size and
pattern of an economic fishing industry in the United Kingdom, issued its report in
January 1961 (Cmnd. 1266).
Its main recommendations were that the operational subsidies at present payable
to the inshore, near and middle water fleets (and due to cease in 1963) should be
extended to the distant water fleet, and that the industry should be assured of their
continuance, at a minimum level, for a period of ten years. Grants and loans for the
construction and modernisation of fishing vessels, also limited at present to the inshore,
near and middle water fleets, should be continued and extended to the distant water
fleet, though no assurance should be given of continuance for a definite period. The
committee also recommended that a single Sea Fisheries Authority should be set
up in place of the present White Fish Authority and Herring Industry Board. Increased
research and improvements in handling and marketing arrangements were also
recommended.
Government proposals, based on some of these recommendations, were published
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY 357
as a White Paper {Cmnd. 1453) in August 1961. Legislation to implement them is to
be introduced as soon as possible.
White Fish and Herring Subsidies
Since 1950 a Government subsidy has been paid to the owners of near and middle
water and inshore vessels fishing for white fish. This subsidy, which varies according
to the length and the method of propulsion of the vessel, is paid at the rate of so much
per day at sea for the larger vessels and at so much per stone of fish landed from
small boats. In 1960-61 the total sum expended in this way amounted to £2-1 million.
In 1957 the subsidy was extended to cover herring. Conditions and rates are broadly
the same as for the white fish subsidy. The amount expended in 1960-61 totalled
£363,000.
Under the Sea Fish Industry Act, 1959, which came into operation in December
1959, the provision available under the White Fish and Herring Industries Acts of
1953 and 1957 for grants towards the cost of new vessels and engines, was increased
from £9 million to £14 million and the amount available for white fish and herring
subsidies was increased from £19 million to £24 million. The Act also included
provisions to extend the powers of the fisheries ministers to enable the United Kingdom
to play its full part in carrying out internationally agreed measures for the conservation
of fish stocks. The White Fish and Herring Industries Act, 1961, empowered the
ministers to increase the white fish and herring subsidies from time to time by not
more than £3 million on each occasion, and to pay the white fish subsidy to vessels
over 140 feet in length and to other vessels voyaging to distant waters.
To enable the White Fish Authority to continue to make loans to the fishing industry,
the Act also increased the maximum amount outstanding from the authority to the
Exchequer from £20 million to £25 million.
Whaling
Whaling is mainly conducted by expeditions, each consisting of a large floating
factory ship accompanied by its attendant whale catchers and tankers, which operate
mainly in the Antarctic Ocean. It is regulated by the International Whaling Commission,
set up under the International Whaling Convention of 1946, which controls the dates
of the season and has powers to set a limit on the Antarctic catch of whales. The
offices of the commission are in London.
At present the United Kingdom industry ranks fourth in size, after those of Japan,
Norway and the USSR, sending two expeditions to the Antarctic each year. Whaling
is also undertaken from land stations on South Georgia, a British island in the South
Atlantic. The volume of whale oil obtained by the British pelagic expeditions in the
1960-61 season amounted to about 197,000 barrels.
FORESTRY
The total woodland area of Great Britain is more than 4 million acres, or over
7 per cent of the total land area. Except for the period of the two world wars when, of
necessity, much over-felling took place, home woodlands have not been in a position
to make more than a small contribution to the nation’s timber requirements. At
present, Great Britain imports about 85 per cent of its needs of timber and wood
products. The Government is, however, devoting continuous effort through the
Forestry Commission to the long-term task of increasing the country s timber resources.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
358
Forest Areas
On 30th September, i960, the area of woodland in blocks of one acre and over in
extent was estimated to be 4,119,000 acres, of which about half were in England,
about two-fifths in Scotland and the rest in Wales. The greatest density of woodland
in Great Britain occurs in north, east and central Scotland and in the southern counties
of England, although afforestation is now increasing the importance of forestry in
many counties which were not previously heavily wooded. The classification of forest
area showing type and ownership in i960 is given in Table 24.
TABLE 24
Classification of Forest Area in Great Britain 1960
Thousands of acres
Forest Type
Forestry
Com¬
mission
woodlands
Private
woodlands
(a)
Total
Percentage
of total
forest
area
Mainly coniferous high forest ..
Mainly broadleaved high forest..
Coppice and coppice with standards
Unproductive woodlands
Totals
1,150
133
28
91
655
735
298
1,029
1,805
868
326
1,120
1,402
2,717
4,119
44
21
8
27
100
Percentage of total forest area
34
66
100
Source: Forestry Commission.
(a) Forest owned by private individuals and bodies; in this classification a small area of com¬
munal forest is included, i.e. forest owned by public bodies such as local authorities and water
supply undertakings.
The high proportion of unproductive woodland, i.e. scrub and areas where trees
have been felled and partially felled, is largely a legacy of two wars, when many woods
were felled to meet home demands for timber. Since 1945 the area of this unproductive
category has been reduced by about 250,000 acres, but the large area which remains
gives some indication of the problem of rehabilitation which still lies ahead.
The most common of the coniferous tree species in Great Britain is probably the
Scots pine, but such trees as the Sitka and Norway spruce are also plentiful. Of the
broadleaved species, the most common tree is the oak, and there are considerable
numbers of beech, ash, birch, sycamore and elm. The climate and soil of Great Britain
are such that the growth of timber which can be obtained under systematic manage¬
ment compares most favourably with that achieved in other European countries.
Increased Use of Timber
From the early Middle Ages there was a continuous process of deforestation in
Great Britain. Woodlands were cleared for agriculture, and timber was used for a
variety of domestic and industrial purposes, for instance, as charcoal in iron-smelting,
for fuel, housebuilding, domestic and agricultural equipment, and shipbuilding.
Following the Industrial Revolution, cheap and easily workable timber began to be
required in ever-increasing amounts for a variety of new industrial uses, which could
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
359
only be met from imported supplies, and by 1914 home woodlands provided only
7 per cent of requirements. The sudden demands of the first world war, however,
brought about a realisation of the need for a national forest policy.
The Forestry Commission and Forestry Policy
In 1919 the Forestry Act was passed establishing the Forestry Commission as the
national forest authority, with the general duty of promoting the interests of forestry,
the development of afforestation and the production and supply of timber in Great
Britain. The commission consists of a chairman and not more than nine commissioners
who are appointed by the Crown; in exercising their functions, they are required to
comply with such directions as may be given to them by the Minister of Agriculture,
Fisheries and Food and the Secretary of State for Scotland. There is continual contact
between the commission’s staff and private owners of woodland and the staff gives
advice, free of charge, on silvicultural and management problems; substantial grants
for planting and other forestry activities are paid to woodland owners.
In the years before the second world war, some progress was made by the com¬
mission in increasing the area under forest. During the war, however, extensive felling
was necessary to replace imports of timber. In i943> Forestry Commissioners
recommended, in their report on post-war forestry policy, that the nation should aim
at having at least 5 million acres of productive forest, of which 2 million acres, mostly
in private ownership, would accrue from the rehabilitation of existing woodlands and
3 million acres from the afforestation of bare land by the Forestry Commission. The
acreage of woodland proposed would, it was estimated, produce ultimately a volume
of timber equivalent to about one-third of the country’s needs. On this basis, forestry
would become a major industry which, in addition to its economic value, would help
to arrest the depopulation of rural areas.
In 1958, after reviewing forestry policy, the Government decided that the planting
programme of the Forestry Commission for the five-year period 1959 *° I9^3 should
be about 300,000 acres and for the period 1964 to 1968, by which time the Forestry
Commission’s existing plantations would begin to come into full production, about
235,000 acres.
Work of the Forestry Commission
The Forestry Commission owns over 500 forests, totalling 1,600,000 acres of forest
land, well distributed over England, Scotland and Wales. All these forests are covered
by management plans, which provide for such work as planting, road construction,
thinning and fire protection.
Nearly half of the Forestry Commission’s new planting is being carried out in
Scotland, about a quarter of it in the Highland counties. The poorer types of land
are being used, such as sour, peaty soil which is unsuitable for other agricultural
purposes, and has become suitable for forestry only as a result of recent advances
in deep ploughing. Sand dunes are also used; on the southern shore of the Moray
Firth, Culbin Forest now covers 7>70° Rcres laud which had been unproductive
for centuries. Similarly, in Wales, 1,900 acres of sand dunes at Newborough, Anglesey,
and nearly 2,400 acres at Pembrey, Carmarthenshire, are being successfully planted.
Over 14,600 people are employed on the staff of the commission, including 1,760
forest officers, foresters, land agents and engineers. The commission has acquired or
built 4,600 houses and nearly 6,300 miles of road.
Large-scale planting expands opportunities for employment, not only for forest
workers but for the communities in which they live. This expansion is taking place
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
360
particularly in the remote uplands where formerly there was a steady exodus of young
people to the towns. In these places the work of the commission, which includes the
establishment of completely new villages, has often reversed this trend and increased
the proportion of young people in the communities.
Many of the commission’s staff combine forestry and farming. Since 1919 the com¬
mission has established over 1,000 ‘forest workers’ holdings’, each of a few acres, where
the tenant agrees to do a minimum of 150 days’ work each year in the forest.
Integration of forestry and agriculture is practised in marginal hill areas. An
example of this is the ‘Strathoykell’ scheme which is proceeding in adjoining sheep¬
farming areas in Ross and Sutherland, in Scotland. In this area a substantial acreage
has been planted by the Forestry Commission, houses have been built, grant-aided farm
improvements have been made, and stocks of sheep and cattle have been increased.
Finance
The Forestry Fund was established by the Forestry Act, 1919; from it is paid all
the expenditure of the Forestry Commissioners and into it are paid their receipts
from sales of produce, rentals and other sources, together with the amounts voted
annually by Parliament. From 1920 to i960, net grants from Parliament totalled £118-5
million and receipts from other sources £38-5 million. Expenditure during these years
totalled £156-7 million. In the year ended 30th September, i960, expenditure
amounted to £13-1 million, of which nearly £1-2 million represented various grants
to private forestry.
Private Forestry
Privately owned woods in i960 comprised 66 per cent of the total forest area in
Great Britain (as shown in Table 24), and contain most of the mature and semi-
mature timber. The size of woodlands in individual ownership ranges from a few
acres to several thousand acres, and a high proportion of the privately owned woodland
area belongs to small owners (i.e. owners of woods of up to about 250 acres).
Impetus has been given to the effective management of private woodlands by the
introduction of the Dedication of Woodlands Scheme under the Forestry Act, 1947.
Under this scheme, owners are invited to put their land permanently to timber
production and to manage their woods in accordance with a plan agreed with the
Forestry Commission, in return for the provision of planting and management grants
and technical assistance. By September i960 the total area dedicated was 622,000
acres. In addition, there are the woodlands covered by the Approved Woodlands
Scheme in which a planting grant, but no management grant, is made; and these
bring the total area managed under an agreed plan to over 776,000 acres. Woodland
owners are represented, in their relations with the Forestry Commission, by the
Forestry Committee of Great Britain, which co-ordinates the work of two associations
of woodland owners, the Timber Growers’ Organisation (for owners in England and
Wales) and the Scottish Woodland Owners’ Association.
The Forestry Commissioners have encouraged the development of co-operative
forestry schemes and have made loans available. The co-operative societies provide
for landowners and farmers the services of skilled staff, centralised purchasing facilities,
and a central agency for the disposal of forest produce. The commission also co-operates
with the principal forestry societies, such as the Royal Forestry Society of England
and Wales and the Royal Scottish Forestry Society, in disseminating technical
knowledge.
In 1959 the Home Grown Timber Marketing Corporation was established by the
timber merchants to promote the use of home grown timber.
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
361
Consultative Machinery
The Forestry Act, 1945, established national committees for England, Scotland
and Wales, composed partly of forestry commissioners and partly of persons outside
the commission. These committees, working directly under the authority of the com¬
missioners, supervise certain aspects of the commission’s work, including particularly
the acquisition and management of land and the promotion of private forestry; in
the latter task they are required to maintain direct contact with the regional advisory
committees which have been set up in each of the commission’s conservancies to
provide a link with all those in the conservancy who are interested in forestry.
Other bodies have been set up to provide for consultation on the marketing and
utilisation of home grown timber. The Home Grown Timber Advisory Committee,
established by the Forestry Commissioners in 1939, consists of representatives of the
Forestry Commission, the Board of Trade and associations of landowners and timber
merchants. In 1949 the Forestry Commissioners set up the Advisory Committee on
Utilisation of Home Grown Timber to advise landowners and to undertake research
into problems connected with the marketing of timber from the commission’s own
forests. A voluntary scheme was agreed upon in 1961 for consultation on proposals
for afforestation of land within National Parks (see p. 196) that has not previously been
planted with trees. The Forestry Commission agreed, and the Timber Growers’
Organisation and the Country Landowners’ Association undertook to advise their
members, to submit such proposals to the park planning authorities.
Forestry Education and Research
The Forestry Commission maintains four forester training schools: in England, at
Parkend in the Forest of Dean, Gloucestershire; in Wales, near Bettws-y-Coed in
Caernarvonshire; and in Scotland at Benmore, Argyllshire, and Faskally, near Pitlochry
in Perthshire. Northerwood House in the New Forest, Hampshire, is the commission’s
educational centre, and is used for practical courses for university students, land-
owners and agents, planning officers, school teachers and others connected with, or
interested in, forestry.
Higher education in forestry is provided at several universities; a proportion of
suitable graduates is recruited by the commission as forest officers.
The commission’s forest research station at Alice Holt Lodge, near Farnham,
Surrey, was opened in 1946. Expenditure on research work at this station and in
experimental areas in many forests in Great Britain amounted to £363,000 in i960.
The commission makes grants for special forestry research work to various institutions
and to university departments including the Imperial Forestry Institute at Oxford,
which is also financed by the University, the Colonial Office, and Colonial Govern¬
ments. Research into the qualities of home-grown timber is carried out by the Forest
Products Research Laboratory at Princes Risborough, Bucks, which is one of the
establishments of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research, and also by
grant-aided research associations.
The Forestry Commission has played a leading part in the Commonwealth Forestry
Conference since its first meeting in 1920; the seventh meeting was held in Australia
and New Zealand in 1957.
Forestry in Northern Ireland
When the Government of Northern Ireland was formed in 1922, the new Ministry
of Agriculture became the forest authority working with similar powers and duties
to those conferred on the Forestry Commission by the Forestry Act, 1919. At that
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
362
time the ministry took over some 4,000 acres for afforestation, of which 700 acres
had been planted.
Forest policy in Northern Ireland is now implemented by the Forestry Act (Northern
Ireland), 1953, which replaced earlier legislation. This Act provides the ministry
with powers to acquire and manage land, and to give financial and technical assistance
for private planting. It introduced measures for the protection of all woodlands,
whether owned by the State or privately owned, against destruction by over-cutting,
fire or depredation by animals.
The State forest area has grown steadily and at a greatly accelerated pace since the
end of the second world war. By 1961 over 105,000 acres had been acquired, of
which nearly 60,000 acres had been planted. The present afforestation programme
provides for the creation, as soon as possible, of an area of 150,000 acres of productive
State forest. To reach this objective, a minimum annual planting rate of 5,000 acres
has been set.
Financial provision is made by sums voted annually by Parliament and receipts
from forest produce, rentals and other sources. From 1922 to 1961 expenditure
amounted to about £8 million, and receipts, other than parliamentary grants, were
in the region of £2-75 million. Output and employment are growing steadily. About
1,750 people are employed in field labour and ancillary work. The area of exploitable
private woodlands is at present about 27,000 acres, and private planting, which is
gaining impetus, is assisted by schemes for the supply at a low cost of young trees
from the ministry’s nurseries, by grants towards the cost of the establishment of new
plantations, and by free technical advice.
XII. TRANSPORT AND
COMMUNICATIONS
Inland and overseas transport and communications employed about 7-3 per cent of
the total labour force in the United Kingdom at the end of May i960. Of the 1,666,700
persons so occupied, 28 per cent were engaged in road passenger transport and road
haulage contracting, 27 per cent in railways and 19 per cent in postal services and
telecommunications. Sea and air transport absorbed respectively 10 per cent and
something less than 3 per cent. Nine per cent were occupied in port and inland water
transport, and 4 per cent in miscellaneous transport services and storage.
Transport and communications contribute nearly 8 per cent to the gross national
product and 15 per cent to gross fixed capital formation at current prices.
SHIPPING
About 16 per cent of the world’s shipping tonnage of 100 gross tons and over is
registered in the United Kingdom, which has the largest merchant marine in active
employment. If the tonnage in the United States reserve fleet and the tonnage
employed on the Great Lakes is excluded, the United Kingdom’s proportion of world
shipping tonnage is about 19 per cent. Although the balance of payments for shipping
services has been negative since 1959 (it was minus £25 million in i960), shipping still
makes one of the largest contributions to total earnings of foreign exchange by the United
Kingdom. In i960 freights, charter receipts and passage money amounted to £570
million, or 27 per cent of the total value of invisible exports. In recent years freight
carried in cross-trade amounted to nearly two-thirds of total shipping earnings. The
proportion of the United Kingdom’s own sea-borne trade carried in British ships is
not known exactly, but is believed to amount to about 50 per cent.
THE MERCHANT FLEET
A total of 21-i million gross tons of merchant shipping (steam and motor vessels of
100 gross tons and over) was registered in the United Kingdom at 30th June, i960,
the largest tonnage ever recorded.
Recent trends in the composition of the merchant fleet have been the reduction
of tramp tonnage, the growth of tanker tonnage, the increasing size of tankers, and the
commissioning of vessels specially built to carry ore, sugar, and other commodities in
bulk. Including Admiralty and other tankers, the United Kingdom accounts for over
7 million gross tons or 17 per cent of the world’s total tanker tonnage.
Modernisation, Age and Size
From 1945 to the end of 1959 orders for new ships placed in United Kingdom yards
by British owners totalled nearly 15 million gross tons, of an aggregate value of over
£1,600 million. As a result, 50 per cent of the total gross tonnage in i960 was less than
ten years old, compared with 43 per cent in 1955. The corresponding figures for tankers
were 67 per cent in i960 and 58 per cent in 1955- There has been a tendency for
replacements to be larger as big ships are more economical to run; between 1955 and
i960 the average size of all ships (over 500 gross tons) increased from 5,200 to 6,000
tons, and that of tankers (over 500 gross tons) from 8,400 to 10,400 gross tons.
364
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
In i960 there were four liners of 30,000 gross tons and over operating on trans¬
atlantic passenger services: namely, the Queen Elizabeth (83,673 g.t.), the Queen Mary
(81,237 g.t.), the Mauretania (35,673 g.t.), and the Caronia (34,173 g.t.). Proposals
made by the Cunard Company to replace the Queen Mary, which was launched in 1934,
were considered by a small committee set up by the Government; in June i960 it
recommended that a 75,000 ton liner to maintain British express passenger services
across the Atlantic should be built with Government assistance in the form of a
substantial loan and in October i960 the Government decided to make £18 million
available to the company for this purpose. An extensive programme of replacement of
their fleets of passenger liners is being carried out by other shipping lines, and the two
largest liners to be built in Britain since 1939, the Oriana (42,000 g.t.), which was
completed in i960, and the Canberra (45,000 g.t.) came into service in i960 and 1961
on the services from Britain to Australia and across the Pacific to North America. In
June i960 there were eight tankers of 40,000 d.w.t. and over owned and registered in
the United Kingdom. The Serenia, of 65,000 d.w.t., launched in i960, is the largest
tanker built in a British shipyard to date.
Propulsion
The amount of coal-fired tonnage was somewhat less than 600,000 gross tons in
i960 and continues to fall. Oil has taken the place of coal in steamships, while steam
has continued to give place to the diesel engine, nearly 49 per cent of all tonnage being
diesel-driven in i960. The first new ocean-going cargo ship to be powered by free
piston engines was launched on Clydeside in January 1959. The Ministry of Transport,
with the co-operation of shipowning, shipbuilding and marine engineering industries,
is investigating the possibility of applying nuclear propulsion to merchant ships.
Employment of Shipping
In June i960, 17-5 million gross tons of trading vessels of 100 gross tons and over
were owned and registered in the United Kingdom.1 The usual employment of this
fleet has been analysed by the United Kingdom Chamber of Shipping as follows:
8-4 million gross tons were employed as ocean-going passenger and cargo liners;
2-8 million gross tons as ocean-going tramps; 5*3 million gross tons as ocean-going
tankers; and i-o million gross tons as coastal and home trade.
SHIPOWNERS
About half of British-owned shipping registered in the United Kingdom consists
of ocean-going passenger-cargo and cargo liners, mostly the latter. Practically all
these ships are owned by large liner companies or groups of liner companies. Many
of them operate wide networks of scheduled freight and passenger services which,
between them, cover every ocean. The 2-8 million gross tons of ocean-going tramp
ships are operated by a large number of private owners, some of them having only a
small number of ships and some with only one ship.
According to a survey published in 1959, the British shipping industry was composed
of some 270 companies, about half the tonnage being owned by nine or ten main
groups controlling over fifty companies. The many world-famous British shipping
lines operating services on international routes include: the Cunard, to North
1 The remaining tonnage included fishing vessels, tugs, river and estuary craft, Admiralty
vessels (mostly tankers) not usually engaged in the commercial carriage of cargo, and shipping
registered in the United Kingdom but owned in other Commonwealth countries (including
over 600,000 gross tons of tankers).
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
America; the Royal Mail, to South America; the Blue Funnel, to Australia and the
Far East; the Peninsular and Oriental (P. and O.) and the British India lines, to India
and Australia; the Orient line to Australia; the Union Castle, to South Africa; Elder
Dempster, to West Africa; Furness Withy, to North America and the West Indies;
the New Zealand line to North America, Australia and New Zealand; and Shaw Savill
and Albion, to Australia.
Over two-thirds of the total United Kingdom tanker fleet belongs to the oil com¬
panies, although there are a few important independent United Kingdom tanker¬
owning companies. A new type of specialised bulk carrier—the ore-carrier—is in use
on a substantial scale; some of the ore-carriers are partly owned by companies in the
steel industry, but are managed and operated by shipping companies.
Unlike shipowning companies in many countries, the United Kingdom ship¬
owners, until the recent decision to aid the Cunard Company (see p. 364) received no
subsidies or other direct financial assistance from the Government. The Government
has, however, recognised for some years that the United Kingdom shipping industry
is faced with severe competition in a world market (especially from ships sailing under
‘flags of convenience’ with small tax liabilities) and that the industry has found it
increasingly difficult to build up finance for the replacement of ships. In 1956 the
shipping industry was the only industry allowed to retain the 20 per cent investment
allowance in respect of taxation which was withdrawn from industry generally
(but restored in 1959). The allowance was raised to 40 per cent in 1957 for capital
expenditure on the construction of new ships.
SHIPPING ORGANISATIONS
The main organisations concerned with the activities, interests and common
problems of the industry are as follows:
The Society of Lloyd's
This body, which was founded in the late seventeenth century, is an incorporated
society of underwriters whose main business is marine insurance (see p. 420).
Lloyd's Register of Shipping
Lloyd’s Register is an organisation (distinct from the Society of Lloyd’s) which
surveys and classifies ships with particular regard to their safety and operational
efficiency. It will accept responsibility for surveying and giving technical advice on
vessels of all flags from the initial stages of building, at regular intervals during their
service, and after casualties. A satisfactory Lloyd’s classification is a guarantee to an
underwriter that he may accept the risk of a vessel, and this forms a strong link between
the Register and the Society of Lloyd’s.
Shipowners' Organisations
The representative bodies speaking for shipowners generally (excluding, for the
most part, owners of fishing vessels) are the Chamber of Shipping and the Liverpool
Steamship Owners' Association. The General Council of British Shipping co-ordinates
the views of the shipping industry as a whole on all matters of major policy.
There are a number of local associations of shipowners centred around the main
port areas, for example, the Bristol Steamship Owners' Association, the London General
Shipowners' Society, and the North of England Shipowners' Association. Others represent
companies specialising in a particular trade or type of cargo.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
366
Employers’ Organisations
The Shipping Federation and the Employers’ Association of the Port of Liverpool
are the employers’ organisations concerned with labour relations and the regula¬
tion of employment throughout the Merchant Navy. They are responsible for the
administration of the Merchant Navy Established Service Scheme, under which
shipowners engaging crews for ships of 200 gross tons and above engage them through
the Merchant Navy Establishment Administration unless they are prepared to offer
two-year Company Service contracts. The Shipping Federation is also responsible
for the day-to-day operation of the National Sea Training Schools set up for the
purpose of training ratings for the deck and catering departments and as firemen.
Seafarers’ Organisations
Shipmasters are represented by the Mercantile Marine Service Association', navi¬
gating officers, engineer officers, apprentices, cadets, pursers and ships’ surgeons by
the Merchant Navy and Airline Officers’ Association', and radio officers by the Radio
Officers’ Union. Some uncertificated engineer officers are represented by the Amalga¬
mated Engineering Union. The interests of the deck, engine-room and catering ratings
are represented by the National Union of Seamen.
The National Maritime Board
The National Maritime Board is composed of equal numbers of representatives
of the shipowners and seafarers and is responsible for all negotiations of wages and
conditions of service in the Merchant Navy, although, except by special arrangement,
National Maritime Board agreements do not apply to vessels of under 200 gross tons,
or to certain other ships, including tugs and salvage vessels. Detailed working of the
board is carried on by a number of ‘panels’ representing the various interests of those
forming the seafarers’ part of the board.
Conferences
British shipping companies operating liners have associated with each other and
with the companies of other countries operating on the same routes in a series of
‘conferences’ designed to secure standardisation and stability of rates, and to maintain
frequency and regularity of services. The essential principle of a conference is the
establishment of a common tariff of freight rates or passenger fares from each port of
departure. Each conference meets from time to time to review and revise existing rates,
or to compile new ones. Some of the conferences are connected by rate agreements, or
have joined together to form wider groupings.
The Baltic Exchange
The Baltic Mercantile and Shipping Exchange, which originated in one of London’s
seventeenth-century coffee houses, is the world’s largest market for the chartering of
ships of all nationalities. Shipbrokers and merchants’ representatives meet here to
arrange the chartering of ships, or space in ships, for the carriage of all kinds of goods
to and from all parts of the world.
RELATIONS WITH THE GOVERNMENT
The Ministry of Transport is the Government department responsible for most
matters connected with merchant shipping. Under the Merchant Shipping Act of
1894 and subsequent legislation it administers many regulations for marine safety and
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
welfare, for instance: certifying the load-line (or Plimsoll line) that ensures that a ship
is not overloaded; ensuring that standards of safety are observed in ship construction;
ensuring the provision of adequate life-saving, fire-fighting and radio equipment;
and dealing with the discipline, professional standards, health and accommodation of
seamen. Most of the work which these responsibilities entail is carried out by the
officers of the Marine Survey and Mercantile Marine at the ports. There is also a
Registrar-General of Shipping and Seamen in whose office at Cardiff a complete
record of all British ships and seamen is kept. The ministry is represented on the
Merchant Navy Welfare Board (see p. 368) and on the Merchant Navy Training
Board (see p. 368). The ministry fosters the development and use of modern naviga¬
tional aids.
The ministry is responsible for transporting by sea the men and materials of the
armed forces and looks after ships that it owns or has chartered. It is concerned with
general shipping policy and the strategic implications of the Merchant Navy; and it is
also the sponsoring department for the shipbuilding, ship repairing and marine
engineering industries.
Abroad, certain parts of the Merchant Shipping Acts, in particular those provisions
dealing with the engagement and discharge of crews outside the United Kingdom,
are administered by H.M. Consuls and by officers of the Commonwealth and
Colonial Governments.
The United Kingdom is a party to the International Convention for the Prevention
of the Pollution of the Sea by Oil which came into force in 1958. The nations which
have ratified this convention agree to prohibit their national fleets from discharging
oil within 50 miles of any coast and also in extensive areas of the Atlantic Ocean and
the North Sea. British ships registered in the United Kingdom were already prohibited
from discharging oil within a wide zone of the sea around the United Kingdom
under the Oil in Navigable Waters Act, 1955, which is administered by the Ministry
of Transport. The discharge of oil from any source into United Kingdom territorial
waters and harbours was first prohibited in 1922.
Lighthouses, Pilotage and Rescue
The Ministry of Transport administers the Coastguard Service. This is primarily
a life-saving organisation which keeps watch at danger points around the coast for
vessels in distress and renders assistance either by rocket life-saving apparatus or by
informing other authorities who may be able to give help. There is close liaison
between the Coastguard Service and the Royal National Lifeboat Institution. The latter
maintains lifeboats around the coast of the United Kingdom; it is supported entirely
by voluntary subscriptions, and depends largely for its operation on voluntary workers.
From its foundation in 1824 to the end of i960, the Royal National Lifeboat Institution
rescued 82,944 people- Lifeboats were launched 714 times in i960, and rescued 367
people; on nearly 850 occasions in the twelve months to March 1961, life-saving
action was taken by the Coastguard Service.
The general lighthouse authority for England and Wales, the Channel Islands
and Gibraltar is the Corporation of Trinity House, which received its first Royal
Charter in the sixteenth century and is administered by a Board of ten Elder Brethren
elected from the Royal Navy and the Merchant Navy. It is also the chief pilotage
authority in the United Kingdom, licensing some 650 pilots in 41 districts in England
and Wales, including London. In some cases the harbour authority is the pilotage
authority. Lighthouses in Scotland and Ireland are the responsibility respectively of
the Commissioners of Northern Lighthouses and the Commissioners of Irish Lights.
368
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The Ministry of Transport also has certain responsibilities in connection with light¬
houses and pilotage.
THE MERCHANT NAVY
The number of masters, officers and men serving in December i960 in British ships
on articles of agreement opened or closed in the United Kingdom was about 145,000.
Training
Nautical training in the United Kingdom has two distinct objectives: first, to give
intending entrants into the Merchant Navy an introductory training before going
to sea—this is commonly known as ‘pre-sea training’—and secondly, to prepare
those who have already performed the requisite sea-service, qualifying them for
admission to the examinations, for the various statutory and other certificates granted
by the Ministry of Transport. Pre-sea training is not compulsory for those who go to
sea as apprentices or cadets but most shipping companies will, in practice, accept
only those who have undergone such a course. There are a number of residential and
non-residential training establishments.
The Merchant Navy Training Board promotes the instruction and studies at sea
of apprentices and cadets who are preparing for their examinations for certificates
of competency as second mate.
The Ministry of Transport holds examinations for, and issues certificates of com¬
petency to, ships’ officers as master, first mate and second mate of foreign-going
ships, or master and mate of home trade ships and as first-class engineer and second-
class engineer. Officers may not normally serve on board ships in these grades unless
they hold the appropriate, or a higher, certificate.
Radio officers are required to hold certificates of competency in radio telegraphy
issued by the Postmaster General on the results of an open examination.
A seaman may not be rated as A.B. (Able Seaman) in United Kingdom registered
ships unless he holds a certificate of competency as A.B., granted by the Ministry
of Transport, or an equivalent certificate. To obtain this certificate a seaman must,
among other qualifications, have served three years at sea on deck, have obtained a
certificate of proficiency as lifeboatman and have passed a qualifying examination.
Seamen qualify by seniority for promotion to the rating of petty officer. Service
as a deck rating qualifies for the purpose of admission to the examination for a second
mate’s certificate.
Conditions of Employment and Welfare
Wages and conditions of employment are negotiated by the National Maritime
Board. Minimum wages and holidays with pay are guaranteed for both officers and
ratings. Moreover, the Merchant Navy Established Service Scheme, introduced by
the board in 1947, has removed a great deal of the uncertainty formerly associated
with a seafaring life. Officers and men can now take two-year contracts, not only with
individual shipping companies but with the industry as a whole, and get special
benefits, in addition to the normal unemployment insurance benefit, when they are
ashore between voyages.
The Merchant Navy Welfare Board, on which are represented officers’ and seamen’s
unions and associations, shipowners, voluntary societies, the Ministries of Transport,
Labour, and Pensions and National Insurance, and the Colonial Office, has been
responsible since 1948 for the control and co-ordination of the welfare services for
merchant seamen in the United Kingdom and of British merchant seamen abroad.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
369
PORTS
There are over 300 ports in the United Kingdom. The eleven largest are shown
in Table 25, which lists them in order of tonnage of shipping arriving and departing
and does not relate to the volume of cargo handled. Most ports, other than those
owned by the British Transport Commission, are represented on the Dock and Harbour
Authorities' Association, formed in 1917 to represent the common interests of port
authorities in their relations with Government, shipowners and traders.
The Port of London, with 69 miles of waterway, over 2,000 acres of dock estate
and 43 miles of quays, is the largest port in the Commonwealth, and with New York
and Rotterdam is one of the three largest ports in the world. Goods of every kind, from
meat to marble, from plywood to perfume, pass through the docks; in the year which
ended on 31st March, i960, 57 million tons of cargo were handled. Imports are distri¬
buted all over the United Kingdom, though the port supplies, primarily, Greater
London and the home counties. In May 1959 the Thames Navigation Service,
installed at a cost of nearly £80,000, was opened at Gravesend to assist, by means of
radar and radio-telephony, ships’ masters entering the river Thames.
Liverpool is the second largest port and the major export cargo outlet of the United
Kingdom. The port handles one-fifth of Britain’s grain imports, and has one of the
largest grain-handling plants in Europe. There are tobacco warehouses with a capacity
of 70,000 casks, and for wool imports, a warehouse with a capacity of 30,000 bales.
TABLE 25
United Kingdom Port Arrivals and Departures, 1960
(With Cargo and in Ballast)
Thousand tons net
Port
London
Southampton . .
Liverpool
Glasgow
Manchester (including Runcorn)
Belfast
Tyne ports
Bristol
Hull ..
Middlesbrough
Swansea
Total
Total all Ports
Foreign Trade
67,707
40,128
34,670
13,132
12,413
3,351
7,684
8,932
9,136
8,452
7,191
212,796
286,422
Coasting Trade
20,834
11,922
7,352
3,971
3,487
11,967
7,552
3,548
2,577
2,838
2,889
78,937
150,257
Total
88,541
52,050
42,022
17,103
15,900
15,318
15,236
12,480
11,713
11,290
10,080
291,733
436,679
Source: Board of Trade Journal.
Manchester is an inland port, access to which is by the Manchester Ship Canal.
Petroleum is both the main import and the main export. At Eastham is the largest oil
dock in the United Kingdom, covering 19 acres.
3?o
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Southampton, largest of the Channel ports, is the chief port for ocean passenger
traffic, and the principal port for imports of deciduous and citrus fruits. Southampton’s
value as a port is enhanced by its double tides and its easy access to London. A
considerable volume of oil for the refinery at Fawley (see p. 281) is handled.
Newcastle upon Tyne and the other Tyne ports serve the industrial north-east of
England and comprise the most important coal-shipping and largest ship repairing
centre in the country.
Hull, on the Humber estuary, serves particularly the industrial centres of Yorkshire
and the Midlands, and is one of the largest white fish ports in the world.
Middlesbrough is the largest port in Britain for iron-ore imports, and exports mainly
steel and engineering products.
Swansea has the largest trade of the group of ports serving South Wales. As well
as coal, Swansea exports the steel and tinplate manufactured in its immediate
neighbourhood. Oil traffic for local refineries is increasing.
Bristol and nearby Avonmouth serve the industrial Midlands as well as the city of
Bristol itself, and also have a large coastal trade. About 7 million tons of cargo are
handled annually, including one-third of Britain’s banana imports and a quarter of its
tobacco imports. There are also extensive oil installations.
Glasgow, the principal Scottish port, serves as an entrepot centre for the industrial
area of central Scotland, and is the principal outlet for exports of Scotch whisky.
Leith is the port of the city of Edinburgh. The chief import is grain and the main
export coal from the Lothian coalfields.
Belfast is the principal port of Northern Ireland and handles the main traffic across
the Irish Sea.
Ownership
The ports, in some cases docks only, previously owned by the main-line railway
companies are now under public ownership and are at present administered by the
British Transport Commission (see p. 372). The commission owns and manages,
through British Transport Docks Division, some 30 per cent of Britain’s dock accom¬
modation, with a total of over half a million feet of quays. A few of the commission’s
ports are docks developed by former canal undertakings, such as the Aire and Calder
Navigation which developed Goole. The rest are those formerly owned by the railways.
In some cases—e.g. at Southampton and Middlesbrough—the railways owned the
main docks in ports where the statutory authority was a harbour board. In other cases
—e.g. at Grangemouth, Garston and Grimsby—the port was largely developed by
the railway company which was itself the statutory harbour authority. Some railway-
owned ports were, and still are, mainly used for the railways’ cross-Channel services:
Folkestone, Harwich, Newhaven, Fishguard, Holyhead, and Heysham are in this
category. Among other ports owned by the commission are Hull, Swansea, Newport,
and Cardiff. In i960 shipping arrivals and departures at the commission’s docks,
harbours and wharves, at which 18,000 were employed at the end of that year, totalled
over 106 million net tons, and the total cargo handled was about 56 million tons.
According to the policy for reorganisation of nationalised transport undertakings
announced by the Government in December i960 (see p. 373), the administration of
ports and docks will be transferred to a new Statutory Docks Board.
Other ports are controlled by a public trust on which are represented users of the
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
371
port (such as shippers, importers and shipping companies) and other bodies, such
as local authorities. Examples are London (controlled by the Port of London Authority),
Liverpool (Mersey Docks and Harbour Board), Belfast (Belfast Harbour Commis¬
sioners), Glasgow (Clyde Navigation Trust) and the Tyne ports (Tyne Improvement
Commission); the Port of London Authority has 28 members, nominated by Govern¬
ment departments, local authorities, port users and the Corporation of Trinity House.
A few ports—Bristol is the most important example—are owned by the town or city
council and controlled entirely by a committee of the council. Finally, there are about
100 ports which are privately owned. Manchester is the only major port so owned—
by the Manchester Ship Canal Company—and here the Manchester City Council
exercises considerable control by appointing 11 of the company’s 21 directors.
The powers and responsibilities of the port authorities are, in the main, set down
in private Acts of Parliament. A model set of clauses dealing with many of the details
is set out in the Harbours, Docks and Piers Act, 1847.
Labour
There are about 140,000 people employed in the operation of ports in the United
Kingdom. Just under half of these are administrative, clerical and technical staff,
and pilots, lightermen and customs officials. Over half are the dock workers (popularly
called ‘dockers’) who do the physical handling of cargo.
Shipping arrivals and departures do not all conform to a regular schedule, with
the result that there is sometimes too much work for the dock workers available,
sometimes too little. Dock labour was therefore Largely casual labour until 1941,
when war-time schemes were introduced to control the port registers of employers
and workers. The war-time arrangements were superseded in 1947 by a permanent
scheme administered by the National Dock Labour Board, which consists of a chairman,
vice-chairman, and eight members appointed by the Minister of Labour, four to
represent employers and four to represent employees. Workers on the board’s registers
now receive a guaranteed minimum wage for attendance, even when there is no work
available. The National Joint Council for the Port Transport Industry agreed in 1959
to a pension scheme which came into operation in January 1961.
Tanker Terminals
Most of the oil tankers coming to the United Kingdom to discharge crude oil are
berthed at special tanker terminals near the oil refineries which are owned and operated
by the oil companies. The deadweight tonnage capacity of some of the most important
terminals is: Finnart (West of Scotland) 100,000; Isle of Grain (Thames estuary)
42,000; Tranmere (Liverpool) 65,000; Canvey Island (London) 21,000; Coryton
(London) 45,000; Thameshaven (London) 60,000; Tilbury Reach (London) 47,000;
Eastham (Manchester) 32,000; Milford Haven 100,000; Fawley (Southampton)
65,000; and Swansea 20,000. The terminal at Finnart was the first in Europe capable of
handling fully loaded tankers of 100,000 tons deadweight at any time; a 57-mile
pipeline connects the terminal to the refinery at Grangemouth, on the Firth of Forth.
At Cardiff and at Granton, on the Firth of Forth, new terminals are planned, each
costing £500,000.
The capacity of existing terminals on the Thames and at Southampton is also being
increased by dredging. As some of the larger existing tanker terminals are unable to
berth fully laden oil tankers of more than 32,000 d.w.t., these new projects have
assumed greater importance in handling the largest tankers.
372
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
INLAND TRANSPORT
The dense passenger and freight traffic of Great Britain1 is carried mainly by road
and rail, although coastal shipping and, to a lesser extent, inland waterways play
an important part in carrying freight, particularly bulk cargoes.
In i960 the number of passenger journeys made by public transport (road and
rail) in Great Britain was 15,409 million, of which 1,711 million were made on British
Railways and London Transport railways. In addition, in the summer of i960, some
5-5 million motor cars and 1-9 million motor cycles (including about half a million
scooters) were licensed for use on the roads. The average annual mileage of most of
the cars is estimated to be between five and ten thousand. Journeys by public transport
are mainly short and a great many of them are to and from places of work. The resultant
concentration of travel in the morning and evening ‘rush hours’ constitutes a formidable
problem in London and other large centres of population.
A general picture of the domestic goods transport system in Great Britain is provided
by the results of a sample survey of goods transport by road made in April 1958 by
the Ministry of Transport, the first such survey for six years. According to this survey,
76 per cent of the total tonnage carried in 1958 (estimated at 1,320 million tons) went
by road, while in terms of ton-mileage2 the proportion was 45 per cent. The railways
accounted for 19 per cent of all tonnage carried and 35 per cent of ton-mileage. The
proportions for coastal shipping were 4 per cent and 20 per cent, respectively, and
for inland waterways 1 per cent of the total tonnage. Although the volume of goods
transported by the railways was reduced considerably in 1958 by the fall in demand
for coal and for iron and steel, the survey affirmed that it was clear that, whatever
unit of measurement was used, road transport was now the major means of inland
carriage of goods. The 1952 survey had shown that the railways were responsible in
that year for 43 per cent of the ton-mileage and road transport for 37 per cent.
THE BRITISH TRANSPORT COMMISSION
The British Transport Commission administers most nationally owned road, rail and
water transport services and installations. It has an annual turnover of £760 million
and is the largest single employer of labour in the country, employing some 729,000.
Its present role and structure are the result of the Transport Act, 1947, and subsequent
Acts. The Government has, however, put forward proposals which involve the replace¬
ment of the Commission by a number of independent boards owning and running
the component services.
The Transport Acts of 19479 *953 anc^ *95®
On 1 st January, 1948, in accordance with the provisions of the Transport Act
of 1947, most of Great Britain’s inland transport system passed into public ownership.
On that date the railways, all railway-owned steamships, docks, hotel and road
transport interests, most of the country’s canals (including all those owned by the
railways) and the whole of London’s passenger transport system came under the control
of the British Transport Commission, a newly created public authority. In addition,
the commission was to arrange for the gradual acquisition of privately owned long¬
distance road haulage firms. Road passenger transport outside London was not taken
1 For an account of inland transport in Northern Ireland, see p. 385.
2 Ton-mileage is calculated by multiplying the tonnage carried by the actual distance it was
transported.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
373
over, but the commission was given powers to prepare area schemes for co-ordinating
passenger services by road and rail, including power to acquire road passenger under¬
takings for this purpose. A considerable amount of road haulage, several waterways and
many docks were left outside the commission’s scope.
The Conservative Government which took office in 1951 announced a new policy
for the operation of public transport, including decentralisation of the railway
administration, greater freedom to adopt normal commercial practice (particularly
in charging), the partial return of long-distance road haulage to private enterprise,
and the revocation of the commission’s power to make schemes for the co-ordination
of road and rail passenger services. The policy was put into effect by the Transport
Act of 1953, and the actual reorganisation of the British Transport Commission was
completed by 1st January, 1955. A further Act, the Transport (Disposal of Road
Haulage Property) Act, 1956, provided for the completion of the denationalisation of
road haulage.
Organisation
Under the 1947 Act, the British Transport Commission is responsible to the
Minister of Transport who, in turn, is responsible to Parliament. The minister appoints
the members of the commission (with the maximum membership of 14 members
and a chairman) and is empowered to give general directions to the commission in
the national interest and to approve the outline of programmes of major development
and of training, education and research.
The commission itself is a policy-making and not a managing body. It works
through six policy-making committees,1 each dealing with one particular subject
in relation to all the commission’s activities, and through sub-commissions1 which
are not policy-making but each of which takes a special interest in the activities of
one of the seven divisions which carry on the various activities of the commission.
These seven divisions are: British Railways, British Road Services, Tilling (bus)
Group, Scottish Omnibus Group, British Transport Docks, British Waterways,
and British Transport Hotels and Catering Services.
In the London area road passenger transport and the underground railways are
operated by the London Transport Executive (see p. 384), which was established as
an agent of the British Transport Commission by the Transport Act, 1947.
Consultation with coastal shipping operators is provided by the Coastal Shipping
Advisory Committee, which was set up under the 1947 Act to consider, and from time
to time to report to the minister on, all matters jointly affecting the interests of the
British Transport Commission and those of coastal shipping. The 1953 Act extended
the scope of the committee’s work to include road haulage. The members of this
committee are appointed by the minister from the commission and from among
representatives of coastal shipping, after consultation with interests concerned. The
commission also consults with the operators of coastal liners on questions of rates and
charges at the Coasting Liner Conference.
Proposed Reorganisation
In December i960 the Government published proposals2 for the future structure
and working of the nationalised transport undertakings and their financial reorganisa¬
tion. It was stated that by the end of i960 the deficits of the British Transport Com-
1 These committees and sub-commissions are mainly composed of members of the British
Transport Commission.
2 Ministry of Transport: Reorganisation of the Nationalised Transport Undertakings. Cmnd.
1248.
374
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
mission would have reached a total of £500 million, the annual rate of deficit being
about £100 million, of which about £60 million is the deficit of British Railways on
operating costs alone. In addition, the railways have to face interest charges, amounting
to some £75 million a year, part of which is due to loans for modernisation. The
problem thus lies mainly in the railways. The Government’s proposals imply greater
decentralisation and commercialisation of the nationalised transport undertakings and
a far-reaching financial reconstruction, dealing especially with railways. It is suggested
that each of the main activities of the British Transport Commission should be
managed by a separate board, holding its own assets and responsible for its own capital
debt. The boards for British Railways, London Transport, British Transport Docks
and British Waterways would each be incorporated under statute and would be
directly responsible to the Minister of Transport, who would approve their members.
All other activities would be grouped under a holding company. Some of the
reorganisation can be carried out within the existing statutory functions of the BTC;
other aspects will require the introduction of new legislation.
Finance
An annual report and statement of accounts is submitted by the British Transport
Commission to the minister, who lays it before Parliament. The Commission is under
obligation to cover its outgoings, taking one year with another, but during the present
period of railway modernisation it is permitted to carry forward the deficits arising on
British Railways, which result mainly from passenger transport. Meanwhile, in order
to meet financial needs during the critical years of reconstruction, the Government,
under the Transport (Railway Finances) Act, 1957, and the Transport (Borrowing
Powers) Act, 1959, was empowered to make repayable advances to the commission of up
to £400 million to meet the annual revenue deficits until 1962. Since the financial year
1960-61 these deficits have been met by the Exchequer and are not repayable advances.
The commission’s ordinary borrowing powers (i.e. excluding those to meet deficits)
are limited to £1,200 million.
Gross receipts from the commission’s principal carrying activities in i960 were:
passenger traffic, £304 million; freight traffic, £381 million; and miscellaneous,
£17 million. In addition, gross receipts from other principal activities amounted to
^56 million. Interest on British Transport Stock and other interest charges amounted
to £93 million. Fixed assets at the end of i960 were valued at £1,990 million, of which
£1,719 million related to British Railways.
Proposed Financial Reconstruction
On 31st December, 1959, the net capital liabilities of the commission amounted to
some £2,000 million. According to the Government’s proposals for reorganisation,
£400 million (out of the total debt of £2,000 million) which is not attributable to the
railways would be transferred to the appropriate new boards. Of the remaining
£1,600 million, £400 million would be written off, and £800 million placed to suspense
account. The new British Railways Board would thus have to pay interest on only the
remaining £400 million, which is equivalent to the written-down book value of the
railways’ investment since modernisation began in 1955. It is hoped that by 1965
the railways will have eliminated their operating loss and reached a position in which
they could meet their reduced interest charges out of revenue.
Transport. Tribunal
The Transport Tribunal, set up under the 1947 Act, has jurisdiction over the charges
schemes which govern the maximum charges which the British Transport Commission
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
375
may make on British Railways, on the road and rail services provided by the London
Transport Executive, at its docks, and by tolls for the use of inland waterways. The
Transport Tribunal replaced the Railways Rates Tribunal and has also taken over
responsibilities from certain other statutory bodies. Appeals arising from applications
for road haulage (goods vehicles) licences are heard by the tribunal and it has other
duties relating to harbours and canals.
Transport Users’ Consultative Committees
There are eleven Area Transport Users’ Consultative Committees and a Central
Transport Consultative Committee for Great Britain, which were set up, under the
1947 Act, to give transport users an opportunity of putting forward criticisms and
suggestions for improving the commission’s transport services. The members of
these committees are appointed by the Minister of Transport (after consultation with
the various organisations concerned) to represent commerce, industry, agriculture,
labour, local authorities and the British Transport Commission itself. The conclusions
of the nine area committees in England are subject to confirmation by the Central
Committee, which reports its findings to the Minister of Transport and the British
Transport Commission. If the Central Committee makes a formal recommendation
to the minister he may, if he thinks fit, give a direction to the commission on the matter
and the commission must give effect to it. The Scottish and Welsh area committees
send their conclusions directly to the minister. Matters dealt with include the British
Transport Commission’s proposals for closing branch railway lines, withdrawing
passenger train services and closing stations, and complaints by the public of
inadequacy of services or facilities.
RAILWAYS
Britain was the pioneer of railways. The opening of the Stockton to Darlington
Railway in 1825, and of the Liverpool and Manchester line in 1830, when George
Stephenson’s famous ‘Rocket’ locomotive was used, began a century of widespread
railway development. The great period of railway building was from 1840 to 1875*
with a short lull following the collapse of the speculative railway boom in 1846.
In the same year an Act of Parliament prescribed a standard gauge of 4 feet 8J inches
for all new railway lines except extensions of the Great Western Railway, which then
had a gauge of 7 feet and was not converted to the standard gauge until much later.
The Railway and Canal Traffic Act of 1888 drew up a standard freight classification
and schedules of maximum freight charges which came into operation in 1893.
During the first world war, the railways came under centralised Government
direction through a Railway Executive Committee. This experience emphasised
the need for concentration and a reorganisation of the whole rail system, d he Railways
Act of 1921 amalgamated 123 private companies into four large groups: the London,
Midland and Scottish; London and North Eastern; Great Western; and Southern.
In the 1920s and 1930s the railways suffered from the prolonged industrial depression
and the growing competition from road transport. The causes of road competition were
twofold: first, motor transport often offered cheaper and better facilities, secondly,
the statutory regulation of the railways’ charging system resulted in the loss of some
lucrative traffic and the forced retention of unprofitable traffic.
In 1938 the railways made proposals for relief from statutory regulation of charges,
but the outbreak of war in 1939 postponed action and the railways again became
controlled by the Government.
M
376
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Organisation under Public Ownership
The Transport Act of 1947 brought the railways under public ownership as a
single enterprise; British Railways, grouped in six regional sub-divisions, operated
under the overall management of a Railway Executive established as the agent of the
British Transport Commission.
The 1953 Transport Act abolished the Railway Executive and provided for a
reorganisation of the administration. The operation of British Railways is at present
in the hands of six area boards (the areas corresponding with the former regions),
which leave day-to-day management to the general managers of the areas. Important
matters affecting general policy are reserved to the British Transport Commission and
are dealt with by the British Railways Division and the Railways Sub-Commission.
Under the proposals for reorganisation put forward by the Government in December
i960, area boards would be replaced by regional railway boards which would be fully
responsible for the management and operation of their regional railway systems. Each
would be autonomous in all matters which concerned its region alone. The railways
would also be freed from statutory control over their charges, except for fares in the
London passenger transport area, and statutory restrictions on the development of
property by the nationalised transport undertakings would be relaxed. Certain under¬
takings, especially the railways, would have power to lease, provide and operate
pipelines on their property.
Operations
British Railways operate about 18,390 route miles of permanent way with a total
track mileage of about 49,209 miles, and at the end of December i960 the total staff
was 514,500, including 255,117 operating staff. The British Transport Hotels and
Catering Services owned refreshment rooms at 345 stations and also 38 hotels. At 92
of the stations tenants operated the refreshment facilities. The urban and suburban
passenger commuting services for London and other large conurbations carry about
million passengers a day, mainly to and from their work in brief rush hour periods.
These services account for about half the annual total of 1,000 million passengers on
British Railways. The railways also carry a great part of the basic freight traffic. Every
day British Railways haul a total of over 51 million ton-miles of freight; the flexibility
of their operations enables them to deal with sudden heavy movements of bulk freight
such as coal, or crops at harvest time. In i960 British Railways carried a total of
249 million tons of freight (the highest figure since 1957).
Development
By the end of 1959 capital expenditure on British Railways in the twelve years since
the British Transport Commission came into operation, amounted to about £820
million. Some of this was accounted for by renewals, including arrears inherited from
the past. The difficulties of the 1930s, the strain of the war years and the numerous
post-war claims on national resources had prevented any large schemes of railway
modernisation and the maintenance of an adequate replacement programme. This
past lack of investment is being remedied by a 15-year modernisation and re-equipment
plan, announced by the British Transport Commission in January 1955, which is
designed to transform virtually all the services offered by British Railways.
In July 1959 the cost of the plan was estimated to be £1,660 million, against £1,200
million in the original version. The revised plan provided for some speeding up of
modernisation.
Major features of the programme include the remodelling of passenger operations
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
377
to ensure fast, clean, regular and frequent services (electric or diesel) in all the great
urban areas, to accelerate inter-city and main-line trains and to provide economic
services on other routes. Freight services are being completely recast to increase
efficiency, for example, by means of express freight trains with vacuum brakes and
special services for export goods between manufacturing centres and the London
docks. By 1963 freight mileage will have been reduced by 15 per cent, and the wagon
fleet of 750,000 will be about a quarter fewer than in 1959.
Electric and Diesel Traction
The plan heralds the end of steam traction and aims at carrying out as much electri¬
fication as possible within the 15-year period, and 25,000 volt alternating current is
being used. This system has cost advantages over the 1,500 volt overhead rail D.C.
and 660 volt third-rail D.C. previously prescribed by the Government as standard
voltages for main line electrification. The plan provides for electrifying the route from
London (Euston) to Birmingham, Manchester and Liverpool by 1964, and later, the
route from London (King’s Cross) to Leeds; extending electrification from London
(Liverpool Street) as far as Ipswich and Harwich; extending the existing third rail
electrification system of the Southern Region east of a line from Portsmouth to Reading
and carrying out additional suburban electrification for London and Glasgow. On
other main lines, diesel locomotives are being introduced as rapidly as possible.
Progress in Modernisation
In 1955 there were, on main lines, about 18,000 steam, 450 main-line diesel and
71 electric locomotives. At the end of i960 the corresponding figures were 13,276
steam, 842 diesel and 135 electric; in addition, 3,820 passenger carrying multiple-unit
diesel vehicles were operating on branch lines and stopping services. Locomotives on
order included 60 electric and 949 main-line diesels.
Passenger coaches of improved design and construction and with a better range of
amenities are being introduced. In i960 five diesel-electric de luxe trains came into
operation on routes from London to Manchester, to Birmingham and Wolverhampton,
to Leicester and to Bristol.
A co-ordinated effort to improve equipment is being made in all regions. As an
example, a magnetic track automatic warning system is being installed on 300 route
miles of the Southern Region; 120 route miles had been completed by May 1961.
Big new marshalling yards, each of which takes over the functions of several smaller
yards, are being constructed: for example, the new Margam (South Wales) marshalling
yard, opened in April i960, is the most modern in Europe and can handle over 4>ooo
wagons a day. New or modernised freight depots are being built at Liverpool, Lincoln,
Barking and Peterborough. Some existing depots and marshalling yards and several
hundred small stations are being closed. There are plans for modernising some of the
many passenger stations (there are over 5>000 stations in Great Britain). Banbury,
Barrow-in-Furness and Plymouth are examples of passenger stations that have been
or are being rebuilt. New signalling devices (including high-intensity colour-light
signals and automatic warning control) are being introduced to increase safety on the
railways.
ROADS
The advent of the motor vehicle made it necessary for the Government to set up a
central road authority; accordingly, the Road Board was established by the Develop¬
ment and Road Improvement Funds Act of 1909. In 1919 the board’s responsibilities
were taken over by the newly established Ministry of Transport.
378
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Motorways
and Trunk
Roads
Motorways completed
or under construction
v/Xffvj Other motorway projects
Trunk roads completed
or being developed
Existing trunk roads
related to new
developments
Medway towns
•idge
Dover
Folkestone
o o
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
379
In April i960 Great Britain had 200,500 miles of public highway. There were
95 miles of motorway, 8,340 miles of trunk roads, 19,740 miles of Class I roads,
17,600 miles of Class II roads, 49,000 miles of Class III roads and 105,800 miles
of unclassified roads. Roads are classified according to their traffic value, those of
purely local traffic importance remaining unclassified. On maps and signposts the
trunk and Class I roads can usually be identified by the letter ‘A’ in front of a route
number, and Class II roads by the letter ‘B’. Trunk roads are the main arteries of
national traffic and the whole cost of their upkeep is met from Exchequer funds. The
Minister of Transport is the highway authority for trunk roads in England and Wales
and on these roads he administers expenditure, which is provided wholly from central
Government sources, although for many purposes he employs local authorities as his
agents. The highway authority for Class I, Class II and Class III roads is, in general,
the council of the county or county borough in whose area the road lies. The minister
makes grants towards approved expenditure on construction and improvement of
these roads at the rate of 75, 60 or 50 per cent according to the class of road. (Classified
roads include nearly all the main streets of the large cities.) The Secretary of State for
Scotland has corresponding responsibilities for roads in Scotland. Unclassified roads
are entirely the responsibility of the local authority in whose area they lie.
Development
While it was impossible in the years immediately following the second world war
to spend much more on the roads than was required for their essential maintenance, a
large road-building programme has now been undertaken. Central Government
expenditure on new construction and major improvements has been rising steadily
over the past few years: for the whole of Great Britain in the year which ended on
31st March, i960, it was £64 million and in the year 1961-62 it is expected to be
£89-1 million. The current programme includes Britain’s first motorways constructed
for the use of limited classes of traffic under the powers granted to the ministers by the
Special Roads Act, 1949 (now consolidated in the Highways Act, 1959). A five-year
programme for the improvement of classified roads was started in the spring of 1961;
the estimated cost is £150 million and the chief aim is the relief of urban congestion.
The motorways form part of a programme designed to provide a national net¬
work of modern through routes. At the same time, work done under this programme
will eliminate the worst bottlenecks in urban areas and thus give free outlets from the
big cities and from other main sources of traffic to the trunk routes, while smaller road¬
works will be undertaken to the maximum possible extent all over the country. Priority
is being given to five major routes: a trunk road from London to Newcastle, based on
the Great North Road; a motorway from London to Birmingham and thence to the
north-west; roads from London to the Channel ports by-passing the Medway towns
and Maidstone and Ashford; a motorway from the industrial Midlands towards the
South Wales ports; and a motorway from London westwards to London Airport, the
west of England and South Wales. Dual carriageways for about two-thirds of the way
to Newcastle are completed or under construction. The London-Birmingham motor¬
way (the M.i) was opened in November 1959. Progress has been made on two con¬
necting stretches of the motorway from the Midlands to South Wales: the 20-mile
Ross Spur was opened in November i960 and work started early in i960 on the
28-mile northern length of the Bristol-Birmingham motorway. In the summer of
i960 the Maidstone by-pass on the London to Folkestone trunk road was completed.
By-passes at Lancaster and Preston already form part of the 110-mile motorway from
Birmingham to Lancaster, and work is starting on other sections of the road which
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
380
should be completed in the summer of 1963. The £11 million Dartford-Purfleet road
tunnel under the river Thames, begun in 1957, will be ready late in 1962. Work
started in 1961 on a new bridge over the river Severn to link Bristol with South Wales.
This bridge—the fifth largest span-bridge in the world—will be completed in 1965-66
and will cost £11 million. In London roadworks began in May i960 on a £5 million
scheme which is already improving traffic flow at Hyde Park Corner, the busiest road
junction in the capital.
On trunk roads in Scotland, the main priority has been given to the reconstruction
of the Glasgow to Stirling and Glasgow to Carlisle roads.
Work on a scheme to construct twin tunnels under the river Clyde at Whiteinch,
Glasgow, began in 1957, and the first tunnel, estimated to cost ^6-n million, is due
to be opened in 1963. The second tunnel, on which work began in 1959, is due to be
completed in 1964 at a cost of £3-4 million. The construction of a new road bridge
across the Firth of Forth began in 1958 and is expected to be completed in 1963,
at an estimated cost of £16 million. It is to be followed by a road bridge across the
Firth of Tay.
ROAD TRANSPORT
In i960 there were 9-4 million motor vehicles licensed to use Great Britain’s
roads. Of these, 1 -4 million were goods vehicles and 94,000 were public road passenger
'vehicles (i.e. buses, trolleybuses, trams and taxicabs).
The first world war greatly stimulated the development of motor vehicles, and
road transport began to make itself felt as a serious competitor of the railways. The
first step towards Government regulation of public road transport was the passing
of the London Traffic Act of 1924, which gave the Minister of Transport power to
control the number of buses and their journeys in London; this was followed, in 1933,
by the setting up of the London Passenger Transport Board (see p. 384). In 1928 a
Royal Commission was appointed to examine the problems that had arisen out of the
growth of motor traffic. The recommendations of this commission led to the introduction
of further legislation.
The Road Traffic Act, 1930, ended the licensing of public service (i.e. passenger)
vehicles by local authorities and set up instead traffic areas, of which there are now
eleven, covering the whole country and each under the control of three traffic com¬
missioners (except for the London metropolitan area, which has one) appointed by
the minister. The commissioners regulate, by means of a licensing system, all public
road passenger transport services, and sanction routes and time-tables in order to
secure proper co-ordination of services and to eliminate unnecessary competition;
they also control fares. Competing operators and local authorities are entitled to raise
objections concerning applications to the commissioners for new licences or the
renewal of existing licences.
Organisation of Road Goods Transport
The Road and Rail Traffic Act, 1933, based upon the recommendations of the Royal
Commission and of an experts’ report (the Salter Report) of 1932, established a system
of licensing for road haulage vehicles, which is still in operation, designed to restrict
vehicle operations to approved needs and to eliminate wasteful competition. A licence
has to be secured from the licensing authority (who is, in fact, the chairman of the
appropriate body of traffic commissioners) before a goods vehicle can be used on the
road. There are three types of licence: the ‘A’ licence for general public haulage;
the ‘B’ licence for public haulage limited to certain goods or certain areas and covering
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
381
also the carriage of the licensee’s own goods; and the ‘C’ licence for the carriage by
traders solely of their own goods. Applications for ‘A’ and ‘B’ licences are examined
by the licensing authorities to see if they are necessary in view’ of existing transport
services already available, and competitors may raise objections. There is a right ol
appeal to the Transport Tribunal against the decision of the licensing authorities. The
‘C’ licence is granted on application, as of right. All goods vehicle operators are bound
by regulations concerning the fitness and loading of vehicles, the keeping of records
and the pay and hours of their employees.
Under the Transport Act of 1947, the British Transport Commission took over
‘A’ and ‘B’ hauliers predominantly engaged on long-distance haulage. Vehicles
operating under ‘C’ licences and those used for carrying certain specialised traffic
were not affected by the Act. After the change of Government in 1951, the Transport
Act of 1953 required the commission to dispose of the bulk of its road haulage under¬
taking. In 1956 this process was halted by the Transport (Disposal of Road Haulage
Property) Act, which enabled the commission to retain under its control more vehicles
than were permitted under the 1953 Act. Altogether, the commission disposed of
20,000 vehicles. Since September 195^ British Road Services (BRS), a division of the
commission, have been conducting their business through the medium of five com¬
panies which together own about 16,000 vehicles: British Road Services Ltd. (general
haulage); BRS (Pickfords) Ltd. (special traffic and some contracts); BRS (Contracts)
Ltd.; BRS (Parcels) Ltd.; and BRS (Meat Haulage) Ltd. The shares of all these
companies are owned by the British Transport Commission; those of BRS (Parcels)
Ltd. and BRS (Meat Haulage) Ltd. are still subject to disposal at some later date. All
the commission’s vehicles are subject to the licensing system.
According to the Government’s i960 proposals, these companies would be operated
as companies incorporated under the Companies Act, with their own boards, and
would be grouped under a new holding company responsible to the Minister of
Transport.
The road goods transport industry consists of about 1 -4 million licensed vehicles,
and of these some i*2 million are operated under a C licence by $65,000 carriers, for
their own goods. Of the other 201,000 vehicles, with A and B licences, about 13,800
are operated by British Road Services and the rest are operated by some 61,000
hauliers. There are only a few operators with large fleets of vehicles in any of the
licence categories. ‘C’ licence vehicles include a large number of small vehicles used
locally in the delivery of groceries and other goods. Other vehicles in this class are
engaged in long-distance carriage of traders’ own goods. A sample survey made by
the Traders Road Transport Association in 1958 indicated that ‘C’ licence operators
with fleets of over 100 vehicles were probably fewer than 3 per cent of the total number
of operators, but accounted for over half the C licence vehicles in use in the country.
Public Passenger Transport by Road
Local authorities own and operate over ninety urban bus systems (but not that of
London). The largest of these is in Glasgow', where 373 trams and 1,390 buses and
trolleybuses carried some 538 million passengers in i960. Glasgow was tne only city
still operating trams in i960. Birmingham city transport system carried 455 million
passengers in i960 and the Manchester system about 402 million.
The bus services throughout the country are operated by some 4,736 local concerns,
nearly all of which belong to three main groups British Electric Traction, the Tilling
Group, and Scottish Omnibuses. Tilling’s and Scottish Omnibuses are owned by the
British Transport Commission; British Electric Traction is a private concern, the
382
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
commission having substantial shareholdings in a number of companies in this group,
but no controlling interest.
Road Safety Measures and Traffic Problems
Britain has the highest density of traffic in the world, giving rise to pressing problems
of road safety. In i960, 6,970 people were killed on the roads and 340,581 injured.
This compares with 7,343 persons killed and 231,603 injured in 1934, when there were
only 2^ million motor vehicles on the roads—an indication that the problems ha\e, to
some extent, been held in check by road safety measures introduced under the Road
Traffic Acts of 1934 and 1956. Among these are a speed limit of 30 miles an hour in
built up areas, modified later by the introduction of a 40 m.p.h. limit on certain
main roads on the outskirts of London and a 50 m.p.h. limit on certain roads during
peak periods of summer holiday traffic; the requirement that all new drivers must pass
a driving test; the provision of pedestrian crossings, including some illuminated by
flashing beacons and marked with conspicuous white stripes (zebra crossings); and a
new system of road markings, including double white lines at dangerous bends, to
keep traffic to its own side of the road and prohibit parking.
All drivers of motor vehicles—including motor cycles, motor scooters and powered
pedal cycles—have to pass a driving test before being granted a substantive licence to
drive1; until they pass the test they must obtain a ‘provisional’ licence which necessitates
their displaying ‘L’ (Learner) plates and, in all cases where vehicles are constructed
to carry passengers, other than pillion passengers, learner drivers must be accompanied
by a qualified driver. By regulations made under the Road Traffic Act, i960, private
motor cars, motor cycles and goods vehicles up to 30 cwt. unladen weight which are
ten years old or more must be submitted for an annual test, at an appioved testing
station, of the condition of their brakes, steering gear and lighting equipment. Since
May 1961 vehicles of these types may not legally be used on public roads without a
valid test certificate. . .
In addition, vigorous road safety campaigns are conducted by local authorities
with the aid of Government grants. The Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents,
which acts as the Government’s agent in this connection, assists and co-ordinates
these campaigns. The police and education authorities are actively at work in the
cause of road safety. The standard of conduct for all road users—pedestrians and
drivers—is set out in the Highway Code. A failure to observe the code does not of itself
render a person liable to criminal proceedings but may be taken into account in any
such proceedings. . ,
The Road Traffic and Roads Improvement Act, i960, permits the employment ot
traffic wardens (with strictly limited powers), and provides for fixed penalties (the
‘ticket’ system) for parking offences. Other measures in the Act, designed to reduce
traffic congestion, include the granting of greater powers of action to the Minister of
Transport within London and to local traffic authorities in other areas. In London,
street parking in certain areas is permitted only for limited periods and on payment at
parking meters, and increased off-street parking facilities are being provided. Several
extensive schemes for the improvement of road safety and the relief of traffic congestion
are being undertaken: these include ‘fly-overs’ at road junctions; new outlet roads
from cities; and, as an experiment, the designation of certain stretches of trunk roads
as ‘clearways’, on which waiting on the carriageway is (with certain exceptions)
^ In February i960 a London Traffic Management Unit was established, charged
1 For overseas visitors’ licences, see Appendix.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
383
with securing the maximum use of London’s streets as traffic arteries by applying
modern traffic engineering techniques. Measures taken in 1961 to improve the flow
of traffic in the London area include the introduction of a one-way traffic plan in
central London and the institution of peak-hour clearways in certain areas.
INLAND WATERWAYS
In 1761 James Brindley completed the Bridgewater Canal to take coal from the
collieries owned by the Duke of Bridgewater at Worsley to Manchester. This marked
the beginning of canal building in modern Britain; and canals played an important part
in promoting the industrial and commercial expansion of the late eighteenth and early
nineteenth centuries. As railway competition developed, about one-third of the canal
mileage passed to the control of the railways. During the first world war Government
control of railways included railway-owned canals and, under the Transport Act,
1947, most of the country’s canals passed from Government control, which had been
re-established in the second world war, to that of the British Transport Commission
in January 1948.
The System
There are some 2,600 miles of navigable inland waterways in Great Britain, some
2,144 miles of which now belong to the British Transport Commission; the remainder
is still in the hands of local authorities or private companies. About 1,000 miles of the
commission’s canals are narrow waterways which can generally be used only by boats
not exceeding 7 feet in width, capable of carrying a load varying from 25 to 30 tons;
the remainder are broad waterways and canalised rivers which can be used by craft of
up to 400 tons capacity. The canals in Scotland are all broad waterways.
Of the 2,170 miles of inland waterways which originally came under the control
of the British Transport Commission 267 miles are closed to navigation or abandoned,
leaving 1,877 mfies still open, of which 1,236 miles are in commercial use. Since 1955
the canals have been managed separately by the waterways division of the commission,
known as British Waterways. For administrative purposes the canals in England and
Wales are grouped into four divisions, based on the main navigable river estuaries,
each group under a divisional manager. In Scotland, the Caledonian Canal and the
Crinan Canal each have a separate manager, and the Forth and Clyde, Monkland and
Union Canals are grouped together under another manager.
In i960 total traffic on British Waterways amounted to 9'6 million tons, of which
4-1 million tons were coal, 2’3 million tons liquids in bulk and 3’2 million tons general
cargo. Some three-quarters of the total traffic is carried on 325 rniles of the broad
waterways, which are mainly canalised rivers.
Although British Waterways is the largest single operator, most of the traffic is
handled by independent carriers, or by traders in their own craft. T he British Transport
Commission at the end of i960 owned 17 tugs and 1,081 carrying craft with a carrying
capacity of 43,737 tons, including 181 power-driven craft with a carrying capacity
of 9,024 tons.
Development
Since assuming control, the British Transport Commission has strengthened
the commercial organisation; it has improved dredging methods and equipment,
brought better types of craft into service, established a research organisation and
undertaken various development works. Following the report, issued in i955> a
specially appointed Board of Survey, a comprehensive development plan was begun
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
384
in 1956. Under this plan, nearly j£6 million is being invested in the improvement of
navigation and the provision of modern equipment on the seven major waterways
that carry most of the traffic—the Aire and Calder Navigation, the Sheffield and South
Yorkshire navigation, the Trent Navigation, the river Lee, the river Severn including
the Gloucester and Sharpness Canal, the river Weaver, and the Grand Union Canal
(on the stretch below Berkhamsted). By the spring of 1961 at least 60 per cent of the
planned improvements had been carried out, and ^750,000 was to be spent on the
scheme during 1961. When it is completed in 1963 the British Transport Commission
will control about 300 miles of first-class waterways linking important industrial
districts with ports.
In 1959 the Government set up an Inland Waterways Redevelopment Committee
to consider and advise upon schemes for the development of some 700 miles of canals
which could no longer be maintained economically for the purpose of transport.
According to the proposals for the reorganisation of the BTC, the control of British
Waterways would be vested in an Inland Waterways Authority.
LONDON TRANSPORT
London is, with Tokyo and New York, one of the world’s three largest cities.
The area known as Greater London, within a radius of about 15 miles from Charing
Cross, contains over 8 million people.
London’s passenger transport system, in its modern sense, began in 1829 when
the first omnibus, horse-drawn, appeared on the London streets. The first regular
tram service, also horse-drawn, began in 1870. In 1863 the first underground steam
railway, the Metropolitan, was built by digging a great trench for the line and roofing
it over. In 1870 the world’s first tube railway, the Tower Subway, was constructed
under the river Thames; it was cable-operated and ran for only a few months. In
1890 the first electric tube railway in the world was opened, the City and South London
line, and this was followed in 1900 by the opening of the Central London Railway and
shortly afterwards by the electrification of the steam-operated underground lines.
Meanwhile, horse-drawn buses and trams were being replaced by motor buses and
electric trams.
Until 1933 there were many separate undertakings providing passenger transport
facilities in London, but in that year these were all vested in a single public corporation,
the London Passenger Transport Board. In 1948, with the establishment of the British
Transport Commission, the London Transport Executive took over control as an
agency of the Commission.
In December i960 the Government proposed that the London Transport Executive
should be replaced by a financially independent board as in the case of the other
undertakings of the British Transport Commission.
The London Transport Executive
The London Transport Executive, which consists of a chairman and six members,
two of whom are part-time members, operates and manages, on behalf of the British
Transport Commission, all road and rail passenger transport services in the London
area with the exception of the London lines of British Railways and the taxicabs.
(Some 6,000 taxicabs that ply for hire in the streets are privately operated by companies
or owner-drivers and are licensed annually by the metropolitan police.) London
Transport’s operations extend beyond Greater London to cover an area of 2,000
square miles (known as the London Passenger Transport Area) with a radius of about
25 miles from Charing Cross and with a population of some 10 million. Between 1955
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
385
and i960 the number of passenger journeys made annually on the London Transport
system fell from 4,079 million to 3,266 million, largely owing to increased private
motoring and changes in leisure-time habits and also some shifting of population away
from the centre of London.
London Transport’s railway network stretches 18 miles from north to south, 32
miles from east to west, and 49 miles from north-west to east. The total length of
the railway over which London Transport trains operate is 258 miles, of which 90
miles are underground, including the longest tube tunnel in the world, 17^ miles
long. London Transport trains serve 278 stations.
At the end of i960, London Transport’s diesel buses and coaches travelled over
3,095 miles of roads, and trolleybuses (which are operated by electricity) over
129 miles.
To carry traffic over all this area, the London Transport Executive in December
i960 owned 4,150 railway cars, 7,743 buses and coaches and 723 trolleybuses. The
total staff employed was 75,800, of whom 10,760 were women.
Since 1945 all tramcars have been replaced by buses, and by 1962 all the trolley¬
buses will be replaced, after more than 20 years’ service, by diesel buses. The under¬
ground railways have been extended, and a new £1 million station linking two lines at
Netting Hill Gate was opened in March 1959. Since the beginning of 1958, the London
Transport Executive has placed orders worth £30 million for new rolling stock, to
be completed in 1963 at the latest, and has undertaken £j million worth of further
track improvement schemes, which should be completed by 1962. These are part of a
general modernisation scheme for the Underground, on which nearly £40 million,
including replacement of rolling stock, is expected to be spent in the four years to
1963. Proposals for a new tube railway, estimated to cost at least £55 million, between
Victoria Station and Walthamstow, in north-east London, have been under con¬
sideration for several years. New methods of tunnelling are being tried out.
PUBLIC TRANSPORT IN NORTHERN IRELAND
With the exception of passenger transport in Belfast, which is provided by the
city corporation, public road passenger and freight transport and rail services within
Northern Ireland are provided by the Ulster Transport Authority, a public body
which was established under the Transport Act (Northern Ireland), 1948.
The road passenger section of the authority’s undertaking operates a wide network
of omnibus services and an extensive programme of coach tours. The road freight
section provides a comprehensive service for the carriage of merchandise of all
descriptions (including heavy indivisible loads and livestock) and can supply vehicles
under contract for the exclusive use of traders. A chain of first-class hotels is also
owned and operated by the authority.
In the year ended 30th September, i960, 99 million passengers and 2'6 million
tons of merchandise were carried by road and rail services run by the Ulster Transport
Authority. There were 297 miles of permanent way, 86 locomotives and 157 diesel
rail cars and trailers. The route mileage of buses was 2,737 m^es and there were 992
buses and coaches and 1,979 goods motor vehicles and trailers.
Roads
On 31st March, i960, there were 13,759 miles of public roads in Northern Ireland,
comprising 373 miles of trunk roads, 933 miles of Class I roads, 1,759 m^es °f Class II
roads, 2,868 miles of Class III roads and 7,826 miles of unclassified roads. The Ministry
of Commerce is responsible for the maintenance and improvement of the trunk
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
386
roads and makes grants from the Road Fund (which is derived from such sources as
the proceeds of taxation of mechanically propelled vehicles registered in Northern
Ireland and from driving licence fees) to help the local authorities who are responsible
for the other roads. During the year ended 31st March, i960, a total of £8’6 million was
spent on work on all types of public roads in Northern Ireland. In the past five years
the Government has spent ^30 million on new roads and a further £35 million will be
spent during the next five years. This does not include large sums spent by local
authorities.
CIVIL AVIATION
British airmen were among the first to carry mails (at the time of the Coronation
of King George V in 1911) and among the first to operate regular mail and passenger
services, which were inaugurated on 25th August, i9I9» when a daily passenger service
was opened between London (Hounslow) and Paris (Le Bourget). The year 19!9 w'as
also marked by notable pioneer flights including the crossing of the Atlantic by John
Alcock and Arthur Whitten Brown in June (both were later knighted for their achieve¬
ment) and the first flight between England and Australia by Captain (later Sir) Ross
Smith and his crew.
Commercial Organisation
In April 1924 four small British companies merged to form Imperial Airways
Limited, which received a Government grant of j£i million spread over the next ten
years. As a substantial shareholder the Government was represented on the board
of directors.
Imperial Airways Limited pioneered the commercial development of inter¬
continental air routes (including the organisation of ground services), following up,
in many cases, the exploratory work of the Royal Air Force. By 1929 there was a
through service from England to India. In 1931 the first service was established
to Central Africa. The first mail service to Australia started in December 1934,
followed by a passenger service in 1935. During a part of 1939 Imperial Airways
operated an experimental transatlantic service for mail.
The British Overseas Airways Corporation, a public corporation, was established
by the British Overseas Airways Act, 1939, and took over the undertakings of Imperial
Airways Limited and British Airways Limited in 1940. During the second world war
BO AC operated essential overseas air services in support of the war effort. By the end
of the war, it was carrying more than twice as many passengers as in 1939 and more
than three times as much freight. The routes, moreover, had efficient radio and radar
systems which had been installed for war purposes and which were adapted for civilian
use.
After the war, British European Airways was established, under the Civil Aviation
Act, 1946, as a separate public corporation, to cover the United Kingdom and Europe.
In addition to the two large corporations, there were in 1961 about 20 independent air
transport companies.
Growth of Air Services
During the period of rapid expansion since 1947, it has been the entry into service
of the first jet-powered aircraft, and particularly the prop-jet Viscount in 1953, that
has brought about a faster rate of development of civil aviation in the United Kingdom.
The prop-jet Britannia, the pure-jet Comet and the Conway by-pass engines employed
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
387
in the Boeing 707, have further enhanced the reputation of the United Kingdom
aircraft industry and British airlines.
In i960, 2-2 million passengers were carried on all domestic scheduled services
and 3-6 million on all international scheduled services operated by United Kingdom
airlines. Measured in this way, domestic passenger traffic had increased by 85 per
cent and international passenger traffic by 104 per cent since 1955; measured in load
short ton miles, the total traffic on scheduled services in i960 was 46 million on
domestic routes and 443'3 million on international routes, an increase over the 1955
figures of 112 per cent and 99 per cent respectively.
The proportion of United Kingdom foreign trade carried by aircraft is steadily
increasing. In 1956, 1-7 per cent of imports, 2-9 per cent of exports and 11-9 per cent
of re-exports were carried by air. By i960 these percentages had risen to 3-9, 5-0 and
20-5 respectively. (The percentages relate to c.i.f. values.) Among the major groups
of commodities imported or exported by air are jewellery, scientific instruments,
electrical machinery, clothing and footwear.
The Role of the Government
Responsibility for the general development and expansion of United Kingdom civil
aviation is vested in the Minister of Aviation. The ministry is also responsible for
supervising the development and production of civil aircraft and undertakes an
extensive programme of research and development to meet civil as well as Service
needs. It also issues ‘air operators’ certificates, which impose recognised standards
of safety on all commercial operators of air services.
In the international sphere, the Minister of Aviation is responsible for participation
in the work of the International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) of the United
Nations Organisation and, with the Foreign Office and the Commonwealth Relations
Office, for dealings with other countries relating to civil aviation. He also advises the
Colonial Office on civil aviation matters.
The Government’s relations with the air corporations and with the independent
operators are described on p. 388. Three special bodies advise the minister in the
exercise of certain of his responsibilities: the Air Transport Licensing Board, the Air
Registration Board and the Air Safety Board.
The Air Transport Licensing Board (ATLB)
The ATLB was established by the Civil Aviation (Licensing) Act, i960,
and consists of six to ten members appointed by the Minister of Aviation. The board
is responsible for granting licences to both the corporations and the independent
operators for the operation of air services. In granting licences the board takes into
account an operator’s experience, financial resources, equipment, organisation and
staffing arrangements, and the adequacy of existing services. The board took over
some of the functions of the former Air Transport Advisory Council and is an
independent licensing authority, its decisions being subject to appeal to the minister.
The Air Registration Board
The board was set up in 1937 and consists of 18 members, of whom 16 represent
the interests concerned with civil aviation and two are appointed by the minister. It is
an independent, non-profit-making limited company to which the minister has delegated
certain functions relating to the design, construction and maintenance of civil
aircraft. The work of the board includes the investigation, by its surveyors, of
aircraft and associated equipment for the purpose of making recommendations to
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
388
the minister concerning the issue and renewal of certificates of airworthiness. It also
conducts the technical examinations for the licensing of aircraft maintenance
engineers, flight engineers and commercial pilots.
The Air Safety Board
The board is a standing advisory body of experts responsible to the minister for
keeping under continuous review the needs of safety in British civil aviation. It
recommends measures to increase safety and efficiency in the operation of British civil
aircraft throughout the world and in the system of ground facilities provided for all
civil aircraft operating over the United Kingdom. In exercising his responsibility for
safety, the minister, advised by the board, regulates the operation of aircraft, the
conditions under which passengers and cargo may be carried, and the licensing of
flight crews, and reviews the effectiveness of air traffic control and of navigational aids.
Scheduled Services: Government Policy
Up to 1949 Government policy was that independent operators should undertake
charter work and the corporations should operate scheduled services. Starting in i949>
independent operators were permitted to operate certain scheduled services as
‘associates’ of the corporations. From 1952 the independent companies became
eligible to develop new routes and new types of scheduled services. The Air Transport
Advisory Council (ATAC), set up by the Civil Aviation Act, 1946, advised the minister
whether permission for these services could be given without materially diverting
traffic from existing services. The Civil Aviation (Licensing) Act, i960, which came
into effect in April 1961, enables the independent operators to apply on an equal basis
with the corporations, to the ATLB for permission to operate scheduled services.
The Corporations: Powers and Constitutions
The existing powers and constitutions of BOAC and BEA are laid down by the
Air Corporations Acts, 1949 to 1956. Each corporation consists of a chairman, deputy-
chairman and from 5 to 11 members, all of whom are appointed by the minister.
In the case of BOAC, the minister may, if he wishes, appoint two deputy-chairmen.
The annual reports and statements of accounts of the two corporations are laid
before Parliament by the minister. In addition, each corporation must submit, before
the beginning of every planning period (of three years), a programme of the services
it proposes to provide and of any other activities it intends to undertake, as well as
an estimate of its receipts and expenditure on revenue and capital account during
the period.
Finance
Each corporation may, with Treasury consent, borrow either by raising temporary
loans or by issuing stock carrying a Treasury guarantee. In addition, the Finance
Act, 1956, permitted the corporations to raise money by means of interest-bearing
redeemable loans from the Exchequer, and these powers have been renewed each year
under the annual Finance Act. Under the Air Corporations Act, i960, the borrowing
powers of BOAC and BEA were raised to £180 million and £95 million respectively.
These limits are expected to meet the corporations’ requirements up to 31st
March, 1964.
Ministerial Control
Although the minister is empowered to give general directions on matters affecting
the national interest, for example, the placing of orders for aircraft, these powers are
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
389
very seldom used. The corporations function as commercial undertakings, but the
ministry is able to exert its influence by means of frequent but informal exchanges
of views. The minister also keeps in touch with the corporations regarding plans for
new aircraft and new routes, since he has to negotiate the necessary rights with foreign
governments. He also provides most of the aerodromes in the United Kingdom
from which the corporations operate, and the necessary navigational aids and
communications.
Operations of the Corporations
The services, fleets and results of the two corporations in 1961 are summarised below.
British Overseas Airways Corporation
BO AC operates scheduled services to all parts of the world. Its terminals in Australia,
the Far East and Middle East are at Sydney, Melbourne, Tokyo, Hong Kong,
Singapore, Karachi, Bombay, Bahrain, Doha, Tehran and Aden; in Africa, at
Benghazi, Dar-es-Salaam, Johannesburg, Nairobi, Accra and Lagos; in North
America and the Caribbean, at New York, Washington, Los Angeles, Chicago,
Toronto, Montreal, Trinidad, and Jamaica; and in South America, at Bogota, Caracas,
Lima, and Santiago, the service to South American cities having been resumed, after
an interval of six years, in January i960. There are regional services between New
York and Bermuda, Nassau and Jamaica (these services operate as extensions of the
London-New York route), and between Montreal and Bermuda, Nassau and Jamaica.
In December i960 BOAC introduced a transatlantic freight service, operating twice
a week between London and New York. BOAC’s Comet 4s connect at Hong Kong
with its Boeing 707s, to provide a round-the-world jet service. The 707s on this route
operate from Hong Kong across the Pacific to London via Tokyo, Honolulu, San
Francisco and New York.
BOAC operates a number of services in close association with other airlines. Associate
arrangements exist between BOAC and Qantas Empire Airways, South African
Airways, Central African Airways Corporation, East African Airways Corporation,
Nigerian Airways, Middle East Airlines, Cathay Pacific Airways, Air India Inter¬
national and Trans-Canada Airlines. In 1959 BOAC inaugurated its first round-the-
world service. It was the world’s first such service operated completely by jet-powered
airliners.
This network of services is supplemented by the activities of subsidiary and associated
enterprises overseas in which BOAC participates financially or with which it has
technical or management agreements.
BOAC has a major financial interest in airlines operating in the southern Red Sea
area, the Caribbean and the Persian Gulf. It is associated, either financially or through
advisory and other agreements, with airlines providing services in East, West and
Central Africa, Malaya, the Far East, Borneo, Turkey, the Middle East, and the
Bahamas.
In common with other International Air Transport Association (IATA) members,
BOAC makes available two classes of service on its route network—first class, and
either tourist or economy class, according to the route. Additionally, it offers a still
lower fare class of service on certain routes between the United Kingdom and certain
dependent territories.
BOAC’s operational fleet in June 1961 consisted of: 19 Mark 4 Comets-, 14 medium-
range Mark 102 Britannias-, 17 long-range Mark 312 Britannias; 8 DC 7Cs (only used
39°
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
on non-scheduled services); 2 DC 7F freighters and 15 Boeing 707s. Orders for 15
Vickers VCWs and 30 Vickers Super VCWs were outstanding.
BO AC has many pioneer achievements to its name: they include the world s first
pure-jet air transport service between London and Johannesburg in May 1952 by
Comet /; the first airliner, the Bristol Britannia, to provide long-range prop-jet travel
(in 1957); and the introduction of the Comet 4 on the North Atlantic route in October
1958, the first transatlantic pure-jet aircraft.
On all its services in the financial year 1960-61, BOAC carried 791,000 passengers,
12,584 short tons of freight and 5>4^ short tons of mail, compared with
passengers, 6,756 tons of freight and 3>4°7 tons of mail in i954—55-
In 1951-52 BOAC for the first time had a surplus amounting to £275,000, after
payment of interest on capital and before crediting the Exchequer grant of £1 5
million in that year. Since i952_53 BOAC has operated without Exchequer grant.
Small surpluses were earned from i953-54 t° I95b-57* Deficits occurred from I957y5^
to 1960-61. In 1960-61 BOAC had a deficit of £473.000> after payment of £47 million
in capital charges, including one of £2'i million in respect of its associated airline
companies.
From 1954-55 to 1960-61, the capacity on BOAC services increased from 205
million to 673 million capacity-ton-miles, traffic revenue increased from £36-6 million
to £88-o million, and operating costs were reduced from 40-1 pence per capacity-ton-
mile to 30-3 pence.
British European Airways
BEA is the seventh largest airline in the world and the largest in Europe, judged by
the annual number of passengers carried—4 million in the financial year 1960-61. In
that year it operated on its own behalf, and in conjunction with its associated companies
and subsidiaries, a network of services covering 36,034 unduplicated route miles,
serving 82 airports in the United Kingdom, Europe, North Africa, and the Persian
Gulf, within a periphery on which the farthest points to the north, south, west and
east are Bergen, Doha, Lisbon and Moscow. Its services within the United Kingdom
include a number which cannot be operated commercially but which meet a vital social
need; these include services to the Highlands and Islands of Scotland. Tourist fares
have been introduced on all BEA’s routes. BEA maintains a close working relationship
with BOAC, whose aircraft, by agreement, use a number of European stopping points.
BEA also co-operates with other airlines in order to create ‘through travel’ facilities.
BEA’s operational fleet in June 1961 comprised 12 Comet 4Bs, 23 Viscount 701s,
20 Viscount 802s, 19 Viscount 806s, 8 Pionair Leopard freighters, 7 Vanguards,
2 Herons, 3 Rapides and 5 helicopters. At that date 13 Vanguards, 2 Comet 4Bs
24 DH Tridents, 3 Handley Page Heralds and 3 Armstrong Whitworth Argosy freighters
were on order. . . ,
The Viscount 701 was brought into regular scheduled service in April 1953, thus
inaugurating the world’s first commercial operations with prop-jet aircraft. In April
i960 BEA started its first turbo-jet services using Comet 4B airliners. These are to be
followed by the 600 m.p.h. DH Trident airliners which are for delivery starting in 1963.
Experimental scheduled services with helicopters were carried out between 1950
and 1956 and in 1960-61 the helicopter unit completed further extensive research
work and charter operations. A British helicopter—the Westland itoWyne—which
may prove suitable for airline service within the next few years, has been ordered by
BEA. When the three Armstrong Whitworth Argosy freighters are in service in the
spring of 1962, they will be the first fully pressurised freight aircraft in the world.
Members of a Young
Farmers’ Club (see p.
183) judging pigs at a
county rally.
Seed testing at the
National Institute of
Agricultural Botany,
Cambridge, one of
the leading research
institutes working to
promote seed improve¬
ment.
AUTOMATIC MACHINERY AND PLANT
Section of an automatic plant for manufacture of starch at
the new factory of Carton Sons and Co. in London.
‘ AMY ’ (Automatic Monitor Yarn), a new machine for
analysing faults in yarns, developed for Northern Ireland’s
linen industry.
A panel controls ingredients of over eighty varieties of
biscuits at Carr & Co.’s Carlisle works.
The English Electric Co.’s transformer v
Antibiotics production: the solve
(a night view).
very unit at Glaxo’s Ulverston factory
The A.P.V. experimental continuous mashing plant at the
Park Royal Brewery of Arthur Guinness, Son & Co.
Stafford
'The Design Centre in
London, run by the
Council of Industrial
Design (see p. 233),
presents a selective
changing display of
British consumer
goods.
An example of modern British glassware (the Chance
‘Calypto’ range).
A worker in a Stowbridge crystal glass
factory.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
391
In addition to 3,990,957 passengers, BEA carried 419,996 short tons of freight and
8,850 short tons of mail in 1960-61. The figures in 1954-55 were 1 >874,316 passengers,
14,884 tons of freight and 6,964 tons of mail.
Over the period 1954-55 to 1960-61, BEA’s capacity increased from 98 million to
237 million capacity-ton-miles and operating revenue increased from £17'i million
to £40-7 million.
In 1954-55 BEA achieved its first net profit, of £63,000. In 1955-56 it earned a net
profit of £603,614, which was sufficient to wipe out its accumulated deficit and leave
a surplus of £64,528, and it has earned a profit in every subsequent year. In 1960-61
its profit totalled £1,545,000.
The Independent Airline Companies
In 1961 there were about 20 independent airline companies. A merger of the two
largest companies took place early in i960. Shipping lines have considerable, in some
cases controlling, interests in the more important companies. The principal indepen¬
dent companies are members of the British Independent Air Transport Association.
Because the air corporations were already operating services on all the major inter¬
national routes in 1952, most of the opportunities for the independent companies
to undertake scheduled services have been in the operation of secondary routes and the
provision of special types of services. The secondary routes on which the independent
companies provide passenger services at present consist mainly of domestic routes
and routes from United Kingdom provincial centres to Europe and the Channel
Islands. They also operate cheap regular services to certain points in the dependent
territories, and to Ghana and Tunis. Other special services are vehicle ferry services
from the United Kingdom to Europe, inclusive holiday tour services to Europe and
to Africa, and all-freight services, also to Europe and Africa. Some of the larger com¬
panies operate subsidiaries in overseas countries and, in some cases, also provide
management services for foreign airlines. With the establishment of the Air Transport
Licensing Board (see p. 387) independent companies can apply to operate on routes
formerly reserved for the corporations.
Passenger traffic on the independent companies’ scheduled services has risen from
387,000 in 1955 to 1,275,000 in i960. Load short ton miles have increased from
11 million in 1955 to 41 million in i960.
In May 1961 British United Airways ordered ten BAC 111 short-haul jet and four
VC 70 jet aircraft.
Charter Services
The greater part of the independent companies’ operations still consist of general
charter work, notably air trooping which accounts for more than half the total passenger
miles flown by independent airlines on all operations, both scheduled and charter.
Other charter work includes the carrying of ships’ crews to and from overseas ports;
transporting the staff of public or private concerns operating overseas; taking parties
to football matches and race meetings in the British Isles; carrying livestock, machinery,
foodstuffs, flowers and other valuable, fragile or perishable cargo. There are also
several firms that specialise in other aerial activites, notably aerial survey and pest
control.
Much charter business is now arranged through the air section of the Baltic
Exchange, the London market for shipping space (see p. 366), where business from
any part of the world is handled between brokers representing the owners of aircraft
available for hire and the prospective shippers of cargo or organisers of passenger
392
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
trips. Inquiries for the charter of aircraft were first received on the Baltic Exchange
as long ago as 1925, but it was not until 1947 that an air section was formed. The
Airbtokers' Association, formed in February 1949, operates, in London, a world market
for chartering aircraft to carry cargo and passengers.
Aerodromes
The Minister of Aviation is authorised to establish and maintain civil aerodromes,
and so may local authorities, subject to his approval; there are also privately owned
aerodromes. All aerodromes not operated by the Government which are used for
commercial operations are subject to the minister’s licensing, inspection and regulation.
There are approximately 138 civil aerodromes in the United Kingdom and, in
addition, about 54 Service aerodromes are available for civil use. Those under civil
control include 23 directly controlled by the ministry, 3 in the Channel Islands and
1 in the Isle of Man administered by the local island governments, and 28 aerodromes
licensed for public use, of which 19 are owned by municipalities. Customs facilities
are provided at 9 of the ministry’s aerodromes and at 8 others.
The main airports used by international scheduled services in 1959-60 were :
for European services: London, Manchester (RingwTay), Renfrew, and
Birmingham (Elmdon);
for North Atlantic services: London, Manchester (Ringway), and Prestwick;
for Middle East, African and Far East services: London.
Aircraft and passenger movements at the principal aerodromes continue to increase.
In i960 all United Kingdom civil aerodromes handled io-6 million passengers.
Of this total, London (Heathrow) Airport dealt with 5 -4 million, and London (Gatwick),
475,000. Outside the London area, Manchester (Ringway) handled the largest number,
752,000; followed by Glasgow (Renfrew), 652,000; and Belfast (Nutt’s Corner),
429,000. The three airports in the Channel Islands together handled 931,000 passengers.
The number of movements of aircraft engaged on commercial transport operations
in i960 was 402,000 for all United Kingdom aerodromes.
Development
London (Heathrow) Airport, already the largest and busiest airport in Western
Europe, will be strained to capacity within the next few years owing both to the increas¬
ing number of passengers and to the increased size of the new jet aircraft that many
international airlines are bringing into service. The recommendations of a special
committee, set up in 1957, to consider the future of London Airport have been
accepted by the Government as the framework of the airport’s development. Most of
the European short-haul services are now handled at the new passenger buildings in
the central terminal area opened in April 1955. For long-distance passengers a £3
million terminal will be completed in 1962. The new airport at Gatwick, 25 miles south
of London, has been developed as the second airport for London. The two airports
are becoming increasingly interdependent. Built alongside the main London to
Brighton railway, London (Gatwick) Airport is the first airport in the world to contain
road, rail and air transport in one unit. A privately owned helicopter terminal (or
‘heliport’) was opened in London, on the south bank of the Thames, in April 1959.
Prestwick (near Ayr, in Scotland), the second international airport in the United
Kingdom, is being developed so that it can accommodate the new large jet aircraft.
The runways at Ringway Airport, near Manchester, have been lengthened and a new
terminal building is being built.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
393
Air Traffic Control and Navigation Services
The Ministry of Aviation is responsible for providing efficient navigation and traffic
control services for all civil aircraft flying over or near the United Kingdom. Meteoro¬
logical information is provided by the Air Ministry. The Ministry of Aviation’s Air
Traffic Control Service is responsible for the safe, orderly and expeditious move¬
ment of all civil airliners flying into the United Kingdom along the corridors of
controlled airspace called airways.
In 1959 the Government established the Air Traffic Control Board, consisting of an
independent chairman and representatives of the Ministry of Aviation, the Air
Ministry and the Admiralty. The functions of the Board are to formulate air traffic
control policy in the United Kingdom, to act as the co-ordinating body in negotiations
with other countries, and with the ICAO. The Board is assisted by an air traffic control
executive, and is responsible jointly to the Minister of Aviation and the Secretary
of State for Air.
Internal Provisions
In 1950 the then Ministry of Transport and Civil Aviation introduced a system of
airways covering the main traffic routes and associated with controlled zones around
the major airports. During 1957 and 1958 a revised and extended airways system was
brought into use. There are three main air traffic control centres, operated jointly
by the Ministry of Aviation’s Air Traffic Control Service and by the Royal Air Force,
at London (Heathrow) Airport for southern England, at Preston for the north of
England and Wales, and at Prestwick for Scotland and the Atlantic. The Southern Air
Traffic Control Centre, situated on the boundary of London (Heathrow) Airport, is
one of the most advanced control centres in the world.
In order to provide the means by which the air traffic control system can accept
the increasingly heavy load of air traffic, the ministry has provided a variety of radar
installations and equipment. The United Kingdom was the first country to use radar
for the control of civil air traffic. The radar approach system known as Ground Con¬
trolled Approach (GCA) is now in use at all major airports in the United Kingdom,
in addition to the Instrument Landing System (ILS). A series of long-range radar
stations that is being set up will extend radar coverage very widely.
The ministry has provided a number of radio navigational aids to help aircraft to
remain safely within the controlled airspace and to make accurate estimates of their
time of arrival. In addition, the ministry supports the Decca Air and Marine Navigator
System now operating over a wide area of the United Kingdom and northern Europe
which can be used, by arrangement with the Decca Company, by any aircraft fitted
with the appropriate receiving equipment. Research is in progress into new landing
aids for use in bad weather. A unit of the Royal Aircraft Establishment, at Bedford, is
developing an automatic landing system which is expected to be in use within the next
few years.
Radio stations maintained by the ministry provide air to ground communications
for the use of the Air Traffic Control Service. There is also a network of communi¬
cations between ground stations in the United Kingdom and between United Kingdom
and overseas ground stations.
External Provisions
On routes outside the United Kingdom, British airline operators rely upon ground
organisation provided by the countries over which they fly. In January 1947 the
airways corporations took the initiative in forming a company, registered in the United
394
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Kingdom, called International Aeradio Limited (IAL), for the purpose of helping
countries in need of assistance by providing radio communications, air traffic control
and navigational facilities for civil aviation. Airlines of other countries have accepted
invitations to become shareholders, and the membership is broadly representative
of international civil aviation. IAL operates by entering into contracts with Govern¬
ments to provide whatever degree of assistance is required to enable States or
Administrations to fulfil their international obligations under the Chicago Convention
on Civil Aviation for the provision and maintenance of ground facilities for civil
aviation. In 1961 International Aeradio Ltd. was operating, either directly or through
subsidiary or associated companies, in 31 countries. It has 54 overseas stations all
over the world as well as at London and Cranfield, Bedfordshire, in the United
Kingdom. In all overseas areas, IAL trains locally engaged staff up to the standards
required for the services it provides; this policy has been so successful that more than
85 per cent of overseas staff are locally recruited. At Southall, Middlesex, IAL has
established a School of Air Traffic Control to train its own air traffic control officers
as well as those from other interested organisations.
THE POST OFFICE
The Post Office with its staff of some 365,000 is a Government department. It
is also the oldest of Britain’s State undertakings. In 1657, under the Protectorate
of Cromwell, an Act of Parliament was passed which declared that ‘there shall be
one general post-office and one officer, styled the Postmaster General of England
and Comptroller of the Post Office’.1
The ministerial head of the Post Office is the Postmaster General who, with the
Assistant Postmaster General, is responsible to Parliament for his department. Under
the Postmaster General, the permanent head of the Post Office is the Director General,
who is supported by three Deputy Directors General, one of whom is the Comptroller
and Accountant General, an Engineer-in-Chief and a solicitor. At the next level there
are eight departmental directors and a Public Relations Officer. The Post Office
headquarters is in St. Martin’s-le-Grand in the City of London.
Six of the main divisions of work at headquarters are carried down into the organisa¬
tion of three directorates—Scotland, Wales and Border Counties, and Northern
Ireland—each under the control of a director of the Post Office, and, in England,
seven regions, each under the control of a director; London has two regional directors,
one for postal services and one for telecommunications. In the United Kingdom there
are 475 head post offices, nearly 25,000 subordinate post offices, and 56 telephone areas.
The staff at headquarters and in the directorates and regions is divided into two
main groups: general Civil Service grades (administrative, executive and clerical)
and special grades recruited directly by the Post Office for its engineering and
operational activities (see p. 67).
The Postmaster General normally presides over meetings of the Post Office Advisory
Council, on which the principal users of the Post Office services are represented.
In addition, there are about 190 local Post Office Advisory Committees, on which are
represented local authorities, chambers of commerce, women’s organisations, the
press and other local interests; these committees are formed on the initiative of, and
are maintained by, the local interests, and are not organs of the Post Office.
1 Charles II declared all Cromwellian Acts null and void at the Restoration, but his Parliament
passed a similar Act in 1660.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
395
The work of the Post Office falls into two main categories: (i) direct services—
mail services, telecommunications and remittance business; (2) agency services—
savings services, broadcasting services and business undertaken on behalf of other
Government departments.
Although a Government department, the Post Office is also an immense trading
concern. The Post Office Report and Commercial Accounts for 1959-60 showed that its
income that year was £442-5 million and its expenditure £421-6 million, leaving a
surplus of £20-9 million. The postal and telephone services earned surpluses of £6-4
million and £16.9 million respectively, and the telegraph service incurred a deficit of
£2-4 million.
The Post Office Act, 1961, made certain changes in the status of the Post Office in
order to give greater recognition to its commercial character. While it remains a
Government department, its finances have been separated from the Exchequer and a
separate Post Office Fund has been established which is managed by the Postmaster
General, and into which all Post Office receipts are paid and out of which all payments
are made. Treasury control over the Post Office is confined to investment and foreign
exchange, and the pay and conditions of Post Office staff, who are still civil servants.
The Post Office is required, while maintaining its standard of services, to ensure that
its income is enough, taking one year with another, to pay its expenses. Parliament is
still able to debate and ask questions about Post Office policy and management and to
control Post Office charges and borrowing.
Mail Services
The development of postal communications in Britain can be traced from the
time when horsemen carried dispatches to the Tudor Court up to modern airmail
transport. There was a great expansion in the postal services in the eighteenth century
with the introduction of mail-coaches in 1784. In the first half of the nineteenth century
the Post Office was quick to take advantage of Britain’s early lead in engineering and
railway development, and the first dispatch of mails by train was made in 1830 between
Liverpool and Manchester.
The heavy charges, based upon the actual distance a letter was carried, were among
the factors which inspired Rowland Hill in his great work of postal reform that led to
the establishment of a uniform postage rate. In 1840 a uniform inland rate of postage
of one penny per half-ounce payable in advance came into operation, prepayment
to be made by means of adhesive postage stamps. Since the business world found
cheap postage a boon and since it proved ultimately a great financial success, it was
imitated by almost every country in the world.
The inauguration of the penny post (the rate remained unchanged until 1918)1
was followed by a rapid extension of the scope of the postal services, beginning in
1841 with the introduction of the registered post to ensure additional safety for
valuable mail. The money order system, which had operated as a private venture
from 1792 to 1838, was supplemented in 1881 by the issue of postal orders for fixed
amounts. Letterboxes had been instituted in London in 1855 to facilitate the increased
postal traffic, and in 1883 the parcel post was introduced. By the end of the nineteenth
century a regular delivery of letters was assured to every house in Britain. In the
twenty-one years from 1938-39 to 1959-60, the parcel post increased from 185
million items a year to 257 million, registered postal traffic from 62 million to 95
million and other postal correspondence from 8,240 million to 10,200 million. Every
1 The minimum postage rate for inland letters is now 3d. for one ounce.
396
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
day the Post Office handles about 33 million letters and parcels. Each year the Post
Office deals with an ever-incrcasing volume of Christmas mail; during the Christmas-
New Year season 1960-61, more than 950 million letters and cards were posted.
The Post Office’s services have been developed to match the needs of the traffic.
Improvements include the provision of motor mail vans and electrical trucks for
parcel deliveries, controlled by walking postmen, postal-sorting carriages on the
railways, special mail trains on certain routes and the ingenious apparatus by which
bags of mail are delivered and collected by trains running at express speed. Between
1919, when the Post Office inaugurated its own motor transport fleet, and 1961 the
number of motor vehicles used in carrying mail or for engineering purposes rose from
48 to 40,000. For quick transmission of mails within the central area of London, the
Post Office has for over 30 years operated an automatically controlled underground
railway that runs for 6| miles connecting Paddington in the west with Whitechapel in
the east and serving six intermediate stations.
The Post Office Research Station at Dollis Hill, London, has developed an electronic
letter-sorting machine (ELSIE). These machines are being used at busy centres,
and at Norwich, where postal codes are being used experimentally in addresses on mail,
all the sorting of small letters is mechanised. An experiment with a fully automatic
sorting machine is being carried out at Luton. A parcel-sorting machine has been
developed and installed at Leeds; new parcel offices being erected in London and
Manchester are designed to accommodate units. Field expermaents are being carried
out with machines for separating letters and packets, and for automatic ‘letter-facing’
(ALE), i.e. stacking letters with all the stamps in the same corner.
Airmail Services
Railways and motor vans as means of transport for mail are supplemented by
ships and aeroplanes. Each year about 3>000 tons of mail are carried by air within
the United Kingdom. Special night air services for mail are run between Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and the Irish Republic. In the year ended March i960
total overseas correspondence amounted to nearly 450 million items, 56 per cent of
which travelled by air. First-class mail to all European countries is sent by air or by sur¬
face transport, whichever offers earlier delivery, without payment of any air surcharge.
The Post Office dispatches over 40 tons of letter mail a week to European destinations
by this ‘all-up’ service, mainly in aircraft of British European Airways, whose network
of services enables many of the letters posted in London for Europe to be delivered
the following day. The air parcel service now operates to all countries in Europe
except Roumania, and about 13 tons of parcel mail are dispatched weekly to Europe
by air.
First-class mail and second-class mail are dispatched by air to countries outside
Europe upon payment of special airmail rates of postage. Light-weight air letters
costing 6d. each are popular, and air parcel services are also available to over 150
countries outside Europe.
Telegraphs
All private telegraph systems in Britain were transferred to the control of the
Postmaster General in 1870. Teleprinter-working for the transmission of inland
telegrams was introduced generally in 1928 and conversion to the present automatic
switching system was completed in mid-1954. It is now one of the most up-to-date
systems in the world and gives direct connection between any of the 500 larger
telegraph offices. The Post Office accepted 13-5 million inland telegrams in 1960-61.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
397
Telex
The Telex Service, which became fully automatic for calls within the United
Kingdom in i960, combines the speed of the telephone and the authority of the printed
word. Customers are provided with a teleprinter and a line to the telex exchange.
Calls may be made between the rapidly increasing number of telex users in the United
Kingdom (7,300 in May 1961) and also to some 100,000 subscribers spread throughout
the world. To send a message, the subscriber types it on the keyboard of his teleprinter:
it is then reproduced simultaneously on both the sending and receiving subscribers’
installations.
The service is available day and night except for a few routes outside Europe.
Messages may be transmitted to a subscriber even though his teleprinter in unattended,
and thus are available for attention when his office reopens. Use of the telex service
is expanding rapidly and the Post Office is planning for a system of 40,000 subscribers
in the United Kingdom by 1980.
For call charging purposes the United Kingdom is divided into 50 charging areas,
each with its telex centre. All inland telex calls are connected automatically by dialling.
They are charged in 2d. units, the amount of time bought for 2d. ranging from 60 to
15 seconds according to the distance of the call.
Inland and overseas telegrams may be sent to the Post Office and to cable offices
by telex. No charge is made for these calls and the telegrams are charged for at normal
rates. Arrangements may also be made for incoming telegrams to be received by telex.
Telephones
When the Post Office bought the property of the National Telephone Company in
1912, it became the owner of almost the whole telephone service in the country.
Local authorities wishing to operate their own telephone services were permitted
to do so under licence from the Postmaster General, but the only municipal system
now in existence is that provided by the Corporation of Hull. Local telephone service
in the Channel Islands is provided, also under licence, by their Governments’ telephone
departments. The Hull and Channel Islands local systems, although operated
independently of the Post Office system, are connected to the Post Office trunk network.
At the end of March 1961 there were 6,002 local telephone exchanges in the United
Kingdom. There were some 8-28 million telephones, including 73,800 telephone
call offices for public use. Over 80 per cent of the telephones are connected to auto¬
matic exchanges and it is planned that by 1970 all the exchanges will be automatically
operated. Telephones are being connected at the rate of about 420,000 a year. A
system of national telephone numbers is planned, which will make it possible to
dial trunk calls. Trunk dialling by subscribers began in Bristol in December 1958;
the system will have been extended by March 1962 to 300 exchanges serving i£ million
subscribers, to 60 per cent of all telephones by 1965 and to 90 per cent of all telephones
by 1970. The introduction of this new group routing and charging equipment (GRACE)
will bring the advantages of quicker service, automatic accounting and cheap long
distance calls of short duration, and will constitute the most radical reform of the
telephone service since the Post Office assumed national responsibility for it.
The number of trunk calls made has trebled since 1939; in the year ended 31st
March, 1961, the Post Office handled a total of 422 million, of which nearly a quarter
were at the cheap night rate, available from 6 p.m. to 6 a.m. and during the whole of
Sundays. The number of local calls handled during the year ended 31st March, i960,
was 3,800 million, an increase of 83 per cent compared with 1938-39.
A public radiotelephone service, introduced in 1959 and at present restricted to a
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
398
small area, enables the users of vehicles fitted with suitable radio equipment to make
calls to, or receive them from, any telephone in the United Kingdom network. Tele¬
phones transmitting messages through loudspeakers instead of through instruments
held by hand were made available to the public in 1961.
There are several specialised services available by telephone. Well over 90 per
cent of subscribers served by automatic exchanges can use the ‘999’ emergency
dialling service, which enables them to be connected as quickly as possible, and free
of charge, to the police, ambulance or fire brigade services, and in coastal districts to
lifeboat and coastguard stations. The automatic time service gives over 3 million
callers access to the correct time when they dial the three-letter code TIM or a figure
code which connects them to a speaking clock. A telephone weather forecast service
is available in 12 centres. In London, a telephone information service provides details
in English, French and German of important events being held in and around the
capital on the day of the call. There is a similar service in Edinburgh and Glasgow
during the summer months: the announcements are in English only. A test match
cricket score service operates at 32 centres during the cricket season and a road
weather service is provided in collaboration with the Automobile Association at nine
centres from 1st October to 30th April each year.
Private Telecommunications Services
There are 72,533 circuits not connected with the public exchange networks. These
circuits are rented for private use for telephone conversations, teleprinter connections,
photo-telegraphy, television, music, or for the transmission of signals which represent
data for computers or operate other devices.
Overseas Telecommunications
All the overseas telephone services from the United Kingdom have for a great
many years been developed and operated by the Post Office. The overseas telegraph
services, on the other hand, were shared until 1950 between the Post Office and Cable
and Wireless Ltd. This company was brought into public ownership in 1947. The
Post Office, which acquired the United Kingdom services, operates all overseas tele¬
graph services from the United Kingdom, except those offered by foreign telegraph
companies. Cable and Wireless Ltd. continues to operate its cable and wireless services
in many colonial and foreign territories.
The overseas telegraph, telex and telephone services are operated from inter¬
national centres in London.
Telegraphs. Telegraph services to overseas countries are operated from Electra House,
Victoria Embankment, London. In the year ended 31st March, i960, 12-7 million
messages were transmitted from London, and a similar number received.
Telex. The International Telex Exchange provides a teleprinter service to 46
countries abroad. In 1959-60, 2-4 million outgoing international calls were made,
and a similar number received from abroad. In mid-1961 facilities were intro¬
duced enabling telex customers in the United Kingdom to dial directly to many
European countries.
Telephones. Telephone service to Europe is through the Continental Exchange in
London, from which some 800 direct telephone circuits give service to all
countries except Albania. These circuits are also used to send and receive pictures,
and special circuits are used for broadcast transmissions. In 1959-60, 2-8 million
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
399
outgoing calls were made. Automatic dialling by operators to subscribers in
certain European countries has been extended and will be further developed.
Radio circuits which provide service with most countries outside Europe and
with many of the larger liners at sea are controlled at the International Exchange
(also in London).
Transoceanic Cables
In 1956 the first transatlantic telephone cable—also the first long-distance submarine
telephone system in the world—was inaugurated. The cable provides 43 telephone
circuits with the United States and 13 with Canada. Six circuits are used to provide
direct telephone communication between the United States and six continental
countries. In addition to the telephone circuits, the cable carries some 60 telegraph
and telex channels to the United States and 24 telegraph channels to Canada, the
latter supplementing the existing telegraph cables and improving communications
with Australia and New Zealand via Canada. The system provides a secure service
that is dependable day and night and free from the distortions and fade-outs
that affect radiotelephone circuits. The whole project was undertaken jointly by
the United Kingdom Post Office, the American Telephone and Telegraph
Company and the Canadian Overseas Telecommunication Corporation, which jointly
maintain it.
Another transatlantic cable is being laid by the Post Office cable ship HMTS
Monarch, between Scotland and Newfoundland at a cost of £8-5 million. When
completed in the autumn of 1961, it will provide capacity for at least 60 simultaneous
telephone conversations. It will form part of the projected round-the-world Common¬
wealth telephone cable agreed in principle at the Commonwealth Trade and Economic
Conference held in Montreal in 1958. It is expected that the £26 million section across
the Pacific ocean, between Canada and New Zealand, will be laid by 1964, the New
Zealand-Australia section having been laid by 1962. This will complete the first half
—some 14,000 route miles—of the network round the world. Completion of the second
half, via Singapore, East Pakistan, India, West Pakistan, South Africa and thence to
Britain, is expected to take a further five years after 1964. The cost of the whole
project is estimated at about ^80 million; the United Kingdom will contribute about
50 per cent of the capital cost, the remaining 50 per cent being shared by other
Commonwealth countries. In i960 the United Kingdom Post Office and the American
Telephone and Telegraph Company concluded an agreement to construct a third
transatlantic telephone cable, in 1963, at a cost of £18 million. This will be the largest
ocean cable in the world, and will carry 128 telephone circuits between the United
Kingdom and the United States, providing for the rapidly increasing telephone traffic
between the two countries. Before the first transatlantic cable came into use in 1956, the
weekly averages of radio calls between London and Canada and between London and
the United States were 530 and 2,320, respectively. By March 1961 traffic had risen to
weekly averages of 2,600 and 7,500, and was growing at the rate of about 450 calls a
month.
The first telephone cable between the United Kingdom and Sweden was laid in
i960, and one between Scotland, the Faroe Islands and Iceland in 1961; later, this will
link with a cable from Iceland via Greenland to Canada.
A new cable ship, HMTS Alert, of 6,200 tons has been built for the Post Office, at
a cost of about ^1-9 million; it will be used mainly for the maintenance of cables in
the north Atlantic and in laying the Commonwealth cable between Newfoundland and
Nova Scotia.
400
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Ship-to-Shore Radio Communications
In addition to the radio stations for overseas telecommunications, the Post Office
has ii coast radio stations in the United Kingdom. These stations provide for radio¬
telegraph and radiotelephone communications with ships at sea at ranges of up to
some 500 and 300 miles respectively. There is also the long-distance radiotelegraph
station, Portishead-Radio, which communicates with ships in all parts of the world.
These coast stations play an important part in the services concerned with safety
of life at sea. They keep continuous watch on the international radiotelegraph and
radiotelephone frequencies for distress calls from ships or aircraft and take immediate
action to obtain assistance for any vessel in distress. During 1960-61 the stations
handled 689 urgent and SOS calls from ships and aircraft.
In addition to the services for safety of life at sea, the stations exchange radio-
telegrams with ships and connect radiotelephone calls between telephone subscribers
ashore and suitably equipped ships, broadcast navigational warnings and weather
bulletins, and operate direction-finding services for ships.
The stations also operate a free medical advice service whereby the Master of a
ship of any nationality may obtain advice from appropriate medical authorities on
the treatment to be given in cases of sickness or injury aboard ship. During 1960-61
the stations dealt with 285 medical inquiries in this service.
The Post-Office Counter: Agency and Direct Services
At the post office counter the citizen can draw his pension and his family allowance,
buy a licence for his gun, dog, sound radio or television receiving set, renew his car
licence and buy national insurance stamps and premium savings bonds. In these
and many similar transactions the Post Office acts as agent for other Government
departments or local authorities. Largely as a result of the extension of social legislation
and the widening scope of the social services, the volume of work at post office counters
has increased greatly compared with the total for 1938-39. In the twenty-one years to
1959-60, the value of transactions with the public increased from just over £1,000
million to £5,850 million. In 1959-60 the Post Office paid out 35 million postal drafts
in payment of benefits under the National Insurance Scheme, and sold £41 million
worth of premium savings bonds.1
Counter sales include also an increasing volume of direct Post Office business:
during the year ended 31st March, i960, about 718 million postal orders were issued
by post offices. The work of the Post Office Savings Bank is described on p. 414.
1 Post Office engineers were responsible for the development of ERNIE, the electronic random
number indicating equipment used for selecting winning premium savings bond numbers.
XIII. FINANCE
A detailed description of the financial system of the United Kingdom may be found
in the comprehensive report of the Committee on the Working of the Monetary System
(Cmnd. 827), published in August 1959. This committee was set up by the Govern¬
ment in April 1957, under the chairmanship of Lord Radcliffe; the inquiry was the
first of the kind since 1931.
PUBLIC FINANCE
Public finance is concerned with the way public authorities (i.e. the central Govern¬
ment and local authorities) finance their activities—how their expenditure is decided
upon and how their revenue is obtained.
Money administered by public authorities1 can be roughly divided into two
categories:
1. The funds of the central Government, raised mainly by taxation, but also
in part by borrowing, and paid into and out of the Exchequer2 in accordance
with the proposals of the Government, as approved by Parliament (principally
the House of Commons).
There are also funds administered for special purposes by central Govern¬
ment departments and wholly or partially maintained by receipts which
do not come from the Exchequer. The only important one is the National
Insurance Fund, administered by the Minister of Pensions and National
Insurance and used for the payment of benefits under the National Insurance
Scheme.
2. The funds of local authorities, obtained partly from rates (local taxes on
dwelling houses and other real estate) and income from property and trading
receipts, partly from grants and loans from the Exchequer, and partly from
loans raised in the open market (see p. 78).
The following broad account of Government finance is concerned mainly with the
Exchequer and only incidentally with local government and other public funds.
Financial control, as exercised by the House of Commons, is based on law,
parliamentary rights and custom.
As the power of Parliament grew in late medieval and Tudor times, the principle
that taxation by the Crown required parliamentary consent was gradually evolved.
The principle was established, at the end of the constitutional struggles of the Stuart
period, by the Bill of Rights, 1689.
In medieval, Tudor and Stuart times, it is broadly true to say that once the King
was granted the right to raise a given sum by taxation, he was free to spend it as he
chose. In the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, the House of Commons gradually
developed the modern system of controlling expenditure through the device of
Appropriation which was embodied in the Exchequer and Audit Departments Act, 1866.
From the very early days of Parliament it had been established that such financial
1 For an account of public finance in Northern Ireland and its relationship to that of the
United Kingdom, see pp. 411-12.
2 The term ‘Exchequer’ took its name from the ‘chess-board’, or table with chequered cloth,
round which the King’s financial officials sat for accounting purposes in the twelfth century.
401
402
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
control as Parliament possessed should be exercised by the House of Commons.
This control became effective, as regards taxation, in the seventeenth century, but
as regards expenditure it was not effective until the nineteenth century. The con¬
trolling power of the House of Commons is acknowledged today in the Speech from
the Throne at the opening of a new session of Parliament, which is addressed to
both Houses but contains a special paragraph addressed to the Commons alone.
The Commons have traditionally claimed that the Lords have no power to modify
financial provisions, though they may reject such provisions; thus, to minimise the
chance of rejection, the practice was started in 1861 of embodying the main financial
provisions for the ensuing year in a single Bill. Since the passing of the Parliament
Act, 1911, however, the assent of the House of Lords is no longer needed for a Bill
certified by the Speaker to be a Money Bill (see p. 38).
Today, the authority of the House of Commons has to be obtained for all expenditure
by the central Government itself and for the raising of revenue by taxation or borrowing.
All Government revenue, other than sums received by Government departments in
the course of their normal activities (known as appropriations-in-aid), is paid into the
Government account with the Bank of England—known as the Exchequer Account
or the Consolidated Fund. With certain exceptions (the main one, as previously
stated, being National Insurance benefits), all payments by the Government come
out of this account.
The following sections outline the machinery by which expenditure and revenue
are authorised and controlled, the purposes on which public money is spent and the
sources from which revenue is obtained.
ESTIMATES AND EXPENDITURE
Classification of Expenditure
Central Government expenditure falls into two main groups:
1. Expenditure which is specifically authorised by Acts of Parliament other than
annual Appropriation Acts. This expenditure includes the loans made by the
Government (shown ‘below the line’1 in the Exchequer accounts) to nationalised
industries, local authorities and other public and private concerns for which
the Treasury has specific statutory authority to borrow. It also includes the
Consolidated Fund services, which are ‘above the line’ in the Exchequer
accounts. These services, which represent a permanent charge on the Con¬
solidated Fund, include the interest, sinking funds and cost of management of
the National Debt, the financial provision made for members of the royal
family, and salaries and pensions of judges and certain high officers whose
independence of the Government is thought to be better guaranteed by
permanent grant than by annual vote.
2. All other Government expenditure, which is authorised by annual Appro¬
priation Acts and which includes all expenditure on defence, on the social
services and on the general administration of the country. These are called
Supply Services because the House of Commons, when voting money, is
granting to the Crown ‘such aids or supplies as are required to satisfy ... the
pecuniary necessities of the Government. It should be noted that some of
this expenditure may also depend on legislation, such as the National Health
Service Acts, which relates to a specific object of expenditure.
1 See footnote on page 405.
FINANCE
403
Authorisation of Expenditure
The Estimates for these Supply Services are considered by the House of Commons
in Committee of Supply (that is, in Committee of the whole House with the Chairman
of Ways and Means, instead of the Speaker, in the Chair). The committee usually
discusses public policy relevant to the Estimates, though any Estimate may be
examined in detail if members wish and if time allows (see also p. 42).
Estimates for Supply Services in the financial year beginning on 1st April are
submitted to the Treasury by each department in the preceding November and
December. Estimated expenditure is grouped under main headings called ‘Votes’
which are further broken down into subheads and items. If the House of Commons
approves the Estimates, the sums asked for are voted and later confirmed in the
Appropriation Act; this Act appropriates the money to specific Votes. Within each
Vote, a ‘virement’, the spending of money on one subhead instead of on another,
is permissible so far as Parliament is concerned, but only with Treasury consent.
The Service departments may spend money on one Vote instead of another, but only
with Treasury sanction which, in turn, requires the retrospective authorisation of
Parliament. Departments are free to distribute expenditure within subheads as they
please subject to Treasury approval of the type of expenditure involved.
An insufficient estimate, or a new service not covered by the Vote, or a virement
of a magnitude or character which the Treasury considers should be brought to the
attention of Parliament, requires a Supplementary Estimate. The Treasury exercises
the same power of scrutiny over this as over the ordinary Estimates.
Scrutiny of Expenditure
Control of expenditure is maintained by the Treasury, by the Comptroller and
Auditor General, and by the Public Accounts and Estimates Committees of the House
of Commons.
The Treasury
The power of the Treasury to control expenditure derives from the responsibility
of the Chancellor of the Exchequer for the financial policy of the Government.
A central function of the Treasury is to present the Civil Estimates to the House
of Commons. In considering the Estimates submitted by departments, the Treasury
has to weigh the advantages of administrative proposals against the monetary and
economic cost, taking into account current Government policy, to decide the relative
merits of expenditure proposed by different departments and to eliminate any over¬
lapping, uneconomic or wasteful expenditure where this has escaped the net of depart¬
mental financial control. Quite apart from the scrutiny of Estimates, throughout
the year the Treasury keeps a close control over such matters as rates of pay and the
aggregate size of the staff in all Government departments, in addition to exercising a
general supervision over all departmental expenditure. The Treasury also lays down
general rules of financial and accounting procedure for departments and prescribes
the principles on which departmental contracts shall be made and the limits within
which losses may be written off.
The Comptroller and Auditor General
Control over issues of money to departments and the audit of accounts is exercised
by the Comptroller and Auditor General, who holds a permanent appointment with
the status of an officer of the House of Commons. Since 1866 he has had two functions:
404 BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
as Comptroller of the Exchequer he controls entries and issues of public money to and
from the Exchequer Account; and as Auditor General he audits departmental accounts
and submits his report on the Appropriation Accounts and other accounts, as required
by statute, to Parliament. His statutory function is to ensure that all expenditure is
properly incurred, e.g. that no payments are made which go beyond any relevant
statutory authority, and that Treasury sanction has been obtained wherever necessary.
In addition, however, he has been encouraged by successive Committees of Public
Accounts (see the next paragraph) to examine departmental expenditure with a view
to drawing attention to any cases of apparent waste or extravagance.
The Public Accounts Committee
The accounts of each department and the reports on the accounts made by the
Comptroller and Auditor General are considered by a select committee called the
Public Accounts Committee. This was first set up in 1861, on the motion of Mr.
Gladstone, for the purpose of ensuring that expenditure was properly incurred in
accordance with the purpose for which it was voted and with any relevant Acts of
Parliament. The terms of reference of the committee are to examine the accounts
and these terms have been widely interpreted by successive committees which have
investigated whether full value has been obtained for the sums spent by departments
and examined cases in which the administration appears to have been faulty or
negligent. The committee has therefore become a powerful instrument for the
exposure of waste and inefficiency. It embodies its findings in reports which may be
debated in the House of Commons. Its recommendations are considered by the
Treasury in consultation with departments and put into effect, so far as they are
accepted, according to Treasury instructions. A reply to each report is submitted by
the Treasury to the committee of the following session and where the recommenda¬
tions have been unacceptable to the Treasury the committee may either accept the
objections or return to the charge in subsequent reports.
The Estimates Committee
This committee was originally set up in 1912 and has been reappointed annually
except during the war years. In i960 it was made a standing committee. Phe com¬
mittee’s functions are to examine the Estimates, to report whether the policy implied
in the Estimates can be carried out more economically, to examine the principal
variations between the Estimates of the current year and those of the previous year
and to suggest the form in which the Estimates should be presented. Usually, the
committee selects each year a few Votes, or aspects of Government-voted services,
for review.
Since 1945 the committee has functioned through the medium of four, later fi\ e,
sub-committees, which carry out extensive investigations into the departments under
consideration. In practice, the Estimates for the current year are not affected, but the
committee’s recommendations produce changes in future Estimates and strengthen
Treasury control. In i960 a further sub-committee was added and it was hoped that
the committee would in future be able to examine and report briefly on the spring
supplementary estimates. It was announced at the same time that the committee
would be asked to examine the principal variations between the estimates presented
and those of the previous year, while additional parliamentary time was to be allocated
for discussion of the reports of the committee and of the Public Accounts Committee.
FINANCE
405
THE BUDGET
‘Budget’ is an old word meaning a bag containing papers or accounts. The use
of the word in public finance originated in the expression ‘The Chancellor of the
Exchequer opened his Budget’, which was applied in Parliament to the annual speech
of the Chancellor of the Exchequer explaining his proposals for balancing revenue and
expenditure.
The Budget speech is the main occasion of the year for reviewing the financial
state of the nation, and its formal basis is the Chancellor’s proposals for raising
money by taxation. By the time the Budget is introduced (usually in April) the Esti¬
mates of expenditure under various headings will have been presented to Parliament
and published, and the expected total of Government expenditure for the year will be
known. The Chancellor estimates the yield of the revenue on the basis of existing
taxation and proposes such changes in taxation as will provide whatever surplus or
deficit he considers desirable on economic grounds. These proposals are later embodied
in detail in a Finance Bill. The gap between the Budget Statement and the Royal
Assent to the Finance Bill (usually given in July) is covered by the Provisional Collection
of Taxes Act, 1913, whereby changes in income tax and customs and excise duties1
have immediate statutory effect if adopted by Resolution of the House of Commons.
The Budget speech also gives figures relating to certain payments of a capital
nature for which the Government has statutory power to borrow and which are there¬
fore excluded from the Budget expenditure met from revenue. These items and others
are set out in the part of the Budget which lies ‘below the line’.2 In 1961 the first
of what is to be an annual series of White Papers giving details of below the line
expenditure was issued before the Budget.
Budget Policy
The original purpose of the Budget was purely financial—to provide money for
Government expenditure. From an early stage, however, it was appreciated that
taxation would affect the distribution of income and property and the level of expendi¬
ture on particular goods and services. At a later period it was realised that taxation
also affected the nation’s total expenditure and therefore the general level of economic
activity. Since the second world war, Budgets have been consciously designed in
greater or lesser degree to bring the total demand for goods and services into balance
with the supplies which could be made available.
Direct taxation on income and property affects the distribution of wealth because
the rates vary according to the size of income and property, the proportion of a high
income taken in tax being much greater than the proportion of a small one; at the
same time, the services provided by the Government (whether in cash or kind) are
generally available to all, irrespective of wealth, but in some cases they are specially
designed to benefit people with lower incomes. Indirect, or outlay taxes (see p. 407)
do not affect the distribution of income; their main purpose has always been the
raising of revenue, but by discouraging or encouraging consumption of particular
goods they can be used to influence the allocation of resources and the pattern of trade.
The Budget affects the general level of expenditure and, therefore, the total demand
for goods and services, in the following way: if there is an increase in Government
expenditure without an increase in taxation then total demand for goods and services
1 In 1957 the Act was extended to include purchase tax.
* Items ‘below the line’ are: (1) receipts applicable by statute to debt interest which would
otherwise be paid out of revenue; (2) receipts applicable to debt redemption; and (3) payments
for which the Treasury has power to borrow.
406
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
will tend to rise; the same thing will happen if there is a decrease in taxation without
a decrease in Government spending. In this way the Budget can be used to counter
unemployment. On the other hand, if there is an increase in taxation without an increase
in Government expenditure or a decrease in Government expenditure without a
decrease in taxation then the total demand for goods and services will tend to fall.
In this way the Budget can be used to counter inflation.
For some years after the war, budgetary policy was mainly designed to counter
inflation by holding down consumer demand for goods and services so that it would
not hamper exports, investment or the defence programme. Between 1953 and 1955
Budgets were aimed particularly at encouraging higher investment and production.
The Supplementary Budget of October 1955, and the succeeding Budget, had the
object of curtailing excessive internal demand and of strengthening the balance of
payments. After some reductions in taxation in 1957 and 1958, the aim of the Budget
of April 1959, which provided for further important reductions in taxation and an
increased rate of repayment of post-war credits, was to give a further stimulus to
economic activity and to encourage the utilisation of spare industrial capacity while
ensuring that price stability was maintained. The i960 Budget was designed to con¬
solidate and fortify the progress of the United Kingdom’s economy. In 1961 the
Budget was intended to counter inflation and to encourage exports; it was also the
occasion for the introduction of two new fiscal ‘economic regulators’ (see p. 408).
Sources of Revenue
Money to meet ‘Ordinary’ (mainly current) Budget expenditure of the central
Government is in normal years derived from taxation. Taxes can be divided into
two groups, direct and indirect, which correspond roughly to the duties collected
by the Board of Inland Revenue and by the Board of Customs and Excise. The
most important inland revenue duties—income tax (including surtax), profits tax
and estate duty (death duty)—are levied directly on the income or property of those
who, in general, have to bear them. Income tax on individual (though not on corporate)
incomes and estate duty are progressive taxes, that is, larger incomes and estates
bear a proportionately higher rate of tax. Stamp duties, although not a direct tax, are
also collected by the Board of Inland Revenue. Taxes on motor vehicles are collected
by the principal local taxation authorities, which are the county or county borough
councils in England and Wales and the corresponding councils in Scotland; the
proceeds are paid by the local authorities to the Exchequer.
Income Tax, Surtax, and Profits Tax
Income tax is imposed at a standard rate for the year of assessment beginning
on 6th April. The standard rate for the year 1961-62 is 7s. 9d. in the £ (3875 per
cent). The tax imposed on an individual is graduated by means of personal allowances
and reliefs, by reduced rates of tax on the first sections of taxable income,1 and by the
surtax.2 In the case of a married couple the incomes of husband and wife are aggregated
1 The balance of income remaining after deduction of the personal allowances and reliefs
is taxable income. For 1961-62 the reduced rates are: is. gd. in the £ on the first £60; 4s. 3d.
in the £ on the next £150; and 6s. 3d. in the £ on the following £150. The remainder is charged
at the standard rate.
2 The surtax, which is essentially an income tax at higher rates, is charged on personal incomes
exceeding £2,000 a year after deducting certain personal allowances in excess of the single
person’s basic allowance. In addition, the same earned income relief as for income tax and a
special earnings allowance (not exceeding £2,000) are deductible from earned income only.
Surtax is imposed at rates which increase progressively until (for 1961-62) on investment
income above £15,000 a year, income tax and surtax combined amount to 17s. gd. in the £.
FINANCE
407
and are treated as one income, but a higher personal allowance is given than for a
single person. Earned income bears less tax than other income as certain fractional
deductions (‘earned income relief’) are allowable.
A single person earning £700 a year pays £101 in income tax, while a married couple
with the same earned income pays £67; if the couple have two children under the
age of 11, their tax falls to £15; when the children are between the ages of 11 and 16,
the tax is only £5; if the children are over 16 and receiving full-time education, no
tax is paid at all. The range of tax payable by a single person varies from, for example,
£49 on an earned income of £500 a year to £1,440 on an earned income of £5,000;
if the income is unearned, tax liability on £500 will be £84, and on £5,000 will be
£2,340-
Most wage and salary earners pay their income tax under a PAYE (Tay-as-you-
earn’) scheme, under which tax is deducted at source, thus enabling them to keep up
to date on tax payments.
Companies are liable at the standard rate of tax on their total income irrespective
of its amount; they are also subject to profits tax, the rate of which was increased from
12! per cent to 15 per cent from 1st April, 1961.
In general, income tax is charged on all income which originates in the United
Kingdom and on all income arising abroad of persons (including companies) resident
in the United Kingdom. The main exceptions are that interest on certain United
Kingdom Government securities belonging to persons not ordinarily resident in
the United Kingdom is exempt; income from certain classes of possessions abroad is
chargeable not on the amount of income arising but on the amount of income remitted
to the United Kingdom; and the trading income of specified overseas trade corporations1
is not charged so long as it remains undistributed. The United Kingdom has entered
into agreements with many countries providing for relief from double taxation;
where such agreements are not in force, the United Kingdom allows unilateral relief.2
Estate Duty
Estate duty is chargeable on the value of property (whether legally settled or not)
which passes or is deemed to pass at death. Thus, it is not limited to property owned
by the deceased. It may, for example, extend to trust funds to the income of which
the deceased was entitled during his lifetime, and to gifts made by the deceased within
five years of his death (one year in the case of a gift for public or charitable purposes).
Estates with a net capital value of £3,000 or less are exempt from duty, but on estates
of a higher value there is a progressive duty ranging from 1 per cent to 80 per cent.
Indirect Taxes
Most indirect or outlay taxes are customs and excise duties and are levied on
commodities or services. They are called indirect because the importer, manufacturer,
wholesaler, or provider of commodities or services pays them first and then adjusts
his prices to his customers accordingly.
Customs duties are levied on imported goods, and excise duties on goods produced,
and services provided, at home. The purchase tax, which is also collected by the
Board of Customs and Excise, applies equally, and at the same rate, to home-produced
and to imported goods.
1 Broadly speaking, these are companies, which, though managed and controlled in the
United Kingdom, carry on all their trading activities overseas.
2 I he information in this paragraph is not legally authoritative. For this purpose reference
should be made to the relevant Statutory Instruments. Inquiries in the United Kingdom should
be addressed to the Secretary, Board of Inland Revenue, Somerset House, London, W.C.2.
N
408
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The system of customs duties is twofold in its purpose: it has the function of provid¬
ing a measure of protection for British industries or preference for products imported
from Commonwealth countries overseas and it has also the function, in association
with the excise system, of providing revenue.
The principal revenue duties collected by the Board of Customs and Excise are
those on tobacco, alcoholic drinks and hydrocarbon oil. There are a number of smaller
revenue duties, e.g., on betting, television, matches and sugar. The protective customs
duties cover a wider field, but their contribution to the yield of indirect taxation is
relatively small.
Purchase tax is charged on a wide range of goods, nearly all of them consumer
goods, at rates varying from 5 per cent to 50 per cent of the wholesale value. Articles
subject to revenue duties of customs and excise are in general exempt from this tax;
other goods free of purchase tax include food, fuel, books and newspapers, young
children’s clothing and footwear, certain non-proprietary drugs and medicines, some
household appliances and textiles. In the 1961 Finance Act, the Chancellor of the
Exchequer was given power to vary by order the rate of purchase tax and of the main
customs and excise duties on certain goods by up to 10 per cent in either direction.
This power is intended to be a regulator of the economy as is the power, granted at
the same time, to levy by order a surcharge on employers’ contributions under the
National Insurance scheme. Both these powers will lapse in 1962 unless renewed by
statute. A surcharge of 10 per cent was introduced on duties and purchase tax in
July 1961.
THE EXCHEQUER ACCOUNTS, 1960-61
In the Budget of April 1961, total current expenditure for the financial year ending
31st March, 1962, was estimated to reach £6,002 million, while the estimate for total
current revenue (after allowing for taxation changes) was £6,508 million, making a
surplus of £506 million. These figures exclude self-balancing revenue and expenditure
such as Post Office trading. ‘Below the line’ total payments were estimated at £1,089
million, while total receipts were estimated at £514 million. After taking into account
the surplus on current account there was an estimated deficit of £69 million to be met
by borrowing.
Table 26 shows the Budget estimates for 1961-62 in comparison with the out¬
turn (Exchequer receipts and issues) for the previous year. The diagram on p. 409
illustrates the pattern of Government estimates of revenue and expenditure on current
account in 1961-62.
CAPITAL PAYMENTS AND RECEIPTS
In the last few years the main items of capital expenditure dealt with in the part
of the Budget statement which lies ‘below the line’ have been funds to meet capital
expenditure by the Post Office (see p. 395); working capital for the National Coal
Board; loans to other nationalised industries (see p. 270); loans under the Export
Guarantees Acts; loans for overseas assistance; and loans for house purchase. Capital
receipts have come mainly from the repayment of loans to local authorities and
nationalised industries. If, on balance, there is a deficit, it is met from the proceeds of
Government borrowing or from the surplus, if any, in ‘Ordinary’ revenue and
expenditure, i.e. ‘above the line’; while if there were a surplus it would go to reduce
the National Debt.
FINANCE
409
THE UNITED KINGDOM BUDGET 1961-62
(based on April 1961 Budget estimates)
REVENUE
Receipts per £ from different sources
TAXES ON INCOME AND CAPITAL lO
Tobacco (£835million)
Alcohol (£418million)
Television and (£55million)
Betting:
Purchase Tax (£525million)
Oil and Motor Duties
Oil, including petrol (£486 million)
Motor (£155 million)
Other
Stamp Duties, Import Duties (except on
Alcohol. Tobacco, Oil), etc. (£285 million)
NON-TAX REVENUE 9d.
Miscellaneous, including receipts from the
servicing of certain loans and . .==, n ,
broadcast licences (£245 million) l ^=1 9d.)
EXPENDITURE
Outlay per £ on different items
SURPLUS Is. 7d.
Surplus(£506 million):
helps to finance
capital expenditure
National Debt
Interest on Government stocks.
National Savings securities, etc.
(£700 million)
DEFENCE 5s. td.
TOTAL £6,SOB million £1. O. 0
Defence (£1,656 million)
SOCIAL SERVICES, SUBSIDIES, ETC. 7s. 8d.
Health (£632 million)
Personal Payments
Family Allowances, War Pensions, National
Assistance, Government Contribution
to Insurance Funds (£613 million)
Excludes benefits and pensions paid out
of National Insurance Funds
Agricultural Support
Subsidies (£267 million)
Assistance to Local Services
School Education, Meals and Milk, Housing,
Police, Classified Roads, etc. (£982 million)
OTHER SERVICES AND PAYMENTS 3s. 6d.
Miscellaneous, including Atomic Energy,
Commonwealth and Foreign. Universities,
Tax Collection, Trunk Roads. Broadcasting,
and Deficit of British Transport Commission
(£1,152 million)
£1. o. O
410
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
TABLE 26
Estimates and Outturn for 1960-61 and Estimates for 1961-62
After Budget changes (£ million)
Revenue1
1960-61
Budget
Est.
Outturn
1961-62
Est.
Expenditure
1960-61
Budget
Est.
Outturn
1961-62
Est.
Inland
Revenue
Customs and
Excise
Motor Duties
Total Tax
Revenue
Other Revenue
Total Revenue
3,273
2,409
113
3,212
2,390
126
Above the Line
Consolidated Fund
Services
3,598
2,510
155
5,795
185
5,728
206
6,263
245
5,980
5,934
6,508
769
798
Supply: Defence . .
Civil
Total Supply
Total Expenditure
Surplus
1,608
3,299
1,596
3,393
4,907
4,989
5,676
304
5,787
147
5,980
5,934
815
1,656
3,531
5,187
6,002
506
6,508
Total Receipts
Net Payments
432
622
428
541
Below the Line
514
575 Total Payments
1,054
969
1,089
1,054
969
1,089
Surplus above the line
Net payments below the line
Borrowing requirement
304
622
318
147
541
394
506
575
69
Source: Financial Statement 1961-62.
1 Excluding revenue, estimated at £130 million for 1961-62, arising from the surcharge and
certain indirect taxes imposed in July 1961.
Apart from the use of surpluses, repayments and extra-budgetary funds such as the
National Insurance Fund, Exchequer payments ‘below the line’ are financed by
direct borrowing from the public either through the National Savings Movement (see
p. 414) or by borrowing on the market by means of new issues of securities. New issues
of Government securities are made from time to time for the purpose of refinancing
maturing issues (conversion issues) or to raise new money (issues for cash). Since
1956, capital requirements of the nationalised industries have been met by the
Exchequer, while most of the requirements of the local authorities since 1955 have
been met by direct borrowing from the public by mortgages or stock issues; net
Exchequer lending [via the Local Loans Fund) to local authorities has steadily
diminished since 1955 and in the last three years local authorities have, on balance,
been repaying debt to the central Government.
The National Debt
So far, borrowing on a large scale has been undertaken only to finance deficits
during or immediately after a war. The National Debt rose from £651 million in
1914 to £7,435 million at the end of the first world war, and from £7,131 million
FINANCE
411
in 1939 to £23,637 million in 1946. On the 31st March, 1961, the total National
Debt was £28,254 million, of which £1,979 million was repayable in currencies other
than sterling, mainly to the United States and Canadian Governments. Of the £26,275
million of internal debt, about £5,055 million was short-term debt, mainly in the form
of 91-day Treasury bills, while the long-term loans included a variety of stocks, bonds,
loans, and certificates carrying fixed rates of interest (ranging from 2% to 5! per cent)
and with fixed or indeterminate dates of repayment.
PUBLIC FINANCE IN NORTHERN IRELAND
The general system of public finance in Northern Ireland is, in its main features,
similar to that operating in the United Kingdom as a whole, under which public
revenues, with a few minor exceptions, are paid into the Exchequer, from which no
money can be withdrawn except on the authority of Parliament. That authority is
expressed in the case of Consolidated Fund charges in permanent legislative form,
and in the case of Supply Services by annual Appropriation Acts based on estimates
prepared by departments and sanctioned by the Ministry of Finance.
The major portion of taxation (customs duties and most excise duties, purchase
tax, income tax, surtax and profits tax) is imposed by the United Kingdom Parliament
over the whole country, and is paid, in the first instance, into the United Kingdom
Exchequer. From the amount attributable to Northern Ireland, known as ‘Reserved’
Revenue, there is deducted and retained by the United Kingdom Treasury, under the
Government of Ireland Act, 1920, the sum contributed by Northern Ireland towards
Imperial Services (called the ‘Imperial Contribution’), the cost of the administration
of the Supreme Court, and other Reserved Services, and the cost of collecting Reserved
Revenue. The balance, termed the ‘Residuary Share of Reserved Taxes’ is paid over
to the Exchequer of Northern Ireland and joins with the proceeds of taxes levied and
collected by the Government of Northern Ireland, called ‘Transferred’ Taxes, and
with other non-tax receipts of a miscellaneous nature, to form the public income. The
items of Transferred Tax Revenue are estate duties, stamp duties, pool betting duty,
bookmakers’ licence duties, television advertisement duty, television licence duty, most
excise licence duties and motor vehicle duties.
A Joint Exchequer Board, representative of the Treasury and the Ministry of
Finance for Northern Ireland, constituted in accordance with the Government
of Ireland Act, 1920, determines the amount of Reserved Revenue and the cost of
Reserved Services attributable to Northern Ireland for each year, the amount of
the Imperial Contribution and such other questions affecting the financial relations
of the two Governments as may be referred to it.
In the Northern Ireland Budget for 1961-62 (year ending 31st March), total
revenues were forecast at £117*68 million and expenditure at £108*92 million. After
allowing for the Imperial Contribution, provisionally estimated at £8*7 million, there
was a small Budget surplus of £60,180.
The Public Debt of Northern Ireland, totalling £91 million on 31st March, 1961,
is fully covered by repayable advances and investments held by the Ministry of
Finance.
Outside the Exchequer system in Northern Ireland, various funds have been
established, in addition to statutory Reserve and Sinking Funds, for specific purposes.
In general, these funds follow the United Kingdom pattern, the principal funds being
those relating to National Insurance and Government loans. The latter constitutes
a pool of capital money available for local and public authority borrowings; on 31st
412
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
March, 1961, a sum of approximately £86 million was outstanding against such
authorities.
BANKING AND PRIVATE FINANCE
The British banking system is long established and well integrated. It comprises
a central bank; commercial banks which carry on the usual main banking services;
the United Kingdom offices of various banks whose main business is in other countries;
and various specialised banks and similar financial institutions.
The Bank of England
The Bank of England is the central bank and its principal business is to act as
banker to the Government and to the other banks, as the agent of the Government
for important financial operations and as the central note-issuing authority; it also
maintains relations with central banks overseas. It was established in 1694 by Act
of Parliament and Royal Charter as a corporate body, and its entire capital stock was
acquired by the Government under the Bank of England Act, 1946.
As the central bank, the Bank of England is responsible for co-ordinating the appli¬
cation of the Government’s monetary policy. One of the main instruments for this
purpose is the Bank Rate—the minimum rate at which the Bank of England will
discount approved bills of exchange and a key factor in the general pattern of interest
rates.
As banker to the Government, the Bank of England holds the main Government
accounts and it acts as the Government’s agent for the issue and registration of
Government loans. It also operates, for the Treasury, the administration of exchange
control which has been in force since 1939.
The commercial banks maintain large balances with the Bank of England and these
balances form part of the banks’ cash reserves. In addition, under an agreement made
with the London clearing banks and Scottish banks in 1958, the Bank of England
may call on these banks for ‘special deposits’ which, not being freely disposable, do
not rank as part of their liquid assets. This scheme, designed to restrict the liquidity
of the banking system should the need arise, was first put into operation in i960,
when, on two separate occasions, each of the banks was called upon to deposit a sum
equivalent to 1 per cent per cent for Scottish banks) of its total deposits. A further
call for 1 per cent per cent for Scottish banks) was made in August 1961.
The Bank of England has the sole right in England and Wales of issuing bank
notes. Notes thus issued need a 100 per cent cover in gold and securities, together with
a limited amount of coin, the part covered by securities and coin being the ‘Fiduciary
Issue’, the level of which is subject to parliamentary control. In practice very little
gold is now held by the Issue Department of the Bank of England, the bulk of the
United Kingdom gold (and foreign exchange) reserves being in a separate Government
fund, known as the Exchange Equalisation Account; this account was originally
established in 1932 for the purpose of checking undue fluctuations in the exchange
value of sterling, and is operated by the Bank of England as agent for the Treasury.
The provision of coin for circulation is the responsibility of a Government department,
the Royal Mint.
The Commercial Banks
The banks handling the major part of the domestic banking business in the United
Kingdom are limited liability companies which, in the main, are subject to the ordinary
law relating to such companies.
FINANCE
413
Some of the main features of the United Kingdom commercial banks are:
1. A relatively small number of banks control a large number of branches.
United Kingdom banking members of the British Bankers’ Association
include 11 London clearing banks,1 5 banks in Scotland and 3 in Northern
Ireland, and control nearly 13,000 branches and had total deposits of over
£8,800 million at the end of i960.
2. The volume of cheques handled is very large and, in spite of a stamp duty
of 2d. on each cheque, many payments—and even relatively small payments
—are made by cheque. The average daily value of cheques, drafts, bills and
bankers’ effects cleared in i960 through the London and Provincial Clearing
Houses was £741 million; and many cheques do not, for various reasons,
pass through clearing houses.
3. It is the practice of the London clearing banks to maintain a ratio of about
8 per cent between cash reserves and total deposits (of which about three-
fifths are repayable on demand, the remainder being mainly deposits at interest
and subject to notice).
The banks make advances to customers partly in the form of overdrafts
and partly in the form of loans (with or without collateral security); in either
case, the advance is normally for a short term only, unless renewed.
The ratio of London clearing bank advances to total deposits declined
from about 43 per cent in 1938 to about 17 per cent at the end of the war,
but gradually climbed back to settle down to a level of 26 to 30 per cent for a
number of years from 1951. After the withdrawal in 1958 of official requests
to the banks to restrict the level of their advances, the percentage again
moved up, and by April 1961 was nearly 47 per cent, well above the 1938 level.2
This increase was accompanied by innovations in bank lending practice,
including the introduction of schemes for personal loans repayable by fixed
monthly instalments over periods up to two years, and facilities for limited
service accounts at low cost. Another development was the acquisition by
many banks of share capital in hire purchase finance companies.
4. Certain banks in Scotland and Northern Ireland have retained limited rights
to issue notes; these issues, apart from an amount specified by legislation for
each bank, must be fully covered by Bank of England notes and by coin.
United Kingdom Offices of Banks Operating Mainly Overseas
The importance of London as a financial and trading centre and as the largest
city of the British Commonwealth has encouraged many banks whose main business
is in other Commonwealth countries and foreign countries to maintain London
offices3; in some cases, indeed, the institutions concerned are United Kingdom
companies and the London office is the head office. These London offices form part
of the complex structure engaged in the financing of trade not only between the
1 Three of these banks are members of the London clearing house but have headquarters
outside London (at Liverpool and Manchester).
2 About 33 per cent of the banks’ deposits at this time were covered by cash and other highly
liquid securities, while 17 per cent were covered by British Government and other long-term
securities. It is an invariably accepted convention that at least 30 per cent of deposits should be
covered by cash and other liquid securities.
3 Twenty-nine overseas banks are members of the British Bankers’ Association.
4H
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
United Kingdom and other countries but also in goods which are shipped direct
between other countries.
Savings Banks and the National Savings Movement
The function of Trustee Savings Banks and the Post Office Savings Bank is to
provide readily available facilities for the investment of savings, particularly the
small savings of persons with low incomes. Both these types of banks were already
well established during the nineteenth century. The growth of their business was,
however, encouraged in the first world war when the War Savings Committee was
set up under Government auspices to promote an official savings drive. A new type
of long-term security for the small investor was inaugurated at that time. This was
the National Savings Certificate, encashable at par at any time, with interest payable
only on encashment, but free of income tax. From this war-time drive originated the
present National Savings Movement, which encourages the widespread investment of
savings in Trustee Savings Banks and the Post Office Savings Bank and in National
Savings securities. The policy of the movement is determined by the National Savings
Committee for England and Wales and similar committees for Scotland and Northern
Ireland.1 The committees are bodies of independent persons representing regional
savings organisations and various national institutions connected with such matters as
finance, industry and education. They are assisted by a salaried staff of civil servants.
Voluntary local savings committees, often assisted or promoted by local authorities,
co-ordinate the work of voluntary local savings groups.
There are now three National Savings securities: the National Savings Certificate,
the Defence Bond and the Premium Savings Bond. Defence Bonds were introduced
in 1939 and are repayable at par on notice; interest is payable half-yearly and is
taxable. Premium Savings Bonds, which were first issued in 1956, after an initial
period of three months and thereafter monthly, give investors a chance to win prizes
ranging from ^25 to £5,000 instead of receiving interest. By 1st August, 1961, about
£324 million had been invested in this form of savings.
Trustee Savings Banks are managed by boards of honorary trustees and managers,
and most of the funds deposited with them are ordinary deposits which are with¬
drawable on demand or at short notice. These deposits are invested with the National
Debt Commissioners, and the Government is responsible to the trustees for the repay¬
ment of the money so invested, with accrued interest, as and when required. In certain
circumstances, Trustee Savings Banks also accept deposits of up to £2,000 for special
investment. These deposits, which may receive a slightly higher rate of interest
than ordinary deposits, are invested under the supervision of the National Debt
Commissioners, but the Government is not responsible to the trustees for the repay¬
ment of these investments. In November i960 there were about 1,340 Trustee
Offices controlled by 83 independent banks; there were over 8 million depositors and
deposits totalled £1,519 million.
The Post Office Savings Bank is the largest organisation of its kind in the world. It
has over 22 million active accounts; in December i960 total balances, which carry a
Government guarantee, amounted to £1,710 million, about £75 per depositor.
Through a centralised system of accounting, a depositor can pay in money or make a
withdrawal at any one of some 20,000 post offices throughout the country. In 1961
1 The Northern Ireland Ministry of Finance is responsible for the administration of Ulster
Savings, but the furtherance and organisation of the savings movement in Northern Ireland is
the concern of a central voluntary committee, which is assisted by county and local committees
and district groups, all of a voluntary nature.
FINANCE 415
the Bank celebrated its centenary and it was announced that the introduction of a
‘giro* system was under consideration.
A person may only have deposits in one Trustee Savings Bank and his holding in
the ordinary department is limited to £5,000. He may also hold up to £5,000 in the
Post Office Savings Bank. The maximum amount of National Savings Certificates
which may be held by any one person is £900 worth of the current (tenth) issue, in
addition to holdings of previous issues, and £800 worth of Premium Savings Bonds.
The limit on individual holdings of the current issue of Defence Bonds (5 per cent) is
£5,000; this is in addition to holdings of previous issues. By May 1961 national
savings had reached a record total of over £7,353 million, and covered one-quarter of
the National Debt.
Co-operative Banks
The Co-operative Wholesale Society formed a deposit and loan department about
the year 1870, and the right of a co-operative society to engage in banking was legally
defined in the Industrial and Provident Societies Act of 1876. The primary purpose
of the Co-operative Wholesale Society Bank was to serve the co-operative movement,
whose financial centre it has become, but the bank has also come to include among
its clients trade unions and other mutual societies, local authorities and individual
depositors. The bank’s headquarters are in Manchester.
OTHER FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
It has been the policy of the commercial banks to leave the provision of many
special financial facilities to other financial institutions. These facilities, which are
supplementary to the credit facilities of the banking system, are mainly provided
through the Discount Market, Finance Corporations, hire-purchase finance companies,
the Stock Exchange, Investment Trusts, Building Societies and the Insurance Market.
The firms engaged in such activities are in the main highly specialised, e.g. discount
houses, stockbrokers, insurers, insurance underwriters and brokers. Another type of
financial institution, the merchant bank, has been of great importance in the finance
of trade and commodity dealings and in the flotation of major issues of bonds, particularly
for overseas concerns and governments.
The merchant banks helped to give London an international reputation as the
main world centre for short-term and long-term borrowing. Long-term loans for
development purposes floated on the London market earned for Britain a continuing
flow of interest and attracted a steady flow of orders for British goods and products.
Where short-term credit was required, much British trade and also a large proportion
of trade between foreign countries was usually financed by bills of exchange, which
were accepted as payable at maturity by the merchant banks (also known as accepting
houses) and were traded on the discount market, thus providing an easy method of
transferring debts and claims.
The Discount Market
The main business of the Discount Market consists of trading in and holding
commercial bills of exchange, United Kingdom Government Treasury bills and
other short-term securities. In recent years commercial bills have become a small
proportion of the discount market’s business, while dealings in short-term bonds and
Treasury bills have increased considerably. Tenders for Treasury bills are invited by
the Government each week and the firms which comprise the discount market acquire
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
416
the bulk of their Treasury bills in this way. They finance the purchase of the bills
and securities they hold, chiefly by loans from the banks; about half of these loans
come from the London clearing banks, and most of the remainder from other United
Kingdom and overseas banks. In the main these loans and deposits may be called in
at any time.
The commercial banks do not, in the ordinary way, buy Treasury bills at the
weekly tenders except on behalf of customers, but purchase, from the Discount
Market, bills which have been taken up by the market and held until they become
of a currency required by the banks.
The Bank of England acts as lender of last resort to the 12 members of the London
Discount Market. The clearing banks do not borrow money directly from the Bank of
England; if they need to add to their cash resources they call in part of their loans to
the Discount Market. If, as a result, any particular discount house is unable to cover
its needs for cash elsewhere, it is obliged to borrow from the Bank of England,
normally at bank rate.
Finance Corporations
Two corporations, the Finance Corporation for Industry Limited and the Industrial
and Commercial Finance Corporation Limited, were set up in 1945 to assist in dealing
with the problems of post-war reconstruction and development. Although the Govern¬
ment displayed considerable interest in their formation, the corporations themselves
are ordinary limited companies with no official representation on their boards and
having no recourse to public funds. Another finance corporation, the Commonwealth
Development Finance Company Limited, was established in 1953 to assist develop¬
ment projects in the Commonwealth. Among other financial corporations of note are
the Agricultural Mortgage Corporation Limited, and the Scottish Agricultural
Securities Corporation Limited.
Finance Corporation for Industry Limited
The FCI was formed to assist in the provision of capital (in amounts of £200,000
and upwards) for the re-equipment and development of major industries with a view
to promoting efficiency and thereby assisting in the maintenance and increase of
employment.
The FCI has an authorised and issued capital of £25 million and may borrow up to
four times this amount, making a possible total of resources of £125 million. The share
capital is held as follows: 40 per cent by insurance companies, 30 per cent by trust
companies and 30 per cent by the Bank of England. At 31st March, 1961, the capital
called and paid up was 2 per cent (£500,000); the Bank of England paid £5 million
in advance of call in 1958-59. The liability of the shareholders in respect of the
uncalled capital represents security to the banks providing loans for the corporation’s
working capital.
The enterprises assisted by the FCI are concerned with a variety of products,
e.g. steel, oil, chemicals, shipping, diesel engines, and electrical components.
Industrial and Commercial Finance Corporation Limited
The ICFC has a smaller issued capital than that of the FCI and has as its main
object the provision of credit and finance by means of loan capital and share capital
for industrial and commercial concerns in Great Britain, particularly in cases where
the existing facilities provided by banking institutions and the Stock Exchange are
not readily or easily available.
FINANCE
417
The authorised and issued share capital of the ICFC is £15 million paid up in full
and a line of credit of £13*5 million, both provided principally by the London clearing
banks and the Scottish banks in proportion to their size, with a token participation by
the Bank of England. In addition, a public debenture issue of £10 million was made
in July 1959 and a further issue of £6 million in April 1961. The current resources of
the ICFC, including reserves shown in the balance sheet, therefore total about
£49 million.
The corporation’s function is to provide finance in sums ranging between £5,000
and £200,000 for small and medium-sized concerns. It has over 650 customers and
has established branches in several large provincial cities.
Commonwealth Development Finance Company Limited
The Commonwealth Development Finance Company was set up in 1953 as a new
channel for the investment of private capital in Commonwealth development schemes.
Its authorised share capital is £30 million, of which about 14! million ‘A’ ordinary
shares of £1 (2s. paid) are held by industrial, shipping, mining and banking interests
in the United Kingdom, and nf million ‘B’ ordinary shares of £1 (10s. paid) are
held by the Bank of England and certain central banks in the Commonwealth. At
the end of March 1961, its commitments amounted to the sterling equivalent of
approximately £19-87 million.
Agricultural Mortgage Corporation Limited
The primary function of this corporation, which was established in 1928, is to
grant long-term loans against first mortgages on agricultural lands and buildings in
England and Wales. The share capital was subscribed by the Bank of England and
other banks, but the funds are mainly derived from public issues of debentures,
of which about £41 million was outstanding in March 1961.
The Scottish Agricultural Securities Corporation Limited
This corporation was established in 1933 under the provisions of the Agricultural
Credits (Scotland) Act, 1929. Its share capital is subscribed by three Scottish banks.
It fulfils broadly similar functions in Scotland to those of the Agricultural Mortgage
Corporation in England.
The Stock Exchanges
Although there are several Stock Exchanges in the United Kingdom, the London
Stock Exchange is by far the most important and is one of the world’s two foremost
free markets in securities.
The Stock Exchanges provide a means by which a holder of quoted stocks or
shares (all important securities are quoted) can, if he wishes, find a buyer for his
securities; they are also a most important element in the raising of new capital by
Government and commercial borrowers. Some 10,000 securities are quoted on the
London Stock Exchange; at the end of i960 these had a total market value of £37,075
million.
The Stock Exchanges do not fix dealing prices; the terms on which bargains are
made between members reflect the interaction of supply of and demand for the
securities concerned. All the Stock Exchanges operate under strict rules of conduct
which they formulate themselves.
In recent years there has been a constantly rising demand for ordinary (equity)
shares, partly in expectation that such shares will maintain their real value or grow
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
418
in value in periods of rising prices. Insurance companies and pension funds now
invest a larger proportion of their assets in these shares than formerly, and the Trustee
Investments Act of 1961 permits trustees, under certain conditions, to invest up to
half the funds they hold in trust in equity shares.
The ownership of Stock Exchange securities in the United Kingdom is much more
widespread than formerly: it is estimated that there are about 3 million shareholders
and that their shareholdings are widely distributed. The largest public company in
Britain has over 300,000 shareholders and there are several others with over 25,000.
Controls over Borrowing
Since 1932 there has been some degree of control over capital issues and other
forms of large-scale borrowing in the United Kingdom. The controls before 1939
resulted from public requests by the Chancellor which the various markets observed.
During the war, a Capital Issues Committee was given the task of advising the
Treasury on the administration of the statutory control of capital issues (and analogous
transactions).
In 1945 the war-time Capital Issues Committee was retained with the same primary
function: to advise the Treasury on the control of capital issues. The Borrowing
(Control and Guarantees) Act, 1946, empowered the Treasury to make orders regu¬
lating borrowing and the raising of money by the issue of shares.
In February 1959 controls over capital issues were considerably relaxed: only
issues of redeemable shares and issues for local authorities and overseas borrowers
require specific approval. The timing of all issues of £1 million or more must be
approved by the Bank of England.
Investment Trusts and Unit Trusts
Through investment trusts and unit trusts, investors may spread their risks and
obtain the benefit of skilled management.
The ordinary type of investment trust is constituted as a public company, registered
under the Companies Acts with limited liability; its business is to invest its capital
in a range of stocks and shares. Like other companies, it may issue several types of
stocks or shares and may retain part of its profits to build up reserves. Investment
trusts grew to importance in the latter half of the nineteenth century and have been
prominent in directing capital towards overseas investment.
Unit trusts are constituted by trust deed between a management company and
a trustee company which holds the securities. Normally, the management company
buys a block of stock exchange securities spread over several companies in certain
sectors of the economy and re-sells them to the general public in the form of units
or sub-units. The price at which the sub-units are sold includes a service charge
which represents the remuneration of the managers of the trust. Fixed trusts are
composed of investments which are determined in advance and which may not be
changed. In flexible trusts, on the other hand, the managers may widen the field of
investment and change the investments as they judge desirable.
Although the first unit trust appeared in London in 1868, it was not until about
1931 that unit trusts became important. The Prevention of Fraud (Investments)
Act, 1939, amended by the Companies Act, 1947, and consolidated in the Prevention
of Fraud (Investments) Act, 1958, brought unit trusts under the control of the Board
of Trade. During the last few years unit trusts have grown rapidly. By the end of i960
the market value of funds invested in unit trusts amounted to about £220 million.
FINANCE
4J9
The Insurance Market
Although a certain amount of insurance is provided by Friendly Societies and
Trade Unions, most insurance services in the United Kingdom are in the hands of
either mutual or joint stock companies or Lloyd’s underwriters.
Table 27 shows the distribution of business in terms of gross premium income in
1959, the latest year for which figures are available.
TABLE 27
Insurance Companies—Gross Premium Income 1959
£ million
Life {a)
Marine
Other
general
business
Total
Companies incorporated in the
U.K 
Lloyd’s underwriters ..
670
80
129
789
187
1,539
316
Total
670
209
976
1,855
Source: Board of Trade.
(a) Including Industrial Life assurance, which is a type of life assurance in which the premiums
are collected at frequent intervals of two months or less by house to house collection. It is con¬
ducted by both friendly societies (called collecting societies) and companies, the former account¬
ing for a gross premium income of £39 million in 1959 and the latter for a further £153 million.
Insurance Companies
There are about 300 insurance companies incorporated in the United Kingdom but
most of the business is in the hands of about 100 companies. Most United Kingdom
insurers write several of the main classes of business although some specialise in one
class, particularly in life assurance where about 40 companies write only that type of
business. A few specialise in reinsurance.
In addition over 100 overseas companies carry on business (and even more companies
are represented) in the United Kingdom, thus emphasising the international nature of
the market. The natural centre of the market is in London, but some of the large
companies have their administrative headquarters elsewhere.
In x959 total insurance funds of the British insurance companies and collecting
societies amounted to £6,200 million; of this, £4,000 million was ordinary life funds,
£1,300 million was industrial life funds and £900 million general non-life funds.
With the growth of group pension schemes the rate of accumulation of life funds is
increasing greatly.
There is no government control over the investment policy of insurance funds and
these represent one of the most important sources of funds for investment in commerce
and industry. More than a third of the total assets of British insurance companies
are invested in equity shares and debentures, and this proportion is gradually increasing.
420
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Lloyd's
Lloyd’s is an incorporated society of underwriters in London. The name ‘Lloyd’s’
is derived from Edward Lloyd’s coffee house, established in the late seventeenth
century, where merchants with maritime and other interests gathered to transact
business. By the middle of the eighteenth centry, Lloyd’s coffee house had become the
principal centre of underwriting business and of intelligence about shipping move¬
ments. Although in its earlier history the activities of Lloyd’s were confined to the
conduct of marine insurance business, during the last sixty years there has also been
built up at Lloyd’s a very considerable world-wide market for the transaction of other
classes of insurance business, except life assurance of which the amount transacted at
Lloyd’s is negligible. In addition to its insurance activities, Lloyd’s maintains a
world-wide organisation for the collection and diffusion of shipping intelligence.
Lloyd’s is now governed by a series of special Acts of Parliament starting in 1871;
the affairs of the Society of Lloyd’s in its corporate capacity are administered by the
Committee of Lloyd’s, which does not itself transact insurance business.
The interests of a holder of a Lloyd’s policy are safeguarded in the following ways:
(1) every Lloyd’s underwriter is liable for his underwriting debts to the full extent
of his means and is required to lodge security by way of a deposit with the Committee
of Lloyd’s; (2) the whole of the premiums received by an underwriter must be placed
in a trust fund to be used exclusively for the payment of his underwriting liabilities
and expenses, and only ascertained profits can be released to the underwriter and then
only with the consent of the trustees; and (3) every underwriter must submit his
accounts to an annual audit.
The usual practice of underwriters today is to form themselves into groups known
as syndicates which generally specialise in particular branches of insurance. The
underwriters forming the syndicate appoint an agent who is empowered to accept
risks on their behalf and to control all matters concerned with the syndicate’s business.
If the insurance is for a relatively large amount, several syndicates may participate,
but each underwriter is individually liable only for the proportion of the risk accepted
on his behalf.
Underwriters may not accept business directly from the public, but must transact
through Lloyd’s brokers in London, who must be connected with Lloyd’s, either as
members or subscribers.
Insurance Brokers
The insurance market is completed by the insurance brokers, acting on behalf of
the insured; brokers are an essential part of the Lloyd’s market and a valuable part
of the company market. Many brokers specialise in reinsurance busmess, acting as
intermediaries in the exchange of contracts between companies, both British and
overseas, and often acting as London representatives of the latter.
International Insurance Services
Over two-thirds of the fire, accident and marine insurance business comes from
abroad, partly by direct placing in London and partly from branches and agencies
established in over 100 countries. The basic principle of this international business
is that resources capable of meeting any potential loss are instantly available for use
in any part of the world.
Behind this large and international volume of business stand the very substantial
assets of the companies, in addition to substantial reserves of uncalled capital and the
FINANCE
421
whole of the deposits, underwriting trust funds and personal fortunes of Lloyd’s
underwriters.
Building Societies
The principal function of building societies is to supply long-term loans on the
security of private dwelling-houses purchased for owner occupation, though loans
are occasionally made on the security of commercial and industrial premises and
farms. The funds of building societies are derived mainly from the general public
who invest in shares or deposits. The amount of share capital is not fixed; shares,
which have a fixed value, are not dealt with on the Stock Exchange but may be with¬
drawn in cash if notice is given. The Building Societies Acts, 1874 to i960, prescribe
the general way in which societies must conduct their business. The Chief Registrar
of Friendly Societies has discretionary powers to stop a society either advertising or
accepting money from investors if he considers that the way in which the society’s
business is conducted is jeopardising investors’ money. The rapid expansion of
building society activity in the twentieth century has been accompanied by a con¬
centration of most of the business in the hands of a few very large societies. At the end
of i960, 726 societies were in operation, with total assets of £3,166 million. The
amount advanced on mortgage in i960 was £559 million.
Under the House Purchase and Housing Act, 1959, the Minister of Housing and
Local Government and the Secretary of State for Scotland were empowered to make
advances to building societies which fulfilled certain requirements as regards assets
and liabilities, liquid funds, reserves and other matters. These advances are for
relending to prospective house purchasers in respect of houses built before 1st January,
1919, which do not exceed £2,500 in value; they were suspended in July 1961, having
been running at the rate of £40 million a year.
XIV. TRADE AND PAYMENTS
Britain was one of the first countries to remove legal and fiscal restrictions on the
internal movement of persons and goods, and the first to develop adequate facilities
for the movement of large quantities of goods by mechanical transport (canals, roads,
railways and steamships). With its resources of coal and iron, and its succession of
mechanical inventions, Britain was also the first country to industrialise on a large scale
and to produce a wide variety of consumer goods in large quantities. In addition,
Britain evolved, over a long period of years, the specialised financial services essential
for the smooth functioning of overseas trade.
OVERSEAS TRADE
Although relatively small in area and accounting for only 2 per cent of the world’s
population, the United Kingdom is the world’s second largest trading nation, conduc¬
ting 10 per cent of international trade.
In the nineteenth century Britain attained a pre-eminent position in international
trade. At the end of the century Britain’s share of exports of manufactures entering
into world trade was about 33 per cent. Its share of world imports was somewhat
larger than that of world exports, as imports into Britain were paid for not only by
exports of goods but by interest on overseas investments and net receipts from shipping
and a variety of financial services. Even before 1914, however, this supremacy was
being increasingly challenged by other nations, including Germany and the United
States, and although Britain’s imports and exports increased in absolute terms over
the years, its share of the world total tended to decline. By 1937 Britain’s share in
world exports of manufactures, measured by value, had fallen to 22 per cent compared
with 24 per cent in 1929 and 30 per cent in 1914. In the years immediately following
the second world war, Britain’s share rose again and in 1950 was 25 per cent; but by
i960 it had fallen to 16 per cent.
For over a century international trade has been of vital importance to Britain’s
economy. Britain relies upon imports for half its total consumption of foodstuffs and
nearly all the raw materials needed for its industries. Its exports of goods and services
together absorb over a fifth of the gross national product. It is a major supplier of
machinery, road and railway vehicles, aircraft, metal manufactures, electrical apparatus,
chemicals and textiles. Britain is the world’s largest market for foodstuffs, and among
the largest for metals, cotton, wool, petroleum and many other products.
PATTERN OF TRADE
Changes since 1938 in value, volume, composition and geographical distribution
of imports and exports are outlined in the following paragraphs.
Value and Volume
Imports rose in value from £919 million in 1938 to £1,802 million in 194? anc^
£4,556 million in i960. The rise in value of exports was from £471 million in 1938
to £1,142 million in 1947 and £3,536 million in i960.
Calculations of changes in the volume of trade (i.e. changes after eliminating varia¬
tions due to price movements) compared with pre-war cannot be made with precision,
as the relative values of different types of goods on which the volume figures are based
have changed considerably since 1938. It has been estimated that in i960 the volume
422
TRADE AND PAYMENTS
423
of imports was about one-quarter greater than the 1938 figure, while the volume of
exports was about twice that of 1938. Statistics showing the value and volume of
imports and exports in 1938 and in selected post-war years are set out in Table 28.
TABLE 28
Imports and Exports: Annual Figures
Value (£ million)
Total imports c.i.f.(6) ..
Exports of U.K. goods,
f.o.b.(c)
Re-exports f.o.b.(c)
Volume Index Nos.
Total imports,
1954=100 ..
Exports of UK goods,
1954=100 ..
Price Index Nos.
Imports,
1954=100 ..
Exports,
1954=100 ..
Terms of Trade(d) ..
1954=100 ..
1938(a)
919
471
61
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
1948(a)
2,077
1,579
61
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
1951
3,892
2,566
125
100
100
113
100
113
1954
3,359
2,650
98
100
100
100
100
100
1958
3,748
3,176
141
114
111
99
110
90
1959
3,983
3,330
131
122
116
98
109
90
1960
4,556
3,536
141
138
122
99
111
89
Sources: Accounts Relating to Trade and Navigation of the United Kingdom,
and Statistics Division, Board of Trade.
(а) The figures for 1938 and 1948 are not completely comparable with those of later years.
(б) ‘Cost-insurance-freight’, i.e. including shipping, insurance and other expenses incurred in
the delivery of goods as far as their place of importation in the United Kingdom. Most of these
expenses represented earnings by United Kingdom firms.
(c) ‘Free-on-board’, i.e. the cost of the goods to the purchaser abroad, all costs and charges
accruing up to the time of placing the goods on board the exporting vessel having been paid by
the seller.
(d) The ratio of import to export price index numbers: a rise indicates an adverse movement.
n.a. = not available.
The increased importance of exports in the economy can be assessed broadly by
comparing their value with that of the gross national expenditure; the proportion has
risen from 10 per cent in 1938 to about 15 per cent in 1948 and about 17 per cent in
i960. Over the same period there was a much smaller change in the relationship of
imports to gross national expenditure; it was about 16 per cent in 1938, 17 per cent in
1948 and 18 per cent in 1960.
Commodity Composition
An analysis of the commodity composition of total imports and exports and the
composition of engineering exports and food imports in i960 is given in the diagrams
on p. 424.
424 BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
As domestic output of agriculture has expanded by about 70 per cent compared with
pre-war while the volume of food imports is now probably not very different from the
pre-war level, Britain relies relatively less than before the war on imported food, which
now forms a smaller proportion of total imports. The value of imports of food,’bever¬
ages and tobacco represented 45 per cent of total imports in 1935-38; by 1948 this
COMMODITY COMPOSITION OF IMPORTS AND EXPORTS IN I960
(Percentages of total values)
Miscellaneous 2 Food, drink and tobacco 6
Composition of Food, Drink and Tobacco Imports Composition of Engineering Products Exports
percentage had fallen to 42 per cent and by i960 to 34 per cent. On the other hand,
imports of manufactures has increased since before the war and they are now relatively
more important in relation to the total. Imports of semi-manufactures formed 15 per
cent of the total in 1935-38 and 14 per cent in 1948; by i960 the proportion had risen
to 20 per cent; for finished manufactures (including both capital and consumer goods)
the proportion has risen from 7 per cent in 1935-38 to 12 per cent in i960. (A marked
growth in trade in manufactured goods has been a general feature of world trade since
the war.) Although the volume of imports of basic materials has shown a modest
increase since 1938* their share of the total (based on value figures) is now less than
pre-war; 28 per cent in 1935-38 and 23 per cent in i960. Imports of fuels rose from
TRADE AND PAYMENTS 425
5 per cent of the total in 1935-38 to 8 per cent in 1948 and 11 per cent in i960, owing
to the greatly increased consumption of petroleum products.
In the early post-war years exports of engineering products increased considerably
in importance in relation to United Kingdom exports as a whole. In 1935-38 they had
represented 20 per cent of the total; in 1948 the proportion had risen to 36 per cent and
since then there has been a steady increase to 45 per cent in i960. Within this group the
increase in the relative importance of motor vehicles and aircraft has been particularly
marked. The proportion represented by ships has been falling since 1948 but in i960
was still greater than before the war. The share of chemicals has risen steadily. On the
other hand, the share of textiles declined from 24 per cent in 1935-38 to 19 per cent in
1948, with a sharper fall in later years to 9 per cent in i960. In the fuels group, the
proportion of petroleum to the whole has fallen since 1954 but in i960 was still greater
than before the war. Most of the decline in the share of coal exports had taken place by
1948. The proportion of the total of exports of metals has remained fairly constant.
Further details of the percentage composition of United Kingdom exports are set out
in Table 29.
TABLE 29
Percentage Composition by Value of United Kingdom Exports
Per cent
Commodity
Average
1935-38
1948
1954
1959
1960
Engineering products ..
Ships and boats
Road vehicles and parts
Aircraft, including engines and
parts..
Metals
Textiles (including wool tops)
Chemicals
Other manufactures
Coal, coke, etc. ..
Petroleum
Food, beverages and tobacco
Other products ..
Totals
20-1
1-0
4-0
0-8
134
24-0
6- 3
11-9
8-0
1-0
74
7- 9
100
35-9
2-5
8-8
1-6
11- 9
19-3
6-8
12- 3
2-8
0-6
5-9
4-6
100
37-9
1- 9
104
1-8
12-8
13-5
7-7
10-9
2- 5
3- 2
5-8
5-7
100
44-1
1*5
12-1
4- 5
13-5
8-7
8-8
10-5
0-7
2-9
5- 7
5-0
100
44-5
1- 5
12- 5
3- 8
13- 3
8- 5
9- 0
10-7
0-8
2- 9
5-6
4- 7
100
Source: Board of Trade.
In i960 the Commonwealth provided a market for rather more than two-fifths
of exports of United Kingdom goods, while the six countries of the European Economic
Community or Common Market (Belgium, France, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands
and Western Germany) took 15 per cent, the United States 9 per cent, the Middle
East (including members of the sterling area) 6 per cent and Latin America 5 per
cent. The other members of the European Free Trade Association (see p. 429) accoun¬
ted for about 11 per cent of United Kingdom exports.
Table 30 shows Britain’s principal markets and principal supplier countries in i960,
and the percentage change compared with 1959.
426
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
TABLE 30
United Kingdom Exports and Imports in i960 by Main Countries of Destination
and Origin
Total UK Exports
to:
United States ..
Australia
Canada ..
Western Germany
South Africa
India
Sweden ..
New Zealand ..
Value
(£ million)
322
259
213
159
153
150
131
120
0/
/o
change
on
1959
—10
+ 16
+ 3
+ 12
+ 3
—12
+ 17
+23
UK Imports
from:
United States . .
Canada ..
Australia
New Zealand ..
Western Germany
Netherlands
Sweden
India
Value
{£ million)
567
375
198
186
182
181
164
149
0/
/O
change
on
1959
+ 53
+20
—11
+ 2
+26
+ 13
+ 28
+ 5
Source: Board of Trade Journal.
From a longer term standpoint, one of the most important trends is the growth of
exports to industrial countries, and particularly to the United States and Canada. The
sterling area provides a higher proportion of United Kingdom imports than pre-war,
although there has been a slight decline in the latter part of the past decade. In i960
there was a heavy increase in imports from North America, mainly industrial materials
and capital goods. The expansion of oil consumption has been a major factor in the
increasing imports from the Middle East. In Western Europe, there has been a sharp
rise in recent years in trade with Western Germany, which has become the most im¬
portant British market there. Nearly one-third of both exports and imports relate to
trade with Western Europe.
Re-Export Trade
Re-exports are goods which are exported (1) in the condition in which they are
imported or (2) after having undergone minor operations—e.g. simple blending,
husking, repacking—which leaves them essentially unchanged. For some hundreds of
years Britain has been an important centre of re-export trade, although its importance
relative to total United Kingdom export trade has declined in the last half-century.
Traditionally,-the greater part of United Kingdom re-export trade is in raw materials
and foodstuffs, for example, wool, rubber, tea, non-ferrous metals and fur-skins.
Recently, a considerable re-export trade has developed in machinery, notably aero¬
engines which have undergone repair and maintenance in the United Kingdom. A
large part of the re-export trade is in commodities imported from Commonwealth
countries and sent on to countries in Europe, particularly traditional re-exports such as
tea and wool.
In i960 the total value of re-exports was £141 million and the principal items were:
rubber, fur-skins, raw wool, tea, non-ferrous metals, beverages and aeroplane engines.
Invisible Transactions
As previously mentioned, the United Kingdom normally imports more goods than
it exports; the gap is, as a rule, covered by net earnings from invisible transactions.
Receipts, payments and net earnings of invisible transactions are divided for statistical
TRADE AND PAYMENTS
427
purposes into six main groups: Government; shipping; interest, profits and dividends;
travel; migrants’ funds; and other services. Some of these figures are precise (for
instance, for Government transactions), others are estimates. The diagram below shows
the breakdown of the figures in 1959 and i960.
INVISIBLE OVERSEAS TRANSACTIONS, 1959 and I960
Under the heading of Government current transactions, the main items on the
debit side are military expenditure overseas and grants and loans. Shipping receipts
come mostly from export freights and cross trades between other countries and also
from passenger traffic. Shipping payments, on the other hand, arise mainly on account
of tramp shipping services.
About three-fifths of Britain’s receipts under the heading interest, profits and
dividends come from investments in the sterling area; the returns from these invest¬
ments are closely linked to movements in the prices of primary commodities. On
the debit side, major items include interest paid on sterling held by overseas countries
and interest payments on long-term loans from Canada and the United States.
Receipts from travel have increased greatly since 1950, reflecting the growing impor¬
tance of the British tourist industry (see p. 428). Major components of other services
include payments and receipts in respect of insurance, civil aviation and films; expen¬
diture of United States and Canadian forces in Britain; net earnings of merchants; and
royalties, commissions, banking and other services.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
428
Tourist Trade
The tourist industry is now one of Britain’s largest earners of foreign currency. Over
the period 1951-59, earnings from the foreign tourist trade and business travel
amounted to the equivalent of £990 million, in addition to £416 million earned by
associated British shipping and air services. In i960 tourist receipts from overseas
amounted to £188 million. United Kingdom residents on holiday or travelling on
business overseas spent about ^205 million in the same year. The United Kingdom
usually has a large net surplus on earnings from tourism with North America (£60
million in i960) but a deficit with Western Europe (£109 million in i960).
The total number of visitors to the United Kingdom in i960 was i,669,ooo1—an
increase of 20 per cent on the 1959 total and more than three times that of 1937.
The British Travel and Holidays Association, which is a grant-aided body, is con¬
cerned with the promotion of the tourist trade, particularly by means of publicity
overseas. It maintains offices, agencies or representatives in many overseas countries
(see Appendix p. 519). The association was formed in April 1950 by the merger of
the British Travel and Holidays Board and the Travel Association.
CONDUCT OF TRADE
It has been a major aim of successive United Kingdom Governments since the
second world war to work for the removal of restrictions on trade and payments, to
reduce barriers to exports and, as far as possible, to restore the convertibility of
sterling. To this end, Britain has taken a leading part in setting up such organisations
as the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the General Agreement on Tariffs
and Trade (GATT), the Organisation for European Economic Co-operation (succeeded
in the autumn of i960 by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Develop¬
ment (OECD)) and the European Payments Union (succeeded by the European
Monetary Agreement), and has had a large share in these organisations’ activities,
especially those to free trade from the restrictions which grew up in the war and post¬
war periods.
In addition to substantial reductions in tariffs on imported goods, carried out
through the GATT, the United Kingdom has removed almost all its quota restrictions
on imports from countries with which it is in normal GATT relations.
There is a short list of goods on which import controls remain. It includes some
items of special difficulty and a few where restrictions are recognised internationally,
such as arms, ammunition and radioactive materials.
Tariff Policy
In the nineteenth century the United Kingdom became strongly attached to the
principle of free trade, and at the beginning of the twentieth century the only customs
duties were those imposed for revenue purposes on a small range of products. During
the first world war, certain duties (the McKenna duties) were introduced to discourage
imports of motor cars, musical instruments, clocks and watches and cinematographic
film. These were continued after the war. Certain key industries, notably optical and
scientific instruments and fine chemicals, were given protection for strategic reasons
under an Act passed in 1921. In 1925 duties were imposed, for revenue purposes, on
imported silk, artificial silk and articles containing these materials. It was not until 1932,
however, that any serious departure was made from the principle of free trade.
1 This total excludes tourists (other than aliens) from the Irish Republic and foreign visitors
in transit to other destinations.
TRADE AND PAYMENTS
429
Under the Import Duties Act of that year, the United Kingdom imposed a duty of
10 per cent ad valorem on all imported goods except those on a Free List (mainly
important raw materials and foodstuffs) and set up machinery for the imposition of
additional duties and for additions to be made to the Free List where appropriate.
This measure provided a degree of protection for British industry and, at the same
time, a basis for negotiations with foreign countries already in possession of a tariff
structure.
The principle of Imperial Preference had been introduced into the United Kingdom
customs tariffs in 1919 and, as a result of the Ottawa Conference in 1932, agreements
were concluded with independent Commonwealth countries providing for reciprocal
preferential tariff treatment over a wide range of goods. The Import Duties Act had
already permitted th: duty-free entry of goods from the United Kingdom dependencies.
A series of bilateral trade negotiations with other countries between 1932 and
1939 resulted in some modification in the level of protection and in the Commonwealth
preferences which had been established. During the second world war, because of
Government purchase and import control, protection by the tariff was of relatively
minor importance, and it was only after the substantial relaxation of quantitative
import controls in 1949 that the tariff again became an effective instrument of protection.
Since the war, the United Kingdom’s protective tariff has been considerably modified
as a result of a series of multilateral tariff negotiations held under the auspices of the
GATT, which permits the retention of existing preferences but prohibits the creation
of new ones. The United Kingdom has, however, obtained certain limited waivers from
the GATT no-new-preference rule; these permit, under certain conditions, increased
tariff protection for United Kingdom industries while preserving duty-free commit¬
ments for Commonwealth goods, and allow increased preferences for the benefit of
Colonial products wholly or mainly dependent on the United Kingdom market. In the
negotiations under the GATT, United Kingdom customs duties have been reduced,
or bound against increase, on goods which account for about half of Britain’s normal
imports from other contracting countries, in return for concessions by those countries.
Margins of preference have thereby been reduced in some instances, but only in
return for compensating tariff concessions by other countries, and only after consultation
with all the Commonwealth countries concerned.
The United Kingdom Government in February 1957 put forward proposals under
which the six countries (France, Belgium, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Italy and
Western Germany) which in March 1957 signed the Treaty of Rome, establishing
the European Economic Community (EEC), and other members of OEEC. would
be associated in a free trade area covering industrial products in Europe. Negotiating
machinery for this purpose was set up by OEEC and, in October 1957 OEEC made a
unanimous declaration of intent to form such an area. By November 1958 however,
no agreement had been reached and the negotiations were suspended.
During 1959 seven members of OEEC—Austria, Denmark, Norway, Portugal,
Sweden, Switzerland and the United Kingdom—agreed to establish between them¬
selves a European Free Trade Association (EFTA) with the object of reducing trade
barriers in Europe and establishing a bridge between the EEC and the other members
of OEEC. A convention was initialled in Stockholm in November 1959 and ratified
by member countries in the early months of i960. Under it, customs tariffs on trade in
industrial products between members of EFTA will be reduced by stages over a ten-
year period. Reductions of 30 per cent had been made by 1st July, 1961. In March 1961
an Agreement of Association was signed between Finland and EFTA, providing for a
similar progressive reduction in customs tariffs,
43°
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
On 31st July, 1961, it was announced that the United Kingdom would seek
membership of EEC under Article 237 of the Rome Treaty, subject to necessary safe¬
guards being negotiated on the interests of the United Kingdom, the other members of
the Commonwealth and of EFTA. Negotiations started in the Autumn of 1961.
Two Acts of recent years have affected tariff policy. The Customs Duties (Dumping
and Subsidies) Act, 1957, empowers the Board of Trade to impose duties on imported
goods of any description which have been dumped or subsidised and which are causing
or threatening material injury to a particular industry. The Import Duties Act, 1958,
replaced the existing legislation relating to the protective tariff (i.e. four main Acts and
some 70 Finance Act provisions) and brought it up to date in a single measure. Follow¬
ing the passing of the Act, the tariff was recast into an internationally agreed form (the
Brussels Nomenclature), which came into use from 1st January, 1959.
Methods of Trading
The export trade and virtually all the import trade of the United Kingdom are
conducted by private firms.
Methods of export trading vary considerably, according to the firm, the industry,
the product and the market. A good deal of United Kingdom export trade, especially
of the smaller manufacturing firms, is conducted through export merchants in the
United Kingdom; many firms, however, sell to importers and consumers abroad
through their own agents or resident representatives in the countries concerned; in
other cases, sales are made through a firm’s own branch offices, distributing organisa¬
tions or subsidiary sales companies established in overseas markets.
Similarly, in import trade, many large firms engaged in manufacture or domestic
trade buy directly from overseas suppliers, while smaller firms may find it more
convenient to buy through intermediaries such as import/export houses, commission
agents, and the representatives of overseas firms.
In the immediate post-war years nearly all the principal imported foods and raw
materials and some other goods were bought wholly or mainly on Government
account, and the Government was also the sole purchaser of nearly all domestically
produced food and certain raw materials such as flax and timber. In later years, and
particularly since 1951, private trading has been restored to each commodity. Since
January 1957 overseas trading undertaken directly by the Government has been
confined to jute goods; the purpose of this is to protect employment in Dundee, where
the jute industry is concentrated and forms the mainstay of employment.
CONTROLS ON TRADE AND PAYMENTS
During the war and in the difficult economic circumstances of the post-war period, a
large number of restrictions on the movement of goods and services and on payments
were imposed. Most of these have been progressively abolished. The following section
gives a short account of the controls still in force.
Exchange Control
Exchange control, which includes, inter alia, control over the purchase and sale of
gold and foreign currencies, was introduced at the outbreak of war in September
1939. Most of the temporary war-time powers were embodied in permanent legislation
in the Exchange Control Act, 1947.
Exchange control is now confined mainly to transactions between residents of the
sterling area and residents outside it, and has been greatly relaxed in the past few years.
TRADE AND PAYMENTS
431
Since the end of December 1958 residents of all countries outside the sterling area can
settle transactions between themselves in sterling. Sterling held by non-residents of the
sterling area on an external account is freely convertible into other currencies, including
dollars. The only remaining important restrictions relate to the movement of capital
from the United Kingdom to non-sterling countries.
Exports of goods to destinations outside the sterling area are subject to exchange
control and, in general, have to be paid for within six months in an acceptable currency
or by sterling from an external account. Control is also exercised over imports, to
ensure that currency authorised for their payment is, in fact, used for that purpose.
Exchange control policy is the responsibility of the Treasury, but most of the ad¬
ministration is, in practice, carried out by the Bank of England as agent of the Treasury;
and, in turn, the Bank of England has delegated to the commercial banks a wide
variety of powers to deal with applications.
Overseas Travel
Restrictions in various forms on the amount of foreign currency and sterling notes
that United Kingdom travellers might take abroad were in force from the end of the
war until November 1959. Since that date there has been no limit on the amount of
foreign currency that United Kingdom residents may obtain; a bank or authorised
travel agency will supply up to £250 in foreign currency in any one year to each travel¬
ler for purposes of travel outside the scheduled territories (sterling area); and an
amount exceeding £250 may be authorised by the Bank of England on application being
made through the traveller’s bank. Reference is made to the Bank of England as a pro¬
tection against the unauthorised export of capital and not to limit the amount available
for travel. Travellers may take up to £50 in sterling notes and £250 in foreign currency
notes without formality.
Import and Export Control
The Import, Export and Customs Powers (Defence) Act, 1939, empowers the
Board of Trade to make statutory orders prohibiting or regulating the import or export
of goods. The powers of both import and export control derive from the same legisla¬
tion, but the purpose and mechanism are quite distinct.
Import Licensing
In accordance with its international obligations under the GATT and the IMF,
the United Kingdom Government has, as the balance of payments has permitted,
progressively removed restrictions from almost all imports from the countries of the
free world. Goods still subject to control require a specific import licence and quotas
have been set up for most of these goods. Some quotas refer specifically to individual
countries and are usually shared out among exporters by the authorities of the countries
concerned. Others are accorded on an overall or global basis; these are generally
allocated by the United Kingdom authorities to United Kingdom importers, usually on
the basis of their share of the trade in the commodity in the past.
Export Controls
Except for the control necessary to ensure that exports to destinations outside
the sterling area are paid for in the proper manner (see above), United Kingdom
exports are not, except in a very minor way, subject to any Government control or
direction. The few controls that are in operation are imposed to supervise exports of
military and strategic importance, to conserve materials, such as metal scrap, which
432
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
may be in inadequate supply, to assist exchange control operations in preventing the
export of capital in the form of valuable goods, and to prevent the export of works of
art classed as national treasures, such as paintings, manuscripts and antiques. Normally,
individual licences are required for specific consignments of goods subject to export
licensing control. Goods controlled for strategic reasons, not included in the category
of atomic energy materials and appliances, arms and ammunition, may be exported to
the Commonwealth, the Irish Republic and the United States of America without
licence.
GOVERNMENT ASSISTANCE TO OVERSEAS TRADE
The United Kingdom Government does not subsidise exports, but supplies informa¬
tion, advice and practical assistance (including credit insurance facilities) to exporters1
and seeks to create conditions in which export trade can flourish. Its general economic
policy includes the use of fiscal, credit and other measures to maintain a stable economy
and to control excessive demand for goods and services by the home market, and action
through international negotiation to reduce barriers to the free flow of trade and to
move towards the freest possible system of trade and payments.
Information and Advice to Exporters
The Government department most concerned in export promotion is the Board of
Trade, which calls upon the assistance of overseas representatives. At each Embassy
or Legation there is always an officer of high rank, a Minister, Counsellor or First
Secretary (Commercial), who specialises in commercial matters. These officers direct
the commercial activities of consular officers in their respective territories. At important
centres in the Commonwealth there are Trade Commissioners, who are directly
responsible to the Board of Trade.
Overseas officers regularly report on local economic and commercial conditions,
pay special attention to local demand for particular commodities, and generally
assist the exporter to overcome any difficulties he encounters in trade with the country
in question, particularly those arising out of governmental regulations. These officers
investigate potential markets for United Kingdom products, advise about methods of
trading with particular areas, and seek out and pass on opportunities for export
business and inquiries for United Kingdom goods. Assistance is also given to United
Kingdom exporters in appointing agents and locating potential importers. From records
kept in London, brought up to date by reports from its overseas officers, the Export
Services Branch of the Board of Trade can provide information concerning any
country on:
(1) prospects for United Kingdom exports and requirements of particular
markets;
(2) governmental regulations affecting trade, including import restrictions and
tariffs and duties on particular commodities;
(3) methods of trading;
(4) local tastes and preferences in design; and
(5) the probity and influence of firms with which an exporter contemplates
entering into business relations.
1 Export promotion is also assisted by the Scottish Council (Development and Industry), the
Northern Ireland Development Council, and the Development Corporation for Wales, see p. 264.
TRADE AND PAYMENTS
433
The Government’s official information services overseas help to promote trade by
publicising British industrial achievements and providing information on new develop¬
ments in British industry.
Export Credit Insurance
The Export Credits Guarantee Department, responsible directly to the President
of the Board of Trade, is run on commercial lines to provide insurance for United
Kingdom exporters and merchants against the main risks of financial loss incurred in
overseas trading. These facilities have been developed over a period of more than
thirty years, and the department insured £742 million worth of exports in the financial
year 1960-61; this sum represents about one-fifth of the total United Kingdom
export trade. The department is obliged to conduct its business on a self-supporting
basis, taking one year with another, and cannot therefore be regarded in any way as a
provider of subsidies to exporters.
The risks covered include insolvency or protracted default of the buyer, govern¬
mental action which blocks or delays transfer of payment to the United Kingdom
exporter, imposition of new import licensing restrictions in the buyer’s country,
war between the buyer’s country and the United Kingdom, cancellation or non¬
renewal of a United Kingdom export licence, or ‘any other cause of loss occurring
outside the United Kingdom and not within the control of the exporter or the buyer,
and not normally insurable with commercial insurers’. Cover may commence from
the date of contract or (at lower premiums) from the date of shipment.
The main types of export insurance policy are:
1. Comprehensive policies normally covering goods sold on terms of up to six
months’ credit. The exporter insures the whole of his trade, or the whole of his
trade with an agreed group of markets, for the twelve months (or, in some cases,
three years) covered by his policy. For certain engineering goods this type of
cover is extended to goods sold on maximum credit terms of up to five years.
Cover is also available for goods of foreign origin sold by a United Kingdom
merchant to third countries, provided this trade does not conflict with direct
United Kingdom exports.
2. Specific policies which cover capital and other goods sold on credit terms of
up to five years. Specific policies are negotiated for each individual contract.
In October i960 it was announced that to match overseas competition, in certain
cases cover would be given for periods in excess of five years; where competition was
supported by an overseas government, full matching cover would be given; in other
cases, cover would be given on payments due within five years. In April 1961 ECGD
introduced finance guarantees for United Kingdom banks providing finance on a long¬
term basis for overseas purchasers of large capital goods and works; and a special
insurance policy for small exporters.
In every case the exporter or merchant is required to retain an interest in the debt
or risk involved and, consequently, guarantees are given up to a maximum of between
85 and 95 per cent of loss. Premium rates are assessed separately for each country,
and vary according to the risks and the terms of payment. Cover is also available for
United Kingdom concerns carrying out services for overseas firms or, under certain
conditions, entering into an international consortium.
Under the Export Guarantees Acts, 1949 to 1957, the Government has powers to
give economic assistance to other countries (see p. 442).
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
434
Trade Fairs
An inquiry carried out by the Federation of British Industries (FBI) in 1957 showed
that the large majority of British trade associations favoured the development of
specialised fairs, concentrating on the products of a particular industry or group of
industries, rather than the general fair at which wide ranges of products are exhibited.
Over 60 specialised fairs are held every year in the United Kingdom and the number
is growing steadily. An increasing proportion, at present about half the total, are
international in character, and the remainder are national (i.e. open only to firms
showing United Kingdom products). Some of the specialised fairs, such as the Motor
Show and the Radio and Television Show, attract large numbers of the public as well
as many trade buyers from home and overseas, and provide an important means of
advertising and selling British goods.
United Kingdom manufactures are shown at most of the large international trade
fairs throughout the world. For example, the United Kingdom is usually well repre¬
sented at the Milan, Hanover and Poznan Fairs. In addition to such international
events there are, from time to time, specially organised displays of British products.
Through a subsidiary company, British Overseas Fairs Ltd., the FBI organised British
Trade Fairs in Baghdad in 1954, in Copenhagen in 1955, in Helsinki in 1957 and in
Lisbon in 1959; in i960 it was responsible for the comprehensive all-British exhibition
in New York.
In 1961 a British Trade Fair, organised by Industrial and Trade Fairs, Ltd., was
held in Moscow, at which 620 British firms exhibited. United Kingdom manufacturers
have been prominent at the many important specialised international fairs which are
held in North America and Europe.
Participation in trade fairs and ‘British Weeks’ overseas is a form of export promotion
for which the Government provides information and advice and, in certain cases,
financial help. The amount allocated to the Board of Trade for this purpose has risen
from £60,000 in 1955-56 to £530,000 in 1961-62. This money is used to provide stands
for United Kingdom trade associations whose members wish to take part in overseas
fairs; to build and manage British pavilions at trade fairs where displays are on a basis
of nationality; to provide exhibits at all-British fairs; and to give support to ‘British
Weeks’ and similar events (often including promotion of British goods in department
stores).
Exports Councils
In December i960 the Dollar Exports Council was renamed the Western Hemisphere
Exports Council and its area of responsibility was extended to include the whole of
Latin America and the Caribbean as well as Canada and the United States. The
Council (originally named the Dollar Exports Board) was established in June 1949
by representatives of United Kingdom industry, trade, finance and organised labour,
with the approval and support of the United Kingdom Government. It is an inde¬
pendent, self-governing, voluntary organisation to promote exports. A similar task is
being undertaken in Europe by the Exports Council for Europe, which was also set
up at the end of i960.
BRITAIN’S ROLE IN THE FINANCING OF INTERNATIONAL TRADE
By a process of evolution through the centuries, the United Kingdom has developed
an efficient and adaptable organisation of trade and financial services, centred mostly
on London, and capable of meeting the needs, not only of Britain itself, but of the
world in general. Britain’s supremacy in this respect derives from a number of factors—-
TRADE AND PAYMENTS
435
historical, geographical and economic—as well as the technical efficiency and low cost
of its services. In the nineteenth century, the rapid growth of British industry, com¬
merce and shipping under the stimulus of the industrial revolution made Britain the
market as well as the workshop of the world. It became the site for the chief world
markets in raw materials (see below), freight, insurance, and precious metals. At the
same time, British capital was invested in overseas countries to assist their development,
increase their output and exports, and provide markets for manufactured goods.
London became the chief supplier of capital for many Commonwealth and foreign
governments and a centre for entrepot trade proceeding to and from the growing
industrial areas on the continent of Europe and in North America. In course of time,
the pound sterling and the sterling bill of exchange developed into the principal form
of money for transactions between one country and another in all parts of the world.
Side by side with these developments, a sound commercial banking system and a
flexible system of central bank control have been built up, while specialised institutions
such as discount houses, merchant banks, accepting houses, the stock exchanges,
investment trusts and finance corporations have evolved to satisfy particular needs for
short-term or long-term finance (see pp. 412-18). The facilities provided by merchant
banks and accepting houses, for example, have long been used to finance shipments of
goods not only to and from Britain, but also between overseas countries themselves.
Commodity Markets
Britain is the traditional centre for marketing many of the world’s basic commodities.
Most of these markets were closed during the war but most, if not all, have now
reopened and many have fully regained—some even surpassed—their previous position.
Among the more important are the Baltic Exchange (the market for shipping and air
transport, grain, seeds and vegetable oils), the London Commodity Exchange (cocoa,
coffee, copra, hides and skins, rubber and sugar), the London Wool Exchange, the
London Metal Exchange, the Liverpool Cotton Exchange and the Liverpool Corn
Exchange. These markets not only cater for the import of goods for home consumption
but do much business in effecting transactions between buyers and sellers in other
countries. In addition to these formal markets, there is scarcely any product which
cannot be traded through an intermediary in the United Kingdom. For example,
London is the world’s most important philatelic market and also the leading inter¬
national centre for the sale of works of art.
The Foreign Exchange Market
The Foreign Exchange Market, which was closed during the war, was reopened
for forward dealings in December 1951 and for arbitrage dealings in currencies of
members of the European Payments Union in May 1953. The market is subject to
United Kingdom exchange control regulations governing the purchase and sale of
foreign currencies in the sterling area, but these regulations have been progressively
relaxed in recent years. The turnover of the Foreign Exchange Market increased
materially as a result of the introduction in December 1958 of external convertibility
for the principal European countries.
The market consists of about 130 authorised banks and nine firms of brokers, all
linked together by telephone in the United Kingdom, and by telephone, telex and cable
with overseas centres.
The London Gold Market
The London Gold Market, which had remained closed from the outbreak of war,
was reopened on a restricted basis in March 1954, under the general supervision of
436
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
the Bank of England. It has regained its pre-war position as the leading centre for
dealings in gold, handling about four-fifths of the gold coming on to the free markets
of the world.
Authorised dealers in gold are now free to deal with residents outside the sterling
area against payment in any foreign currency, or in sterling held outside the sterling
area, but residents of the sterling area have access to the market only as sellers, except
where permission is given for the purchase of gold for essential industrial purposes and
for the jewellery trade.
The Sterling System
As a result of Britain’s early lead in international trade and finance, several countries
tended not only to use sterling as their natural currency for international transactions,
but also to maintain central currency reserves in Britain. When Britain abandoned the
gold standard in 1931 these countries, which came to be known as the ‘sterling bloc’
and later as the ‘sterling area’, did likewise, and pegged their currency exchange rates
to the pound sterling. In 1939, after the outbreak of war, the pound sterling was no
longer freely convertible into other currencies and the sterling area became more
formally defined as a currency area for exchange control purposes. Within the sterling
area the United Kingdom imposes virtually no restrictions on payments, whether in
respect of current or of capital transactions.
All the Commonwealth countries (except Canada), together with Burma, Iceland,
the Irish Republic, Jordan, Kuwait, Libya, the Republic of South Africa and South
West Africa, and the British protected states in the Persian Gulf, are members of the
sterling area. These countries contain one-quarter of the world’s population and do
one-quarter of the world’s trade. The main feature of the sterling area is that the
greater part of the overseas trade of member countries is financed in sterling; they
keep their foreign reserves largely in the form of sterling and maintain a fixed relation¬
ship between their currencies and sterling. Member countries for the most part sell
their foreign currency earnings in London in exchange for sterling and can purchase
for sterling the foreign currency they require. They generally also sell gold in the
London Market for sterling. The United Kingdom reserves of gold and foreign
currencies are held in the Exchange Equalisation Account, which buys and sells
exchange in the market as appropriate, and is a large buyer of gold from the sterling
area and elsewhere.
All these currency arrangements are voluntary; there are no strict or centralised
rules of conduct, the Commonwealth member countries agreeing between themselves
at periodic conferences the broad policies to be followed for the strengthening of
sterling and of the reserves.
THE BALANCE OF PAYMENTS
Estimates of the United Kingdom’s balance of payments are published half-yearly
in White Papers. These publications provide a summary of the whole range of the
United Kingdom’s transactions with other countries, classified by type of transaction
and by area.
The transactions fall into three main groups—current account, long-term capital
account and monetary movements. The balance on current account is composed of
the balance of visible trade (i.e. the difference between merchandise imports and exports
and re-exports) and the balance of invisibles (see p. 427). On long-term capital
account, the main groups of items are intergovernmental loans (including amortisation)
TRADE AND PAYMENTS
437
TABLE 31
United Kingdom General Balance of Payments
£ million
1958
1959
1960
1959
Jan.-
June
July-
Dee.
1960
Jan-
June
July-
Dee.
Current account
Visible Trade {a)
Imports (f.o.b.)
Exports and re¬
exports (f.o.b.) . .
Total
Invisibles:
Government:
debits
credits
Shipping:
debits
credits
Interest, profits and
dividends:
debits
credits
Travel:
debits
credits
Migrants’ funds,
legacies and private
gifts:
debits
credits
Other services:
debits
credits
Total
Current Balance
Long-term capitalaccount(b)
Inter - government
loans (net) ..
UK subscription to
IMF, IDA and Euro¬
pean Fund
Other UK official long¬
term capital (net) . .
Private investment:
abroad (net)
in the United King¬
dom (net) ..
Balance of Long¬
term Capital
3,330
3,392
+ 62
278
56
615
637
415
676
155
138
97
95
277
464
+229
+291
- 45
- 4
-323
+ 193
-179
3,578
3,509
4,077
3,711
1,730
1,726
1,848
1,783
2,033
1,907
69
-366
- 65
-126
275
41
650
625
420
643
173
153
92
91
312
489
332
45
669
644
455
634
205
188
91
91
342
514
138
24
324
307
172
308
64
65
46
44
153
240
137
17
326
318
248
335
109
88
46
47
159
249
170
28
331
328
198
299
79
79
43
45
165
254
+ 120
+ 22
91
+ 29
+ 47
+ 51
-344
+ 87
36
79
-118
-236
+ 1
-317
+ 175
—495
- 91
- 10
+ 1
-274
+ 173
+ 35
-232
-163
+ 91
-153
- 4
+ 1
-154
+ 84
- 37
+ 1
- 2
-136
+ 63
-201
-269
-226
-111
2,044
1,804
-240
162
17
338
316
257
335
126
109
48
46
177
260
25
-265
- 54
- 11
+ 3
-138
+110
90
Continued overleaf
438
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
TABLE 31 (continued)
Balance of current and
long-term capital
transactions
Balancing Item (c) ..
Monetary movements (b)
Miscellaneous capital
(net)
Overseas sterling hold¬
ings :
countries
Non-territorial or¬
ganisations
UK balance in EPU. .
UK official holdings of
non-convertible cur¬
rencies
Gold and convertible
currency reserves
Balance of Mone¬
tary Movements ..
1958
+ 112
+ 99
+ 2
+ 80
- 22
- 10
+ 23
-284
-211
1959
-444
+ 64
+ 8
+ 154
+ 82
+ 9
+ 8
+ 119
+380
1960
-545
+377
+119
+380
-156
+ 2
-177
+ 168
1959
Jan-
June
-182
+ 66
+ 24
+ 26
+ 86
+ 9
+ 8
- 37
+ 116
July-
Dee.
-262
-2
- 16
+ 128
- 4
+156
+264
1960
Jan.-
June
-190
+ 141
+ 41
+ 107
- 44
+ 1
- 56
+ 49
July-
Dee.
-355
+236
+ 78
+273
-112
+ 1
-121
+ 119
Source: United Kingdom Balance of Payments, 1959 to 1960, Cmnd. 1329.
(a) The values of exports and imports shown in this table differ from those in the Trade
and Navigation Accounts used in Table 28 because of differences of coverage, valuation and
methods of recording.
(Jb) An increase of assets is shown by a minus sign and a decrease by a plus sign. An increase
in liabilities is shown by a plus sign and a decrease by a minus sign.
(c) The balancing item is introduced to balance the account. It represents the net total of
errors and omissions in other items.
and other identified net long-term investment abroad by United Kingdom residents,
or in the United Kingdom by non-residents. The third heading, monetary movements,
reflects in part the United Kingdom’s position as an international banker. It includes
identified capital transactions not of a long-term character (e.g., changes in acceptances),
changes in overseas sterling holdings and changes in the United Kingdom reserves of
gold and convertible currencies.
The main balance of payments problem for Britain has been to earn enough from
exports, visible and invisible, (1) to pay for half Britain s food and nearly all the raw
materials used in its factories; (2) to build up the gold and foreign exchange reserves
needed in a world of multilateral trading and convertible currencies, and to meet
obligations overseas, including foreign debt service; and (3) to meet obligations
voluntarily accepted in respect of economic development in Commonwealth countries
and elsewhere.1
1 In addition, since the war, the United Kingdom Government has had to meet heavy overseas
military expenditure. In i960, for example, this amounted to £215 million.
TRADE AND PAYMENTS 439
Between 1945 and 1951 the balance of payments on current account fluctuated
widely. Since 1952 there have been surpluses in each year except 1955 and i960.
Balance of Payments in i960
For i960, as a whole, the United Kingdom had a deficit on current account of £344
million; there was a surplus of £300 million on current account with the rest of the
sterling area and a deficit of £644 million with the non-sterling area. Usually the deficit
on visible trade is more than balanced by invisible earnings, but this did not happen in
i960; the reserves of gold and convertible currencies rose by a total of £177 million
and the sterling holdings of all countries rose by £380 million. Table 31 gives details
of the United Kingdom’s balance of payments from 1958 to i960.
Reserves of Gold and Convertible Currencies
The reserves of gold and convertible currencies at the end of each year from 1945
to i960 are shown in Table 32. At the end of August 1961, these reserves amounted
to £1,245 million ($3,486 million).
TABLE 32
Reserves of Gold and Convertible Currencies
(at end-December)
Sources: Annual Abstract of Statistics and Monthly Digest of Statistics.
In addition to the gold and convertible currency reserves, the United Kingdom has
drawing rights on the International Monetary Fund (IMF) based on its ‘quota’, which
was raised to £696 million in 1959. On 31st December, i960, the United Kingdom
could draw £871 million without raising the IMF’s holding of sterling beyond 200 per
cents of quota. In August 1961 to strengthen the reserves the United Kingdom drew
$1,500 million (£536 million) in nine different currencies from the IMF, plus a
further $500 million to be held by the IMF under stand-by arrangements.
External Financial Aid received by Britain
Britain’s difficulties in balancing its external accounts, particularly with the dollar
area, in the immediate post-war years, were greatly alleviated by aid received from the
United States and Canada.
In 1945 the United States extended to Britain a line of credit of $3,750 million,
and a loan of $650 million (later adjusted to $622 million) in settlement of Lend-Lease
o
440
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
and reciprocal aid adjustments arising out of the war. In 1946 Canada also extended a
line of credit, amounting to $C. 1,250 million, of which the United Kingdom drew
$C. 1,185 million. The terms of settlement with both countries provided for repayment
in 50 annual instalments, starting on 31st December, 1951, with interest at the rate
of 2 per cent a year. Between 1948 and 1951 Britain received in all $2,700 million in
Marshall Aid from the United States under the European Recovery Programme.
However, after 1951 the financial aid received by Britain from the United States
was mostly for mutual security purposes. By 1958, when the programme was termi¬
nated, net receipts by Britain had totalled $1,184 million.
The Mutual Security Programme also assisted Britain’s balance of payments by
the placing of contracts in Britain for military goods to be supplied to other NATO
countries. These offshore sales to the United States Government totalled £7 million
in i960, compared with £18 million in 1958 and £12 million in 1959. United States and
Canadian Forces’ expenditure in Britain in i960 amounted to £65 million.
Overseas Private Investment in Britain
By far the largest proportion of private investment by overseas countries in Britain
is made by United States firms. It has been estimated1 that between 1950 and 1959
the total book value of United States direct investments in Britain rose from $847
million to $2,475 million, representing about 45 per cent of the total United States
direct investment in Western Europe over the period. The 1959 total included $492
million in petroleum refining and distribution and $1,607 million in manufacturing
industry. Much of this investment is in expanding industries such as machinery and
vehicles. This investment by United States industrial firms has enabled the British
economy to acquire some new techniques and to make considerable savings in imports
and at the same time to expand its exports of several important products. As a result
of the increasing American interest in direct investment in the United Kingdom, a
British Industrial Development Office has been established in New York to provide
potential investors with advice and information about manufacturing conditions in the
United Kingdom. According to a survey by the Board of Trade, it is estimated that
private direct investment (excluding oil and insurance) in 1959 amounted to £126
million, of which about £go million was United States capital, £15^ million Canadian
and ;£ii£ million from Western European countries.
Overseas investors are also allowed to repatriate the proceeds of the sale of these
investments, including any capital gains that may have accrued, provided that the
investment was made after 1st January, 1950. Earned profits and dividends can be
transferred, irrespective of the amount; transfers of this kind have never been
restricted. Portfolio investment (for instance, by purchase, on a stock exchange, of
securities in United Kingdom companies) by people in overseas countries has also
increased markedly since 1957.
UNITED KINGDOM AID AND INVESTMENT OVERSEAS
For well over a hundred years the United Kingdom has been a major supplier of
external finance for other countries; up to the first decade of the twentieth century
it was the foremost supplier of private long-term capital. Since the second world war,
despite economic difficulties, the United Kingdom has made available to other
countries very large sums in the form of grants and loans for relief, rehabilitation,
development and other economic purposes.
1 United States Department of Commerce’s Survey of Current Business, September i960.
TRADE AND PAYMENTS
441
In recent years United Kingdom finance for overseas development has been made
available through private sources, public funds and intergovernmental organisations.
The greater part of such finance goes to Commonwealth countries (including Colonial
territories) and consists of private funds. There has also been substantial direct or
indirect governmental assistance to Colonial territories and to under-developed
countries inside and outside the Commonwealth.
All the countries of the sterling Commonwealth except the United Kingdom are
net importers of long-term capital and look to the United Kingdom for a substantial
proportion of their external capital requirements. The sources and availability of
capital for development are therefore regularly considered at Commonwealth Economic
Conferences and Meetings. At a meeting in September i960 it was decided to set up
a Special Commonwealth Assistance Plan for Africa.
Private Finance
In recent years the net level of United Kingdom private investment in all areas
has been over £100 million a year. The gross outflow of new funds has however,
been much larger and is estimated to have averaged £300 million yearly since 1953.
It is estimated that about £150 million a year of this private investment goes to under¬
developed countries. The results of a survey by the Board of Trade showed that
private direct investment abroad by United Kingdom companies totalled £178 million
in I959> about half being in the sterling area, some ^50 million in North America and
about £20 million in Western Europe. The figures exclude operations in oil and
insurance companies but include reinvested profits.
Private investment abroad may take several forms: the raising of loans on the
London capital market; direct investment; the establishment of subsidiary companies;
the ploughing back of profits earned overseas; and participation, jointly with domestic
capital, in enterprises overseas.
London Market Borrowing
Because of the heavy demand for such funds, borrowing by overseas Governments
on the London capital market since the war has normally been confined to issues by
Commonwealth and Colonial Governments. New capital issues for Commonwealth
countries averaged about 3^55 million a year between 1953 and 1959.
Other Private Investment
The United Kingdom imposes no restriction on investment in the sterling area by
United Kingdom firms. Such investment is frequently made from a firm’s existing
resources. However, borrowers outside the United Kingdom must normally obtain
the consent of the Treasury (which is advised by the Capital Issues Committee) if the
amount borrowed exceeds £50,000 in any one year. Finance is also made available
by the Commonwealth Development Finance Company (see p. 417), which, by
March 1961, had entered into commitments totalling £16 million in thirteen Com¬
monwealth countries for a wide variety of projects.
Finance from Public Funds
Non-military loans and grants to the under-developed countries from the United
Kingdom Exchequer have been increasing: figures are given in Table 33.
This assistance takes two forms: grants and loans, and payments for technical assis¬
tance arranged directly with the country receiving help (bilateral assistance); and
contributions to international bodies (multilateral assistance). The division of assis¬
tance between these various forms is shown in Table 34. In i960 bilateral assistance
442
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
totalled ,£125 million and multilateral assistance was £26 million. Provisional estimates
indicate that Government assistance in 1961 will total some £180 million.
TABLE 33
United Kingdom Government Assistance
1951-52 to 1960
£ million
Sources: Assistance fr om the United Kingdom for Overseas Development (Cmnd. 974)
and United Kingdom Balance of Payments 1958-60 {Cmnd. 1308).
There are several public sources of finance from which United Kingdom funds
are made available for overseas development. The following are the principal forms
of machinery through which funds are provided.
e
Export Guarantees Acts
Under Sections 2 and 3 of the Export Guarantees Act, 1949, as amended by Section 2
of the Export Guarantees Act, 1957, the Government has authority to give economic
assistance to countries outside the United Kingdom. Securities issued by the borrowing
country are acquired by the Export Credits Guarantee Department (ECGD), and
their purchase price used to facilitate payment for United Kingdom exports.
United Kingdom Government loans are made through these powers to overseas
Governments. The loans bear interest at rates related to the notional rates for United
Kingdom Government borrowing.
From 1949 to mid-1961 loans have been effected through ECGD to Yugoslavia
(£19-5 million), India (£120-5 million), Iran (£10 million), Pakistan (£28 million),
Iraq (£3 million), Malaya (£2-25 million), Nigeria (£12 million), the Sudan (£5
million), and Ceylon (£2-5 million). Further loans agreed in principle include: to India
(£20 million), Ghana (£5 million), Chile (£2 million), Nepal (£o-8 million), Sierra
Leone (£3-5 million), Cyprus (£2 million), Yugoslavia (£3 million), and the Federa¬
tion of Rhodesia and Nyasaland (£5 million).
Colonial Development Corporation
The Colonial Development Corporation is a public corporation set up in February
1948 to assist Colonial territories in the development of their economies. The corpora¬
tion can borrow up to £150 million on a long-term and medium-term basis, and £10
million on a short-term basis. Exchequer advances to the corporation outstanding at
any one time may not exceed £130 million long-term and medium-term advances.
At the end of i960, the corporation reported that it had 91 continuing projects,
and a total capital commitment of nearly £110 million. Of this, about £19-5 million
was in the Far East, £14-5 million in the Caribbean and the remainder in Africa.
TRADE AND PAYMENTS
443
TABLE 34
Assistance by the United Kingdom Government for Overseas Development
Distribution of United Kingdom Bilateral Assistance1 1959-60 £ million
Bilateral Assistance
April 1959-
March 1960
1960
Jan.-March
Year
Colonial territories2
Grants
technical assistance1
emergency assistance
other grants ..
Loans
technical assistance1
emergency assistance
other loans ..
3-6
8-0
29-8
1-2
0-8
15-4
M
4-5
10-8
0-5
0-8
6-6
3-9
5-3
34-3
0-7
0-9
26-0
Total Colonial Territories .
58-8
24-3
71T
Independent Commonwealth
Grants
technical assistance1..
emergency assistance
other grants ..
Loans ..
0-9
2-9
1-2
34-7
Total Independent Commonwealth
39-7
Other Countries
Grants'
technical assistance1
other grants ..
Loans ..
0-9
6-4
5-0
Total other countries
12-3
Total bilateral assistance ..
110-8
Multilateral assistance
20-2
Total economic and technical assis¬
tance
131-0
0-3
0-6
7-3
8-2
0-3
1-3
1-0
2-6
35-1
5-4
40-5
1- 3
2- 5
3- 5
33-5
40-8
1-0
7-4
4-5
12-9
124-8
25-8
150-6
The figures do not cover all technical assistance provided by the United Kingdom, some of
which cannot be assessed in quantitative terms. A more detailed account of technical assistance is
contained in the White Paper on United Kingdom Technical Assistance (Cmnd. 1308).
2 Includes assistance to Nigeria, Cyprus and British Somaliland before independence and to the
Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland.
Colonial Development and Welfare Acts
The United Kingdom has made available, under the Colonial Development and
Welfare Act of 1945 and subsequent Acts, £220 million for planned development
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
444
and welfare in its dependent territories for the period 1946-60. Under the Colonial
Development and Welfare Act, 1959, a further £95 million will be provided for the
period 1959-64 for the continuation of assistance on the existing basis. The 1959 Act
also provides for additional Exchequer loans of up to ^100 million in the same period,
the maximum amount approved for any one year must not exceed £25 million. In the
financial year 1960-61, ^22-7 million was issued as loans. These loans and grants are
used by the dependent territories to supplement development expenditure from their
own resources and from market borrowing.
Other Government Sources
United Kingdom Government funds are also made available for overseas purposes
in other ways than those mentioned above, e.g., grants and loans to assist the
administrations of certain dependent territories; in special circumstances, direct
financial assistance (other than loans under the Export Guarantees Acts) is provided
for independent Commonwealth and foreign Governments—examples are Malaya
and Libya.
United Kingdom Aid through Intergovernmental Organisations
The principal intergovernmental organisations through which the United Kingdom
provides aid to other countries are the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development (IBRD) and its affiliate, the International Finance Corporation (IFC),
the United Nations Expanded Programme for Technical Assistance and Special Fund
for Technical Assistance, and (through private and public channels) the Colombo
Plan. An additional source is the International Development Association (IDA), set
up in September i960.
The United Kingdom’s subscription to the capital of IBRD is the second largest of
any country; originally $1,300 million, it was increased to $2,600 million in September
1959 as part of the general increase in the Bank’s capital in order to facilitate its
borrowings in capital markets. The £84 million representing the United Kingdom’s
paid-up sterling subscription to the Bank had been disbursed in full by September i960.
All but £4 million was for lending to Commonwealth countries. Repayments on loans
financed in this way may be used by IBRD for fresh lending, thus constituting a
revolving fund. In addition, IBRD has also borrowed £20 million by the issue of
bonds on the London market.
The United Kingdom is contributing the equivalent of $131 million to the capital
of the IDA, which has been set up under the auspices of the IBRD, to provide capital
on special terms for under-developed countries.
The United Kingdom is also the second largest contributor to IFC,1 and has
subscribed $14-4 million of the corporation’s total capital of $100 million. In addition,
since 1949 the United Kingdom has contributed nearly million to the United
Nations Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance2 and in 1959 and i960 provided
a total of over £2 million towards the resources of the United Nations Special Fund.3
For 1961 the United Kingdom has pledged $3 million to the expanded programme and
$5 million to the Special Fund.
1 IFC was set up as an affiliate of IBRD in 1956 to assist the growth of private enterprise in
member countries. _
2 The object of this programme is to provide under-developed countries with expert advice
and training facilities over a wide field.
3 The object of the fund is to extend the scope and resources of the existing technical assistance
and development programmes of the United Nations.
TRADE AND PAYMENTS
445
Colombo Plan
The Colombo Plan for Co-operative Economic Development in South and South-
East Asia had its origin in, and took its name from, the meeting of Commonwealth
Foreign Ministers held at Colombo in January 1950. It is designed to provide a frame¬
work within which a co-operative effort can be made to raise the area’s standards of
living and to undertake economic development.
The cumulative total of commitments from the United Kingdom Exchequer to
Colombo Plan countries from 1951 to 30th June, i960, amounted to about £171
million (not including the sterling releases or releases from the United Kingdom’s
sterling subscription to IBRD). This figure comprises disbursements from depart¬
mental votes; aid given under the Colonial Development and Welfare Acts and from
the Colonial Development Corporation to Malaya, North Borneo and Sarawak;
technical assistance; ECGD credits.
The United Kingdom undertook at the Colombo Plan Consultative Committee
meeting at Seattle in November 1958 to increase the amount of technical assistance
to be provided up to 1963 from £7 million to £9 million.
INTERNAL TRADE
The internal trade of the United Kingdom can be divided into two broad categories:
trade in raw materials, capital goods and intermediate products (for example, vehicle
components) and trade in consumer goods, that is to say goods for direct sale to the
public. (The pattern of consumers’ expenditure is outlined in Chapter IX, The National
Economy.)
The 1957 census of distribution, which was a large-scale sample inquiry, provides
an account of the structure of retail trade and a full-scale inquiry into the wholesale
trade was made by the Board of Trade for 1959. The full census of distribution,
relating to the year 1950, also covered wholesaling and the catering and other service
trades, and provides a comprehensive picture of the distributive trades as a whole. It
also included more detailed information on the retail trades than was given in the
I957 census. Both censuses covered Great Britain but not Northern Ireland.
WHOLESALE TRADES
Only a proportion of the trade in consumer goods passes through wholesalers:
sales are also made to consumers through producers’ own selling organisations (in¬
cluding their own retail outlets and mail-order business); and other sales are made
directly by producers to retailers. Wholesale channels are particularly in evidence in
the distribution of textiles, agricultural produce and foodstuffs. The inquiry made by
the Board of Trade in respect of 1959 showed that out of a total of 19,000 business
units engaged in wholesale distribution in Great Britain, over 3,000 dealt in clothing,
footwear and textiles, 2,000 in grocery and provisions, 2,000 in vegetables and fruit,
and over 3,000 in other food and in drink. In addition, there were 8,000 dealers
(wholesale or retail) in coal, builders’ materials, grain or agricultural supplies, and
7,000 dealers in other industrial materials and machinery.
Firms in the wholesale trades in Great Britain in 1959 increased their stocks from
£736 million at the beginning of the year to £759 million at the end; they spent £84
million on new building work and on vehicles and other capital equipment; their
receipts in that year, including commissions, totalled £12,127 million. Of the £84
million capital expenditure, by far the largest single item was the £22 million invested
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
446
in capital equipment by business units engaged in distributing petroleum products—
most of them being the distributing organisations of the major oil companies.
Methods of wholesale distribution vary according to the type of merchandise
handled. Fresh fish, for example, is auctioned at the ports to port wholesalers who
sell to inland wholesalers at the main distribution centres or, in some cases, direct
to retailers; fruit and vegetables, on the other hand, may be sold by growers to com¬
mission agents who dispose of the produce either to wholesalers or direct to retailers,
or alternatively the grower may deal only with wholesale firms.
London’s wholesale markets are of outstanding importance in the distribution of
foodstuffs, particularly imported supplies. Covent Garden handles about five million
tons of fruit, vegetables and flowers each year; nearly 8,000 tons of meat pass through
Smithfield market each week; Billingsgate is the principal distributing centre in
Britain for fish. Other markets in London include those at Leadenhall (poultry) and
Spitalfields (fruit and vegetables).
Voluntary wholesale chains, that is to say independent retailers linking themselves
to a single wholesaler or a group of wholesalers and so benefiting from some of the
lower operating costs of large-scale trading without losing their independence, have
developed quite rapidly in the grocery trade since 1954. As yet, however, they account
for only a small, though growing, proportion of grocery business.
RETAIL TRADE
Types of Retail Shop
Retail shops in Britain may be classified under four heads: (1) retail co-operative
societies; (2) department stores with a number of departments selling different types
of goods (in some cases a firm may own several department stores); (3) multiple
traders, that is organisations, other than co-operative societies or department stores,
with ten or more branches; and (4) independent retail business and branches of small
multiple stores (i.e. chains of stores with nine or fewer branches). In addition, there
are a number of market and street traders but, according to the 1950 census of
distribution, the amount of business done by these traders is usually very small;
their average turnover was less than £2,000 per year. Table 35 shows the shares of
the four main groups of retail business in total turnover in 1957-
TABLE 35
Turnover of Main Groups of Retail Business in 1957
Main Groups
£ million
Percentage
Retail co-operative societies
Department stores
Multiple traders ..
Independent retail businesses
Total Retail Trade
905
381
1,902
4,610
11-6
4.9
24-4
59-1
7,798
100-0
Source: Board of Trade.
There are a large number of small undertakings; the 1950 census recorded 246,000
businesses with an annual turnover of under £5,000. Most of the smaller under¬
takings have working proprietors; out of the 27 million persons engaged in the retail
TRADE AND PAYMENTS
447
trade in 1957, 590,000 were working proprietors and unpaid family helpers. More up-
to-date information on the number and type of retail businesses will be provided by
a census of distribution to be taken in respect of the year 1961. Out of a total of about
574,ooo establishments shown by the 1957 census of distribution, and recorded in
Table 36, grocery and other food retailing groups numbered nearly 276,000 establish¬
ments, and the clothing and footwear group about 94,000. The 1957 census also
showed that among multiple retail enterprises the three largest, each with more than
2,000 establishments, accounted for about one-eighth of the total turnover of this
group of retailers.
TABLE 36
Retail and Service Trades, 1950 and 1957
Total Retail Trade
Grocers and provision dealers
Other food retailers ..
Confectioners, tobacconists,
newsagents ..
Clothing and footwear
Household goods
Other non-food retailers
General stores
Service Trades
Boot and shoe repairers
Hairdressers ..
Number of
Establishments
1950
579,813
140,559
143,896
74,613
96,247
65,062
57,771
1,665
18,467
33,113
1957
573,988
149,109
126,777
77,440
93,556
64,906
58,487
3,713
14.458
34.458
Turnover
1950
/ million
5,100
1,232
1,006
503
932
571
385
471
19
38
1957
/ million
7,799
2,042
1,565
703
1,151
888
578
872
23
62
Per¬
centage
change
in turn¬
over
+53
+66
+56
+40
+23
+56
+50
+85
+19
+64
Source: Board of Trade.
Present Trends in Retail Trade
By the end of i960 total retail sales in Great Britain had advanced 11 per cent over
the 1957 level. Within this total, the department stores expanded more rapidly than
other retailers, their i960 sales being 7 per cent greater than in 1959, compared with
increases of 5 per cent for multiples, 3 per cent for independent retailers and 1 per cent
for co-operative societies. The rate of increase also varied according to commodity.
The durable goods sector (furniture, radio and television, household appliances and
cycles) decreased sharply after the re-imposition of hire-purchase restrictions at the
end of April, and showed a fall of 5 per cent for the year as a whole. Clothing and
footwear shops’ sales showed an increase of 8 per cent between 1959 and i960, while
food shops’ sales advanced by 3 per cent during the year. Retail prices, which had
previously been rising for some years, showed virtually no change in 1959 and were
again relatively stable in i960, increasing on average by about 1 per cent compared
with the previous year, and most of the increase in the value of sales (4 per cent over
I959) was attributable to a greater volume of sales.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
448
In Northern Ireland, the value of retail sales per week was 2 per cent higher in
i960 than in 1959.
Self-Service Shops and Mobile Shops
The development of self-service in retail establishments since 1950 has probably
helped the multiple stores and the retail co-operatives to achieve a higher rate of
expansion in sales. The number of self-service shops in the United Kingdom in i960
was probably over 7,000 and new self-service outlets are being established at the rate
of well over 1,000 a year. Nearly half of these shops are thought to be owned by retail
co-operative societies and the majority of the remainder by multiple stores. On the
basis of returns provided for the 1957 census of distribution, the Board of Trade has
estimated that their total turnover in that year exceeded £200 million, unofficial
estimates for self-service trading put the i960 rate of sales at some £5°° million. Self-
service shops as a whole are now estimated to be responsible for about a quarter of
retail sales in the grocery and provision trade, but for other types of merchandise the
proportion is insignificant.
Other recent self-service developments are the growing use of new forms of auto¬
matic vending machines and the increase of launderettes (at which the customer pays
for the use of an electric washing machine).
Supermarkets, which may be broadly defined as self-service shops with a selling
area of more than 2,000 square feet and selling all types of food and some household
goods (such as cleaning materials), have been operating since 1956 in the United
Kingdom. By 1961 about 500 had been opened, of which about one-half were in
or around the London area. Co-operative societies own about a third of the super¬
markets, and multiple stores about two-fifths. It has been unofficially estimated that
the number of supermarkets will double in the next two years.
There has also been a large increase in the number of mobile shops serving out¬
lying housing estates and rural areas. Several thousand mobile shops, about half of
which are owned by retail co-operative societies, are estimated to be in operation, the
majority selling groceries or other foodstuffs; several manufacturers specialise in
building fully equipped vehicles for this type of trading.
Mail Order Sales
Mail order trading has been one of the most rapidly growing forms of selling in the
United Kingdom in recent years. Retail sales amounting to £128 million were reported
by specialist mail order houses in 1957, compared with only £47 million in 1950,
and some manufacturers and large stores also sell by mail order. The twenty largest
companies account for about 85 per cent of total mail order sales; the bulk of their
trade consists of clothing, footwear and household textiles. The smaller mail order
businesses normally specialise in a single commodity, notably in the sale by post of
seeds, plants and small horticultural requisites.
Retail Co-operative Societies
The retail co-operative societies are voluntary non-profit-making organisations
engaged in retail trade and controlled by their members, who are also their customers.
An operating surplus is returned periodically to members as a dividend, and the
amount distributed is proportionate to the value of the member’s purchases.
Retail co-operatives also sell to the general public, but membership is open to
anyone paying a small deposit on a minimum share, which entitles the member to
an equal voice with other members in determining the policy of the society. Invest-
TRADE AND PAYMENTS 449
ment by individual members is limited to £500 but the rules of some societies fix
lower limits. Only a low rate of interest is paid on the shares.
At the end of 1959 there were 982 retail co-operative societies registered under
the Industrial and Provident Societies Act, but amalgamations are slowly diminishing
the number of societies. More than a quarter of the total membership of the co¬
operatives (12,585,000) was provided by the eight largest societies, each of which
had a membership of more than 150,000. One, the London Co-operative Society
with about 1*3 million members, is the largest retail co-operative in the world. Total
sales of the retail co-operative societies in 1959 reached £999 million (this figure
includes certain activities not covered by the census of distribution figure in Table 35);
the largest society had a turnover of more than £55 million, and of the total trading
surplus, £49 million was allocated to dividends on sales.
Retail co-operative societies are free to purchase where they wish or to produce
their own goods, but in order to secure the advantage of large-scale production and
distribution, they have collectively established wholesale and production societies.1
Hire-Purchase Sales
The rapid growth of sales of household and durable consumer goods, such as cars,
furniture, washing machines, refrigerators and cookers, has been greatly helped by
instalment purchasing. The Board of Trade has powers to regulate the terms of hire-
purchase and credit sales agreements. Controls imposed in 1955 were completely
revoked in October 1958, but in April i960 minimum deposits and maximum repay¬
ment periods for most categories of consumer goods were reintroduced. By the end of
June 1961 the total hire-purchase debt had grown to £957 million.
Retailers finance most of their own hire-purchase business (covering furniture and
other domestic goods) and at the end of June 1961 the hire-purchase debt owed directly
to them, including the amount rediscounted by finance houses, was £306 million.
The balance of their hire-purchase business is directly financed by finance houses but
these companies are mainly concerned with the financing of hire-purchase business in
motor vehicles and industrial, farm, and commercial equipment. At the end of June
1961 the hire-purchase debt owed directly to them was £651 million. There are a
large number of these companies but a high proportion of the business is done by a
small number which operate on a national scale.
Packaging
The British Productivity Council estimated in 1958 that British industry spent not
less than £400 million annually on packaging, an increase of one-third during the
previous decade. The expansion of self-service shops and the growth of sales in the
form of branded and standardised products have been major factors in the great
changes which have taken place in packaging methods. These developments are
reflected in the marked increases in output of the industries concerned—plastics, fibre-
board, metal tubes, tin plate and glass containers. Fruit and vegetables, for example,
are increasingly sold in packs of transparent film. Aerosol dispensers, almost unknown
a few years ago, were being used at a rate of over 50 million in i960. Laminated alumi¬
nium foil is now employed extensively as a wrapping material in the food industry.
Advertising
The expansion of productive capacity in industries manufacturing consumer goods
in Britain, and the ever-increasing choice of goods and services available to the
1 The two major wholesale societies are the Co-operative Wholesale Society Limited and the
Scottish Co-operative Wholesale Society Limited.
45°
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
consumer in recent years, have been accompanied by a steady upward trend in expendi¬
ture on advertising. About £455 million is estimated to have been spent on all forms
of advertising in i960. About £220 million was expended on press advertising, over
three-fifths of it in the national and provincial press and the rest in periodicals and
magazines and in the technical trade press; and about £80 million (33 per cent more
than in 1959) was spent on television advertising. The remainder was divided between
other media, such as posters, films, catalogues, window displays, exhibitions, and free
samples and gift schemes. Most of the advertising is carried out by advertising agencies,
which, in some cases, also provide marketing, consumer research and other services.
The central organisation of the agencies is the Institute of Incorporated Practitioners
in Advertising. The trade association for agencies, owners of advertising media, and
all concerned in advertising is the Advertising Association.
Consumer Protection
Various legislative measures exist in the United Kingdom to protect the consumer
against specific abuses. Independent organisations have also sought to establish
voluntary minimum standards of quality. Weights and measures legislation, one of
the earliest forms of consumer protection, is strictly enforced by qualified inspectors.
The Merchandise Marks Acts, 1887-1953, are designed to ensure that the marking of
goods is both accurate and honest. The British Standards Institution (see p. 272) has
established a number of standards for consumer goods, and the Council of Industrial
Design (see p. 233) helps to foster improvements in the design of consumer goods.
Advice to the public on the merits of consumer goods is provided through the British
Standards Institution’s Consumer Advisory Council and by the Consumers’ Associa¬
tion Ltd., a private body financed by the subscriptions of members; both issue to
subscribers regular bulletins reporting on the qualities of products tested. Assistance
with certain aspects of consumer guidance is also given by a number of other private
bodies and by certain Government departments, e.g. the Department of Scientific
and Industrial Research. Special arrangements in the form of consumer councils and
consumer committees, have been made for the nationalised industries. Individual
trades and industries have also taken measures to raise standards of quality.
The purity, hygiene and description of food are controlled by the Food and Drugs
Acts, 1955, 1956, and 1958. , .
A committee was set up by the President of the Board of Trade in 1959 to consider
and report whether changes in the law and other measures are desirable for the
further protection of the consumer. It published an interim report in April i960
(Cmnd. ion), in which it recommended the enactment of legislation empowering
ministers to make regulations prohibiting the sale of consumer goods not conforming
to specified safety standards in any case where such a prohibition becomes necessary.
In March i960 the President of the Board of Trade set up a confidential fact¬
finding inquiry into the extent and effects of individual resale price maintenance
(see p. 275).
A prospective purchaser of a second-hand car can obtain guidance as to whether
the car he proposes to buy is the subject of a hire-purchase agreement. Virtually every
hire-purchase agreement on a car is registered with H.P. Information Ltd., a non-
profit-making company whose members are car dealers or finance companies con¬
cerned with car sales, and this company will answer inquiries made through its
members, the police, solicitors, the motoring associations, or the Citizens’ Advice
Bureaux (see p. 139).
XV. LABOUR
MANPOWER
The total working population of Great Britain at the end of June 1961 was about
24*4 million, some 48 per cent of the total population, and included about 76 per cent
of persons of normal working age (15 years to 59 years for women, 15 years to 64
years for men). About 95 per cent of the men of working age are today in or seeking
gainful work. The remaining 5 per cent consist mainly of those continuing their
education, of the severely disabled and of some persons of private means. The pro¬
portion of women of working age in or seeking gainful work is much lower, about
50 per cent, as many housewives have no wish to take employment outside the home,
or if they have, are prevented by household duties from doing so. Besides those of
normal working age, there are nearly million older men and women still at work.
The great majority of the working population work for a wage or salary, but over
11 million are employers or self-employed.
The situation is markedly different in Northern Ireland, where the ratio of working
to total population is under 40 per cent, and farmers and smallholders working their
own holdings account for about an eighth of the working population. Northern Ireland,
however, has under 3 per cent of the United Kingdom population, so that the figures
for Great Britain are broadly representative of the position in the United Kingdom.
During the present century, decreases in both birth and death rates have had the
effect of increasing the proportion of persons over the age of 35 years in both the total
population and the working population. Changes in social habits have also had their
effect. The minimum working age has been raised to 15 years. The proportion of those
over the normal working age who are still working has declined (though the great
increase in the number of older persons has meant that the actual number who are
working has increased). The proportion of men aged 20 to 64 who are at work has
remained very high at all ages. Among women, on the other hand, there has been a
steady increase during the century in the proportions employed in the age groups
I5 to 59> but this has been offset by the raising of the minimum working age and by
a decrease in the proportion of women employed above the age of 60. There has been
an increase in the employment of married women, particularly in the last twenty years.
The proportion of women at work tends to decrease with age but is at every age
much higher for single than for married women. Nearly 30 per cent of the female
labour force is under 25 years of age and about 6 per cent is over 60. Almost all single
women under 45 are in, or seeking, employment, compared with rather more than
half in their late fifties; among married women, however, the proportion occupied,
which is nearly 40 per cent for women in their early twenties, declines for the age-
groups 25 to 34 but rises again for those aged between 35 and 50. An increasing
proportion of women in the middle age groups are taking up employment (including
part-time work) and the total number of married women working is now about the
same as the number of single women working.
The total working population (including men and women in the armed forces)
rose considerably during the second world war when housewives, including mothers
of young children, manned war factories at great personal inconvenience, while men
451
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
452
served in the armed forces. From the end of the war until mid-1947 size of the
working population declined as women left industry; then, after remaining fairly
steady until mid-1949, it began to rise and has continued to rise since except for a
slight recession in 1958. It is expected to continue to increase fairly rapidly for the
next few years as the bulk of the young people born in 1946—48, when the birth rate
was high, enter employment.
The broad changes in the manpower position in Great Britain between mid-194$
and mid-1961 are shown in Table 37.
TABLE 37
General Manpower Position in Great Britain
Number in Civil Employment (b):
Men ..
Women
Totals
Registered Wholly Unemployed
H.M. Forces (including Women’s
Services):
Men ..
Women
Totals 
Total Working Population (c):
Men ..
Women
Totals
Thousands
End-
June 1948
14,549
7,020
21,569
273
807
39
846
15,657
7,123
22,780
End-
June 1959
15,308
7,889
23,197
379
550
15
565
16,137
8,008
24,145
End-
unel961 ( a)
15,640
8,225
23,865
251
459
15
474
16,283
8,307
24,590
Source: Ministry of Labour.
(a) The mid-1961 figures are provisional.
(b) The civil employment figures include employers, those working on their own account and
temporarily stopped workers. Part-time workers are counted as full units.
(c) The working population figures include small numbers of ex-Service personnel on leave after
completing their service and not included in the other figures in this table.
Deployment of Labour
About 40 per cent of those in civil employment are employed in the mining and
manufacturing industries and only about 4 per cent in agriculture and fisheries, even
during the harvest season. Over half of those in manufacturing are in the metal, engi¬
neering and chemical groups of industries.
Most industries employ women as well as men, but there are jobs, such as under¬
ground work in coal mines, which are forbidden to women. The industrial groups in
which women are chiefly employed are in the metal-using industries, in the manu¬
facture of textiles and clothing, in the food, drink and tobacco industries, and in the
distributive trades and professional and miscellaneous services.
LABOUR
453
An analysis of the total number in civil employment by broad industrial groups is
given in Table 38.
The numbers given in Table 38, as working in an industry or service, include those
engaged on administrative, technical and clerical work, so that the totals given for the
production industries are greater than the numbers on productive processes. Only
about a third of the men at work and only about a quarter of the women at work are
employed in manual occupations in mining or manufacturing industries.
TABLE 38
Analysis of Civil Employment in Great Britain
Thousands
Industry or Service
End-
June 1948
End-
June 1959 (a)
old basis
new basis
End-
June 1961
(*)
Agriculture and fisheries
Mining and quarrying ..
Manufacturing industries:
Chemical and allied trades
Metals, engineering and vehicles
Textiles
Clothing
Food, drink and tobacco
Other manufactures
Totals in manufacturing indus¬
tries ..
Construction
Gas, electricity and water
Transport and communications..
Distributive trades
Professional, financial and miscel¬
laneous services
National Government Service ..
Local Government Service
Totals in Civil Employment
1,178
876
441
3,944
931
649
750
1,422
8,137
1,450
321
1,787
2,484
3,954
682
700
999
823
544
4,602
851
644
939
1,589
9,169
1,509
374
1,676
3,000
4,340
520
787
999
826
520
4,166
851
565
818
1,557
8,477
1,523
374
1,672
3,209
4,874
505
738
21,569
23,197
23,197
947
729
542
4,476
839
589
832
1,638
8,917
1,592
376
1,686
3,309
5,048
512
749
23,865
Source: Ministry of Labour.
(а) A new standard industrial classification was introduced in 1958.
(б) The mid-1961 figures are provisional.
The industrial and occupational distribution of the population has changed during
the twentieth century. Some short-term changes were brought about during the two
world wars and by the severe trade recession and unemployment of the inter-war
years, but the following appear to be the main long-term trends:
1. A continuance at a decreasing rate of the decline in agricultural employment
which was rapid at the end of the nineteenth century.
454
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
2. A general increase in administrative, technical and clerical employment,
including public administration, and a very large increase in the employment
of women in clerical work.
3. A decline in employment in certain of the large old-established industries,
notably coalmining, cotton textiles and shipbuilding.
4. A very large increase in employment in the metals, engineering and vehicles
group of industries and the chemicals group of industries. Employment in
these industries approximately doubled between 1931 and 1951 and has since
increased by a further 10 per cent. Expansion has been most marked in those
sections of the industries making relatively new types of products, e.g., cars,
aircraft, electrical and electronic apparatus and plastics. The rate of increase
in certain branches of these industries was accelerated during both world wars.
5. A decline in indoor private domestic service, in which the number of women
employed fell by about a million between 1901 and 19s1,
6. A considerable increase in the numbers employed in the distributive trades.
Unemployment and Labour Demand
Since the end of the second world war, unemployment in all parts of Great Britain
has been very much less than in the period between the two world wars, when the
general rate ranged between 9 and 22 per cent.
This decline in unemployment is due partly to specific measures taken by the Govern¬
ment (see pp. 262—4) fitit, in the main, to changes in the general economic situation.
The general demand for labour has been high, the number of unfilled vacancies on the
registers of employment exchanges usually exceeding the number of registered
unemployed, while the demand for certain types of skilled craftsmen and for qualified
scientists, engineers and technicians has far exceeded the supply.
Since 1945 the unemployment rate in Great Britain (the ratio of the number of
unemployed to the total number of employees) has ranged, except for brief periods,
between 1 and 2 per cent.
The unemployment rate varies in different localities and, though high unemploy¬
ment has ceased generally to be a problem in any of the major industrial regions, there
is still relatively high unemployment in a number of districts in Scotland and Wales,
and in certain seaside resorts and isolated localities in England. Under the Local
Employment Act, i960, the Government has powers to alleviate unemployment in
those districts known as development districts (see p. 263).
Northern Ireland
The total working population of Northern Ireland—including employers and
self-employed, but excluding certain unpaid helpers—was about 545,000 in June
i960 (370,000 males and 175,000 females). The largest industries are agriculture
and textiles. Most of the agricultural work in Northern Ireland is done by small
farmers and their families without hired help. The total manpower in agriculture,
forestry and fisheries was 79,000 in mid-1960, according to the official estimates of
the Ministry of Labour and National Insurance of the Northern Ireland Government,
and was considerably larger according to other estimates which include unpaid helpers,
but the number of insured employees in these industries was only about 17,600.
The textile industry, traditionally concerned with linen, employs about 63,000 people
and now makes extensive use of man-made fibres as well as natural fibres.
The unemployment rate in Northern Ireland has remained higher than in England,
tABOUK
455
Wales or Scotland. In April 1961 it was about 7-3 per cent of the insured employees
and during the last 10 years has rarely fallen below 6 per cent. The Ministry of Com¬
merce of the Northern Ireland Government has wide powers (similar to those of the
Board of Trade in development districts in Great Britain) to assist the development
and diversification of industry. It is using these powers vigorously in an attempt to
improve the situation.
GOVERNMENT EMPLOYMENT AND TRAINING SERVICES
The provision of employment services in Great Britain has been one of the principal
functions of the Ministry of Labour since its inception in 1916. Northern Ireland has
its own legislation in these matters which embodies the main principles of the corre¬
sponding legislation in Great Britain, but owing to the much smaller area of adminis¬
tration and the less favourable employment situation, the facilities available are not
so comprehensive in their scope as is the case in Great Britain, and administrative
arrangements are in some respects on different lines. The responsible department is
the Ministry of Labour and National Insurance.
The following account, therefore, of services in Great Britain applies in general
to Northern Ireland except where otherwise stated. The scope of the services in
Great Britain has gradually been extended to include the provision of advice on
employment and, in suitable cases, of vocational training. The Employment and
Training Act, 1948, provided a permanent legislative basis for these wider services.
The main services are provided through the country-wide network of some 900
local employment and branch employment offices, which act as employment exchanges.
Local employment committees, composed of representatives of employers, workers
and other local interests serving all areas, are attached to certain employment exchanges
as advisory bodies to secure for the department the full benefit of local knowledge and
the close co-operation of employers and workers. There are additional services designed
to meet the needs of men and women who are qualified, or who are likely to qualify,
for professional, administrative, managerial, senior executive and higher technical and
scientific posts at home and overseas. These are operated in Great Britain as follows:
1. The Technical and Scientific Register, kept centrally in London, which deals
with qualified scientists, engineers, architects and surveyors.
2. The Nursing Appointments Service, which provides an advisory service
through 157 Nursing Appointments Offices situated in the larger towns in
Great Britain, is available to all persons seeking information about employ¬
ment in or training for the nursing, midwifery and medical auxiliary professions
and certain allied occupations.
3. The Professional and Executive Register held at certain of the larger employ¬
ment exchanges, which provides a service for all other persons qualified for
professional and senior executive posts; ex-regular officers of the armed forces;
and young men and women suitable for training for management. Information
about this service can be obtained from any local office of the ministry.
General Services for Adults
All the offices referred to above accept on their registers both employed and
unemployed persons seeking employment. Their primary function is to introduce
suitable persons seeking employment to employers requiring employees, thus providing
an efficient service to employers and job-seekers and meeting the needs of the national
economy.
456
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
The employment exchanges holding the Professional and Executive Register are
also ready to give information about the professions and allied occupations to young
men and women aged 18 years and over who have not already established themselves
in a profession or in the business world, and to older people who wish to change
their careers.
The Nursing Appointments Service is freely available to all persons interested in
training for and seeking employment in any of the professions concerned, including
those who wish to change from their present employment. Nursing Appointments
Offices are staffed by officers who have undergone special training for the work and
qualified nurses are also available to give advice where necessary.
The Regular Forces Resettlement Service exists within the Ministry of Labour
and works through the employment exchanges, helping regular officers and other
ranks returning to civilian life to find suitable employment. During the past 3! years
about 20,000 officers and 240,000 other ranks left the armed forces and nearly all
were satisfactorily resettled. The Ministry of Labour arranged with local education
authorities in various parts of the country for the provision at commercial colleges
of short business training courses lasting six weeks and designed to meet the needs
of regulars who wish to take up a business career. A four-week course in industrial
supervision has also been introduced to help the resettlement in civil life of regular
Warrant Officers and senior NCOs. The courses are held at the ministry’s Staff
Training College, Letchworth.
In recent years, it has been the Government’s policy, in view of the increasing
numbers of older persons in the population, to promote the employment of older
men and women by persuading employers to change their approach to the problem.
In 1952 the Minister of Labour appointed the National Advisory Committee on the
Employment of Older Men and Women to advise and assist him in carrying out this
policy. The committee’s first report, published in 1953, recommended that the test
for engagement should be capacity and not age and that all who can give effective
service should have the chance to continue in work if they so wish; and it made
suggestions for overcoming any difficulties that might prevent these principles from
being applied. These recommendations have been put into practice by the Govern¬
ment and by many other leading employers, and have had a favourable influence
upon employers and upon public opinion in general. The committee’s second report,
issued in 1955, reviewed developments. In 1958 it was decided to disband the com¬
mittee as further work in this field could best be carried out through the ordinary
machinery of the National Joint Advisory Council (see p. 478).
A special responsibility of the local employment offices is recruitment under the
vocational training scheme. In Britain the main responsibility for vocational training
for employment below professional level rests on the industries and trades directly
concerned. The main purpose of the ministry’s scheme is to assist certain classes of
people in special need of help to fit themselves for suitable employment, but the
ministry is also concerned in helping to overcome shortages of labour in key industries
and for this purpose training is available more widely. The majority of trainees under
the scheme are disabled persons but many are able-bodied men and women seeking
employment after voluntary service in the regular armed forces, or other unemployed
persons having special difficulty in resettlement (including skilled workers whose
prospects of employment in their existing trade are poor).
The training is normally provided at one of the 15 Government Training Centres
which are situated near the main industrial areas, but training under the scheme can
in some cases be arranged at technical and commercial colleges, private training schools
LABOUR 457
or employers’ establishments and, for the more severely disabled, at four Residential
Training Centres run by voluntary societies.
Courses vary in length according to the trade; most last for six months. Schemes of
training for particular trades have been drawn up in consultation with representatives
of the employers and workers concerned, who in some cases also assist in the selection
of persons suitable for training. Allowances, at a higher rate than for unemployment
benefit, are paid to trainees during training to maintain them and their dependants.
Over 5,000 people were trained under the scheme in i960, and about 95 per cent of
them were subsequently employed in the trade for which they had been trained.
The Government training courses at centres are available to trainees from overseas
under approved schemes (for instance, those of the ILO or the Colombo Plan).
Training of Apprentices
As one measure designed to encourage industry to increase its intake of apprentices
during the years 1961 to 1963, when large numbers of children are leaving school,
facilities have been provided in Government Training Centres for full-time training
of apprentices in their first year. The object is a demonstration, limited in numbers,
to enable employers to see for themselves what can be achieved by systematic methods
of practical and theoretical instruction, combined with day-release for further educa¬
tion at technical colleges. The employers continue to pay the apprentices’ wages
during the course and are responsible for completion of the remaining years of
apprenticeship.
Special Training Services
The Ministry of Labour provides a service to industry through its scheme of Training
Within Industry for Supervisors. The four programmes of instruction which comprise
the TWI scheme are: job relations, the fostering of good working relationships; job
instruction, the technique of instructing or directing staff; job methods, the steps taken
n planning the best way of doing a job; and job safety, which seeks to arouse safety
iconsciousness and to train supervisors to detect dangers and deal with them.
The ministry employs a small staff of TWI officers, whose work is mainly directed
to the training of firms’ TWI instructors, who then train the supervisors in their own
organisations by the group discussion method. The ministry is prepared to extend a
measure of these services to overseas branches of British firms. It is prepared also to
train suitable persons to develop the scheme in their own territories. The arrangements
may be made by the Government of the country concerned or (where appropriate)
by the International Labour Organisation (ILO).
In addition, the ministry’s Technical Staff College at Letchworth, Hertfordshire,
provides two-week courses in teaching methods for instructors responsible for the
training of apprentices and other workers. These courses have been developed by the
ministry to meet its own requirements for the training of instructors engaged in
training adults in skilled occupations at Government Training Centres, and the
syllabus has been made available to employers in the United Kingdom and in overseas
countries.
Services for Foreigners
Foreigners are admitted to the United Kingdom to take up employment with a
particular employer, provided they are in possession of a permit issued to the prospective
employer by the Ministry of Labour (the Ministry of Labour and National Insurance
45^
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
for Northern Ireland if the proposed employment is in Northern Ireland). About
40,000 such permits are issued each year. Of these, approximately one-half are for
domestic workers in hospitals, schools, other institutions and private households, and
one-eighth for student employees. Employment is limited to a maximum of one year
in the first instance but may be extended on application by the employer. In certain
circumstances, permission may be given by the Home Office for foreigners who landed
as visitors or students to take employment approved by the ministry. Approval is
subject to the same conditions and requirements as are applied to the issue of permits
to foreigners while still abroad.
Before a permit is issued, the ministry must be satisfied that there is a bona fide
job, that no suitable British or foreign worker already resident in Britain for a long
period is available, and that the wages and conditions of employment are not less
favourable than those enjoyed by British workers. These conditions are waived for
student employees who are admitted for limited periods in order to improve their
English and to gain a wider knowledge of their occupations. A foreigner permitted to
take employment in the United Kingdom may not change his employment, unless his
prospective employer has obtained prior approval from the ministry to employ the
foreigner.
The permit system applies to individual foreigners. In addition, after the second
world war, far greater numbers were admitted under various schemes organised by
the Ministry of Labour, notably the resettlement of members of the Polish Forces
who felt themselves unable to return to post-war Poland, and the recruitment of
European volunteer workers from the displaced persons’ camps in Germany, Austria
and Denmark. More recently, the United Kingdom Government has admitted many
Hungarian refugees who fled from their country following the uprising in October
1956, and there is a current scheme whereby the ministry assists in the bulk recruit¬
ment of Italian workers. Special arrangements are made to dispense with the need for
individual permits in these cases.
The United Kingdom, as a member of the Western European Union, participates
in the arrangements for assisting nationals of the countries concerned to obtain
employment in other member countries.
It must be stressed that these controls over entry and employment apply only to
citizens of foreign countries. Except as regards employment in Northern Ireland,
there are no such controls over persons from Commonwealth countries and territories
overseas and citizens of the Irish Republic. There are no current records of the
numbers now resident or in employment, but information about the numbers of such
persons resident in 1951 is available from the population censuses and similar informa¬
tion relating to April 1961 will become available from the analyses of the 1961
population census.
Youth Employment Service
The Ministry of Labour is also responsible in Great Britain for two
specialised employment services: the Youth Employment Service and the Disablement
Resettlement Service.
The purpose of the Youth Employment Service is to help young people leaving
school and young workers under 18 years of age at the start of their working life.
The service is under the general direction of the Central Youth Employment
Executive, staffed by officers of the Ministry of Labour, the Ministry of Education
and the Scottish Education Department. This joint executive is appointed by the
Minister of Labour, who is responsible to Parliament for the Youth Employment
LABOUR 459
Service as a whole. The minister has appointed a National Youth Employment Council
and separate advisory committees for Scotland and for Wales to advise him.
Locally the service is operated in most areas through Youth Employment Offices
established by local education authorities (in Scotland by education authorities) in
accordance with the schemes submitted by them to the Minister of Labour and
approved by him. In those areas where such schemes are not in operation, the service
is operated by the local office of the Ministry of Labour.
The main functions of the service are to collect and disseminate information on
careers, provide talks in schools, give vocational guidance, find suitable employment
and keep contact with young workers to help them to settle down. A further function
is to help employers to fill vacancies for young people. Local youth employment
committees, made up of teachers, employers, workers and other appropriate interests,
assist the service in an advisory capacity.
In Northern Ireland a Youth Employment Service of more limited scope is operated
by the Ministry of Labour and National Insurance, and in co-operation with this
service, one local education authority provides a Vocational Guidance Service. A com¬
prehensive Youth Employment Service similar in scope to that operating in Great
Britain is now being set up.
Disablement Resettlement Service
The purpose of the Disabled Persons (Employment) Acts, 1944 and 1958, on which
all the ministry’s work for disabled persons is based, is ‘to make further and better
provision for enabling persons handicapped by disablement to secure employment
or work on their own account’, and the Disablement Resettlement Service is designed
to help disabled persons to get and keep suitable work. The service is available to all
persons over school-leaving age who are substantially handicapped as a result of
injury, disease or congenital deformity in obtaining or keeping employment.
The Ministry of Labour is responsible for the administration of the service. At each
of its local offices there is a disablement resettlement officer, working under the
direction of the manager and in co-operation with other officers. Besides his contacts
with employers this officer is in touch with all the hospitals in his area and visits any
patient who wishes to discuss the question of future employment. His work involves
close co-operation with doctors, local authorities and voluntary welfare agencies.
The help given by the service falls under four main headings:
1. Vocational Guidance. This is given at local offices by disablement resettlement
officers in consultation, as necessary, with the local disablement advisory committees,
hospital resettlement clinics and medical interviewing committees, and also by
vocational psychologists in the industrial rehabilitation units (see paragraph 3).
2. Placing in Ordinary Employment. Having regard to a disabled person’s qualifica¬
tions and aptitude and to medical guidance, and concentrating on what the person can
do rather than on what he cannot do, the disablement resettlement officer endeavours
to find the work most suited to each person, either immediately, or in appropriate
cases after a course of industrial rehabilitation or vocational training. To some extent
this is facilitated by the main provision of the Disabled Persons Employment Act,
1944, namely, that all employers of 20 or more persons are required to employ a
quota (at present 3 per cent for all industries, except shipping, in respect of the manning
of ships) of registered disabled persons. Registration is voluntary. The number of
disabled persons registered on 17th April, 1961, was 666,454. ^ same date 47,860
registered disabled were unemployed, 43,279 being considered capable of ordinary
460
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
employment. The remaining 4,581 were so severely disabled as to be classed as
unlikely to obtain ordinary employment, though in fact many so classed are found
work in unsubsidised competitive undertakings by careful selective placement.
3. Industrial Rehabilitation and Vocational Training. Industrial rehabilitation is
provided at residential and non-residential units run by the Ministry of Labour
where physical and mental toning-up is given and, for those who need it, vocational
guidance as to the best kind of employment to take up.1 For the blind, similar industrial
rehabilitation facilities, to the cost of which the ministry contributes, are available
at two centres conducted by voluntary organisations.
There are vocational training facilities for the disabled at Government Training
Centres, educational institutions and employers’ establishments. For the more seriously
disabled there are special residential training colleges run by voluntary organisations
with the financial assistance and technical help of the Ministry of Labour. There are
also arrangements for the training of special categories of disabled persons such as
the blind, and for providing disabled persons (including the blind), who are of the
appropriate educational standard, with grants to undertake study or training for the
purpose of qualifying for professional or comparable employment.
4. Sheltered Employment. Remploy Ltd., a non-profit-making public company
with no share capital, was set up in accordance with the provisions of the Disabled
Persons (Employment) Act, 1944. Its objects are to provide training and employment
facilities for registered disabled persons unlikely to obtain work except under special
conditions. Its powers include the provision of special factories and workshops, hostel
accommodation and facilities for homeworkers. The directors are appointed by the
Minister of Labour; funds for capital development and to meet operational costs are
provided by loans and grants under the Ministry of Labour Vote. At the end of i960
Remploy Ltd. operated 90 factories and employed 6,384 severely disabled men and
women, including some 190 homeworkers.
Facilities for the employment of blind persons are provided by local authorities
directly or through voluntary bodies, with the financial assistance of the Ministry
of Labour. At the end of December i960 there were 67 workshops for the blind in
which there were 263 blind persons in training and 3,669 in employment. Some 1,100
blind persons were working at home under homeworkers’ schemes. The ministry also
helped to finance training or employment of 1,086 severely disabled sighted
persons at 35 workshops run by voluntary undertakings or local authorities, and 93
severely disabled sighted persons in workshops for the blind.
TERMS OF EMPLOYMENT,
CONDITIONS OF WORK AND LABOUR RELATIONS
At the beginning of the nineteenth century, industrial v/orkers lacked legitimate
means of defending their standards of living or of ameliorating their working conditions.
The traditional methods of fixing wages had become obsolete, trade unions were
regarded as criminal conspiracies, and there was no protective legislation setting
minimum standards of safety, health and welfare in places of work.
The first attempt at protective legislation was the Health and Morals of Apprentices
Act, 1802, but the first effective Factory Act was that of 1833, which created an inspec¬
torate employed and paid by the central Government to enforce its provisions. Since
1 For an account of medical rehabilitation of the disabled, see p. 156.
LABOUR
461
that date, legislation extending, strengthening, adapting and consolidating the statutory-
protection for employees has been passed at an accelerating rate. The progress in
standards has owed much to the recommendations of strengthened inspectorates,
much to the example of progressive employers and much to the persistent pressure of
trade unions and disinterested reformers.
Trade unions ceased to be actionable conspiracies in 1824 but their status as legal
entities was not properly established until 1871. This latter step had been made
acceptable to public opinion by the leaders of certain craft unions, who had abandoned
the revolutionary and financially unsound policies of earlier trade unions to pursue a
limited practical objective, i.e. the improvement of their members’ wages and con¬
ditions through skilful and honest negotiation from positions of financial strength.
After 1880 the organisation of unskilled workers became more extensive and effective
and the whole tone of trade unionism became more militant and political. At the same
time, many employers were still hostile to trade unionism and were unwilling to
negotiate with trade unions or to recognise agreements made on an industry-wide
basis. Partly as a result of continuing antagonisms and of the changing and difficult
economic situation, much of the first thirty years of the twentieth century was marked
by widespread and prolonged strikes. Since 1932, however, the strike rate (in terms of
man-days lost) has, in most years, been very much lower, and arrangements for the
negotiation of terms of service and the peaceful settlement of disputes have become
general and are on the whole satisfactory.
This improvement in industrial relations has been achieved mainly by voluntary
action. There is, in general, no legal obligation on an employer to recognise a trade
union, or not to refuse to employ trade unionists; nor is a collective agreement with a
trade union held to be in itself a legal contract of employment, though under recent
legislation there is a procedure whereby a particular employer can sometimes be
legally bound to pay wages and observe conditions of employment established in an
industry by collective agreement (see p. 477).
Nevertheless, in the majority of trades and industries minimum or standard wages,
normal working hours and other terms of employment are effectively settled by
collective agreements, whose negotiation and observance continue to depend primarily
on the strength, integrity and representative character of the signatory organisations
rather than on any legal sanction. The determination by statute of minimum wages,
holidays and holiday pay is in principle confined to those trades and industries where
the organisation of employers or workers, or both, is inadequate to negotiate collec¬
tive agreements and to ensure their observance.
On the other hand, the conditions of work of employees—their safety, health and
welfare—depend to a far greater extent on minimum standards established by statute
and enforced by official inspectorates. Voluntary action is, however, of the greatest
importance even in these matters. In some cases, additional health, safety or welfare
requirements are the subject of collective agreements, while many employers provide
higher standards on their own initiative with help and advice from Government
departments and various voluntary bodies.
Management-employee relations depend not only on terms and conditions of
employment, but on human relationships at the place of work; managements have in
recent years become increasingly concerned with improving such relationships.
PAY, HOURS AND HOLIDAYS
Minimum or standard time rates for most British manual workers, as determined
by agreements or by statutory orders, vary between 3s. 6d. and 4s. yd. an hour for men
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
462
and between 2s. 3d. and 3s. 4d. for women. Actual earnings are usually higher. Higher
rates are sometimes paid, and piece rates, shift rates and overtime rates raise the level
of average earnings. The Ministry of Labour conducts a six-monthly survey of earnings
and hours of work of manual workers in manufacturing industries and in some of the
principal non-manufacturing industries in Great Britain. The survey made in April
1961 covered about 7 million workers and showed the average hourly earnings in all
the industries covered to be as follows:
Men 21 years and over .. .. .. .. .. 6s. j^d.
Youths and boys under 21 years .. .. .. .. 3s. 9*9d.
Women 18 years and over: full-time .. . . . . 3s. 9’9d.
part-time . . . . .. 3s. 7*9d.
Girls under 18 years .. .. .. .. .. 2s. 5*4d.
Average weekly earnings were:
Men  301s. 4d.
Youths   135s- 9d-
Women: full-time .. .. .. .. .. .. I52s- 7d-
part-time .. .. .. .. .. .. 7^s- ld-
Girls  99s. 1 id.
The survey does not cover agriculture, coalmining, railways, dock work, shipping,
distribution, catering or other services. In agriculture the average weekly earnings
for regular adult male workers were 209s. 3d. in the year April i960 to March 1961;
in coalmining, the average weekly cash earnings for men were 337s. 6d. plus 21s. 8d.
in kind in April 1961; in the railway services average weekly earnings in March i960
were 279s. for men in the wage-earning grades, including the workshop grades,
and 149s. for women; average weekly earnings of dock workers employed by the
National Dock Labour Board from January to March 1961 were 321s. 4d.
Since 1947 average weekly wage rates have increased by about 94 per cent and
average weekly earnings by about 136 per cent. Most of the increase in wage rates
has been offset by a rise in the cost of living. The trends of manual workers’ earnings,
and of wage rates and retail prices from 1948 to i960, compared with 1947, are shown
in the diagram on p. 463.
Women in industry are for the most part engaged on different tasks from men
and are paid less than men on the grounds that these tasks are unskilled or semi¬
skilled. In the relatively few instances in the field of manual employment where men
and women are employed on precisely the same work and under identical conditions,
collective agreements frequently provide for equal remuneration.
Information about the spread of earnings of manual workers, i.e. the proportion
of manual workers with weekly earnings within certain ranges, has become available
for the first time since 1938 as the result of a special inquiry made by the Ministry
of Labour as part of its survey of earnings in the second pay-week of October i960.
This survey covered establishments not only in manufacturing but also in mining
(other than coalmining), construction, gas, electricity and water supply, transport
other than rail transport, public administration, laundries and cleaners, garages and
shoe repairers. It is estimated that returns received relate to about four-fifths of the
full-time adult manual workers in manufacturing and probably to about two-thirds in
LABOUR
463
the other industries surveyed. Corresponding figures for coalminers, dock and agri¬
cultural workers have been compiled by the National Coal Board, National Dock
Labour Board and the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food.
In all the industries surveyed by the Ministry of Labour, 3-6 per cent of the men
earned less than £9 and 42 per cent earned £15 or over; in manufacturing industries
alone, 3-1 per cent earned less than £9, and 48 per cent £15 or over; in the non¬
manufacturing industries covered, 4-8 per cent earned less than £9 and 28 per cent
£15 or more. In coalmining no full-time workers underground earned less than £10
and no surface workers less than £9. Nearly two-thirds of the underground workers
earned £15 or more, but only just over a quarter of the surface workers earned £15 or
more, while about the same proportion earned less than £10. A few dock workers (1*4
per cent) earned less than £9 while 65-5 per cent earned £15 or more and 19*5 per
cent earned £22 or more.
It must be stressed, however, that in all these cases the distribution of earnings is
that for a single week. Particularly in dock work, but also in coalmining and in a number
of manufacturing occupations, there are sharp variations in piecework earnings from
week to week, so that it is probable that relatively few manual workers maintain over a
long period, the high level of earnings which a substantial proportion attain each week.
There are no similarly detailed and comprehensive figures for the rates of pay
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
464
and earnings of non-manual workers, as these are often based on individual contracts,
except in the public service, teaching and retail distribution. The rather limited evidence
suggests that the majority of male non-manual workers—the clerks and shop assistants
—have average earnings little different in range from those of manual workers, but
the earnings of women in these occupations are somewhat higher than in manual
occupations. According to a Ministry of Labour survey of the earnings of administra¬
tive, technical and clerical employees in manufacturing and certain other industries
in October i960, the average earnings of male salaried employees in manufacturing
were £105 4s. lod. a month for those paid monthly and £14 19s. id. for those paid
weekly. For all industries covered the corresponding figures for males were £102 19s. 9d.
and £14 15s. od. respectively. For full-time females, average earnings in manufac¬
turing were £44 19s. 2d. a month for the monthly paid and £7 ns. 2d. a week for
the weekly paid; and in all industries covered, £45 7s. id. a month and £7 13s. 4d.
a week respectively. The pay of shop assistants is on scales prescribing weekly minima
from about £7 8s. 6d. to £10 4s. for men and £$ 4s. 6d. to £7 7s. 6d. for women. The
Office Management Association makes periodic surveys of clerical salaries. The latest
survey, of March i960, covered 1,112 establishments, employing 87,011 clerks, and
showed that the average weekly salaries for young inexperienced clerks ranged mainly
from 76s. od. to 120s. od. for youths and from 66s. od. to 101s. od. for girls, while
average salaries for adult male clerks ranged from £12 6s. od. for the lowest grade
of skill and responsibility to £16 19s. od for the highest. Corresponding women’s
salaries were 25 to 30 per cent less.
The starting salaries in many professional and technical careers are often in the
range of £500 to £700 a year, though they may be lower for trainees starting work in
their teens, and higher for some graduates entering industry and the Civil Service.
Such posts offer incremental progression to higher salaries and opportunities for
promotion. According to an investigation carried out by the Central Office of Informa¬
tion Social Survey in 1955-56 (but referring to the previous year) and published in
the report of the Royal Commission on Doctors’ and Dentists’ Remuneration, the
average (median) annual remuneration of qualified people ranged from £1,600 to
£2,000 in the leading professions. It is probably now from 14 to 20 per cent more.
Most of the senior posts in business, the professions and the Civil Service are in
the range of £1,500 to £5,000 a year. The posts with salaries of £5,000 to £12,000
a year include those of Cabinet Ministers, chairmen and some other members of
the boards of nationalised industries, judges of the High Court and Court of Appeal,
and Lords of Appeal, the Permanent Secretaries of Government departments, the
clerks of the largest municipal authorities, editors of daily newspapers, some persons
outstanding in their professions and in the higher managerial posts in industry,
commerce and banking. A few persons in business draw still higher salaries, while the
earnings of star entertainers and certain other very successful people exceed £25,000
a year.
Regarding the incidence of such salaries, it may be noted that in 1958-59 only 8
per cent of all male employees and 0-9 per cent of female employees earned £1,000
or more a year. Only about 0-9 per cent of all employees were earning over £2,000
a year, while only about 0-3 per cent earned over £3,000 and less than o-i per cent
over £5,000.
Women have the same right of entry as men to nearly all public offices, administrative
posts and professions. They are paid the same salary for doing the same work in
medicine, dentistry, physiotherapy, radiography, university teaching, journalism,
broadcasting and architecture, and as Ministers of the Crown, members of Parliament,
LABOUR
465
salaried magistrates and solicitors, pharmacists working in hospitals, and administra¬
tive, professional and technical workers in local government. Women in independent
professions are not expected to charge lower fees than men. In many other non-manual
occupations, however, a woman in Britain doing the same job as a man is still paid
less for doing it, although the position has been changing.
The principle of equal pay for male and female salaried staff began to be implemented
in 1955 in the public service, including national and local government service, the
national health service, the nationalised industries, and teachers in maintained and
assisted schools. Progressive increases in women’s salaries resulted in most cases in
men’s and women’s salary scales being assimilated by 1961. Women’s salaries outside
the public service are being similarly adjusted in some cases.
HOURS OF WORK
National legislation in the United Kingdom embodies a general prohibition of
employment of children under 13 years of age; forbids the employment of older
children and women in certain occupations; and limits and defines permissible hours
of work for women and young persons in a number of industries or trades. Children
aged thirteen to fifteen may not be employed during school hours or before 6 a.m. or
after 8 p.m. on any day, or for more than two hours on school days or on Sundays.
This part-time employment is regulated in various ways by statute and by by-laws
made by local authorities.
The Shops Act, 1950, makes local authorities responsible for ensuring that the shops
in their area observe its requirements. With certain exceptions, shops must be closed
on weekdays by 8 p.m. (9 p.m. on one late day) except on the early closing day when
they must be closed by 1 p.m., and all day on Sunday; but local authorities may make
orders modifying these and other provisions of the Act within there own area. The
hours of work of shop employees under sixteen years of age are normally restricted to
44 a week, and those of employees between sixteen and eighteen 5'ears of age to 48 a
week, with limited provision for overtime. Broadly speaking, all shop assistants must
be given a half-holiday (half a day) every week and, in addition, every Sunday off or
another day off instead.
In premises under the Factories Acts the working hours of women and young
persons between the ages of sixteen and eighteen are generally limited to 48 a week
and nine a day, although some overtime is allowed (up to six hours a week but not
more than 100 hours a year or in more than 25 weeks in a year). Young persons under
sixteen years of age are limited to 44 hours a week. Adequate intervals for meals must
be arranged for women and young persons and the employment of women and young
girls at night is, in general, prohibited.
In mines and quarries, women and young persons under eighteen may not normally
start work before 6 a.m. and must never start before 5 a.m. Their work must normally
end before 9 p.m., in the case of young persons under sixteen, and before 10 p.m., in
the case of women and young persons aged sixteen to eighteen; and never in any case
after 11 p.m.
The Young Persons (Employment) Act, 1938, imposes restrictions on the hours
of work of young persons (48 a week at the age of sixteen years and over and 44 for
those under sixteen years) in certain occupations not covered by the Factories Acts,
the Mines and Quarries Act, 1954, or the Shops Act, 1950.
While the hours of work of adult men are not, in general, restricted by statute,
normal hours of work for both sexes and those of all ages are usually well within the
legal limits on the hours of women and young persons. Agreed weekly hours, in
466
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
which substantial reductions have been negotiated in many cases within the past
two years, are mainly 42 to 46, and may be worked as either a five-day or a five-
and-a-half-day week according to the industry and the rule of the particular establish¬
ment. Hours actually worked by men are somewhat longer owing to overtime working.
The survey conducted by the Ministry of Labour in April 1961 into earnings and hours
of manual workers showed that average weekly hours actually worked were as follows:
Men
Youths and boys .
Women: full-time
part-time
Girls
47*9 hours
44*1 hours
35*9 hours
21 *7 hours
40*8 hours
Holidays with Pay
With a few exceptions, manual workers (including shop assistants) in industries
covered by agreements or statutory orders are entitled to paid holidays of twelve
days or two weeks. Moreover, payment is made for bank or statutory public holidays,
which are as follows: in addition to Good Friday and Christmas Day, there are Bank
Holidays in England, Wales, and the Channel Islands on Easter Monday, Whit-
Monday, the first Monday in August and the first weekday after Christmas (Boxing
Day), and in Scotland on New Year’s Day, the first Monday in May, and the first
Monday in August. Northern Ireland observes all the English holidays and, in addition,
has a Bank Holiday on St. Patrick’s Day, 17th March, and a statutory public holiday
on 12th July (commemorating the Battle of the Boyne, 1690); Easter Tuesday is also
a customary holiday for industry and trade. Many agreements provide that payments
should also be made for specially proclaimed holidays.
SAFETY
Employers have a duty at common law to take reasonable care of their employees
and provide a safe system of working, while employees have a duty of care towards
each other. In addition, minimum required standards of safety in certain kinds of
workplace or work are laid down in a number of statutes, some of which also deal with
health and welfare. The statutes include: the Factories Acts, 1937, 1948, and 1959;
the Mines and Quarries Act, 1954; the Shops Act, 1950; the Agriculture (Safety,
Health and Welfare Provisions) Act, 1956; and the Offices Act, i960.
Fatal and serious industrial accidents have tended to diminish during the twen¬
tieth century, and the rates for fatal and serious accidents are among the lowest in the
world. There have, however, been disturbing increases in the past two years.
Factories and Industrial Premises
Over 200,000 industrial premises (factories, workshops, slaughter-houses, shipyards,
docks and warehouses) and about 25,000 building and civil engineering sites come
under the Factories Acts, which are administered by the Ministry of Labour and
enforced by H.M. Inspectorate of Factories, which forms part of the ministry. Any
person intending to use premises as a factory has to notify H.M. District Inspector
of Factories of his intention not less than one month before he begins to occupy them.
Under the Acts, every fatal accident and every accident causing more than three
days’ incapacity must be reported to the factory inspectors; provision is also made for
LABOUR 467
compulsory notification and investigation of certain dangerous occurrences and, in
addition, a number of general and specific safety requirements are laid down.
The general requirements include provisions concerning the fencing of prime
movers, transmission machinery and dangerous parts of other machinery; the sale,
hire or use of power-driven machinery without effective guards of certain parts; the
cleaning of machinery in motion; the training and supervision of young persons
employed at certain machines; the examination of hoists and lifting equipment, steam
boilers and steam and air receivers; the construction of floors; precautions against
falls, against gassing, and against explosions of inflammable dust or gas; fire preven¬
tion, fire-fighting, fire alarms and means of escape in case of fire; the protection of the
eyes; the handling of dangerous substances; and the lifting of heavy weights.
These general requirements are supplemented or modified by regulations providing
for safeguards against special risks in particular industries, processes, and types of
machinery.
In addition to regulatory functions, the Minister of Labour was given the duty,
under the Factories Act, 1959, of promoting safety, health and welfare by the collection
and dissemination of information and by investigating safety, health and welfare
problems. The Act thus provided a specific statutory basis for the advisory and educa¬
tive activities which have long been an important part of the ministry’s work.
Safety depends in fact at least as much on the education and voluntary efforts of
the employers and of the workers as upon safety regulations. Prevention of accidents
by frequent inspection of all industrial premises and sites is impracticable. The total
strength of H.M. Factory Inspectorate, including medical and other specialists, was
450 in June 1961.
The concern of both trade unions and employers’ associations with safety helps
to maintain safety standards, and the requirements about accident notification
help inspectors to examine the means of prevention with employers, machinery
manufacturers and interested organisations. But the voluntary co-operation of manage¬
ments and employees in individual workplaces is essential to the safety drive. The
Accident Prevention Movement, a voluntary educational campaign, is strongly
supported by the Factory Inspectorate. Inspectors inquire into safety aspects of
machine design and specification, circulate expert advice by personal exhortation,
lectures and literature, and encourage the appointment of safety officers and the
formation of works safety committees.
Most large and many small firms have such committees and, in many areas, safety
groups have been organised, whose members meet monthly for the exchange of
information, discussion, lectures and films on safety measures.
Training for safety is an important facet of the safety drive and, to help in this
work, the Ministry of Labour has recently incorporated a safety course in the Training
Within Industry for Supervisors (TWI) scheme (see p. 457). An industrial health and
safety centre in London is also maintained by the Ministry of Labour. An industrial
safety training centre in Birmingham is run by the Birmingham and District Industrial
Safety Group, and training centres for building and civil engineering foremen have
recently been set up, with the assistance of the Ministry of Labour, by the London
Building and Engineering Contractors’ Accident Prevention Group and by the
Merseyside Area Industrial Accident Prevention Group. The Royal Society for the
Prevention of Accidents helps the Accident Prevention Movement by providing
publicity and by organising conferences and courses for safety officers.
Organisations in industry are now concerning themselves to an increasing extent
with the promotion of safety at work and the provision of information and advisory
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
468
services to their members. They participate also in joint standing and advisory com¬
mittees established by the Chief Inspector of Factories. Representatives of the Trades
Union Congress, the British Employers’ Confederation, the nationalised industries
and the Ministry of Labour meet on the Industrial Safety Sub-Committee of the
National Joint Advisory Council. The Minister of Labour has established a joint
advisory committee, representative of employers and workers in the building and civil
engineering industries, to examine safety and health problems in these industries.
Mines and Quarries
The safety of workers in mines and quarries is the subject of comprehensive
legislation which also deals with health and welfare at work and a number of related
matters. Protective legislation in mines began with an Act of 1842, which forbade
the employment of women underground; successive measures laid down detailed
requirements for the safe conduct of operations and dealt with such matters as
ventilation, dust suppression, support of workings, the safe use of electricity, rescue
and first aid. The latest stage was reached when the Mines and Quarries Act was
passed in 1954. This Act established the basic modern principles of safety, health
and welfare, leaving the details to be dealt with in statutory regulations; it both
consolidates the previous law and brings it up to date. Apart from technical matters,
it also covers such subjects as the general responsibilities of owners and managements,
the appointment and duties of officials, training, welfare, the powers of official
inspectors, statutory qualifications of managers and under-managers, employment of
women and young persons, and inspections on behalf of workmen.
The Ministry of Power is responsible for the administration of these enactments,
while the Mines and Quarries Inspectorate, which is part of the Ministry of Power,
is responsible for their enforcement.
The National Coal Board is expressly charged with the statutory duty of securing
the safety, health and welfare of its employees and has set itself to accomplish this in
all practicable ways. The Board has its own safety organisation—a Standing Com¬
mittee on Safety, a chief safety engineer, and safety engineers at divisions, areas and
the largest collieries. It conducts courses of safety training for workmen and officials
and is constantly on the alert for new methods of reducing risks. Its research programme
includes a number of projects with a direct bearing on safety. Examples of voluntary
action by the Board to reduce risks include the use of fire-resistant conveyor belting,
and the withdrawal of light alloy equipment from the coal face pending the develop¬
ment of an alloy unlikely to cause dangerous sparks. . _
The Ministry of Power maintains a Safety in Mines Research Establishment, with
stations at Buxton and Sheffield, which carry out research into safety problems m
co-operation with the Mines and Quarries Inspectorate and the National Coal Board’s
research organisation.
Agriculture
Two Acts provide for the protection of agricultural workers by means of regulations
made by the ministers concerned with agriculture in Britain. The risks involved in the
use of chemicals are dealt with in the Agriculture (Poisonous Substances) Act, 1952;
other risks are covered by the Agriculture (Safety, Health and Welfare Provisions)
Act, 1956. Regulations have been made dealing with the safe use of dangerous
chemicals, the provision of first-aid equipment, safety standards for workplaces and
ladders, the safeguarding and safe operation of farm machinery, the lifting of heavy
weights and the avoidance of accidents to children arising out of the use of farm
LABOUR
469
vehicles and machines. Regulations are enforced by inspectors of the Agricultural
Departments. To safeguard the many interests which might be adversely affected by
the use of chemicals in agriculture and food storage, a voluntary scheme is operated
by the Government with the help of an advisory committee and with the full co-opera¬
tion of the chemical industry.
Transport
The general safety legislation covering the main forms of transport protects transport
workers as well as members of the public against accidents involving moving vehicles.
The Minister of Transport is responsible for the administration of the Merchant
Shipping Acts, which cover in great detail the question of marine safety, including
navigational procedures, the strength and design of hulls, the safety of machinery, the
safety and design of living quarters, life-saving appliances, measures for protection
against fire, and the carriage of special cargoes and dangerous goods.
The Air Navigation Order and Regulations provide for the registration of aircraft
and for the issue of certificates of airworthiness and of competency certificates and
licences for aircrew, lay down requirements for safety equipment and for safety
procedures during take-off, flight and landing, and prescribe maintenance schedules
for public transport aircraft. The Minister of Aviation delegates most of his powers in
respect of airworthiness to the Air Registration Board (see p. 387).
The Minister of Transport exercises technical supervision of the safety aspects of
railway construction and operation through an inspectorate, whose main functions are
statutory approval of new works on railways carrying passenger traffic; accident investi¬
gation, including the holding of formal inquiries; and technical advice to the minister.
In the interests of road safety, the hours of driving and the rest periods of drivers
of buses and goods vehicles are regulated by the Road Traffic Acts. In certain cases,
the driver must be accompanied by a second person.
In addition to general safety legislation, there are certain statutory provisions
concerned entirely, or mainly, with the safety of employees; for example, railway
employees are protected by the Railway Employment (Prevention of Accidents) Act,
1900, and the statutoryi rules and orders made under it which enable the Ministry of
Transport to require the use of safe plant and appliances, to forbid what is unsafe,
and to make rules for safe railway operation. This Act also sanctioned the employment
of inspectors, now known as Railway Employment Inspectors, who inquire into the
more serious accidents to railway employees.
Both transport operators and the Ministries of Transport and of Aviation give
high priority to safety measures affecting crews and passengers. Every endeavour is
made to counter the higher risks resulting from rising traffic densities, by improving
the design of vehicles, transport plant and equipment, by traffic regulation and control
of standards of maintenance and by training crews in competency and safety awareness.
The detailed regulations and instructions issued by the ministries and their agents
form the basis of elaborate safety procedures laid down by the operators themselves
and by the makers of vehicles and aircraft, equipment and works. The radio industry
and the transport services co-operate in the development and application of radar
systems and other safety devices (see p. 393).
Other Work Premises
There are at present (September 1961) no specific statutory safety requirements in
offices, shops, warehouses, hotels and restaurants, places of entertainment or educa¬
tional establishments apart from the fire regulations applicable under local authority
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
470
by-laws to all large buildings. The employers, however, are bound by their common
law obligation to provide a safe system of work, and employers and educational
authorities may voluntarily seek the advice of the Factory Inspectorate if they have
occasion to instal power-driven machinery or deal with any other special risk.
Under the Offices Act, i960, whose provisions are due to come into force on
1st January, 1962, the Secretary of State for the Home Department will be empowered
to make regulations specifying the standards to be applied in offices to protect the
safety, health and welfare of the employees. This Act, however, is based on a Private
Member’s Bill and the Government has announced its intention of introducing more
comprehensive legislation to supersede it.
HEALTH AND WELFARE
Local authorities, under the Public Health Acts, have power to regulate the
provision of suitable sanitary accommodation in houses and at places of work and
to treat workplaces which are dirty or badly ventilated or overcrowded as nuisances
the abatement of which can be enforced. They are also responsible under the Shops
Act, 1950, for seeing that shops in their area observe the requirements of the Act, which
include, besides a number of provisions relating to closing hours and to hours of work
of young employees (see p. 465), maintenance of reasonable minimum standards of
ventilation, temperature, lighting, sanitary accommodation and washing facilities.
Factories and other industrial premises must comply with the health and welfare
requirements of the Factories Acts. These include: with regard to health, the cleanli¬
ness of workrooms, the observance of proper standards of accommodation an
ventilation and of suitable temperature and lighting, the avoidance of overcrowding
and the provision of sanitary accommodation, and the protection of workers against
inhaling harmful dust or fumes; with regard to welfare, the provision of washing
facilities, lockers or other accommodation for outdoor clothing, drinking water,
first aid,* and adequate seating arrangements. All young persons under eighteen years
of age must, on entry into employment in factories and docks, or on building operations,
be medically examined by doctors appointed by the Chief Inspector of Factories and
known as Appointed Factory Doctors, and they must be re-examined annually until
they reach the age of eighteen. , , , ,
The general requirements of the Factories Acts in regard to health and welfare are
supplemented or modified by regulations designed to protect workers agamst special
health risks in particular industries. These may include provision for compulsory
periodic medical examinations. 0. . . , ,
The far-reaching and detailed requirements of the Merchant Shipping Acts and th
regulations made thereunder include specific provisions for the protection of merchant
seamen, covering such matters as the engagement and discharge of seamen, limitations
on the employment of young persons at sea, standards of crew accommodation, scales
of provisions, medicines and medical stores, and the care and repatriation of seamen
left behind at ports abroad.
The laws restricting the employment of children, young persons and women form
an important part of legislation to protect the health and welfare of employees.
National legislation, besides forbidding any employment of children under thirteen
years of age, forbids the employment of children under fifteen years of age in any indus¬
trial undertaking; of women and young persons under sixteen years of age underground
in mines and in certain other dangerous occupations (for example those involving
work with lead compounds); and of women in factories and workshops within one
Liverpool, Britain’s second largest port, handles the biggest volume of export cargoes,
SOME
NEW BRIDGES
Over eighteen miles of
scaffolding were re¬
quired for the pre-stres-
sed concrete bridge to
span the Wentbridge
Valley on the Ai Lon-
don-Edinburgh road. An
artist’s impression of the
bridge is shown below.
Kingsferry rail and road bridge, opened i960, links
the Isle of Sheppey with Kent.
The new Widnes-Runcorn road bridge replaces the
old Transporter, seen in rear.
Tamar road bridge, linking Cornwall
and South Devon, under construction
beside Brunei’s rail bridge.
Sketch of the Forth road bridge, to be completed in 1963
it will be the largest suspension bridge in Europe
m
LABOUR
471
month of childbirth. It also limits and defines the permissible hours for children aged
thirteen to fifteen and for young persons under eighteen and women in a number of
industries and occupations. Local authorities, moreover, have wide powers under the
Children and Young Persons Act, 1933, as well as by the Education Acts, 1944-48,
which regulate hours and conditions of employment of children under fifteen years
within their areas within the limits of national legislation.
The above are the main legislative provisions relating to health and welfare at work,
but it is essential to note that employers frequently achieve health and welfare
standards considerably higher than those prescribed by law. They are helped to do
this by the inspectorates, by Government departments and agencies, by employers’
associations and trade unions and by expert voluntary bodies.
An increasing number of firms in Britain provide a whole-time or part-time doctor,
an industrial nurse, and a canteen with hot meals, pay part or all of the cost of clubs
and sports grounds, operate retirement and sickness insurance schemes supple¬
menting the State insurance schemes, and afford training and educational facilities.
Some have their own rehabilitation centres or support convalescent homes.
Industrial Health Services
In addition to the statutory requirements of the Factories Acts and Regulations, a
number of employers voluntarily maintain medical services for their employees. It is
estimated that there are about 400 full-time and 4,000 part-time doctors employed in
factories, together with several thousand nurses and assistant nurses. There are also
the 2,200 Appointed Factory Doctors who carry out the compulsory medical exami¬
nations under the Acts and Regulations. Increasing numbers of doctors and nurses
are taking up this work, which aims at providing occupational health facilities of a
specialised preventive character.
The big employers, including the State and the boards of nationalised industries,
have naturally taken the lead in this expansion. A number of smaller factories also
provide medical services and in some cases (for instance, in Slough and Harlow) have
joined together in group medical schemes. There are, however, difficult problems to
be solved in connection with the further development of industrial health services, and
in 1955 the Minister of Labour appointed a Standing Industrial Health Advisory
Committee, of which he is the chairman, to advise him on this subject. The membership of
this committee includes representatives of the Medical Research Council and persons
nominated by the British Employers’ Confederation, the Trades Union Congress, the
nationalised industries, the British Medical Association, the Royal College of Nursing
and other organisations and bodies closely concerned with the promotion of industrial
health. In connection with its consideration of the possibilities of developing and
extending medical supervision in factories, the committee has advised on the conduct
of two pilot surveys, one in the town of Halifax and one of the pottery industry, and
has approved the issue of a booklet, Health at Work, describing fourteen individual
medical schemes in factories in different parts of Great Britain.
Prompt and effective action in industrial health depends, among other things, on
adequate and properly co-ordinated arrangements for investigation and research.
Field investigations are carried out by the Factory Inspectorate, which has specialised
medical and technical branches. Research facilities are provided by Government
agencies such as the Medical Research Council and the Department of Scientific and
Industrial Research; by the faculties of industrial health and social medicine of the
universities; and by the research departments of various industries and large industrial
concerns. Co-ordination is provided by a number of general and special committees.
p
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
472
Welfare
Welfare standards vary considerably from one factory to another. The amenities
provided by large factories depend partly on the employees’ needs and desires.
The requirements of a factory where the work is light, and many employees are
women or young persons, are different from those of an iron foundry or steelworks,
where much of the work is arduous, and is undertaken by men. Progressive firms are
careful to find out what their employees want, and welfare policy is often decided in
consultation with the workers, through regular consultative machinery or by other
means. The National Coal Board, for example, has provided pithead baths and
canteens, while other social welfare of coalminers and their families has been, since
1952, the responsibility of the Coal Industry Welfare Organisation, which is controlled
by the Board and the miners’ trade unions.
During and since the second world war, the provision of meals for workers at their
place of work has become usual in large undertakings and quite common in smaller
ones. It is estimated that over 19,000 industrial premises have canteen facilities for their
workers. There are also colliery canteens providing meals for about 98 per cent of
coalminers. Any surplus earned by canteens is used to improve the canteen or to
finance some other welfare services, while any losses are borne by the firms.
SAFETY, HEALTH AND WELFARE IN NORTHERN IRELAND
The safety, health and welfare of employees in Northern Ireland have been the
subject of legislation which, with certain exceptions, is similar to that in Great Britain
and is embodied in separate statutes to meet the special requirements of Northern
Ireland. Provision for the safety, health and welfare of workers in factories, workshops,
ship and building yards and certain other working premises is embodied in the Northern
Ireland Factories Acts. The Minister of Labour and National Insurance is responsible
for the administration of these Acts and for their enforcement by a factory inspectorate,
which forms part of his department.
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS
The structure of labour relations in Britain is established mainly on a voluntary
basis, and rests on the organisation of employers and workers into employers’ asso¬
ciations and trade unions. These organisations1 discuss and negotiate terms and con¬
ditions of employment and other matters affecting the workpeople at their work.
In some industries these negotiations are conducted simply by ad hoc meetings,
which are held when necessary; in others, voluntary joint machinery has been
established on a permanent basis. Normally these arrangements for collective bargaining
suffice to settle all questions which are raised, but provision is often made for matters
not so settled to be referred for settlement to independent arbitration. In certain
trades where wages cannot be effectively controlled by voluntary agreement owing to
the inadequate organisation of employers or workers, provision has also been made by
the State for statutory regulation under the Wages Councils Act, 1959, the
Agricultural Wages Act, 1948, and the Agricultural Wages (Scotland) Act, 1949.
Employers’ Associations
Many employers in Great Britain are members of employers’ associations, which are
wholly or partly concerned with labour questions.
1 Some employers, including the central Government and the public corporations operating
the nationalised industries, negotiate directly with the trade unions representing their different
types of employees.
LABOUR
473
The primary aims of such employers’ associations are to help to establish suitable
terms and conditions of employment, including a sound wage structure and proper
standards of safety, health and welfare; to promote good relations with employees
and the efficient use of manpower; and to provide means of settling any disputes which
may arise. Different associations vary in the emphasis which they put upon these
different aims and in the means by which they try to achieve them. Some concentrate
on defensive action, trying by negotiation and representations to modify proposals of
trade unions and Government in their members’ interests. Others also try to give their
members practical help and advice in developing positive employment policies. They
may provide special services such as general or specialised training courses, or arrange
for the provision of such services by some specialist agency.
There is diversity in regard to structure as well as function. Generally, however,
employers’ associations are organised on an industry basis rather than a product basis.
Some associations are purely local in character and deal with a section of an industry;
others are national in scope and are concerned with the whole of a particular industry.
In some of the chief industries there are local or regional organisations combined into
national federations, while in others within which different firms are engaged on
making different principal products, there is a very complex structure with national
and regional federations for these different sections of the industry as well as for the
industry as a whole. Altogether there are some 1,800 employers’ associations dealing
with labour matters and about 270 of them are national federations. These numbers
have not varied greatly in the last 25 years.
The final authority of a local or small national association may be a meeting, where
all member firms are directly represented; but in larger organisations some form of
indirect representation is necessary, either through local associations or through the
regions or sections into which these associations are grouped.
The representatives thus chosen, together with a number of office holders, form a
general council, central committee or general committee, which meets perhaps once a
quarter, mainly to take major policy decisions, to elect committees and to ratify their
work. The committees usually include a general purposes committee and a negotiating
committee. A small paid staff under a director or secretary carries out the day-to-day
work of the organisation. There is usually a small working group, consisting of senior
officials and committee chairmen, which meets to deal with urgent questions and
co-ordinate the work of the committees.
The British Employers' Confederation
The central organ of employers’ associations is the British Employers’ Confederation,
which was set up in 1919 and was at first called the National Confederation of
Employers’ Organisations. Its membership now comprises some 60 separate auto¬
nomous organisations in industries employing about 70 per cent of the persons engaged
in private enterprise industries and services in the country. The boards of nationalised
industries are not in membership. The confederation’s business is managed by a
council which meets under the chairmanship of the President and on which every
member organisation is represented.
The confederation deals with matters affecting the interests of organised employers
and their relations with their employees and is recognised by the Government as a
channel for consultation between Government departments and representatives of
private employers as a whole on such matters. It acts as an advisory and consultative
body for its member organisations, providing them with information and statistics,
ascertaining their collective views and representing them nationally to the Government
474
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
and the public and also internationally, e.g. on the International Labour Organisation.
Its representatives sit on various councils and committees advisory to the Government,
on other statutory bodies, and on a number of voluntary bodies.
Trade Unions
In nearly all industries and occupations some workers—and in some industries
nearly all workers—are organised into trade unions. These have grown up gradually
and independently over a great many years, and consequently their form and organi¬
sation vary considerably. Trade unions started more than two hundred years ago
among the skilled craftsmen and spread later to the general labouring and unskilled
classes. More recently trade unionism has increased among clerical, supervisory,
technical and administrative workers. A number of associations of professional
workers, formed primarily for the preservation and improvement of professional
standards, have also come to exercise many of the functions of trade unions, including
negotiations on salary and fee scales, and are legally trade unions.
The qualification for membership of some unions is occupational, e.g. they may
recruit clerks or fitters wherever employed, while in others the qualification is industrial,
i.e. they seek to recruit all persons in an industry, whatever their occupation. In a
number of unions, recruitment is based on a combination of these principles. A few
large unions recruit members in a number of different occupations and industries.
At the end of 1959, the total membership of British trade unions was about 9,600,000.
There were 651 trade unions, but about two-thirds of all trade unionists were in the
17 largest unions.
The basic unit of organisation in most British trade unions is the local branch
(called a lodge in some trade unions). Every member of the union belongs to a branch
or lodge. He may attend its meetings, put forward suggestions about terms and con¬
ditions of employment, discuss the work and policy of the union, and take part in
the election of branch officers. The branch takes action on certain matters considered
to be entirely, or mainly, of local interest but refers wider issues to the union’s national
or regional bodies.
Many unions also have shop stewards or other representatives at the place of work
to enrol members and collect dues, to report any encroachment on agreed or customary
conditions of work, and in some cases, to act as representatives of members at their
place of work for the settlement of grievances. In a few trade unions, mainly in the
printing and allied trades, organisation is based primarily on the place of work.
In most large unions the central organisation is along the following lines: elected
officials, including a general secretary assisted by clerical and specialist staff, are in
charge of the work of the head office and are responsible to a national executive council
or committee which may be part-time or full-time, and which is usually elected by,
and responsible to, annual or biennial conferences of delegates from the branches.
Executive committees or councils play an important part in the government of the
unions; between conferences they are the highest authorities and carry out policy
decisions made by delegates.
Most unions also have some regional, district or area organisation, while in large
unions there are usually regional, district or area committees or councils.
Trade unions may affiliate to one or more federations or confederations whose
main purpose in most cases is to represent all or most of the trade unions in an industry
in negotiation with employers. The scope and authority of these federations and
confederations vary greatly in different circumstances.
Most trade unions of any size and importance are affiliated to the Trades Union
LABOUR
475
Congress (TUC), the national centre of the British trade union movement. The main
exceptions are the National and Local Government Officers Association (NALGO),
the National Union of Teachers (NUT), certain Civil Service staff associations, and
the Electrical Trades Union (expelled by the 1961 Congress). The TUC’s objects are
to promote the interests of its affiliated organisations and to improve the economic
and social conditions of the workers. Its membership comprises 186 organisations, of
which about a dozen are federations of some 150 separate unions; approximately 350
unions in all are affiliated directly or indirectly. These represent over 8 million work¬
people. The TUC deals with all general questions which concern trade unions both
nationally and internationally and gives assistance on questions relating to particular
trades or industries at the request of the trade union concerned.
The congress of delegates, which constitutes the TUC proper, meets for a week
every year to discuss matters of general interest to trade unionists and to employees
generally. It elects annually a General Council which represents it during the remain¬
ing 51 weeks of the year. The General Council is responsible for carrying out congress
decisions, for watching economic and social developments, and for providing educa¬
tional and advisory services. It is also empowered in certain circumstances to mediate
in inter-union disputes.
The TUC and a number of affiliated unions have in recent years substantially
developed their educational services to members. At the training college in TUC
headquarters, Congress House, London, one-week and two-week courses are provided
for about 700 students each year in general trade union subjects, production and
management subjects, industrial relations, collective bargaining, industrial finance,
and social insurance and industrial welfare. The TUC Educational Trust also provides
summer schools, regional week-end schools, and special week-end schools for women
and for young workers.
Certain unions organise one-week and other short residential courses, and these
and other unions provide week-end schools, for the education and training of officers
and members in the principles and practice of trade unionism. More than 80 unions
arrange education schemes either with the National Council of Labour Colleges or with
the Workers’ Educational Association, or with both these organisations. Scholarships
for longer-term studies (usually one academic year) at Ruskin College, Oxford, other
adult residential colleges, or the London School of Economics, are offered by the
TUC Educational Trust and by certain unions.
A proposal for the co-ordination of the educational services to be provided for trade
unionists by the creation of a new co-ordinating body to take over the work of the WEA
and National Council of Labour Colleges came before the annual Trades Union Con¬
gress in September 1961.
The TUC is recognised by the Government as the channel of consultation between
the Government departments and representatives of organised workers on matters
affecting the interests of employees generally.
There is also a separate Scottish Trades Union Congress, to which trade unions
may affiliate in respect of their membership in Scotland.
The TUC is a non-political body, but individual trade unions can, by a ballot
vote of members, decide to set up a political fund, financed by a separate levy, which
any member can refuse to pay without loss of his normal trade union rights and
benefits. About 80 separate trade union organisations, including most of the largest
trade unions, have such a fund and, in almost every case, it is used to support the
Labour Party (or the Co-operative Party, which is associated with the Labour Party
and has substantially the same platform).
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
476
Branches of various trade unions in a locality generally affiliate to a local trades
council, which acts as a forum for the discussion of matters of common interest
and as a local agent of the TUC, by which it is registered each year. There are more
than 500 trades councils in England and Wales alone, grouped together in 22 federations.
Voluntary Joint Negotiating Machinery
At National Level. While in some industries all matters affecting terms and conditions
of employment are discussed on an ad hoc basis between the employers’ organisations
and the trade unions concerned, in other industries there are standard procedures for
dealing with such matters by joint discussion at national level. In many industries
there are, for this purpose, bodies composed of representatives of both sides of the
industry with, in some cases, an independent chairman. There are about 200 of these
bodies, most of which are called Joint Industrial Councils. Their functions vary
considerably, some being simply negotiating bodies, while others deal with a wide
range of subjects affecting the interests of the industry concerned. Provision is some¬
times made in their constitution that a dispute on which it is not found possible to
reach agreement should be referred to some form of conciliation or arbitration by
independent persons, including the means provided under the Conciliation Act, 1896,
or the Industrial Courts Act, 1919.
Collective agreements between employers’ associations and trade unions are not
civil contracts between particular employers and employees, and are not, therefore,
in themselves enforceable at law. Observance of agreed terms and conditions is based
mainly on the good faith of employers and the mutual respect and vigilance of trade
unions and employers’ associations, but can be secured in particular instances through
reference to the Industrial Court (see p. 477).
At District and Factory Level. Arrangements for negotiation and joint consultation
also exist at district and factory level in many industries, where matters are discussed
either between the appropriate representatives of the two sides on an ad hoc basis, or
through regular machinery provided by District Joint Industrial Councils or similar
bodies and Works Councils. Such bodies discuss how agreements reached at a national
level may be applied to their district or factory, but as a rule have no power to alter
the terms of such national agreements. They also discuss new problems which may
arise, and if no solution can be found at factory or district level, refer them to the
national body. In many of the larger industries national agreements recommend such
consultation, and in some they even prescribe model rules for its conduct.
Statutory Wage-Regulating Machinery
In certain industries in which, owing to the lack of organisation among employers
and workers, voluntary negotiating arrangements do not exist for the effective settle¬
ment of terms and conditions of employment or are inadequate to secure their obser¬
vance by voluntary methods throughout the industry, statutory bodies known as Wages
Councils and Agricultural Wages Boards have been set up. These are composed of
equal numbers of representatives of employers and workers in the respective industries,
with the addition of certain independent members. Wages Councils may submit
proposals for fixing minimum remuneration and holidays with pay to the Minister
of Labour, who must then make orders giving statutory force to such proposals,
subject only to his right to return them as a whole to the council for further
consideration.
Orders relating to employment in agriculture are made by the appropriate Agri¬
cultural Wages Board (England and Wales or Scotland). Such orders are effective
LABOUR
477
only in the county agricultural wages committee area in respect of which they have
been made, but there is a national minimum enforceable in England and Wales and
also one for Scotland.
State Provision for Conciliation, Arbitration and Investigation
Matters which prove difficult to settle by negotiation are sometimes referred by
agreement to independent conciliators or arbitrators, and one way in which the parties
can find such persons is by invoking the help of the Minister of Labour. Under
authority derived from the Conciliation Act, 1896, and the Industrial Courts Act, 1919,
the minister has certain powers to assist industry to settle disputes which it is not
found possible to resolve through an industry’s own machinery and procedure. These
powers are all intended to supplement and not to supersede the industry’s own
machinery.
To assist conciliation in industry, a staff of conciliation officers long formed part
of the Ministry of Labour. The duties of these officers were to keep in touch with the
course of relations between employers and workers at national, district, and, in some
cases, factory level, and to assist them, if requested, to settle their problems by joint
discussion and negotiation. In i960 this service and the ministry’s personnel manage¬
ment advisory service (see p. 480) were merged to form an integrated industrial
relations service.
Disputes which cannot be settled in this way may, at the request of both parties,
be referred to voluntary arbitration, either by a single arbitrator, or an ad hoc Board
of Arbitration, or by the Industrial Court, a permanent tribunal established under the
Industrial Courts Act. The court normally consists of three members—the president,
one member experienced in representing employers and one in representing workpeople.
Like collective agreements, arbitration awards are not in themselves enforceable
at law, but, under the Terms and Conditions of Employment Act, 1959, reports that a
particular employer is not observing the recognised (i.e. agreed or awarded) terms
and conditions of employment in his trade or industry may be made to the Minister
of Labour by organisations which are parties to the agreement or award or are truly
representative of the employers or workers in the trade or industry concerned. If the
matter is not otherwise settled, the minister must refer it to the Industrial Court which,
after hearing the case, may issue an award requiring the employer to observe the
recognised terms and conditions. Such an award becomes an implied term of the
contract of employment. This procedure, established under the 1959 Act, replaced
an earlier one of similar intention and effect.
The Minister of Labour is also empowered to appoint a Court of Inquiry or Com¬
mittee of Investigation into a dispute, whether existing or apprehended. These proce¬
dures are primarily means of informing public opinion of the facts of a dispute and
are not means of arbitration. The report of a Court of Inquiry has to be laid before
Parliament. Although the recommendations contained in the reports of such bodies
are not binding on the parties, they usually provide the basis of a settlement.
Strikes and Lockouts
In general, the arrangements for negotiation and conciliation of disputes are
effective in making resort to direct action unnecessary. For example, in the twelve
months ending in June i960 more than 300 important claims for increased wages or
shorter hours, covering almost every industry, were settled peacefully, while less than
ten claims resulted in disputes which gave rise to stoppages of work.
The amount of working time lost in strikes and lockouts has been much less in the
past three decades than formerly. The average time lost per year in Great Britain from
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
478
1933 to i960 inclusive has been 24 million man-days (or about one eighth of a day per
employee per year), compared with an average of 21 million man-days in the 23 years
1910 to 1932. It must be noted, however, that the reduction has been in the size and
duration of strikes and not in their number; also that in the last six years the number
of man-days lost has been appreciably higher than in the previous 22, and that the
figures do not include employees laid off at establishments not on strike. Some of the
stoppages in recent years have been in key industries and have caused widespread
disruption by cutting off supplies of materials and components, by losing markets or
upsetting transport. It should also be borne in mind that the strike record of different
industries and the effectiveness of their conciliation arrangements vary greatly. The
time lost through stoppages is, however, still low, when every allowance has been
made. For i960 it worked out at a little over three hours per year per worker in the
productive and transport industries (in which most of the stoppages occur), which is
insignificant when compared with the average of 13 days per employee lost through
sickness and accidents. The record also compares favourably with that of many other
major industrial countries.
Liaison between the Government and Industry
The Government is in contact with representatives of employers and workers at
all levels on matters affecting their common interests. At local and district level the
conciliation officers of the Ministry of Labour keep in touch with the representatives
of both sides of industry, while, at national level, officers of the department are requested
by many Joint Industrial Councils to attend their meetings as liaison officers. Standing
arrangements also exist for consultation between the Government, the British
Employers’ Confederation and the Trades Union Congress through the National
Joint Advisory Council, which was set up in 1939 to advise the Government on matters
in which employers and workers have a common interest. It meets quarterly under the
chairmanship of the Minister of Labour. Its membership consists of representatives of
the British Employers’ Confederation and the Trades Union Congress, together with
representatives of the managements of nationalised industries. Among the subjects
which it has considered in recent years are the machinery for settling industrial
disputes, joint consultation in industry, industrial training and recruitment, double¬
day-shift working, and the economic situation with special reference to production,
wages and prices, and the efficient use of manpower.
Labour Relations of Public Authorities
While labour relations in Government service and in the nationalised industries
are, in general, organised on the same principles as in private industry, there are
some special features.
Non-industrial employees in central Government service, where salaries and con¬
ditions of service are under the direct control of the Treasury, are permitted and
encouraged to join the appropriate Civil Service staff associations (trade unions)
and there is a highly developed system of negotiation and joint consultation by means
of the National and Departmental Whitley Councils (see p. 69), corresponding to the
Joint Industrial Councils in industry. The two sides of the National Whitley Council
are parties to a Civil Service Arbitration Agreement which, subject to certain limitations,
provides that if there is failure to reach agreement by negotiation a department or
association may report the dispute to the Minister of Labour for reference to the Civil
Service Arbitration Tribunal. The tribunal is an independent one appointed by the
minister by virtue of his powers under the Industrial Courts Act, 1919. Industrial
LABOUR
479
employees of the central Government, however, are organised by trades and not by
departments; negotiations regarding their wages and conditions of employment take
place on Trade Joint Councils and Departmental Joint Councils.
In local government services there are separate National Joint Councils for the
main grades of employees (such as manual, clerical and technical employees, and road-
menders) which deal with wages and conditions of service as well as other matters.
There are corresponding regional and district councils.
In the nationalised industries, the main corporations, though not subject to detailed
governmental control, have a statutory duty to establish satisfactory arrangements for
collective bargaining in their industries and for joint consultation with their employees;
but in carrying out these duties they are free to choose the arrangements that suit them.
In nearly every case a complex system which already existed before nationalisation has
been taken over and modified. The arrangements, therefore, as in industry generally,
vary substantially. The main difference from private industry is that the corporations
are not members of employers’ associations. In some industries they are sole or main
employers, but even where part of the industry is in private hands, as for example in
air or road transport, the corporations are separately and directly represented on
wage-negotiating bodies.
Wages and conditions of service in the nationalised industries are generally settled
by negotiation between representatives of managements and trade unions at the national
level; in most cases there are also regional and local bodies, similarly representative,
charged with the duty of applying these agreements and dealing with any difficulties
or differences which may arise. Most of the industries use the facilities for arbitration
offered to industry generally by the Ministry of Labour, but coalmining and rail
transport have their own special arrangements.
The machinery for negotiation and conciliation in the United Kingdom is usually
based on the industry as a whole and not on the individual establishment or firm.
Accordingly, those industries, such as electricity or gas supply, where there are several
corporations which act as employers, are covered by a single set of arrangements for
each industry, and the duty of seeing that the arrangements are made falls on the
central authorities, e.g. the Gas Council or the Electricity Council. In civil aviation,
there is a single joint council at national level on which both the nationalised air
corporations and the private operators are represented. Where a single public corpora¬
tion engages in various activities, these may be treated as separate industries and
organised separately. For example, the National Coal Board’s coke and by-products
plants have arrangements quite distinct from the coal mines, and the British Transport
Commission’s rail, road and water transport have their different methods based on
individual traditions which existed before nationalisation. In road passenger transport
(unlike civil aviation) the arrangements cover only the commission’s employees; there
is separate machinery for the employees of municipal and private undertakings.
Some of the nationalised industries have felt that joint consultation was best carried
out by their negotiating bodies; others have established separate and specially con¬
stituted joint committees at all levels. In general, where consultation and negotiation
are conducted through the same machinery, separate committees exist for different
groups or grades of employees; where the consultative and negotiating arrangements
are kept apart, a single consultative committee serves all grades.
Northern Ireland
The system of labour relations in Northern Ireland is based on the same principles
as that of Great Britain and, in these matters, the Minister of Labour and National
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
480
Insurance has powers and duties broadly similar to those of the Minister of Labour
in Great Britain. About 90 per cent of trade unionists in Northern Ireland are members
of trade unions whose headquarters are in Great Britain.
HUMAN RELATIONS AT THE WORKPLACE
The establishment of good working conditions is assisted by the organisation of
employers and workpeople, by arrangements for negotiation and settlement of
differences, and by protective legislation and its enforcement. This institutional frame¬
work, however, cannot by itself create satisfaction with work and working conditions,
nor the mutual trust and co-operation of management and workers, nor the sense of
shared effort and achievement known as ‘team spirit’. Nor will good wages and hours,
high standards of safety and health and lavish employee services necessarily bring
about these attitudes and responses; their achievement depends rather on building up
good relations between individuals and interacting groups within the organisation.
In recent years, therefore, there has been a marked increase of interest in ‘human
relations’ in industry, i.e. relations between management and their workers as indivi¬
duals, as distinct from relations between organisations of employers and organisations
of workers. This has led to more widespread attention being given to all aspects of
personnel management and to the establishment of more personnel departments.
Practically all large industrial firms and many small ones now have a personnel
department staffed by one or more specialist officers. While the form of organisation
of personnel departments varies, the personnel officer is generally responsible for
advising all levels of management on every aspect of labour relations. This officer
also has particular duties with regard to recruitment, selection, education and training,
transfer of labour, the application of wage agreements, the promotion of joint
consultation and the supervision of working conditions and employee services.
Both voluntary and official organisations are concerned with promoting better
human relationships in industry. Voluntary organisations include bodies which deal
with management problems and provide a service to subscribing firms, professional
associations, linking individuals with a common interest in particular functions of
management, and bodies providing specialist services, usually on a fee-paying basis.
In 1945 the Ministry of Labour established a Personnel Management Advisory
Service which did much to promote good personnel management and to assist firms
by discussing problems of personnel policy. The service was amalgamated in i960
with the conciliation service to form an integrated industrial relations service and will
in future be staffed by specially trained industrial relations officers of the ministry.
Recruitment and promotion policies are matters which each undertaking decides
for itself, although in some industries the decisions may be limited by collective
agreements or by trade practices. Great importance has recently been attached to
selection; and courses for training personnel officers in modern interviewing techniques,
including the use of test procedures, are now well attended. Selection of applicants for
jobs is assisted by the Government Employment Services.
Education and Training
Since the end of the second world war, there has been an intensification of the
educational and training activities arranged by industry. Short-term training is
almost entirely the responsibility of individual firms, but in over no sections of
industry and commerce, employers and trade unions have agreed national or regional
schemes of apprenticeship and other long-term training. Further expansion and
LABOUR
481
improvement of training facilities have been urged in the report of a sub-committee
of the National Joint Advisory Council. This report, published in February 1958 under
the title Training for Skill, stressed that the increase in the number of young people
leaving school in the next few years afforded a great opportunity to increase the supply
of skilled workers and technicians, and proposed that a council should be formed by
industry to follow up its various recommendations. As the outcome, the Industrial
Training Council was established in July 1958 by the British Employers’ Confederation,
the Trades Union Congress and the boards of nationalised industries. Representatives
from the interested Government departments, the Association of Technical Institutions
and the City and Guilds of London Institute were also appointed to participate in the
council’s work. 7’he council’s aims are to keep under review the recruitment and train¬
ing of workpeople, to provide encouragement and help to industries in dealing with
the training of workpeople, and to collect and disseminate information about aspects of
training common to more than one industry, including information about trainine
practices in other countries.
In 1959 the council accepted the offer of a Government grant-in-aid for the general
purpose of promoting the expansion of training for young people, and for the particular
purpose of assisting in the appointment by employers’ organisations or joint bodies of
training development officers to stimulate the setting-up of training schemes for young
people. The council can draw up to £75,000 until March 1964, the only condition being
that industry must itself match the amount of grant drawn by an equal sum. The
council issued its first report (July 1958 to December 1959) in January i960.
Joint Consultation
The realisation that the co-operation of workpeople depends largely on their proper
understanding of management’s aims and plans has focused attention on the means
of conveying information to workers. Methods used include posters, wall information
sheets, production charts, displays of photographs, the production of news-sheets and
house journals, discussions and lectures, film shows and exhibitions. It is increasingly
held, however, that, although these media have their use, it is more important to
improve communications down the normal chain of responsibility to workshop level
(a matter which depends on personal relations and on the adequacy of supervisor
training) and to establish means for joint consultation, such as those provided by a
works council.
The range of subjects which works councils can fruitfully discuss is wide and
includes hours of work (within the framework of agreements), safety, health, efficiency
of production, absenteeism, labour turnover, training, education, recreation and
employees’ services generally. Works councils are usually kept informed about the
state of trade and production and the firm’s prospects, and frequently consider problems
resulting from decisions to change production methods. It is the general practice,
however, to exclude all questions relating to wages and conditions of employment, and
other matters covered by negotiation between organisations of employers and workers.
The Government has assisted these developments by advice on techniques, by the
supply of posters, pamphlets, films and other publicity material, and by encouraging
and promoting joint consultation. Industrial relations officers of the Ministry of
Labour are often approached by firms seeking advice on the establishment of works
councils or on ways in which their activities can be made more effective.
The Government has sought to extend by research the available knowledge of the
factors influencing human relations in industry and human efficiency. Research units
of the Medical Research Council have worked on these problems for many years. In
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
482
1948, the Advisory Council on Scientific Policy set up a committee on industrial
productivity, and in March 1953, the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research
and the Medical Research Council set up two committees concerned with research on
the human factor in industry, the Committee on Human Relations in Industry and the
Committee on Individual Efficiency in Industry.
Results of some of the sponsored researches have been appearing during the last
few years. The committees were disbanded in 1957 on completion of their terms of
office and the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research has appointed a new
Committee on Human Sciences (see p. 224), while units of the Medical Research
Council are continuing research into cognate problems.
XVI. SOUND AND
TELEVISION BROADCASTING
Broadcasting of sound and of television in the United Kingdom is regulated under
powers conferred on the Postmaster General by the Wireless Telegraphy Acts, 1949-
I955> which prohibit the sending or receiving of radio communications, except under
licence. Users of sound and television receiving sets must obtain an annual licence,
which can be purchased from most post offices.
Sound broadcasting services are provided solely by the British Broadcasting
Corporation (BBC), which was established as a public corporation by Royal Charter
in 1927. Television services are provided by both the British Broadcasting Corporation
and the Independent Television Authority (ITA), which was established by the
Television Act, 1954.
The number of receiving licences current in the United Kingdom at the end of
June 1961 was 11,440,884, of which 7,584,000 were for sound and television combined
and 3,856,884 (including 488,759 for sets fitted in cars) for sound only. A combined
sound and television licence costs ^4 (including £ 1 excise duty); a sound only licence
costs £1. Registered blind people are entitled to free sound licences or to combined
licences for £3. One licence covers all receiving sets in a household, but a separate
licence is required for a set fitted in a car.
Development of the Services
When sound broadcasting began in the United Kingdom in 1922, it was decided
in Parliament that the Postmaster General should grant only one licence for that
purpose at any one time, and the first licence was granted exclusively to a limited
company (the British Broadcasting Company). The decision to grant only one licence
for broadcasting was maintained when the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC)
was formed to take over the functions of the limited company in 1927; it was reaffirmed
in 1937 when the BBC’s second charter was granted to cover the sound services and
the television service which the BBC had inaugurated during the previous year;
and it was upheld throughout the second world war and during the post-war period
until 1952.
During the second world war television broadcasting was suspended and trans¬
missions were not resumed until 1946. After resumption, however, the television
service gained rapidly both in technical efficiency and in popularity; and between 1949
and 1952 the Government instituted a major review of sound and television broad¬
casting which aroused great interest in Parliament, in the press and among the public.
After prolonged parliamentary and general discussion it was decided by the Govern¬
ment that the potential power of television was so great that it would be undesirable
to leave transmission services in this medium in the hands of a single authority,
however excellent. The Independent Television Authority was therefore established
in 1954 to provide services additional to those of the BBC for an initial period often
years; and independent television transmissions began in September 1955—the BBC’s
monopoly in the provision of sound broadcasting services remaining undisturbed.
A further review into the fundamentals of the broadcasting services is at present
being carried out by a Committee of Inquiry, under the chairmanship of Sir Harry
483
484
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Pilkington appointed by the government in i960. The committee is considering the
whole question of the future broadcasting services in the United Kingdom, including,
for example, the question of the provision of additional sound broadcasting and
television services; local sound broadcasting; television for public showing in cinemas
and halls; the relay by wire of broadcasting and other programmes, including pay-
television ; and such technical matters as the introduction of colour television and the
question of line definition standards.
Broadcasting Authorities
The BBC and the ITA are independent authorities in so far as daily administration
and presentation of programmes are concerned. The Government, however, retains
ultimate control, and the Postmaster General, as the responsible minister, is answerable
to Parliament on broad questions of policy and may issue directions to the BBC and
to the ITA on a number of technical and other subjects. The Postmaster General also
has powers to prohibit the broadcasting of any particular matter or class of matter, or
to revoke the licences of the BBC or ITA at any time; these powers, however, are
treated as major reserve powers, and no formal veto has ever been placed on the broad¬
casting of a particular item. Both the BBC and the ITA are required to prepare annual
reports and accounts, which are presented by the Postmaster General to Parliament.
The BBC and the ITA both consult with the Postmaster General as to the hours
of television broadcasting, and he has approved an arrangement which permits a
maximum of 50 hours a week, together with extensions (averaging ten hours a week)
for certain stated purposes, such as religious broadcasts, ministerial and party political
broadcasts, schools broadcasts, outside broadcasts and Welsh language broadcasts.
The authorities may broadcast television programmes, within the prescribed maxima,
during any periods best suited to the needs of their audiences. The BBC provides
four domestic sound services and broadcasts for some 18 hours out of the 24.
Organisation and Finance
The BBC operates under the provisions of two documents, each granted for limited
periods at the end of which they may be renewed or amended: the Charter, which sets
out the constitution, objects and internal organisation of the BBC and contains certain
financial provisions; and the Licence and Agreement between the BBC and the Post¬
master General, which deals with technical matters, certain non-technical conditions
such as the prohibition of commercial advertisements and sponsored programmes,
and details of the financial arrangements in force. The operations of the ITA are
governed by the provisions of the Television Act, 1954, which formulate its constitution,
its functions, its purpose and the framework of its finances; and by the Licence (which
contains technical provisions) issued to it by the Postmaster General in 1955’
The British Broadcasting Corporation
Under the current Charter (which came into force in 1952) the corporation consists
of nine governors (including a chairman, a vice-chairman and separate national
governors for Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland) each appointed for a period of
not more than five years by the Sovereign in Council. As a corporate body, the gover¬
nors are responsible for the conduct of the whole broadcasting operation, including
the content and presentation of the programmes in sound and television, and the
provision and working of the necessary installations and equipment.
In the discharge of its responsibilities the BBC is required to ensure that its
services are used, as stated in the preamble to the Charter, ‘as a means of disseminating
SOUND AND TELEVISION BROADCASTING 485
information, education and entertainment’, to pay heed to the requirements of the
Licence (for instance, it must allow the broadcasting of any announcement at the
request of a Government department, and must not broadcast commercial advertise¬
ments in any form in its programmes without the written consent of the Postmaster
General), and to refrain from expressing editorial opinion, since to express such
opinion would be to depart from the rule of impartiality which the BBC is expected
to observe in current affairs and matters of public issue.
The governors are advised on all aspects of their work by a number of councils,
established in accordance with the terms of the Charter, e.g. the General Advisory
Council, which has been in existence, except for a break during the war years, since
1934; the National Broadcasting Councils for Scotland and Wales, which, under the
chairmanship of the national governors for Scotland and Wales, are responsible for
domestic sound services in those countries; and the Regional Advisory Councils for the
English regions and for Northern Ireland. There are also a number of other councils
and committees, not specifically required by the Charter, but established by the BBC
to advise on such matters as religious broadcasting, schools broadcasting, music
and agriculture.
The chief executive officer of the BBC is the Director-General, who is appointed
by the governors at their discretion and with whom they discuss all major matters of
policy and finance. Under the Director-General are six directors (the Chief Assistant
to the Director-General, and the Directors of Sound Broadcasting, Television Broad¬
casting, External Broadcasting, Engineering, and Administration) who, between
them, cover the whole work of the BBC, and who, with the Director-General, con¬
stitute its Board of Management. The number of staff employed in 1961 was
approximately 17,500.
The services of the BBC are financed from (1) an annual sum, voted by Parliament,
which is related to revenue derived from the sale by the Post Office of broadcast
receiving licences; (2) an annual grant-in-aid, voted by Parliament, for the External
Services, i.e. the European Services, the Overseas Services, and the Monitoring
Service; and (3) profits from BBC publications, mainly the Radio Times, which has a
weekly sale of over 6 million copies and attracts a large advertising revenue. The gross
revenue from the sale of licences for the year ended 31st March, 1961, amounted to
^37,855,07°, excluding the excise duty which is not regarded as part of the income
from licences and is not available to be spent on broadcasting.
In 1960-61 the Post Office deducted £2,570,390 from the gross licence income, for
the expenses it incurred in collecting the licence fees, investigating complaints of
electrical interference, and administration; the Treasury retained £1,761,864, or 5 per
cent of the net licence revenue, and the BBC received £33,522,816. In the same year, the
net revenue from publications was £598,295, and grant-in-aid receipts amounted to
£6,590,000.
The Independent Television Authority
The Independent Television Authority consists of a chairman, a deputy chairman
and eight ordinary members (three of whom have special responsibility for Scotland,
Wales and Monmouthshire, and Northern Ireland severally) appointed by the Postmaster
General. The ITA owns and operates the transmitting stations, but the production
studios and equipment are owned, and the actual programmes are provided, by
programme companies under contract to the ITA. The Authority has controlling and
regulatory powers of a wide and important character in regard to programmes; the
Television Act requires it to ensure that they do not offend against good taste or
486
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
decency, that they are balanced in their subject matter, that they preserve due impar¬
tiality in presenting matters of industrial or political controversy, and that the news is
reported accurately. In the choice of programme companies the ITA is guided by
their potential ability to provide an efficient service and, in the case of regional
companies, by their associations with the local communities concerned.
In the discharge of its duties the ITA is advised by three statutory committees:
the Advertising Advisory Committee; the Children’s Advisory Committee; and the
Central Religious Advisory Committee, which by arrangement with the BBC acts
as the statutory advisory body to the ITA on religious broadcasting. The ITA has
also appointed a panel of six consultants to assist it in the exercise of its day-to-day
responsibilities for religious services and programmes.
The chief executive officer of the ITA is the Director-General. There is also a
Deputy Director-General, and a headquarters staff covering all technical, adminis¬
trative, clerical, typing and office services, which numbered 152 in 1961. Staff has
also been recruited for the transmitting stations and for regional offices, bringing the
total number of ITA staff to 400. Fifteen programme companies are under contract
with the ITA: Associated-Rediffusion Limited; Associated Television Limited;
ABC Television Limited; Granada TV Network Limited; Scottish Television Limited;
Independent Television for South Wales and the West of England Limited (TWW);
Southern Television Limited; Tyne-Tees Television Limited; Anglia Television
Limited; Ulster Television Limited; Westward Television; Border Television
Limited; Grampian Television Limited; Wales Television Association; and Channel
Islands Communications (Television) Limited. A common news service is provided
by Independent Television News Limited. A standing consultative committee, com¬
posed of two representatives of the ITA and a representative of each of the programme
companies, provides consultative machinery between the ITA and the companies on
matters affecting the companies as a whole. There is also an Independent Television
Companies Association, designed to further the collective interests of the companies
with such outside bodies as trade unions and sporting organisations, and generally
to ensure that they speak as far as possible with one voice on public issues connected
with television broadcasting policy.
The ITA receives no payments from licence revenue; its finance is drawn from annual
payments made to it by the programme companies of amounts about three times
greater than the actual cost of the engineering and administrative services it provides. In
the year which ended on 31st March, 1961, these payments amounted to approximately
£4-2 million. The authority has no public debt and meets all its capital expenditure
from income. Moreover, it is estimated that by 1964 the ITA will hold debt-free
physical assets of £5 million at first cost, on which depreciation of £2-75 million will
have been provided, and it will have accumulated in addition some £4 million in
the reserve fund or in other reserve income.
Sound Broadcasting
The BBC operates its domestic sound broadcasting services from 57 long-wave
and medium-wave transmitters at 43 transmitting stations, and from 21 permanent
very high frequency (VHF) transmitting stations, built since 1955 to provide a satis¬
factory alternative to the deteriorating reception of national and regional services on
long and medium wave lengths brought about by increased interference from foreign
stations. The external broadcasting services are transmitted from 39 high power, high
frequency transmitters: 37 in the United Kingdom and two (used for relay purposes)
at Tebrau, near Singapore.
SOUND AND TELEVISION BROADCASTING
487
There are 149 studios for the domestic sound programmes, of which 59 are in
London and 90 at various centres in the regional areas. The external services use
35 London studios. There are also 20 semi-automatic studios which can be operated
by programme officials without an engineering staff.
Domestic Services
The domestic sound services (which produce over 20,000 programme hours a year)
consist of the Home Service, the Light Programme, the Third Programme and Net¬
work Three. These separate, but inter-related, services offer the listening public a
wide and varied choice of programmes.
Each of the four services has its own characteristics: the Home Service is planned
as a general service, and in addition to a wide range of musical programmes and plays
provides the principal news and information services, discussions on domestic and
foreign affairs, political broadcasts (ministerial broadcasts and controversial
broadcasts by party spokesmen) and special programmes of various kinds, including
broadcasts for schools. It is also the vehicle for regional broadcasting (i.e. programmes
specially compiled for listeners in Scotland, Northern Ireland, Wales, and the Midlands,
and north and west of England). The Light Programme is intended for those who wish
to enjoy relaxation and distraction in the least demanding form. The aim of the Third
Programme is to satisfy the intellectual and cultural interests of a minority audience;
and that of Network Three to meet the practical need of various groups of people for
expert information on hobbies or work, which cannot properly be met during the
evening hours by the other main services.
External Services
The external broadcasting services of the BBC are intended to provide a link of
culture, information and entertainment between the peoples of the United Kingdom
and those in all other parts of the world; to present events of world-wide importance
with speed and accuracy; and generally to reflect British opinion and the British way of
life. These services are heard in English and in 38 other languages throughout the
world for a total, between them, of over 80 hours a day, which is longer than the output
of all the BBC’s domestic sound and television services added together, and involves
the transmission of some 43,000 news bulletins and 50,000 talks (including press
reviews) in the course of a year.
The services, under the Director of External Broadcasting, are divided into the
European Services and the Overseas Services, each in charge of a Controller. Within
these two groups are the regional divisions. Common to both groups is the External
Services News Department, which prepares all the news broadcasts for audiences
outside the United Kingdom.
The European Services broadcast over 220 programme hours a week and are
sub-divided into four regional groupings: South European (Spain, Italy, Greece,
Turkey, Israel), Central European (Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland, Finland),
East European (Soviet Union, Roumania, Bulgaria, Yugoslavia, Albania), and
German. A French language service provides programmes for both European and
African listeners. There is also an English service directed to the whole of
Europe. The material broadcast by the regional services is mainly supplied by
two central departments: the European Talks Department and the European
Production Department.
The Overseas Services, which are directed to countries outside Europe, broadcast
over 360 programme hours a week. They comprise the General Overseas Service
488
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
(started as the Empire Service in 1932) with its world-wide audience of English-
speaking listeners, and a number of regional services in English and 21 other
languages. The General Overseas Service which includes among its audience
peoples of the Commonwealth, British Forces and British communities overseas,
gives a complete programme service for 224- hours every day. The regional
services consist of the African Service with programmes in English, Hausa,
Swahili and Somali; the Arabic Service; the Asian Service with programmes in
13 oriental languages; the Latin American Service with programmes in Spanish
and Portuguese; and other special programmes in English for North America,
Australia, the Pacific, the Caribbean and the Falkland Islands, in Maltese for
Malta, and in French for Canada.
The external broadcasting services also include the Transcription Service, which
records over 700 BBC sound programmes annually and distributes them to broad¬
casting organisations in all parts of the world; the ‘English by Radio1 service, which
distributes English lessons with explanations in over 30 languages and reaches an
audience of several millions by direct transmission from London and by recorded
broadcasts from local stations; and the Monitoring Service, which reports foreign
broadcasts from some 35 countries and languages and works under a reciprocal
agreement with its American counterpart as regards monitored material from the Far
East and other areas inaudible in the United Kingdom.
The languages and the hours of broadcasting in the external services are prescribed
by Government departments concerned with overseas relations. These departments are
also consulted about the content of the programmes, but the final responsibility remains
with the BBC.
The BBC maintains offices in New York, Paris, Berlin, Ottawa, Toronto, Sydney,
New Delhi, Singapore and Beirut, to encourage local interest in the BBC and to
provide the BBC with advice and help concerning programmes, whether for home
listeners about that area or for listeners in the area itself. The offices (which are con¬
cerned with the whole field of sound radio and, where appropriate, television) are
also responsible for promoting good relations with the local broadcasting organisations,
and for keeping the BBC informed about local broadcasting and other developments
of interest; in these matters, they work closely with the BBC’s Overseas and Foreign
Relations Department. Audience research is undertaken by sampling surveys and other
research methods to assess the size, nature and tastes of various audiences.
Television Broadcasting
In 1936 the BBC launched the world’s first regular public service of high definition
television. By 1961 this service was being transmitted from 25 stations and was available
to over 98 per cent of the population. In the course of a year, it broadcasts on a national
network more than 7,000 items, made up of studio productions, outside broadcasts,
films, and relays from the continent of Europe. BBC Television Promotion undertakes
the world-wide sale of BBC television programmes (films, tele-recordings and video¬
taped material); it also purchases material for the use of the BBC television service and
conducts business relations with other television organisations throughout the world.
BBC studio productions come from the London Television Theatre at Shepherds
Bush; eight main London studios; and fully equipped regional studios at Manchester,
Birmingham, Cardiff, Glasgow, Bristol and Belfast. In addition, twelve small interview
studios (used mainly for short insertions into the news) have been established in
London, Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland, and in the north, midland and west of
England regions. The Television Film Department of the BBC is housed at the Ealing
SOUND AND TELEVISION BROADCASTING
489
film studios; and Television News and newsreel programmes originate from a specially
equipped studio at Alexandra Palace, London. The building of the new main block
of the Television Centre in west London has been completed: the scenery block, the
restaurant block and three of the seven production studios, together with ancillary
areas, are also in use.
Outside broadcasting (which during the year 1960-61 transmitted nearly 1,000
programmes, providing over 16 per cent of the total BBC television output) covers
most parts of the United Kingdom with its mobile units, presenting programmes
both of national and of specifically regional interest, and also brings scenes of events
in Europe to viewers in the United Kingdom.
The first regular independent television (ITV) service was inaugurated in
September 1955 by a programme transmission from the ITA London station at
Beaulieu Heights, Croydon. By the end of 1961 programmes were being transmitted
from 15 stations in all parts of Great Britain, and over eleven million homes in the
United Kingdom were able to receive Independent Television.
ITV programmes are produced at studio centres in London, Birmingham,
Manchester, Glasgow, Cardiff, Southampton, Newcastle, Norwich, Belfast,
Dover, Plymouth and Aberdeen. The establishment of these studios is the direct result
of the ITA’s policy of encouraging the development of regional television, and the
programmes are either for local broadcasting or for transmission to one or more of
the other regions through the link system operated by the ITA. In June 1961 this
consisted of 1,905 miles of vision links, about 60 per cent of which were two-way
circuits.
Both the BBC and the ITV services provide programmes of music, drama, light
entertainment, variety, films, news reports covering international, national, and local
events, and outside broadcasts, particularly of national and State occasions and sport.
Religious broadcasts and broadcasts for schools also feature regularly in both services,
as do programmes designed to stimulate thought and widen people’s horizons, e.g.
political discussions including party political broadcasts, interviews with outstanding
personalities, investigations into matters of public interest, and programmes on the
arts; and there are programmes of specialised interest, such as children’s and family
programmes, programmes for women, regional programmes, and programmes
on agriculture.
Commercial advertising is excluded from the television programmes of the BBC,
as from its sound programmes, and the BBC seeks to avoid giving publicity to any
individual firm or organised interest except in so far as is necessary in providing
effective and informative programmes under the terms of the Charter. The ITA
broadcasts advertisements (on which the programme companies depend for their
revenue) subject to the relevant provisions in the Television Act, namely, that there
should be no sponsoring of programmes by advertisers, that all advertisements should
be clearly distinguishable as such and recognisably separate from the programme, and
that the amount of time given to advertising should not be so great as to detract from
the value of the programmes as a medium of entertainment, instruction and informa¬
tion. The ITA also has rules agreed with the Postmaster General about certain classes
of broadcasts (including, in particular, religious services) in which advertisements may
not be inserted and, on the advice of the Advertising Advisory Committee, has drawn
up certain ‘principles for television advertising’ with a view to the exclusion of mis¬
leading or unsuitable advertisements from the programmes. The cost of inserting
advertisements in the ITA service is borne by the advertisers, who pay the programme
companies for advertising time.
49°
Britain: an official handbook
Wire Broadcasting
Wire broadcasting—a system whereby radio programmes are received at a central
point, whence they are distributed by wire to listeners and viewers—began in the
United Kingdom in 1925 as a private venture and remains in the hands of private
enterprise. Wire broadcasting companies operate under licence from the Postmaster
General. They are not allowed to originate programmes of their own, and their function
is to distribute programmes put out by general broadcasting stations. A specified
minimum of their programme material must be taken from BBC sources. Subscribers
to wire broadcasting services must have ordinary broadcast receiving licences. At the
beginning of 1961 there were 552 wire broadcasting services, of which 345 gave tele¬
vision service and the remainder sound-only service. The number of subscribers at
that date was 1,074,432, including 449,725 who were receiving television services.
Audience Research
Audience research, as conducted by the BBC, is carried on by means of (a) a Survey
of Listening and Viewing, during the course of which a representative sample of the
population is interviewed each day about its listening and viewing on the previous
day, and (b) a continuous system of gathering, through panels of representative
listeners and viewers, information about the way programmes are received by those
who happen to see or hear them. Matters outside the scope of these routine and con¬
tinuous operations are the subject of ad hoc investigations.
On behalf of Independent Television, audience research is undertaken by an
independent research organisation—Television Audience Measurement Limited—
using a machine known as a Tammeter, which is fixed to about 6,000 representative
television receivers and records the actual time these receivers are in use.
Technical Developments
The Postmaster General is advised on the technical aspects of television (and very
high frequency (VHF) sound broadcasting) by the Television Advisory Committee,
which consists of an independent chairman, the Director-General of the BBC, the
Director-General of the ITA, representatives from the radio industry, independent
members, and representatives of interested Government departments. In its latest
report (which has been referred to the Pilkington Committee) the committee expressed
the view, inter alia, that the 405-line standards now in use in the United Kingdom
would not be adequate for all purposes for the next twenty-five years and that 625-line
transmissions making full use of a channel 8 Mc/s wide would offer worth-while
improvements in quality over the present British 405-line transmission in a 5 Mc/s
channel; and it recommended that a decision on ultimate monochrome line standards
should precede any decision on the introduction of colour.
Research into technical problems is carried out by the scientific and engineering
staffs of the BBC, the Post Office and the radio industry. Recent studies include:
investigations into various systems of stereophonic sound transmissions giving satis¬
factory reproduction on conventional VHF receivers; methods of improving studio
acoustics, microphones and loudspeakers; long-distance propagation studies in the
short wave, VHF and ultra high frequency bands; and methods of increasing national
coverage both in sound and television by such means as the sharing of frequencies
between stations in different parts of the United Kingdom, the construction of trans¬
mitting aerials having special horizontal radiation patterns, and the development of
unattended satellite transmitters of very low power for providing a television and
VHF sound service to small and isolated communities. Following the installation of
SOUND AND TELEVISION BROADCASTING
491
three such transmitters, the BBC is proceeding with the construction of 23 more for
television and 21 for VHF sound. The BBC has also developed equipment for con¬
verting television programmes from European standards to those of North America,
and has granted a licence to a British company and a company in the United States for
its manufacture.
International Relations
The BBC and the ITA (together with the Independent Television Companies
Association) are active members of the European Broadcasting Union. The union,
which now has 29 active members among the broadcasting organisations in the
European zone and 16 associate members (mostly from outside Europe, including
the United States of America and many of the nations of the Commonwealth) meets
every year to exchange views and information, and to study common problems in
the programme, technical and legal fields. It also maintains a Technical Monitoring
Station, where frequency measurements and other observations on broadcasting
stations can be carried out.
Within the Commonwealth, the BBC is closely associated with the broadcasting
organisations of the other member countries and of the dependent territories. A
decision, taken at the third Commonwealth Broadcasting Conference in 1956, to
achieve still closer co-operation, resulted in the BBC joining with the Australian
Broadcasting Commission, the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation, and the Rank
Organisation to establish a British Commonwealth International Newsfilm News
Agency Trust. Through an associated non-profit-making company (the British Com¬
monwealth International Newsfilm News Agency Limited), this joint enterprise
provides a reliable service of international news on film for subscribers who operate
television services, produce cinematograph newsreels or acquire newsfilm for any other
purposes, including education, anywhere in the world.
The BBC also participates in the work of the International Telecommunication
Union (ITU)—the United Nations specialised agency responsible for the regulation
and control of all international telecommunication services (including sound and
television), for the allocation and registration of all radio frequencies and (through
its International Consultative Committees) for the promotion and co-ordination of the
international study of technical problems in broadcasting. In addition, the BBC has
long-established relations with the United Nations Radio Division, with the United
Nations Educational and Scientific Organisation (UNESCO), and with the Council of
Europe.
Eurovision
As well as taking part in the exchange of sound radio programmes arranged between
the member countries of the European Broadcasting Union (EBU), the BBC is a
regular contributor to the network of European television (Eurovision). This network
now includes fifteen Western European member countries; the exchange of tele¬
vision programmes between them is arranged by the EBU, which maintains an Inter¬
national Television Co-ordination Centre (Eurovision) in Brussels. To facilitate
programme exchanges on the Eurovision network a permanent television link, operating
in either direction between London and the Continent, has been constructed by the
Post Office. The range of Eurovision is steadily increasing as countries expand their
networks and facilities, and new countries participate. Successful programme exchanges
have also been made between Moscow and London.
XVII. THE PRESS
The British press caters for all political views, different levels of education and a
wide range of interests. It is free from Government censorship and interference.
TABLE 39
‘National’ Newspapers and London Evenings
Title
General
Political
Tendency
Owner
Circulation
average
Jan.-June
(inc.) 1961
Dailies
The Times (1785)
Daily Telegraph (1855)
The Guardian (1821)
Daily Express (1900)
Daily Mail (1896)
Daily Herald (1912)
Daily Worker (1930)
Daily Mirror (1903)
Daily Sketch (1909)
Financial Times (1888)
New Daily (1960)
London Evenings
Evening News (1881)
Evening Standard(1827)
Independent
Conservative
Liberal
Independent;
stresses
importance of
British Common¬
wealth
Conservative
Labour
Communist
Left of centre
Conservative
Independent
Independent
As for Daily Mail
As for
Daily Express
Times Publishing Co.
Ltd.
Daily Telegraph Ltd.
Manchester Guardian
and Evening News Ltd.
Beaverbrook News¬
papers Ltd.
Associated Newspapers
Ltd.
Odhams Press Ltd.
(Daily Mirror Group)
Daily Worker Co-op¬
erative Society Ltd.
Daily Mirror News¬
papers Ltd.
Associated Newspapers
Ltd.
The Financial Times
Ltd.
British Newspaper
Trust Society
Associated Newspapers
Ltd.
Beaverbrook News¬
papers Ltd.
260,099
1,250,720
234,539
4,313,063
2,687,150
1,418,500
57,608
4,593,263
999,663
131,631
50,000
(estimate)
1,485,823
761,325
492
THE PRESS
493
TABLE 39 {contd.)
Title
General
Political
Tendency
Owner
Circulation
average
Jan.-June
(inc.) 1961
Sundays
Observer (1791)
Sunday Times (1822)
Sunday Telegraph
(1961)
News of the World
(1843)
People (1881)
Sunday Express (1918)
Reynolds News and
Sunday Citizen (1850)
Sunday Pictorial (1915)
Independent
Conservative
As for Daily
Telegraph
Independent
Independent
As for
Daily Express
Supports the Co¬
operative Move¬
ment and the
Labour Party
As for
Daily Mirror
The Observer Ltd. All
shares owned by The
Observer Trust
Thomson Allied News¬
papers Ltd.
Daily Telegraph Ltd.
News of the World
Ltd.
Odhams Press Ltd.
(Daily Mirror Group)
Beaverbrook News¬
papers Ltd.
Co-operative Press Ltd.
Sunday Pictorial
Newspapers Ltd.
727,964
1,022,913
{a)
6,733,596
5,442,440
3,766,724
326,026
5,335,460
(a) The Sunday Telegraph was first published on
1961 was 716,083.
5th February, 1961. Its circulation in June
The British public buys more newspapers per person than any other in the world.
It has been estimated (by UNESCO, in 1959) that for every 1,000 inhabitants of
the United Kingdom 573 copies of daily papers are sold every day. Next comes
Sweden with 462 per 1,000 inhabitants. Circulation figures of individual newspapers
are proportionately high: five of the daily morning newspapers and five of the Sunday
papers have circulations in the millions. These high figures are largely explained by the
fact that the London morning and Sunday papers have ‘national’ circulations, i.e.
they are distributed throughout the United Kingdom, being available almost every¬
where on the day of publication.
Britain imports nearly half its newsprint requirements, while the rest is made
from imported raw materials. In i960 1*3 million tons of newsprint were used in the
United Kingdom. The average size of London national morning papers varies between
12 and 24 pages. Prices of daily newspapers vary from 3d. (for the majority of papers)
to 5d. (for The Times). Sunday papers run up to 48 pages and to a price of 6d.
494
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
According to The Newspaper Press Directory1 there are some 150 daily and Sunday
newspapers and over 1,300 weekly papers published in Greater London and almost
every sizable town in the rest of the country. These papers deal mainly with news
of interest to the region where they are sold. There are also the sporting papers,
papers in foreign languages for groups of nationals of other lands resident in Britain,
and religious papers.
In 1947 a Royal Commission on the Press was appointed to inquire into the finance,
control, management and ownership of the British press. Its report was issued in
June 1949 {Cmd. 7700) and found that the British press‘is completely independent of
outside financial interests and that its policy is the policy of those that conduct it’;
there was evidence that the direct influence of advertisers on policy was ‘negligible’.
After studying management and ownership, the Royal Commission concluded that
‘there is nothing approaching monopoly in the press as a whole, or ... in any class
of newspaper’. Among other recommendations it suggested the establishment of a
General Council of the Press and this was set up in 1953 (see p. 499).
Since 1949 there have been signs of a trend towards concentration of ownership
and a number of newspapers have had to close, because of inability to pay their way,
or have been absorbed by others; they included in i960 and 1961 five ‘national’ news¬
papers—the daily News Chronicle, the London evening Star, and the Sunday
Empire News, Sunday Graphic and Sunday Dispatch. The economic and financial
factors affecting the production and sale of newspapers and periodicals are being
examined by a second Royal Commission appointed in March 1961 to consider, in
the public interest, whether these factors tend to diminish diversity of ownership and
control or the number or variety of publications.
Ownership
Ownership of the press is varied: it includes individual owners, two or more partner
proprietors, local printing and publishing firms, newspaper companies owning between
one and half a dozen papers, or press groups controlling a chain of newspapers in
different parts of the country. In some cases newspaper groups also have interests in
groups of periodicals.
Although pronounced views may be expressed in newspapers and their political
leanings may be obvious, they are financially independent of any political party.
While early newspapers were often family concerns (and some provincial weeklies
still are), with the development of papers for mass readership large capital sums were
needed and ownership began to be transferred to joint stock companies. The largest
press groups are: Associated Newspapers Limited, which, with three London papers,
owns directly or through subsidiary companies a total of 14 dailies and 16 weeklies, of
which 9 dailies and 6 weeklies are linked under the management of Northcliffe
Newspapers Group Limited; Thomson Newspapers Limited, which owns 14 dailies,
24 weeklies and 2 Sundays and whose chairman also controls Scotsman Publica¬
tions; Westminster Press Group, which controls 10 dailies and 46 weeklies; Pro¬
vincial Newspapers Limited, which owns 4 dailies, 21 weeklies and one bi-weekly;
the Mirror Group, which (with Odhams Press Ltd., which it has owned since 1961)
has three London dailies and two Sundays, one general weekly, and, through subsidiary
companies, two Glasgow dailies, one Glasgow Sunday paper, and six Scottish weeklies;
and the Beaverbrook Group, which owns a London morning, evening and Sunday,
and a Glasgow evening paper.
1 Changes in the number of newspapers occur constantly; figures are based on the 1961 edition
of The Newspaper Press Directory.
THE PRESS
495
The Daily Mirror Group is by far the largest publisher of periodicals in England
and Wales. Its subsidiaries include Fleetway Publications (formerly the Amalgamated
Press), Odhams Press Limited, the George Newnes Group and the Longacre Press
(formerly Hulton Press). Between them they publish more than 350 periodicals,
magazines and yearbooks. There are other, smaller groups, and publishers of single
magazines. In Scotland the largest publishers of magazines are the Thomson-Leng
Group.
Certain newspapers and periodicals are controlled by trustees whose aim is to
preserve the character and traditions of the paper and prevent control from falling
into the hands of people who might change the editorial policy and tradition. Various
forms of trust govern the direction of The Times, The Guardian, Observer, Economist,
Spectator and New Statesman.
The ‘National’ Press
Ten morning papers with headquarters in London, and one {The Guardian) in
Manchester, are ‘national’ in the sense of circulating throughout the British Isles, and
there are 8 ‘national’ Sunday papers (see Table 39). Ten of these papers have northern
editions published in Manchester which, after London, is the largest press centre in
England; while The Guardian has had a London edition since September 1961.
The leading Scottish papers (see below) circulate widely, and certain specialised daily
papers also have a circulation not limited by region, for example, Lloyd's List and
Shipping Gazette and Sporting Life. The two London evening papers each have
affiliations with a national daily, but draw their readership very largely from people
living within fifty miles of London.
Provincial Newspapers
The provincial newspapers, numbering over 80 morning or evening dailies and
Sunday papers and over 900 weeklies, provide the general and local news expected
by readers whose daily life and interests are known to, and shared by, the newspaper
staff. Some 60 provincial papers still in existence were founded before 1800; the
oldest being Berrow's Worcester Journal, dating back to 1709. With a few exceptions
(e.g. Yorkshire Post, Birmingham Post, Newcastle Journal, Northern Echo, Sheffield
Telegraph, Western Mail) they reflect no definite political tendency. The total circu¬
lation of the provincial morning papers is about million, of the provincial evenings
about 7^ million, and of the provincial weeklies about 12 million. Among the provincial
mornings, The Journal (Newcastle), the Yorkshire Post and the Northern Echo have
circulations of over 100,000; two provincial Sunday papers—the Sunday Sun
(Newcastle) and the Sunday Mercury (Birmingham)—have circulations of over 200,000;
while, among evening papers, the Liverpool Echo and Evening Express has a circulation
of 410,205, the Manchester Evening News of 332,311, five {Birmingham Mail, Man¬
chester Evening Chronicle, Newcastle Evening Chronicle, Sheffield Star, Yorkshire
Evening Post) have circulations of over 200,000 and nine of between 100,000 and
200,000. The provincial newspaper, often read far more thoroughly than the national
daily, is a valuable medium for national and local advertising.
There are over 90 London suburban weeklies.
Scotland
Scotland has eight morning, eight evening and three Sunday newspapers, including
the Scottish editions of the Daily Express, Daily Mail and Sunday Express. The
Glasgow Herald, founded in 1783, and The Scotsman, founded in 1817 and a daily
496
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
since 1855, published in Edinburgh, are among the papers which influence serious
opinion in Great Britain. The circulation of the former is 86,799 and of the latter
69,176 (average figures January to end-June 1961). Other morning papers are the
Daily Record and the Noon Record, published in Glasgow; the Courier and Advertiser,
published in Dundee; and Aberdeen’s The Press and Journal. Evening papers include
the Edinburgh Evening News and Evening Dispatch, Glasgow’s Evening Times and
Evening Citizen, Dundee’s Evening Telegraph and Post, Aberdeen’s Evening Express,
the Paisley Daily Express and the Greenock Telegraph. The Sunday papers are the
Sunday Mail and the Sunday Post as well as the Scottish Sunday Express.
Among the weekly papers are the Weekly Scotsman and the People's Journal, which
also circulate outside Scotland; in all there are almost 160 weekly papers published in
Scottish towns.
Northern Ireland
Northern Ireland has three morning papers and one evening paper, all printed
in Belfast: they are Belfast News-Letter, Northern Whig, Irish News and Belfast
Telegraph. There are 42 weekly newspapers in Northern Ireland, including two
published twice a week. There is also a sporting paper, Ireland's Saturday Night,
published each Saturday afternoon (Belfast). The majority are published by individual
companies and all the counties have good coverage of local papers. There are no
Sunday newspapers.
Wales
One daily morning newspaper, the Western Mail, a Thomson newspaper, is printed
and published in Cardiff; it has a circulation of over 104,000, mainly in the southern
half of Wales. In North Wales, the Liverpool Daily Post gives wide coverage to events
in the area. Evening papers published in Wales are the South Wales Echo, Cardiff,
the South Wales Argus, Newport, and the South Wales Evening Post, Swansea. North
Wales is served by the Liverpool Echo and to a smaller extent by evening papers
published in Manchester, the Manchester Evening News and the Manchester Evening
Chronicle. The News of the World and Reynolds News carry news about Welsh affairs
written by columnists.
The weekly press includes 54 weekly papers in English, many of them carrying
articles in Welsh; four bilingual papers; and eleven papers in Welsh, of which five
are denominational.
Channel Islands and Isle of Man
The Channel Islands have one morning paper (Guernsey Star), two evening papers
and two weeklies. The Isle of Man Times is issued from Mondays to Wednesdays with
a special weekly edition which is published on Saturday. There are four other
weeklies.
Periodicals
Weekly, monthly and quarterly journals cover an enormous field. Salient features
of the last twenty-five years have been the development, on the one hand, of periodicals
with a mass appeal, particularly those for women and adolescent girls; and, on the other
hand, the growth of the trade and technical press. There are over 4,000 periodical
publications: general magazines with circulations ranging up to over a million;
women’s magazines, some of which have even larger circulations; numerous publica¬
tions for children; a wide range of religious periodicals for all denominations; magazines
THE PRESS
497
dealing with sports, hobbies, fiction and humour; periodicals specialising in various
subjects such as politics, finance and economics, science, the professions, and the arts;
nearly 1,800 trade and technical publications, many with circulations not confined to
the United Kingdom; and the journals of learned societies, trade unions, regiments,
universities, colleges, schools, and other associations. There has also been a large
increase in recent years in the number and circulation of ‘house journals’, produced by
industrial organisations mainly for their staffs; a survey made in 1958 by the British
Association of Industrial Editors estimated that some 1,500 house journals were
published, and were read by about 30 million people.
The weekly periodicals with the highest sales are: Woman (2,968,702); Woman's Own
(2,161,009); Reveille (1,716,416); Woman's Weekly (1,402,424); Woman's Realm
(1,300,174); Weekend (1,239,218); Woman's Mirror (1,152,681); together with the
Radio Times (6,146,433) and TV Times (3,778,009).
Although their circulations are smaller, the weeklies dealing with political, social
and economic affairs enjoy a large and influential readership. The Economist covers
topics of the day from a far wider angle than its title would indicate and is politically
independent; the New Statesman is a review of politics, literature and the arts with an
independent socialist political tendency; the Spectator covers much the same subjects
and is non-party; Time and Tide has a liberal tendency; and Tribune has a left-wing
but strongly anti-communist bias. Other papers whose circulations are in the
tens of thousands are the illustrated weeklies such as the Illustrated London News,
the Sphere, the Field and Country Life, while Punch is the leading humour periodical.
All these weeklies are widely read in libraries, clubs and other institutions.
Monthly and quarterly journals, generally speaking, appeal to the more serious
type of reader, particularly the literary and political journals and those specialising
in international and Commonwealth affairs.
In addition to the circulation of periodicals published in England, Wales has had
since 1957 its own farming weekly, the Welsh Farm News. There are also several
monthly and quarterly publications in both the Welsh language and English.
Four monthly illustrated periodicals are published in Scotland: Scottish Field,
Scotland's Magazine, the Scots Magazine (founded 1739) and Scotland’, and two
weeklies devoted to farming interests, Farming Nezvs and the Scottish Farmer. Among
literary journals, probably the most famous is Blackwood's, published in Edinburgh.
Popular magazines are numerous: the Thomson-Leng Group of Dundee alone
distributes about 10 million copies of weeklies in the British Isles and abroad.
In Northern Ireland weekly, monthly and quarterly publications cover farming,
the linen industry, building, motoring and politics.
News Agencies
There are three principal British news agencies:
Reuters Ltd., which is a world news agency owned by the newspapers of the United
Kingdom, Australia and New Zealand. The owners treat their stockholding in Reuters
as ‘a trust rather than an investment’ and are bound by a trust agreement which
guarantees the independence and integrity of the news service for all time. Reuters
has correspondents in all major capitals and is associated with the principal news
agency in every country in the world. It employs several hundred staff correspondents
abroad and also has the services of more than 2,000 local journalists as part-time
correspondents throughout the world.
Press Association Ltd., which distributes home news. It is owned by British provincial
newspapers. All profits are used to develop the service.
49^
rritain: an official handbook
Exchange Telegraph Company Ltd., a public company which distributes home
news to British papers and other subscribers.
Two other agencies supply a general service of overseas news:
Associated Press, which is a branch of the Associated Press of America.
British United Press, which is a Canadian subsidiary of United Press International,
an American agency.
There are also some 60 United Kingdom, Commonwealth and foreign agencies
and news services with offices in London, as well as agencies in other cities, specialising
in various aspects of newspaper and periodical requirements.
Syndication of features is not so common in the United Kingdom as in some
countries, but there are agencies specialising in this type of work.
Training for Journalism
Until recently, and this therefore applies to most older newspapermen working
today, journalists were, broadly, of two classes: those who entered newspaper offices
on leaving school and worked their way up, learning by experience; and university
graduates who held some of the specialised posts, such as correspondents abroad or on
special subjects, leader-writers, sub-editors or reporters. The second class has always
been comparatively small.
In 1952 an agreement was reached for a comprehensive plan for the training and
education of journalists in newspaper offices. A National Council for the Training of
Journalists, on which the principal press organisations are represented, administers
the scheme, which is based on the voluntary co-operation of newspaper offices. There
are regional training committees of local newspaper representatives to supervise the
operation of the scheme in provincial areas. Examinations are taken at two levels:
the Proficiency Test which may be taken after three years of active journalism; and
the Diploma, which may be awarded after further examination and submission of a
thesis. About 85 per cent of each year’s new intake of journalists by British newspapers
are now trained under this system.
In i960 the Commonwealth Press Union launched a travelling fellowship scheme
for the training and education of young journalists throughout the Commonwealth.
Under the pilot scheme six journalists from overseas spent six months in the United
Kingdom: three months in the offices of newspapers or periodicals and three months
acquiring a general idea of life in Britain.
Press Institutions
Both employers and employees in the industry are well organised. On the employers’
side, the most important organisations are the Newspaper Proprietors Association,
whose members are proprietors of London (national) daily and Sunday newspapers;
the Newspaper Society, whose members are proprietors of provincial daily and weekly
newspapers in England and Wales; the Scottish Daily Newspaper Society; the Scottish
Newspaper Proprietors’ Association; the Belfast Newspaper Society; Associated
Northern Ireland Newspapers, whose members are the proprietors of weekly news¬
papers in Northern Ireland; and the Periodical Proprietors’ Association, whose member¬
ship embraces the independent publishers of trade and technical publications and
general magazines. On the employees’ side there are the Institute of Journalists
(loj)—the National Association of Journalists until 1889—incorporated by Royal
Charter in 1890, and the National Union of Journalists (NUJ), founded in 1907. The
THE PRESS
499
National Union of Journalists has a membership of 15,500 (December i960) working
journalists and is the largest trade union confined to journalists in the world; editors
who have powers of dismissal are excluded from full membership but may be associate
members. The Institute of Journalists, as it admits all qualified journalists on equal
terms of membership, may claim to be representative of the profession as a whole.
Free-lance journalists (who are not on the staff of any one paper or group of papers, but
send contributions to any journal) may belong to the NUJ or loj. The aims of these
organisations are the improvement of the economic status of journalists, the promotion
of their professional welfare, and the safeguarding of the status of the press and its
editorial staffs.
The aims of the Guild of British Newspaper Editors are, inter alia, to sustain the
dignity of editorship, to raise and safeguard the professional status of editors, to
protect the rights and freedom of the press, and to improve the education and training
of journalists: the guild has over 300 members. The British Association of Industrial
Editors is the professional organisation to which most editors of house journals belong.
The Typographical Association, in the provinces, and the London Typographical
Society, in London, are the principal craft unions organising such workers as
compositors and machine minders. The National Union of Printing, Bookbinding
and Paper Workers is principally concerned with the publishing and distribution
side, and the National Society of Operative Printers and Assistants (NATSOPA)
includes machine assistants, clerical workers and general assistants in printing works.
These unions cover the printing industry generally.
The General Council of the Press
Following the recommendations of the 1947-49 Royal Commission on the Press, a
Press Council representative of the various press organisations was set up in 1953.
Its aims are:
to preserve the established freedom of the British press;
to maintain the character of the British press in accordance with the highest
professional and commercial standards;
to keep under review any developments likely to restrict the supply of informa¬
tion of public interest and importance;
to promote and encourage methods of recruitment, education and training of
journalists;
to promote a proper functional relation among all sections of the profession;
to promote technical and other research;
to study developments in the British press which may tend towards greater con¬
centration or monopoly; and
to publish periodical reports recording its own work and reviewing from time
to time the various developments in the British press and the factors affecting
them. Reports are published annually.
The council consists of eight editorial representatives, four nominees of the National
Union of Journalists, three nominees of the Institute of Journalists, and ten managerial
representatives.
The work of the Press Council has been largely concerned with complaints of
unjustifiable intrusion by the press into the private lives of individuals, including
members of the Royal Family, or other breaches of professional standards, and with
500
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
the admission of the press to meetings of local authority councils and to hearings of
administrative tribunals.
The Press and the Law
The press in Britain has the same freedom as the individual to do and say what it
likes provided it does not transgress the law; and, in general, it enjoys very great
liberty of comment on matters of public interest. Apart from enactments relating
directly to such matters as the registration of newspapers, there are no laws applying
to the press in particular and not to the general public; but requirements which affect
journalists and the ,press occur in a variety of Acts of Parliament. For example, the
Public Bodies (Admissions to Meetings) Act, i960, and other Local Government Acts
govern the admission of the press (and the public) to meetings of local councils;
and restrictions on the reporting of domestic proceedings and proceedings concerning
juveniles are imposed by legislation governing procedure in the law courts. The
press must comply with the copyright laws and with the laws against the publication
of matters covered by the Official Secrets Acts, with the laws of seditious libel, blas¬
phemous and obscene libel, and defamation, with the laws for the protection of
children from publications which might do them moral harm, and with the laws against
fraudulent advertising, against breach of parliamentary privilege, and against ‘contempt
of court’—for example, the publication of anything affecting a case before the courts
which might tend to influence the result of the trial, or of comment on court proceedings
which might tend to prejudice their reputation for fairness.
Legal proceedings against the press are infrequent; the majority of actions that do
take place are brought by private individuals seeking to protect their own interests,
for example, against libel. In such cases, the editor, proprietor, publisher, printer and
distributor of the newspaper, as well as the author of the article, may all be held
responsible.
XVIII. SPORT
In Britain, the word ‘sport’ is used generally to describe such activities as organised
outdoor games, athletics, field or country sports, indoor games, aquatic sports, and such
popular pursuits as horse-racing, dog-racing, show-jumping, riding, boxing, rock
climbing, motor racing, cycling and rifle shooting as well as those (for instance,
archery, fencing, gliding and ice-skating) which, although less popular judged by the
number of participants and spectators, have their own enthusiastic following. Those
who engage in sport may be professionals (i.e. paid players) or amateurs (i.e. people who
play games or take part in other forms of sport usually in their leisure time and
without monetary reward). Professionals keep up the technical standards of the sports
in which they take part1 and spectators make a vital contribution by their enthusiasm
and their financial support; but the sporting life of Britain derives its character
principally from the amateur element—people who devote time and energy to organ¬
ising sport and to teaching and training, as well as the many thousands of all ages
who engage in sport for pleasure.
Central and Local Government Participation
The Government is not directly concerned with the organisation or promotion of
sport, but it gives encouragement and support to physical education through the
Ministry of Education and the Scottish Education Department, and it allocates
grants from public funds to bodies responsible for the provision of playing fields
and other facilities for physical recreation, and to national sporting organisations
towards the cost of appointing instructors (coaches) in various kinds of sport.
The Minister of Education and the Secretary of State for Scotland, although not
responsible for prescribing the curricula in any school, require that all schools receiving
financial assistance from public funds shall provide for the physical education (gym¬
nastics, games, athletics, dancing and swimming) of their pupils, and are concerned,
through inspectors of physical education and by means of departmental publications,
that a high standard shall be maintained. All schools in the national system must have
their own playing field, or the use of one, and most secondary schools have a gym¬
nasium. Facilities for, and instruction in, many kinds of sport are also provided at
the independent preparatory and public schools, and at the universities (some of
which have departments of physical education).
Local authorities are empowered under the Public Health Acts and the Physical
Training and Recreation Act, 1937, to provide playing fields. They also provide
gymnasia, tennis courts, golf courses and swimming baths, on a varying scale.
Composite National Bodies
The national organisations most closely concerned with the development of sport
are the Central Council of Physical Recreation, the Scottish Council of Physical
1 Some sports, for example, athletics, Rugby Union football, hockey and rowing, are entirely
amateur, but in other sports the distinction between professional and amateur status is becoming
less strictly defined.
5°2
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Recreation, and the National Playing Fields Association. The British Olympic Associa¬
tion, whose main functions are connected with the participation of British teams and
competitors in the Olympic Games, is also interested in all matters likely to benefit
sport or physical recreation in Great Britain as a whole.
The Central Council of Physical Recreation
Formed in 1935, the Central Council of Physical Recreation (CCPR) is a voluntary
association of all national bodies in England, Wales and Northern Ireland concerned
with the development of post-school physical recreation. Its funds are partly raised
by voluntary contributions but it receives a grant from the Ministry of Education,
with which it is closely associated in much of its work.
The CCPR is composed of representatives of the British Olympic Association, the
National Playing Fields Association, the governing bodies of 41 sports, 16 national
outdoor activity associations, 16 bodies concerned with dancing and rhythmic move¬
ment, and 34 voluntary youth organisations, in addition to representatives of com¬
munity centres, educational, physical education and health education organisations,
local authorities and local education authorities, and the Services’ sports branches.
Its headquarters are in London and it has nine regional offices in other parts of
England. Its activities in Wales are controlled by a representative Welsh committee,
and in Northern Ireland by a separate section with its own executive committee.
Broadly, the function of the CCPR is to promote all forms of physical recreation.
Its activities include the organisation of a wide range of courses for coaches and
instructors, courses in personal performance, lectures, displays and other publicity
events. Its staff give advisory, technical and administrative help wherever required,
but particularly to the headquarters, regional, county and local branches of the con¬
stituent organisations and to local education authorities and industrial concerns.
The Scottish Council of Physical Recreation
The Scottish Council of Physical Recreation (SCPR) was formed as a fully
autonomous body in 1953. It is the counterpart in Scotland of the CCPR, performing
many of the same functions, and it receives a grant-in-aid from the Scottish Education
Department under the Further Education (Scotland) Regulations, 1959.
The National Playing Fields Association
Founded in 1925, the main aim of the National Playing Fields Association (NPFA)
is to stimulate the provision of playing fields and playgrounds, especially for children,
by publicity and financial assistance. Between 1925 and 1961 it distributed £1,468,676
in the form of grants for playing field and playground schemes and £54,079 in the
form of loans. It sponsors more than 400 schemes a year.
The NPFA council is composed of representatives of the governing bodies of
16 sports, and of other sports bodies, of the British Olympic Association and the
CCPR, and of a number of educational bodies, voluntary youth organisations, physical
education associations and local authorities. The national headquarters in London
employs a small full-time staff, including a technical and research department which
gives advice on all aspects of playing field provision, design and maintenance. The
NPFA, which works in close co-operation with the Ministry of Education, the
Ministry of Housing and Local Government and local authorities, derives its funds
mainly from voluntary contributions; in 1961 it also received a contribution from
the Ministry of Education towards administrative costs.
The NPFA has branches in Scotland and Northern Ireland; there are also branches
in nearly every English and Welsh county; administration is carried out, in the main,
Automatic-vending machine in a staff canteen
The University Boat
Race between Oxford
and Cambridge, rowed
on the Thames is one of
the most popular sport¬
ing events of the year.
The Grand National Steeple¬
chase : Becher’s Brook, one
of the hazards of the Aintree
course.
The county cricket
ground at Worcester:
visiting Commonwealth
teams usually play their
opening game of the
tour on this ground.
SPORT 503
on a voluntary basis, in many cases in association with a county Rural Community
Council.
National Recreation Centres
There are five National Recreation Centres in Britain—two in England, one in
Wales and two in Scotland—administered by the CCPR and the SCPR. The purpose
of the centres, which were established by voluntary funds, is to provide residential
facilities for training in leadership and in personal performance in a wide range of
games, sports and outdoor activities.
A further National Recreation Centre is being built by the London County Council
at a cost of £4 million on a 36-acre site at Crystal Palace. This centre will include a
stadium with seating accommodation for 12,000 spectators; a sports hall in which
there will be a large gymnasium divisible into three, with seating for 1,320 spectators,
and a swimming hall with racing and diving pools of Olympic dimensions, a teaching
pool and a gallery for 1,750 spectators; practice rooms for cricket and lawn tennis; a
lecture theatre, two first-aid rooms and six changing rooms; and a hostel and staff
housing. The centre will be administered by the CCPR; its main purpose will be
training, but it is also designed for international competitions.
Outdoor Games
Outdoor games played in Britain include team games such as football, cricket,
and hockey, and games, e.g. lawn tennis and golf, in which individuals or couples
match their skill. Judged by the number of participants and spectators the most
popular of the team games are football and cricket, and the most popular of the
individual games is lawn tennis.
Football
Although football of a kind was played in the Middle Ages or even earlier, as an
organised game it dates from just over a century ago. One type of football, in which
only the feet are used, was adopted at Cambridge in 1855; the other type, in which
the ball is handled as well as kicked, was first played at Rugby School, whence
it derives its name, and was adopted by the Blackheath football club in 1859.
In England the controlling body of the non-handling game, Association Football
(colloquially known as ‘soccer’), is the Football Association (FA), which was formed
in 1863. Its chief function is to promote the interests of the game and to prevent
infringement of the agreed rules; it also arranges for the instruction of promising
young players (some £10,000 is spent annually on coaching); organises various matches
and competitions, including the international matches played by England, the Amateur
Cup competition, two national youth competitions, and the competition for its own
leading trophy, the Football Association Challenge Cup; and chooses and manages
English international teams. Over 350 clubs are registered with the FA, more than
200 as full members and between 130 and 140 as associate members. The FA derives
its main income from subscriptions and admission charges to international and cup
matches, and ploughs back a large portion of the money into the game. Scotland,
Northern Ireland and Wales have their own controlling bodies: the Scottish Football
Association, the Irish Football Association and the Football Association of Wales.
The principal professional matches in England and Wales (played weekly) are
controlled by the Football League, which comprises 92 professional clubs in these
countries. The funds of the League are derived largely from contributions paid by
member clubs in the form of a levy of 4 per cent of the net gate receipts from league
5°4
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
matches, after allowable expenses have been deducted, and from annual payments
(approximately £250,000, of which some £80,000 is passed to the Scottish League)
from the leading football pools promoters for the use of league fixture lists.
In Scotland the Scottish Football League is in charge of the weekly games; Northern
Ireland has its own league. Clubs belonging to the English and Scottish Leagues are
organised in divisions, the members of which compete against one another for the
respective league championships. Their positions in the divisional tables are decided
at the end of the season by the number of points gained for wins or draws. In the
season 1960-61 a total of nearly 28 million people watched league football matches
and the gate receipts in all amounted to about £4! million.
Several million people stake small weekly sums on the results of the league matches
by filling in what are known as ‘pools’ coupons; the aggregate sum staked during the
1960-61 season was over £90 million. The odds against winning anything in the pools
are very great, but the prizes, which are tax free, are high; in a season, individual
payments of £300,000 may occasionally be made. The promoters of the pools deduct
varying amounts from the stakes for commission and expenses.
The annual competition for the FA Cup is organised on a knock-out basis and the
Cup Final is one of the most important football matches of the year in England; it is
always played at Wembley Stadium, near London, which can accommodate some
100,000 spectators. The Scottish Cup Final is played at Hampden Park, Glasgow.
The international matches between England, Scotland, Wales and Ireland also excite
great interest, as do the matches between British teams and teams from European
and South American countries.
There are many more amateur association football players than there are pro¬
fessionals (the comparative figures are about 650,000 amateurs, including schoolboys
and members of the armed forces, to 7,000 or 8,000 professionals), but with one or
two notable exceptions their teams cannot compete on equal terms, since professional
teams are more systematically and intensively trained. Amateur teams compete against
each other for the Football Association Amateur Challenge Cup.
Rugby football, or ‘rugger’, is played under the auspices of the Rugby Union (a
controlling body with functions similar to those of the Football Association), which
was established in 1871. The rules of the game are completely different from those
that govern soccer, and there are 15 players, instead of 11, in a side. International
matches between England, Scotland, Wales, Ireland, and France are played regularly
at the leading rugby football grounds of each country, including Twickenham, London
—the headquarters of the Rugby Union. Other important rugger matches are: the
county championship competitions; the annual match between the universities of
Oxford and Cambridge; the Hospitals’ Cup final; and the Services Challenge Cup final.
Seven-a-side football (a variant of Rugby football) is also played by clubs and in
English and Scottish secondary schools.
Membership of the Rugby Union is strictly confined to amateur clubs, but in the
north of England there is a professional variant of the game played by teams of 13
instead of 15, according to the rules of the Rugby League. The Rugby League (insti¬
tuted in 1895) holds frequent international matches as well as regular inter-county
competitions. The match for its highest trophy—the Rugby League Challenge Cup—
is played at Wembley and is attended, on average, by some 75,000 spectators.
Cricket
Cricket is often called the English national game. The exact date of its origin is
not recorded, but it is known that the game was played by the boys of Guildford
SPORT
505
Grammar School during the sixteenth century, and by the beginning of the eighteenth
century it had gained greatly in popularity both in the villages of England and on the
larger country estates.
The game has been played more or less as it is played today since the adoption
of a generally accepted set of laws in 1744. About 1750 a cricket club was formed in
the little Hampshire village of Hambledon; within 20 years it had made an outstanding
name for itself and acquired a membership representative of patrons of cricket from
all over England. In 1787 the Marylebone Cricket Club (MCC), now the governing
body of cricket, was founded, with its headquarters in London on a site rented by a
Yorkshireman called Thomas Lord. In the year 1809-10 the MCC moved its head¬
quarters to a ground near Regent’s Park, keeping the name Lord's-, four years later
Lord's transferred to another ground, at St. John’s Wood, in the same neighbourhood,
where it has remained ever since.
Following the establishment of the MCC, the laws of cricket became stabilised;
other clubs that sprang up all over England during the nineteenth century recognised
its authority, and nowadays all cricket is played according to the ‘laws of cricket’
as laid down by the MCC in consultation with cricketing organisations in Britain and
the overseas Commonwealth.
In England cricket is played in schools and universities, and almost all towns and
villages have their cricket teams which play at least one match a week during the
season—roughly May to September. There are many thousands of cricket grounds
all over England—in the London area alone nearly 400 pitches are provided by the
county council besides many leased or owned by clubs.
Apart from the university match between Oxford and Cambridge and certain
representative games, such as Gentlemen versus Players, i.e. amateurs versus pro¬
fessionals, the greater part of first-class cricket is played in a county championship
between seventeen ‘first-class counties’. (The other counties have a ‘minor counties
championship’ of their own.) Among famous grounds besides Lord's, are the Oval,
Kennington, London, headquarters of the Surrey Cricket Club; Old Trafford, Man¬
chester; Headingley, Leeds; and Trent Bridge, Nottingham.
In the late nineteenth century more amateurs played cricket than economic con¬
ditions in the twentieth century allow. Nowadays, when first-class matches last three
days and each county plays between twenty and thirty matches in a season, most county
players are professionals, although there are still some amateurs who can afford the
time to play regularly. League cricket, which is a feature of the game in the north of
England, is played by teams mainly consisting of amateur Saturday afternoon players
with one or more professionals, many of whom are distinguished players from other
Commonwealth countries. The MCC is an entirely amateur body, although retired
professional cricketers of ‘the highest merit’ are elected to honorary membership.
In addition to county championships, matches known as ‘test matches’ are played
regularly between a number of Commonwealth countries. The first of these matches
was played at Melbourne, Australia, in 1877, between England and Australia. Present-
day test matches last 30 hours (spread over five or six days); they arouse great popular
interest and are widely reported in the press and on radio and television.
Hockey
Variants of hockey (as distinct from ice-hockey) have been played in Britain for at
least five centuries; a haphazard form was played in schools before football became
popular, and many hockey clubs were to be found in the London area during
the latter half of the nineteenth century. Modern hockey, however, dates from the
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
5°6
formation (in 1886) of the Hockey Association, which standardised the rules. Nowadays
there are several hundred hockey clubs affiliated to the Hockey Association and a
county championship was instituted in i957> b11* the game has never attracted the
same wide public interest as football and cricket, and there are no professional county
teams and no cup-ties. On the other hand, regular amateur international matches
(inaugurated in 1894) are played between England, Scotland, Ireland and Wales, with
overseas countries, e.g. France, the Netherlands, and Denmark, sometimes taking
part.
In Britain hockey is more commonly played by women than by men. The con¬
trolling bodies are: the All England Women’s Hockey Association (founded 1895) to
which are affiliated some 1,550 girls’ schools and about 950 women s clubs; and the
Scottish Women’s Hockey Association. The first international women’s hockey match
took place in 1896. Nowadays, one such match is always played at Wembley Stadium
and may be attended by as many as 50,000 spectators.
Lacrosse
Lacrosse, adapted from the game played by the Iroquois Indians of North America,
is played mainly by women—in girls’ schools, at lacrosse clubs, and at universities.
International matches are played, as well as regional matches, by women’s teams repre¬
senting the east, west, south, north and midlands of England, under the auspices of
the All England Ladies Lacrosse Association.
The men’s game, of which the controlling body is the English Lacrosse Union, is
played in seven universities, and by clubs and schools, mainly in the London and
Manchester areas. County matches are played and there is an annual fixture between
the North of England and the South.
Netball
Netball is a popular game for girls and women. The controlling body is the All
England Netball Association to which are affiliated the English county associations, the
netball clubs of the three Women’s Services and sections of the national youth
organisations for girls and women. Inter-county and home international matches are
played regularly and inter-Commonwealth tours are arranged.
Polo
Polo, of which the earliest records are Persian, was first played by the British in
India, and brought to England in 1869. The governing body of British polo is the
Hurlingham Polo Association to which all the Commonwealth polo associations are
affiliated.
Polo players are a very small section of the community, for the cost of the purchase
and upkeep of polo ponies is very high. However, many of the clubs now own trained
ponies which are hired out to members at moderate cost. There are about 500 players
handicapped by the Hurlingham Polo Association.
Public interest in polo has increased in recent years and large numbers of spectators
attend inter-club tournaments and matches between high-handicap teams composed
of players from several countries. The better known polo grounds are those at Cowdray
Park, Sussex; Windsor Great Park; Cirencester Park, Gloucestershire; Tarporley,
Cheshire; and Tidworth on Salisbury Plain.
Lawn Tennis
A form of tennis has been played out of doors from the earliest times; but modern
lawn tennis dates from about 1873, when it began to take its place with cricket as one
SPORT
5°7
of the British national summer games. In 1877 the words ‘and lawn tennis’ were added
to the title of the All England Croquet Club at Wimbledon, near London, and in the
same year the first championships were played; the Lawn Tennis Association, the
controlling body of the game in Britain, was founded in 1888. The governing body
of the game in the world is the International Lawn Tennis Federation, with head¬
quarters in London and Paris.
The number of people who play lawn tennis has greatly increased during the
present century, particularly since the game has spread to practically every country
in the world. In Britain the game is played in almost all girls’ schools and in very
many boys’ schools where the pupils are of secondary school age. It is also played on
private courts, in parks and recreation grounds and at several thousand tennis clubs.
The annual championships held at Wimbledon for two weeks at the end of June
and beginning of July are the main event of the lawn tennis season in Britain and,
in fact, in the world. These championships, in which men and women of many
nationalities compete, draw large crowds; there is accommodation for over 30,000
spectators in the grounds of the All England Club—14,000 can be accommodated
round the centre court where the finals are played. Other tournaments which attract
a good deal of attention are: the British Hardcourt Championships, the British Junior
Championships and the County Championships. There are also competitions for
boys’ and girls’ schools on a national basis, and matches for the Public Schools’
Cup. The most important international event is the Davis Cup (for men). Britain
and the United States of America also compete annually for the Wightman Cup (for
women).
Golf
Golf originated in Scotland, where for centuries it has borne the title of the Royal
and Ancient Game, but it did not become really well known in the other countries
of the United Kingdom until towards the end of the nineteenth century. Since then,
however, it has gained steadily in popularity and nowadays there are golf courses in
the vicinity of many towns and villages—some owned by local authorities, but the
majority owned by golf clubs. The headquarters of the Royal and Ancient Golf Club
is St. Andrews, Scotland.
The main event of the golfing year is the British Open Golf Championship, which
was first played in i860; other important matches include the Walker Cup (for amateurs)
and the Ryder Cup (for professionals), both played between Britain and America;
the Amateur Championship; and the Ladies Championship.
Bowls
The game of bowls has been played in Britain since the thirteenth century. Nowa¬
days the flat green game is regulated, as far as the English Bowling Association is
concerned, by the International Bowling Board (IBB), founded in 1905. The Bowling
Associations of Ireland, Scotland and Wales also come under and play to the laws as
laid down by the IBB, but there are other bowling associations in England—the English
Bowling Federation, the Crown Green Association and the English Women’s Bowling
Association—which are not under the IBB’s control.
During the summer bowls is played on bowling greens in the open; in winter it is
played on indoor greens, which are increasing in number. At one time regarded as a
pastime for the elderly, the game has gained immensely in popularity during recent
years; over 2,400 bowling clubs in 34 counties of England are affiliated to the English
Bowling Association alone, and international and inter-county matches are played.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
5°8
Athletics
Amateur athletics, which include running (track, road and cross-country), relay
racing, jumping, hurdling, throwing and race-walking, are governed by the Amateur
Athletic Association (AAA), which was founded in 1880 to encourage, promote and
control amateur athletics, to improve the management of amateur athletic meetings by
the establishment of uniform regulations, and to promote annual championship
matches. The association, whose membership increased rapidly from small beginnings,
is now organised from club to national level by honorary officers and managed by
representative members appointed by the Northern, Midland, Southern and Welsh
areas and by affiliated clubs and associations (amateur athletic clubs, schools and
youth organisations), of which there are hundreds throughout England and Wales.
The AAA administers a coaching scheme, with a constant expenditure of at least
£10,000 a year, under which five full-time national coaches, working mainly in
separate regions, lecture, demonstrate and coach in schools, youth clubs, evening
institutes, training colleges and universities and at special courses organised by the
national associations, by regional associations or by the Central Council of Physical
Recreation. Some of the work of the national coaches is directly concerned with
coaching young athletes but their main duties are to instruct men who wish to qualify
by examination as honorary coaches; some 2,000 qualified honorary coaches give
voluntary services in the counties and districts of England and Wales. Scotland and
Northern Ireland have their own amateur athletic associations, with similar functions;
there are also separate Women’s AAAs for each country.
International athletics and the selection of teams representing the United Kingdom
are dealt with by the British Amateur Athletic Board, which is composed of representa¬
tives of the three national associations for men and of the Women’s Council, and is
affiliated to the International Amateur Athletic Federation.
Track meetings of athletics are held throughout Britain from April to October.
The main events in England and Wales are: the AAA championships for men and
international matches held at the White City, London; area and county champion¬
ships; and the universities, Services, business houses and schools championship
meetings. Clubs usually compete in cross-country running from October to March,
and international, county and area cross-country championships are held.
Teams representing Great Britain and Northern Ireland compete in the Olympic
Games (held every four years), and separate teams representing England, Wales,
Scotland, and Northern Ireland compete in the Commonwealth Games, held at four-
yearly intervals between the Olympic Games.
Highland Games. The Highland games are traditional gatherings of local people
in the Highlands of Scotland, at which sports (including tossing the caber, putting
the weight, and throwing the hammer), and dancing and piping competitions take
place. Among the better known Highland games are the Northern Meeting at Inverness,
the Braemar Gathering on Deeside (traditionally attended by the royal family), the
Argyllshire Gathering at Oban, and the meeting at Aboyne. The Highland games
attract large numbers of spectators from all over the world.
Country Sports
The most popular country sports are hunting, shooting and fishing; these are
old-established sports with a long history, and they still play a considerable part in the
life of the countryside. The organisation which looks after their interests is the British
Field Sports Society.
SPORT
5°9
Hunting
In Britain hunting means primarily hunting the fox, on horse-back with a pack of
hounds especially bred for the purpose, but it also includes stag-hunting, which
preceded fox-hunting and is still pursued, mainly in Devon and Somerset; hunting
the hare, either on foot with beagles or with harriers when the followers are mounted;
and otter-hunting along the banks of rivers. Hunting depends, not on right but on
permit, landowners and farmers allowing followers of recognised hunts to cross their
property.
Fox-hunting originated some 200 years ago. Originally a sport mainly for the
landed gentry and local farmers, it has gradually widened its appeal, in spite of the
fact that it is an expensive pastime for those who ride to hounds. The sport is not
without its critics, but a large number of people, including many townsmen, take a
keen interest in it, and unmounted enthusiasts follow the hunt in cars, on bicycles or
on foot.
There are between 190 and 200 packs of hounds in England and Wales, 26 in
Ireland, and 10 in Scotland. The packs range in size from the large establishments
in the ‘shires’, i.e. the midlands of England (for instance, the Belvoir, the Cottesmore,
the Quorn, and the Fernie) where mounted followers may be two hundred or more, to
small kennels in the west and north, where hunting is often on foot.
The fox-hunting season proper starts in early November and lasts until April; it is
preceded by cub-hunting, i.e. the hunting of young foxes, when young hounds are
taught the science of hunting. At the end of the season, most hunts organise steeple¬
chases, known as point-to-points, which are patronised by large crowds.
Hunts are financed mainly by the subscriptions of their members and with the aid
of the farmers, whose support enables fox-hunting to continue to flourish; sometimes
however, the Master of Fox-hounds (MFH), who is in charge of the hunt, must bear
a proportion of the cost.
Shooting
Game shooting as an organised country sport may be said to date from the early
part of the nineteenth century; nowadays, game consists mainly of grouse, partridge,
pheasant and wildfowl (duck and geese) although in some areas it also includes snipe,
woodcock, wood pigeons and hares.
There is virtually no free shooting in any part of the United Kingdom. In the first
place, a gun licence or a game licence must be applied for and purchased annually
(the latest returns of gun licences issued in the United Kingdom give a total of over
290,000), and secondly, nearly all game birds are to be found on privately owned land,
shot over either by the owner and his friends or by syndicates which have leased the
shooting. However, in some parts of the more remote countryside, rough shooting
may be enjoyed in a less formal way. Much of the country’s wildfowling is controlled
by the Wildfowling Association of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, through its
numerous clubs.
Grouse, partridge, pheasant and certain other game birds are ‘preserved’; that
is to say, there is a ‘close season’ during which they are protected under the game
laws and allowed to breed in security, under the care of privately employed game-
keepers on numerous estates. The grouse, partridge and pheasant seasons open on
12th August, 1 st September and 1st October, severally, and last for between four
and five months. Grouse shooting takes place mostly in Scotland, northern England
and North Wales, where the main grouse moors are to be found; partridge and
pheasant shooting in nearly every county in England, Wales and Scotland, the former
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
5!°
mainly over farm land, and the latter in or near woodland; and wildfowling on the
marshes and fenlands of the coastal areas.
A Game Research Association was founded in i960 by a group of landowners,
farmers and others interested in game conservation to take over part of the work on
game research previously carried out by Imperial Chemical Industries, to collect
and collate information on a national scale and to make a detailed study of factors
controlling game population, including diseases to which game birds are subject, game
ecology and density, survival rates and movements of game in changing environments.
Deer stalking, which derives its name from the fact that, in order to get an effective
shot, a very cautious approach is needed (since red deer have a keen scent, are far¬
sighted, and take alarm at the slightest sound), is mainly a sport of the Highlands of
Scotland. The deer are preserved on privately owned tracts of land known as ‘deer
forests’, ranging in size from g,ooo to over 30,000 acres. The statutory closed seasons
(coming into force in 1962) are October to June, inclusive, for stags and February to
October, inclusive, for hinds.
Fishing
Fishing is the most popular of the country sports in that it is within the reach of
everyone in some form or another (from the small boy with his hook and line to the
experienced fly-fisherman), and that many more people fish in their leisure hours than
hunt or shoot. #
The outstanding forms of the sport in Britain are salmon and trout fishing. Trout
streams are to be found in most parts of the country, and in Scotland there are also
many hundreds of lochs which provide good sport. Salmon fishing may be enjoyed
on many rivers in England and North Wales, but the best salmon rivers are to be
found in Scotland and Northern Ireland. In England and Wales the most widely
practised form of fishing is for coarse fish (e.g. pike, perch, carp, roach, dace, tench,
chub and bream), and the National Federation of Anglers (NFA) has some 350,000
members. Match angling—competitive fishing for coarse fish by weight—is a feature
of the many angling clubs affiliated to the NFA, particularly in the midlands and north
of England; a national angling championship, composed of no teams of 12 anglers,
is organised annually by the NFA; and the NFA enters a team in the International
Angling Competition.
Fishing around the coasts is another popular pastime, while deep-sea fishing for
tuna and shark has gained many adherents since the end of the second world war.
Coastal and deep-sea fishing is free to all (except for salmon and sea trout fishing
in Scotland) but, as a rule, freshwater fishing has to be paid for and local inquiries
made about any permit or licence required. Most coarse fishing is let to angling clubs;
trout and salmon fishermen either rent a stretch of river, join a club, stay at an hotel
with its own fishing rights, or pay for the right to fish by the day, week or month.
The cost of salmon fishing is often high.
Indoor Games
Indoor games played in Britain include billiards, table tennis, and badminton, which
are enjoyed by large numbers of people, and for which facilities are provided in
social clubs of every kind, including youth clubs; and games such as real tennis (a
game which originated in thirteenth-century France), squash rackets, rackets fives,
which are less national games than games of the schools, universities and specialised
clubs. Annual championships are held in all these games, the controlling bodies of
which are: the Billiards Association and Control Council; the Badminton Association
SPORT
511
of England and the Scottish Badminton Union; the Tennis, Rackets and Fives
Association and the Squash Rackets Association. Basket-ball, an indoor variant of
netball which originated in the United States of America, is also played in Britain,
primarily by men. Matches in the game are included among the Olympic events. The
controlling body in Britain is the Amateur Basket Ball Association.
Aquatic Sports
Aquatic sports include rowing, sailing, swimming, canoeing, punting and water
ski-ing. The first three are the most commonly practised in Britain and are included
in the Olympic events and the Commonwealth Games.
Rowing
Rowing as a pastime is enjoyed by people from all sections of the community, and
as a sport it arouses considerable public interest. The two annual rowing events
which excite the greatest enthusiasm are the University Boat Race, which originated
in 1820 and has been rowed annually on the Thames in the early spring since 1836;
and Henley Regatta, founded in 1839, which takes place each July at Henley-on-
Thames in Oxfordshire. The University Boat Race, which provides one of the sights
of London, is between eight-oared crews from Oxford and Cambridge over a course
of some 4J miles between Putney and Mortlake; it is watched by many thousands of
rival supporters gathered on both sides of the river. Considerable interest is also
shown in the Head of the River Race from Mortlake to Putney, in March, in which
between 200 and 300 eights row in procession—the largest assembly of racing craft in
the world.
Crews from all over the world compete at Henley Regatta, where various kinds of
races are rowed over a straight course of one mile 550 yards; for instance, for the
Grand Challenge Cup, open to eight-oared crews from any nation, the Silver Goblets
for pair oars, the Diamond Sculls for single scullers, and the Ladies Challenge Plate
open to crews from schools and colleges in the United Kingdom. Many other riverside
resorts arrange regattas every summer.
The oldest annual event in the English racing calendar is Daggett's Coat and Badge,
founded in 1716. Originally for professional watermen and limited to six entrants, the
race is now open to amateurs (who must, however, still be apprentice watermen) and,
if necessary, may be rowed in heats. The course is from London Bridge to Chelsea.
The art of oarsmanship is taught in many schools, universities and rowing clubs,
including women’s rowing clubs, throughout Britain; and women as well as men
compete in the European rowing championships. The Amateur Rowing Association
is the governing body of the sport.
Sailing
Enthusiasts have always devoted much of their leisure to yachting on the inland
waters and round the coasts of Britain, but since the end of the second world war
the sport, and in particular small boat sailing, has greatly widened its appeal. Sail
numbers registered in the Royal Yachting Association’s small boat classes in June
1961 were: International Fourteen Foot, 766; National Eighteens, 248; Enterprise,
7,407; Firefly, 2,699; Merlin Rocket, 1,301; Redwing, 223; Swordfish, 207; Twelve
Foot, 1,919; and there is an even greater number of still smaller sailing boats not
included in the register.
Most British yacht racing is administered by the Royal Yachting Association,
subject to the rules of the International Yacht Racing Union, founded in 1907. The
5^
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
main event of the inshore yachting season is the annual regatta at Cowes in the Isle
of Wight, the headquarters of the Royal Yacht Squadron, founded in 1812. Other
events include the Round the Isle of Wight race and the races arranged during the
special yachting weeks (or fortnights) held at such sailing centres as Poole in Dorset,
Bembridge in the Isle of Wight, Lowestoft in Suffolk, Harwich and Burnham-on-
Crouch in Essex, Plymouth in Devon, Falmouth in Cornwall, and on the Scottish
river Clyde.
Off-shore, or ocean, racing is based on rating and measurement rules drawn up
by the Royal Ocean Racing Club, founded in 1925. Typical courses are: Cowes to
Jersey (Channel Islands), Plymouth to La Rochelle (Charente Maritime, France),
and Harwich to the Hook of Holland. A number of British yachtsmen also took part in
a single-handed race across the Atlantic which was held for the first time during i960.
The famous yacht race between Britain and America for the America’s Cup
(originally given by the Royal Yacht Squadron in 1851 and presented in 1857 to the
New York Yacht Club for competition by the owners of America, the winner of the
cup in 1851) is now held at increasingly long intervals, owing to the expense involved.
The cup has remained in America since the institution of the race, the last challenger
being the British yacht Sceptre, in 1958.
Swimming
Many children in Britain learn to swim at school, or during holidays at the seaside,
and swimming as a summer pastime is enjoyed by millions of people. The existence of
indoor swimming baths makes all-the-year swimming possible, and instruction and
coaching is provided in some places by qualified teachers who hold certificates for
elementary or advanced teaching and coaching awarded by the Amateur Swimming
Association (ASA). (The Scottish counterpart is the Scottish Amateur Swimming
Association.) The objects of the ASA are to promote the art of swimming and
encourage its teaching to schoolchildren; to stimulate public opinion in favour of
providing proper accommodation and facilities for learning to swim; to promote the
game of water polo and the art of diving; and to draw up, publish and enforce uniform
laws for the control and regulation of amateur swimming and water polo championships
and competitions.
Attempts to swim the Channel between various points on the coasts of France and
England—some of which are successful—are made by swimmers of many nationalities
every summer.
Racing
Racing is a term which, in Britain, is taken to mean first and foremost, horse-racing.
Other forms of racing include greyhound racing, coursing, pony-racing, trotting races,
and pigeon-flying.
Horse-racing
The history of the English turf proper began with the formation of the Jockey
Club in 1750, although horse-racing was known in Tudor times and even earlier.
The Jockey Club and the National Hunt Committee (founded in 1866) now exercise
control over all horse-racing in England and indirectly in many other countries, and
their rules are the basis of universal turf procedure.
There are two forms of racing: flat racing carried on from late March till November
under the authority of the Jockey Club; and steeple-chasing, conducted under the
rules of the National Hunt Committee.
SPORT
513
The classic flat races are: the Two Thousand Guineas for colts and fillies, run on
the Newmarket course, owned by the Jockey Club; the One Thousand Guineas for
fillies only, also run at Newmarket; the Derby for colts and fillies, run at Epsom; the
Oaks for fillies only, also run at Epsom; and the St. Leger for colts and fillies, run
at Doncaster. The Derby is the outstanding event in the racing calendar; it takes place
annually in early June and the scene on Epsom Downs on Derby Day is one of the most
colourful and exciting of the sporting year. The most fashionable race-meeting of the
flat racing season takes place on the course at Ascot in Berkshire. This meeting, which
is held in mid-June, is known as ‘Royal Ascot’, and is traditionally attended by the
Sovereign; it includes the races for the Gold Cup and the Royal Hunt Cup.
The best known steeple-chase is the Grand National, first run in 1839, and run
annually since then over the Aintree course near Liverpool. The race, which draws
immense crowds and arouses widespread interest (and some criticism) tests the skill,
stamina and courage of both horse and rider to the utmost. Most steeple-chase meetings
are held during the period September to May, one of the most important being the
National Hunt Festival Meeting at Cheltenham, in Gloucestershire, early in March.
In England and Wales there is racing on 66 racecourses (excluding point-to-point
courses), at which there are approximately 650 days’ racing annually; Scotland has
seven racecourses, where racing takes place on an average of 50 days in the year. There
are approximately 7,500 horses in training in Great Britain, at an average cost of 10 to
11 guineas a week each.
Horse racecourses must be licensed by the Jockey Club or the National Hunt
Committee. Facilities for both cash and credit betting are provided on the course by
bookmakers, who must have personal permits issued under the Betting and Gaming
Act, i960, and by totalisators operated by the Horserace Totalisator Board. Before
1 st May, 1961, off-the-course betting was lawful only on credit terms but the Betting
and Gaming Act has now legalised cash betting either in licensed off-the-course
betting offices maintained by bookmakers holding personal permits under the Act or,
through the post, to the course totalisators. The prohibition on betting by persons
under 18 years of age is continued in the i960 Act.
The object of the Betting Levy Act, 1961 (which comes into force fully in April 1962)
is ‘to provide for contributions for purposes connected with the advancement of
horse-racing from persons engaged by way of business in effective betting transactions
on horse races’. A Horserace Betting Levy Board has been set up, with power to
impose a levy both on bookmakers and the Horserace Totalisator Board. The latter is
empowered to deduct from money staked with the totalisator such percentage as it
may determine, and the practice is to deduct 15 per cent from the losing stakes in the
win, place and forecast pools, and 10 per cent of the double and treble pools; this
provides an average yield of approximately 11 per cent of the total annual turnover.
It will be for the Levy Board to distribute its revenue from bookmakers, together with
the contribution from the totalisators, for purposes conducive to the improvement of
horse-racing and horse breeding and for the advancement and encouragement of
veterinary science and education.
Greyhound Racing
The racing of greyhounds after a mechanical hare started in Britain in 1926, when
the first modern greyhound track was opened at Belle Vue, Manchester. There are
now some 200 licensed tracks in operation, nearly all of which are situated in or on the
outskirts of large towns. Racing usually continues throughout the year (although betting
is limited by the Betting and Lotteries Act, 1934, to 104 days in any year), and meetings
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
5H
(which usually consist of eight races) are generally held two or three times a week.
The licensing authorities for greyhound racing tracks are the county and county
borough councils. Some twenty million people a year visit the tracks.
The main authority of the sport is the National Greyhound Racing Club, founded
in 1928; its functions include drawing up the rules of greyhound racing and exercising
strict discipline over all aspects of the sport. The National Greyhound Racing Society
—an association of 65 of the leading tracks—accepts the rules of the National Grey¬
hound Racing Club. Most of the classic greyhound races, including the Derby at the
White City, the Laurels at Wimbledon, the St. Leger at Wembley, and the Cesare-
witch at West Ham, take place in the London area, although many other large centres
have their ‘big’ nights.
There is a considerable volume of betting at greyhound race-meetings, both with
bookmakers and on the totalisator. Under the 1934 Act, the occupier of any licensed
greyhound track may operate a totalisator on the 104 ‘appointed days’; 10 percent
of the stake money must be paid to the Government; up to 6 per cent may be deducted
for operational expenses before successful backers are paid. Under the Betting and
Gaming Act, i960, the ‘copyright’ in tote odds granted to the Racecourse Betting
Control Board in respect of horse-racing also applies to the occupiers of licensed
greyhound tracks.
Riding
Interest in the art of horsemanship continues to increase steadily, and many more
people have learned to enjoy riding as a pastime since the end of the second world
war than at any time since the advent of the motor car. There are some 1,200 riding
schools in Britain, many of a high standard, and about 50 new schools are opened each
year; membership of the British Horse Society has risen to about 10,500; some 150
riding clubs have been established since 1945; and the Pony Club (open to young
people up to the age of seventeen years) now has an overall membership of nearly
60,000 members. There are over 700 branches of the Pony Club throughout the
world, of which 200 are attached to hunts in Britain, and the remainder are overseas.
The British Horse Society, as the national equestrian federation of Great Britain,
is the authority on all matters relating to horses and ponies, including breeding,
training, riding, showjumping and dressage, and is responsible for preparing equestrian
teams for the Olympic Games and all international events. The Society is also the
parent body of the Pony Club and the riding clubs, and organises and provides tests,
lectures, demonstrations, courses and examinations to promote horsemanship and
horsemastership.
Horse trials of all kinds are held throughout Britain during the spring and summer.
The three-day trials held each year—in April at Badminton Park, Gloucestershire, and
in September at Burghley House, Lincolnshire—are among the outstanding equestrian
events of the year. These trials include dressage, cross-country riding, and show
jumping; some 25 one-day trials on similar lines are held annually.
Show Jumping
Show jumping competitions are held each year at over 1,000 shows. The main
events take place during the Royal International Horse Show (held at the White
City, London, under the auspices of the British Horse Society towards the end of
July)—the outstanding contests being the individual jumping championships for the
King George V Gold Cup and for the John Player Trophy (first presented in 1961).
Jumping competitions are also a feature of the Horse of the Year Show, which takes
SPORT 515
place in October at Wembley and is acknowledged to be one of the finest indoor horse
shows in the world.
In recent years show jumping has attracted vast audiences. Its popularity may be
gauged from the fact that the total membership of the British Show Jumping Associa¬
tion has risen to well over 7,000. The number of horses and ponies registered is
approximately 5,000 and over £100,000 is distributed annually in prize money.
The selection of British riders and horses taking part in international competitions
(whose successes have materially contributed to the increased popularity of show
jumping) is the responsibility of the executive committee of the association.
Boxing
Boxing as an English sport probably originated in Saxon times. Its modern form,
and the one that has been adopted in many overseas countries, dates from 1865 when
the Marquess of Queensberry drew up a set of rules which eliminated much of the
brutality that had hitherto characterised prize fighting, and made the basis of the sport
a trial of strength and skill.
Nowadays, many boys learn to box at school and in boys’ clubs, and there are various
amateur boxing competitions carried out according to the rules of the Amateur
Boxing Association (ABA), which controls all amateur boxing, including schoolboy
boxing, club and association boxing, and boxing in the three Services.
Professional boxing is covered by the British Boxing Board of Control, founded
in 1929. The board has strict medical regulations which provide for the examination
of boxers before each contest, and the appointment of inspectors to ensure that the
regulations are observed and that all contests are ‘vetted’ to safeguard against over¬
matching and exploitation.
Championships at fixed weights have been the rule in boxing contests since the
presentation of the Championship Challenge Belts by the late Lord Lonsdale in 1909.
Competitions organised by the ABA are decided at ten weights: flyweight, bantam¬
weight, featherweight, lightweight, light welterweight, welterweight, light middle¬
weight, middleweight, light heavyweight and heavyweight. In professional boxing
there are no light welterweight or light middleweight classes.
Wrestling and Judo
Wrestling is one of the oldest sports in the world. Nowadays the style most com¬
monly used in Britain is the ‘free’ style, which evolved from the Catch-as-Catch-Can
or Lancashire style, but Cumberland and Westmorland wrestling is still practised
in the north of England and in Scotland, and Cornish style wrestling (in which the
contestants wear rough canvas jackets by which all the holds must be taken) takes
place in Cornwall. Wrestling in the free and Graeco-Roman styles are used at the
Olympic Games; in the Commonwealth Games only free style is wrestled.
Amateur wrestling in Britain is governed by the British Amateur Wrestling Associa¬
tion, which is affiliated to the International Amateur Wrestling Federation, under the
rules of which all wrestling is conducted. Professional wrestling is usually in the ‘all-in’
or ‘free’ style, which is not the same as the free style used in amateur wrestling. Judo,
a Japanese form of wrestling, has a large following, and is governed by the British Judo
Association which has coaching schemes assisted by the Ministry of Education.
Mountaineering
Mountaineering in Britain consists mainly of fell (or hill) walking, rock climbing,
and, in winter when conditions are suitable, snow and ice climbing on the higher hills
of Scotland, northern England and North Wales. Rock climbing is practised on the
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
5l6
crags of Snowdonia in North Wales, in the Highlands of Scotland, Skye, the English
Lake District, and Derbyshire, as well as on many smaller outcrops. Climbs are
graded from ‘Easy’ to ‘Exceptionally Severe’—the technical difficulties of the higher
grades comparing with any that occur in other parts of the world. The popularity of
mountaineering has greatly increased since the end of the second world war, and
a very large number of clubs (ranging from purely local organisations to large bodies
such as the Climbers’ Club, the Scottish Mountaineering Club, and the Fell and
Rock Climbing Club) exist throughout the country. The Alpine Club, founded in
London in 1857, is the oldest mountaineering club in the world; the representative
body of the sport is the British Mountaineering Council; the Mountaineering Associa¬
tion organises courses of instruction in climbing both in Britain and the Alps.
British mountaineers have taken a leading part in exploring most of the great ranges
of the world and in climbing their peaks, e.g. the first ascent of the Matterhorn in
1865, of Everest in 1953, and of Kangchenjunga in 1955.
Motor Racing
Motor racing is one of the most popular spectator sports in Britain; more racing
and sports cars have been built in Britain than in any other country; and British
drivers (including women drivers) have an international reputation second to none.
British cars and British drivers take part in the international rallies and world
classic races which are the main features of the sport. They include the British classic
races—the British Grand Prix (held at Aintree), and the Tourist Trophy for sports cars
(first held in 1905 in the Isle of Man, later at Dundrod in Northern Ireland, and
now at Goodwood, Sussex). There are also several British national race meetings and
British national rallies, as well as several thousand day and night rallies and trials,
endurance tests, hill climbs and other events, arranged by various driving clubs, of
which there are over 500 in Great Britain.
The best known motor racing circuits (in addition to that at Goodwood) are those
at Silverstone, Northamptonshire; Crystal Palace, London; Brands Hatch, Kent,
Snetterton, Norfolk; Mallory Park, Leicestershire; Oulton Park, Cheshire; Aintree,
near Liverpool; and Charterhall, Berwickshire, in Scotland. The controlling body of
motor racing in Britain is the Royal Automobile Club (RAC), founded in 1897? the
RAC is represented on the Federation Internationale de I’Automobile, which draws
up the regulations for international motor racing.
In addition to motor car racing, there are motor cycle races—the most important
contest of the year is for the Isle of Man Tourist Trophy—and motor cycle speedway
racing, introduced into Britain in 1928, and governed by the Speedway Control
Board.
Cycling
The internationally recognised body for cycle racing in the United Kingdom is
the British Cycling Federation. It controls track racing and massed start racing in
Britain, and is concerned with the cycling events in the Olympic and Commonwealth
Games’and the annual world championship. Time trials are organised by the Road
Time Trials Council.
Touring by bicycle is also a popular pastime, and both the British Cycling Federation
and the Cyclists’ Touring Club (CTC) cater for this. The CTC is the oldest touring
club in the world and has a membership of some 40,000. Its representatives in all parts
of the United Kingdom give advice and practical help to touring cyclists; its fifty
district associations arrange holiday and week-end tours, and competitions, rallies and
SPORT
517
rides of all kinds; and its travel department gives CTC members every facility, both
at home and abroad, from the provision of itineraries to the supplying of tickets, maps
and other essential requirements.
Rifle Shooting
Full-bore (•303) rifle shooting is organised by the National Rifle Association,
founded in i860. The Imperial Meeting is held annually at Bisley Camp, Surrey, and
is open to subjects of the Queen, and for certain competitions to all-comers. The
meeting extends over 17 days: the first week consists of team and individual com¬
petitions for members of the armed forces, and there are three days for schools only.
The premier award of the meeting is the Queen’s Prize, which attracts about 1,250
entries.
Small-bore (-22) rifle shooting—carried out either on indoor ranges of 15 to 25
yards in length or on open ranges up to 200 yards—is also widely practised in Britain.
Some 4,000 clubs throughout the country are affiliated to county rifle associations and
the National Small-Bore Rifle Association (NSRA), which arranges inter-club and
inter-county competitions of various kinds for teams and individuals. The NSRA
also organises a National Bisley Meeting (usually attended by about 1,500 competitors),
a Scottish meeting, and a pistol shooting competition at Bisley. International small¬
bore rifle matches are fired against teams from overseas countries, and British teams
are entered for the world championships and the competitions in the Olympic Games.
APPENDIX
NOTES FOR VISITORS TO THE UNITED KINGDOM
Currency
The unit of currency is the pound sterling (£), which is divided into 20 shillings (s.).
The shilling is divided into 12 pennies or pence (d.)- Prices are often quoted in guineas,
the guinea (an old coin no longer in circulation) being Is.
Coins in common use are: halfpenny, penny, threepenny piece, sixpence, shilling,
two shilling piece (florin) and half-crown (2s. 6d.). Silver and cupro-nickel coins (3d.,
6d., Is., 2s., 2s. 6d., 5s.) are legal tender for payments up to £2; nickel-brass threepenny
pieces up to 2s.; and bronze (|d. and Id.) up to 12d.
Bank of England notes are issued in denominations of 10s., £1 and £5. Notes of £1
and 10s. are legal tender in the United Kingdom foi any amount; notes of £5 are legal
tender in England and Wales only.
Notes are issued by Scottish banks in denominations of £\, £5, £10, £20, £50 and
£100; though not legal tender, these notes are generally accepted in Scotland and in
some other parts of the United Kingdom. Northern Ireland banks issue notes with
denominations of £1, £5, £10, £50 and £100.
Exchange Facilities and Control
Persons coming to the United Kingdom may bring in notes in any currency, travellers’
cheques, letters of credit, etc., without limit; and although visitors leaving the United
Kingdom may normally only take with them sterling notes to the value of £50, they
can make arrangements for up to £100 to be changed into travellers’ cheques available in
their own country. Currency can be exchanged at banks and there are bureaux de change
at all the main ports and at London and Prestwick airports, the main London air terminals
and Victoria Station, London.
Regulations relating to exchange control in the United Kingdom are somewhat
complex and are subject to modification from time to time. Accordingly, any person who
is going to live in the United Kingdom or who desires information affecting his own
particular circumstances is advised to consult his own or a United Kingdom bank;
banks in Britain are experienced in all aspects of exchange control.
In general, persons visiting the country for a limited period are regarded as non¬
resident; any sterling account which they open with a United Kingdom bank will be
designated an External Account and funds in it may be used without formality to make
payments anywhere in the world. Persons intending to reside permanently in the United
Kingdom are subject to the provisions of the Exchange Control Act, 1947, and will
require permission to make payments outside the Scheduled Territories.
Income Tax
The question of when a visitor to the United Kingdom who is not domiciled there is
chargeable for income tax as a ‘resident’ is complicated. The main qualifications are:
1. A visitor is resident in the United Kingdom for any income tax year (beginning
6th April) in which he is in the United Kingdom for a period or periods equal, in the
whole, to six months.
2. Even if a visitor does not stay six months in any one year he is regarded as being
resident if he visits the United Kingdom regularly for substantial periods of time.
3. If a person maintains a place of abode in the United Kingdom available for his use,
he is regarded as resident for any year in which he pays a visit, of whatever length.
Double Taxation Agreements: A visitor who is regarded for tax purposes as resident
in the United Kingdom, and who is liable to United Kingdom tax on income arising in
518
APPENDIX 519
another country and taxed there, may be entitled to a reduction of liability to United
Kingdom income tax.
Information on specific questions relating to income tax may be obtained from The
Secretary, The Board of Inland Revenue, Somerset House, London, W.C.2 (or for
residents in Great Britain, from local offices).
Travel and Tourist Information
Information about travel to Britain can be obtained in the major cities of the world
from travel agents, airline, shipping line and railway offices, and British Government
offices abroad, or directly from the headquarters of the British Travel and Holidays
Association (BTHA), 64 St. James’s Street, London, S.W.l (Telephone: Mayfair 9191).
The Association has overseas offices in Argentina (Buenos Aires), Australia (Sydney),
Canada (Toronto and Vancouver), France (Paris), Germany (Frankfurt-am-Main), the
Netherlands (Amsterdam), South Africa (Johannesburg and Cape Town), Sweden
(Stockholm) and the United States (Chicago, Los Angeles and New York); and represen¬
tatives in Brazil (Sao Paulo) and New Zealand (Auckland). Information available from
the Association includes details of places of interest, lists of exhibitions, fairs, festivals,
concerts and special events of interest to overseas visitors to Britain, with hours of open¬
ing, etc.; and advice on motoring and touring itineraries. The Association publishes an
annual guide, Hotels and Restaurants in Britain, listing accommodation, services and
charges, and booklets giving particulars of youth hostels, holiday camps, and camping
and caravan sites.
For information about the principal events of the day in London, visitors may use the
Teletourist Service (operated by the General Post Office in conjunction with the BTHA
and the BBC). The information can be obtained in four languages by dialling the follow¬
ing telephone numbers: ASK 9211 (English), ASK9311 (French), ASK 9411 (German),
and ASK 9511 (Spanish). If using a call box, the caller should dial 100 first and then
ask the operator for the number. The weather forecast for the London area is also given
in the French, German, and Spanish services; in English it can be obtained by calling
WEA 2211.
Demand for hotel space in London is heavy, especially in the summer; the London
Hotels Information Service, 88 Brook Street, London, W.l (Mayfair 5414), gives
information free of charge as to where accommodation is available.
Additional information on travel in Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland is obtainable
from: the Welsh Tourist and Holidays Board, Terminal Buildings, Wood Street,
Cardiff; the Scottish Tourist Board, 2 Rutland Place, West End, Edinburgh, 1; the
Northern Ireland Tourist Board, 10 Royal Avenue, Belfast, and 13 Lower Regent
Street, London, S.W.l.
Passports, Visas, Registration
As a general rule travellers entering the United Kingdom must have a valid passport.
Foreign nationals must obtain leave to land in the United Kingdom from an immigration
officer at the point of entry and must also have a visa issued by British Consular
authorities abroad, but visas are not required for citizens of the following countries:
Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, German Federal Republic, Greece,
Iceland, Italy, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Monaco, Morocco, Netherlands, Norway,
Portugal, San Marino, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, the United States of
America, and all countries in Central and South America. Citizens of the Republic of
Ireland do not require either passport or visa.
Nationals of the following countries who wish to visit the United Kingdom for social
or holiday visits of up to three months may use instead of a passport their national
identity card (in the Netherlands a ‘toeristenkaart’, obtainable from town halls) in con¬
junction with a special Visitor’s Card (obtainable from travel agents in the tourist’s
own country): Belgium, France, Germany (Federal Republic and West Berlin), Liechten¬
stein, Luxembourg, Monaco, Netherlands, and Switzerland. A passport must, however.
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
520
still be used where the purpose of the visit is other than touristic, or where a stay of
longer than three months is intended.
Foreign visitors who are over sixteen years of age must register with the police three
months after their arrival.
Customs Duties and Purchase Tax
The personal baggage of persons entering the United Kingdom is subject to Customs
examination. Many articles are liable to Customs Duty and a number to purchase tax.
Failure to make a complete declaration can involve heavy penalties; but, although there
is no legal entitlement to them, certain concessions are given to travellers who properly
declare their belongings.
Used personal effects, including tools of trade and articles of professional use, which
have been in the ownership and use of a traveller for a considerable period and are not
intended for other persons or for sale, may be admitted free of duty and purchase tax,
as may also used furniture and domestic articles belonging to persons transferring
residence to the United Kingdom. Small quantities of dutiable goods, including tobacco,
wine and spirits, and perfume, carried by travellers for their personal use are allowed
to pass free of duty within fixed limits.
Inquiries on importing personal and household effects should be addressed to the
Secretary, H.M. Customs and Excise, King’s Beam House, London, E.C.3.
There are purchase tax concessions for overseas visitors shopping in Britain. Many
of the principal stores are able to send goods to an address abroad free of purchase tax;
and under the Personal Exports scheme, if the tax-free value of goods bought at one time
is £5 or more, a visitor may have them delivered free of tax to the seaport or airport by
which he is leaving the country.
Import of Domestic Animals and Birds
All cats and dogs brought into the United Kingdom have to undergo six months’
quarantine; and the landing of the animals must be authorised by a licence issued by
the appropriate Agricultural Department for England and Wales, Scotland or Northern
Ireland (see Chapter XI). The department will provide a list of approved carrying agents
and quarantine kennels. An annual licence (obtainable at any post office) is needed for a
household dog aged 6 months or more.
The import of birds of the parrot family, if they are personal pets, is allowed under
licence, subject to certain conditions, by the Agricultural Departments. Imports of live
poultry are permitted only from certain countries.
Motor Vehicles and Driving Licences
Regulations concerning the temporary import of cars, motor cycles, etc., by visitors to
Britain are best obtained from the national motoring organisations in the visitor’s country
of residence, which will normally issue a Customs 1 carnetjtriptyque’. (For an experi¬
mental period of two years from August 1961 a simple form giving brief identification
details will replace the carnet/triptyque, except in Northern Ireland.) A private motor
vehicle may be temporarily imported free of road taxation; after 90 days a motor licence
is necessary. Third party insurance is compulsory.
A visitor holding a current International Driving Permit or a current domestic driving
licence for his own country is entitled to drive without obtaining a British driving licence
during the currency of his own permit or licence, subject to a maximum of 12 months.
After that he must take a driving test to secure a British licence (see p. 382), which
costs 15s. and is valid for three years.
The rule of the road is to keep LEFT. Road signs are illustrated and explained in
The Highway Code (published by H.M. Stationery Office).
Social Security Benefits
Eligibility for the main social security benefits is dependent on {a) sufficient National
Insurance contributions having been paid under the United Kingdom scheme, or
APPENDIX
521
(b) the existence ot a reciprocal agreement between the United Kingdom and the previous
country of residence of the claimant (see p. 140). Information on specific points may be
obtained from the Ministry of Pensions and National Insurance, 10 John Adam Street,
London, W.C.2.
To qualify for family allowances, a residence qualification must be fulfilled, varying in
length according to the nationality and previous country of residence of the applicant.
Health Services
The services provided under the National Health Service are available to everyone in
Great Britain without regard to residence, nationality or insurance qualification.
Immigration authorities have been instructed, however, to refuse admission to the
country to any person coming to Britain solely for the purpose of securing free treatment
under the Health Service.
Employment Permits
Persons from countries other than members of the British Commonwealth and the
Irish Republic are admitted to the United Kingdom to take up employment with a
particular employer only if they are in possession of a permit issued by the Ministry of
Labour (see p. 458).
Visitors of foreign nationality wishing to set up in any business or profession in
Britain must ask for permission from the Under-Secretary of State, Home Office, Aliens
Department, Princeton House, 271 High Holborn, London, W.C.l.
BRITISH WEIGHTS AND MEASURES AND THEIR
METRIC EQUIVALENTS
Measures of Length
12 inches
3 feet
1,760 yards
1 inch
— 1 foot
= 1 yard
= 1 mile
= 2’54 centimetres
= 30-48 centimetres
= 0-914 metre
= 1 -609 kilometres
144 square inches
. 9 square feet
4,840 square yards
640 acres
Measures of Area
1 square inch
= 1 square foot
= 1 square yard
— 1 acre
= 1 square mile
= 6-451 square centimetres
= 929-03 square centimetres
= 0-836 square metre
= 0-405 hectare
= 2-59 square kilometres
4 gills
2 pints
4 quarts
1 gill =
Measures of Capacity
0-142 litre 2 gallons = 1 peck
= 1 pint — 0-568 litre
1 quart =
1 gallon =
1 -136 litres
4-546 litres
4 pecks — 1 bushel
8 bushels = 1 quarter
— 9-092 litres
= 36-37 litres
= 2-909 hectolitres
16 oz.
14 lb.
28 lb.
4 quarters (112 lb.)
20 cwt. (2,240 lb.)
2,000 lb.
Measures of Weight (Avoirdupois)
1 ounce (oz.) — 28-350 grams
= 1 pound (lb.) = 0-454 kilogram
= 1 stone (st.) = 6-35 kilograms
= 1 quarter (qtr.) =12-7 kilograms
= 1 hundredweight (cwt.) =50-8 kilograms
= 1 long ton = 1-016 metric tons
— 1 short ton — 0-907 metric ton
522
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
DOUBLE CONVERSION TABLES FOR WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
(Note: the central figures represent either of the two columns beside them, as the case
may be—e.g., 1 centimetre = 0394 inch, and 1 inch = 2-540 centimetres.)
Centi¬
metres
2-540
5-080
7-620
10-160
12-700
15-240
17-780
20-320
22-860
25-400
0-454
0-907
361
814
268
722
175
629
082
536
Inches
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0-394
0-787
181
575
969
•362
•756
150
•543
•937
Kilo¬
grams
Av.
Pounds
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
2-205
4-409
6-614
8-818
11-023
13-228
15-432
17-637
19-842
22-046
Metres
Yards
0-914
829
743
658
572
486
401
315
8- 230
9- 144
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1- 094
2- 187
■281
■374
•468
■562
•655
8- 749
9- 843
10-936
Litres
Pints
0-568
1-136
1- 705
2- 273
841
409
978
546
114
682
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1-760
3-520
5-279
7- 039
8- 799
10-559
12-319
14- 078
15- 838
17-598
Kilo¬
metres
Miles
1-609
3- 219
4- 828
6-437
8- 047
9- 656
11-266
12-875
14-484
16-094
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0-621
1-243
1- 864
2- 485
3- 107
3- 728
4- 350
4- 971
5- 592
6- 214
Litres
Gallons
4-546
9-092
13-638
18-184
22-730
27-276
31-822
36-368
40-914
45-460
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0-220
0-440
0-660
0-880
1-100
1-320
1-540
1-760
1- 980
2- 200
Hec¬
tares
Acres
0-404
0-809
1-214
1- 619
2- 023
2-428
2- 833
3- 237
3- 642
4- 047
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
2-471
4-942
7-413
9-884
12-355
14-826
17-298
19-769
22-240
24-711
Hecto¬
litres
per
Hectare
English
Bushels
per
Acre
0-898
1- 796
2- 695
3- 593
4- 491
5- 389
6- 287
7- 186
8- 084
8-982
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1- 113
2- 226
3- 340
4- 453
5- 566
6- 679
7- 793
8- 906
10- 019
11- 132
THERMOMETRICAL TABLE
Water boils
Water freezes
Blood heat
To convert:
°Fahrenheit into °Centigrade: subtract 32, then multiply by 5/9; °Centigrade into
°Fahrenheit: multiply by 9/5, then add 32; °Fahrenheit into °Reaumur: subtract 32,
then multiply by 4/9.
Fahrenheit Centigrade Reaumur
212° 100° 80°
32° 0° 0°
98-4° 36-9° 29-5°
BIBLIOGRAPHY
This bibliography is in no sense comprehensive: it is only intended to be a guide to further
reading on the subjects covered in this handbook.
Readers in the United Kingdom are asked to note that the Central Office of Information
reference documents marked with an asterisk and listed as free, are only available free of
charge from United Kingdom Information Offices overseas; in the United Kingdom they
may be obtained, on payment of a small charge, from the Central Office of Information,
Reference Division Distribution Unit, Hercules Road, Westminster Bridge Road,
London, S.E.l.
In the United States, equivalent free material can be supplied by British Information
Services, 45 Rockefeller Plaza, New York 20, N. Y.
Certain reference pamphlets produced by the Central Office of Inf or mation can be purchased
from Her Majesty's Stationery Office and its agents overseas. These pamphlets are listed
here with their respective prices (postage extra, as on all H.M.S.O. publications, if ordered
direct).
Acts of Parliament referred to in the text can be obtained at varying prices from H.M.
Stationery Office and its agents overseas.
I. THE LAND AND THE PEOPLE
Physical Background
Bailey, Sir Edward. Geological Survey of Great Britain
Thomas Murby
Hoskins, W. G. The Making of the English Landscape
Hodder & Stoughton
Manley, G. Climate and the British Scene Collins
Matthews, L. H. British Mammals Collins
Miller, Terence. Geology and Scenery in Britain Batsford
Stamp, L. Dudley. The Face of Britain. 3rd rev. edn
For the British Council Longmans
 The Land of Britain: Its Use and Misuse Longmans
 Man and the Land Collins
 and Beaver, S. H. The British Isles: a Geographic and
Economic Survey. 4th rev. edn Longmans
Steers, J. A. The Coast of England and Wales in Pictures
Cambridge University Press
 The Sea Coast Collins
Tansley, Sir Arthur. The British Islands and their Vegetation.
2 vols. and edn Cambridge University Press
Witherby, H. F. and others. Handbook of British Birds. 5 vols.
rev. edn Witherby
British Regional Geology Handbooks HMSO
Weather Report of the Meteorological Office Monthly HMSO
Demographic Background
Bowen, Ian. Population Cambridge University Press/Nisbet
Carr-Saunders, A. M., Jones, D. Caradog, and Moser, C. A.
A Survey of Social Conditions in England and Wales
Oxford University Press
1952
1955
1952
1952
1953
1957
1950
1955
1954
i960
1953
1950
1958
1946
to
1954
s. d.
22 6
25 °
25 o
25 o
18 o
2 6
60 o
25 °
46 6
30 o
25 o
84 o
240 o
4 °
to
6 o
2 3
1954 10 6
1958 25 o
523
524
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Cauter, T. and Downham, J. S. The Communication of Ideas:
A Study of Contemporary Influences in Urban Life
For The Reader's Digest, Chatto & Windus
Freeman, T. W. Conurbations of Great Britain
Manchester University Press
Political and Economic Planning. Britain and Commonwealth
Migration PEP
 Social Mobility in Britain, edited by D. V. Glass
Routledge
Scott, J. D. Life in Britain Eyre & Spottiszvoode
Young, Michael and Willmott, Peter. Family and Kinship in
East London Routledge
Annual Reports
Registrar General, Northern Ireland For 1959 Belfast, HMSO
Registrar General, Scotland For 1959 HMSO
Registrar General’s Statistical Review of England and Wales
HMSO
HMSO
HMSO
1801-1931 (Guides to Official
HMSO
HMSO
Part I. Medical: Tables 1959
Part II. Civil: Tables 1959
Part III. Commentary 1958
Census Reports of Great Britain
Sources No. 2)
Census 1961. England and Wales Preliminary Report
Census 1951. England and Wales
General Report HMSO
General Tables HMSO
Report on Usual Residence and Workplace HMSO
Report on Greater London and Five other Conurbations HMSO
Census 1951. Great Britain. One per cent Sample Tables
Part I. Ages and Marital Conditions, Occupations, Industries,
Housing of Private Households HMSO
Part II. Characteristics and Composition of Private Households,
Non-Private Households, Education, Birthplace and
Nationality, Fertility, Welsh and Gaelic Languages,
Conurbation Supplement HMSO
Census of Northern Ireland 1951. Final Report Belfast, HMSO
Census 1961. Scotland Preliminary Report HMSO
Census of Scotland 1951.
Vol. I. City and County Reports1
Part 1. City of Edinburgh HMSO
Part 2. City of Glasgow HMSO
Vol. II. Population of Towns and Larger Villages (excluding
Burghs) and of Urban and Rural Areas HMSO
Vol. III. Population, Age, Sex and Conjugal Condition, Birth¬
place and Nationality, Gaelic-Speaking Population and Housing
HMSO
Vol. IV. Occupations and Industries HMSO
Census of Wales (including Monmouthshire) 1951. Report on
Welsh-Speaking Population HMSO
External Migration: A Study of the available Statistics 1815-1950,
by N. H. Carrier and J. R. Jeffery HMSO
Internal Migration: Some Aspects of Population Movement within
England and Wales, by Mary Newton and J. R. Jeffery HMSO
1954
1959
1957
1954
1956
1957
1960
1960
1961
1961
1960
1951
1961
1958
1957
1957
1957
1952
1952
1955
1961
1952
1952
1952
1955
1957
1955
1953
i95i
s. d.
25 °
37 6
2 6
36 o
25 o
25 o
6 o
25 o
20 O
ii 6
13 o
3 6
7 6
13 o
52 6
65 o
105 o
17 6
40 o
15 °
5 °
7 6
10 o
32 6
120 o
7 6
8 6
Series of reports comprising statistics of predominantly local interest.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Matters of Life and Death [prepared by the General Register Office\.
4th edn HMSO
Ulster Belfast, HMSO
Royal Commission on Population. Report Cmd 7695 HMSO
Residence in the United Kingdom: Notes for the Guidance of
Persons from Overseas Reference Paper R.4630 COI
Women in Britain Reference Paper R.4497 COI
II. GOVERNMENT
General Survey
Campion, Lord, and others. British Government since 1918
Allen & Unwin
Jennings, Sir Ivor. The British Constitution. 4th edn
Cambridge University Press
 The Law and the Constitution. 5th edn
University of London Press
 The Queen’s Government Penguin Books
Keeton, George W., General Editor. British Commonwealth: the
Development of its Laws and Constitutions, Vol. I
Part 1. England and Wales, Northern Ireland and the Isle of
Man, by George W. Keeton, Dennis Lloyd and others
Stevens
Part 2. Scotland and the Channel Islands, by T. B. Smith and
L. A. Sheridan Stevens
Keir, Sir D. Lindsay. The Constitutional History of Modern
Britain since 1485. 6th edn Black
Le May, G. British Government 1914-1953: Select Documents
Methuen
Marshall, Geoffrey and Moodie, Graeme C. Some Problems
of the Constitution Hutchinson
Morrison, Herbert [now Lord]. Government and Parliament: A
Survey from the Inside, rev. edn Oxford University Press
Wade, E. C. S. and Phillips, G. G. Constitutional Law. 6th edn
Longmans
Report of the Committee on the Machinery of Government [Haldane
Committee]. Cd 9230 HMSO
The Monarchy
Laird, Dorothy. How the Queen Reigns Hodder & Stoughton
Morrah, Dermot. The Work of the Queen Kimber
Tanner, Lawrence E. The History of the Coronation Pitkin
Wheeler-Bennett, John W. King George VI: His Life and Reign
Macmillan
Queen and People, by Dermot Morrah For COI, HMSO
British Constitutional Monarchy, by Sir Ernest Barker, rev. edn
COI
The Monarchy in the United Kingdom.
Reference Pamphlet RE.P.4526 COI
Parliament
Abraham, L. A. and Hawtrey, S. C. A Parliamentary Dictionary
Butterworth
Boardman, Harry. The Glory of Parliament Allen & Unwin
525
s. d.
1959 1 6
1960 8 3
1949 9 o
i960 free*
1960 free*
1950 16 o
1961 21 o
1959 18 o
1954 3 6
1955 63 o
1955 63 o
1960 30 o
1954 25 °
1959 21 o
1959 30 o
1960 42 o
1918 2 3
1959 25 O
1959 21 O
1952 17 6
1958 60 o
1959 2 O
1958 free*
1960 free*
1956 21 o
i960 21 o
526
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
S. d.
Bromhead, P. A. The House of Lords and Contemporary Politics
1911-1957 Routledge
 Private Members’ Bills in the British Parliament Routledge
Bulmer-Thomas, Ivor. The Party System in Great Britain
Phoenix House
Butler, D. E. The Electoral System in Britain 1918-51
Oxford University Press
 and Rose. R. The British General Election of 1959 Macmillan
Campion, Lord. An Introduction to the Procedure of the House of
Commons, 3rd edn Macmillan
 and others. Parliament: A Survey Allen & Unwin
 Consultant Editor; Fellowes, Sir Edward and Cocks,
T. G. B., Editors. Sir Thomas Erskine May’s Treatise on the Law,
Privileges, Proceedings and Usage of Parliament Butterworth
Gordon, Strathearn. Our Parliament. 5th edn Hansard Society
Hansard Society. The British Party System. 2nd edn
Hansard Society
 The Future of the House of Lords Hansard Society
  Lords and Commons: How Parliament Began and How it
Works. 2nd edn Hansard Society
 Parliamentary Reform 1933-1960 Cassell
Jennings, Sir Ivor. Parliament. 2nd edn Cambridge University Press
 Party Politics Vol. I. Appeal to the People
Cambridge University Press
Vol. II. The Growth of Parties
Cambridge University Press
Mackenzie, K. R. The English Parliament, rev. edn Penguin Books
McKenzie, R. T. British Political Parties: The Distribution of
Power within the Conservative and Labour Parties Heinemann
Ross, J. F. S. Elections and Electors Eyre & Spottiswoode
Schofield, A. N. Parliamentary Elections. 3rd edn Shaw
Taylor, Eric. The House of Commons at Work. 3rd edn
Penguin Books
‘The Times’. The House of Commons 1959 The Times
Wilding, Norman and Laundy, Philip. An Encyclopaedia of
Parliament, rev. edn Cassell
Report from the Select Committee on Procedure HMSO
The British Parliament
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.4949 HMSO
The Growth of Parliamentary Government in Britain
Reference Pamphlet RE.P.4934 COI
The Organisation of Political Parties in Britain
Reference Paper R.4769 COI
Parliamentary Elections in Britain Reference Paper R.4767 COI
1958
1956
1953
1953
i960
1958
1952
1957
1958
1952
1954
1954
1961
1958
1960
1961
1959
1955
1955
1959
1958
1959
1961
1959
1961
1961
1960
i960
30
25
25
25
30
24
27
i°5
18
2
25
45
3
3
21
63
3
10 6
10 o
60 o
45 o
30 o
42 o
84 o
2 o
free*
free*
free*
The Privy Council, Her Majesty’s Government, Government Departments
Bridges, Sir Edward [now Lord]. Treasury Control Athlone Press 1950 2
Chester, D. N., Editor, anJ Willson, F. M. G. The Organisation of
British Central Government, 1914-1956 Allen & Unwin 1957 30
Jennings, Sir Ivor. Cabinet Government. 3rd edn
Cambridge University Press 1959 60
Keith, A. Berriedale. The British Cabinet System. 2nd edn rev. by
N. H. Gibbs Stevens 1952 40
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Lee, Sir Frank. Home and Overseas Responsibilities of the Board
of Trade (Stamp Memorial Lecture 1958) Athlone Press iQ59
Mackenzie, W. J. M. and Grove, J. W. Central Administration in
Britain Longmans 1957
Know Your Ministry: A Description of Government Departments
Whose Operations Affect the Conduct of Business
Europa Publications 1959
New Whitehall Series: For the Royal Institute of Public Administra¬
tion
The Colonial Office, by Sir Charles Jeffries Allen & Unwin 1956
The Foreign Office, by Lord Strang and others Allen & Unwin 1955
The Home Office, by Sir Frank Newsam Allen & Unwin 1954
The Ministry of Labour and National Service, by Sir Gordon Ince
Allen & Unwin i960
The Ministry of Pensions and National Insurance, by Sir Geoffrey
King Allen & Unwin 1958
The Scottish Office and other Scottish Departments, by Sir David
Milne Allen & Unwin 1958
The Ministry of Transport and Civil Aviation, by Sir Gilmour
Jenkins Allen & Unwin 1959
The Ministry of Works, by Sir Harold Emmerson Allen & Unwin 1956
Government Administration in Wales Cmnd 631 HMSO 1959
Handbook on Scottish Administration HMSO 1956
Pier Majesty’s Ministers and Heads of Public Departments [5 issues
a year] HMSO
How Northern Ireland is Governed: Central and Local Govern¬
ment in Northern Ireland, by Hugh Shearman Belfast, HMSO 1951
Royal Commissions and Similar Bodies in Britain
Reference Paper R.4785 COI i960
Scottish Administration Reference Paper R.3363 COI 1956
The Civil Service
Bridges, Sir Edward [now Lord]. Portrait of a Profession: The Civil
Service Tradition Cambridge University Press 1950
Campbell, G. A. The Civil Service in Britain Penguin Books 1955
Dunnill, Frank. The Civil Service: Some Human Aspects
Allen & Unwin 1956
Monck, Bosworth. How the Civil Service Works Phoenix House i952
British Civil Service 1854-1954, by Wyn Griffith HMSO 1954
Royal Commission on the Civil Service 1953-55 (Priestley Com¬
mission). Report Cmd 9613 HMSO 1955
The British Civil Service Reference Paper R.4985 COI 1961
Local Government
Chester, D. N. Central and Local Government: Financial and
Administrative Relations Macmillan 1951
Clarke, J. J. The Local Government of the United Kingdom.
15th rev. edn Pitman 1956
 Outlines of Local Government of the United Kingdom.
19th rev. edn Pitman i960
Hart, William O. Introduction to the Law of Local Government
and Administration. 6th rev. edn Butterworth 1957
Jackson, R. M. The Machinery of Local Government Macmillan 1958
527
s. d.
3 6
30 o
25 o
18 o
18 o
18 o
21 O
18 O
21 O
21 O
15 °
1 9
2 6
I 9
6
free*
free*
3 6
3 6
18 o
25 o
I o
6 6
free*
30 o
30 o
25 o
45 °
30 o
528
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
s. d.
Jackson. W. Eric. The Structure of Local Government in England
and Wales. 4th edn Longmans
 Local Government in England and Wales, new edn
Penguin Books
Jennings, Sir Ivor, edited by J. A. G. Griffith. Principles of Local
Government. 4th edn University of London Press
Marshall, A. H. Financial Administration in Local Government
Allen & Unwin
Maud, Sir John and Finer, S. E. Local Government in England
and Wales. 2nd edn Oxford University Press
Morrison, Herbert [now Lord]. How London is Governed.
2nd edn James Barrie
Municipal Year Book For 1961 Municipal Journal
Schofield, A. N. Local Government Elections. 3rd edn Shaw
Warren, J. H. The Local Government Service Allen & Unwin
 The English Local Government System. 3rd edn
Allen & Unwin
Annual Report
Ministry of Housing and Local Government
For i960 Cmnd 1435 HMSO
Local Government Finance (England and Wales) General Grant
Order, i960 HMSO
Local Government Finance (Scotland) General Grant (Scotland)
Order, i960 HMSO
Local Government in Scotland [prepared by the Scottish Home
Department and COI] HMSO
Report of Royal Commission on Local Government in Greater
London 1957-60 Cmnd 1164 HMSO
Local Government in Britain
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.4945 HMSO
The Corporation of the City of London
Reference Paper R.4864 COI
The Fire Service
Blackstone, G. V. A History of the British Fire Service
Routledge
Eyre, Frank and Hadfield, E. C. R. The Fire Service To-day.
2nd edn Oxford University Press
Annual Reports
Fire Research Board For i960 HMSO
H.M. Chief Inspector of Fire Services (England and Wales)
For i960 Cmnd 1447 HMSO
H.M. Inspector of Fire Services for Scotland
For i960 Cmnd 1420 HMSO
The Fire Services in Britain Reference Paper R.4990 COI
m. LAW AND ORDER
The Law
Allen, Sir C. K. Administrative Jurisdiction Stevens
 Law and Orders Stevens
Allsop, Peter. The Legal Profession. 5th edn Sweet & Maxwell
Amos, Sir Maurice. British Criminal Justice
For the British Council Longmans
Archer, Peter. The Queen’s Courts Penguin Books
i960 26 o
1959 3 6
1960 18 o
1960 32 o
1953 8 6
1949 8 6
1961 105 o
1954 65 o
1952 18 o
1953 i5 °
1961 9 6
i960 1 3
i960 4
1958 4 o
1960 28 o
1961 2 6
1961 free*
1957 60 o
1953
1961 5 6
1961 1 3
1961 1 3
1961 free*
1956 15 o
1956 42 o
i960 10 6
1957 2 6
1956 3 6
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Bedford, Sybille. The Faces of Justice
Cavenagh, W. E. The Child and the Court
Denning, Lord. The Changing Law
Freedom under the Law
Collins
Gollancz
Stevens
Stevens
Devlin, Sir Patrick. The Criminal Prosecution in England
Oxford University Press
 Trial by Jury Stevens
Eddy, J. P. The Justices’ Handbook: A Guide to Law, Evidence and
Procedure in Magistrates’ Courts. 3rd edn Stevens
Gibb, D. M. A Preface to Scots Law. 3rd rev. edn William Green
Giles, F. T. The Magistrates’ Courts Penguin Books
 Children and the Law Penguin Books
Gloag, W. M. and Henderson, A. D. Introduction to the Laws of
Scotland, 5th edn William Green
Goodhart, A. L., Editor. The Migration of the Common Law
Stevens
James, Philip S. Introduction to English Law. 3rd edn Butterworth
Jenks, Edward. The Book of English Law. 5th edn rev. by D. J. LI.
Davies John Murray
Rubinstein, Ronald. John Citizen and the Law. 4th edn
Penguin Books
Walker, D. M. The Scottish Legal System William Green
Annual Reports
The Law Society on the Legal Aid and Advice Act
For 1959-60 HMSO
The Law Society of Scotland on the Legal Aid Scheme
For 1959-60 HMSO
Criminal Statistics, England and Wales
For i960 Cmnd 1437 HMSO
Criminal Statistics, Scotland For i960 Cmnd 1343 HMSO
Report of the Committee on Civil Jury Trial in Scotland [Strachan
Report] Cmnd 851 HMSO
The First Report of the Council on Tribunals HMSO
Time Spent Awaiting Trial: First Report of the Home Office
Research Unit HMSO
1961
1959
1953
1949
1960
1956
1953
1961
1949
1959
1952
1960
1955
1953
1958
1959
1961
1960
1961
1961
1959
1960
i960
529
s. d.
21 o
21 o
11 o
11 o
15 o
15 °
18 o
12 6
2 6
3 6
75 o
5 o
17 6
24 o
5 °
50 o
4 6
2 6
8 o
5 °
2 6
2 6
3 °
Treatment of Offenders
Elkin, Winifred A. The English Penal System Penguin Books
Fox, Sir Lionel W. English Prison and Borstal Systems Routledge
Fry, Margery. Arms of the Law. Gollancz
Grunhut, M. Juvenile Offenders Before the Courts
Oxford University Press
King, Joan F. S., Editor. The Probation Service Butterworth
Klare, Hugh J. Anatomy of Prison Hutchinson
The After-Care and Supervision of Discharged Prisoners. Report
of the Sub-Committee of the Advisory Council on the Treat¬
ment of Offenders HMSO
Annual Reports
Commissioners of Prisons For i960 Cmnd 1467 HMSO
Council of the Central After-Care Association For 1959 HMSO
Prisons in Scotland For i960 Cmnd 1383 HMSO
Corporal Punishment. Report of Advisory Council on the Treatment
of Offenders Cmnd 1213 HMSO
Penal Practice in a Changing Society Cmnd 645 HMSO
1957 3 6
1952 32 o
1951 8 6
1956 25 o
1958 25 o
1960 18 o
1958 2 6
1961 9 6
1960 2 o
1961 36
i960 3 6
1959 2 6
53°
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Prediction Methods in relation to Borstal Training, by Dr. Hermann
Mannheim and Leslie T. Wilkins HMSO 1955
Prisons and Borstals, 4th edn HMSO i960
The Probation Service, Its Objects and Its Organisation, rev. edn
HMSO 1952
The Probation Service in Scotland HMSO 1955
Report of the Committee on Discharged Prisoners’ Aid Societies
Cmd 8879 HMSO 1953
Report of the Royal Commission on Capital Punishment 1949-53
Cmd 8932 HMSO 1953
Report of the Committee on Children and Young Persons [Ingleby
Report] Cmnd 1191 HMSO i960
Work of the Children’s Department of the Home Office HMSO 1961
The Treatment of Offenders in Britain
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.4414 HMSO i960
The Police Service
Moriarty, C. C. H. Police Procedure and Administration. 6th edn
Butterworth 1955
Scott, Sir Harold, Scotland Yard Andre Deutsch 1955
Thomas, J. L. Police Administration. 2nd edn
Police Review Publishing Co. 1957
Annual Reports
Commissioner of the Police of the Metropolis
For i960 Cmnd 1440 HMSO 1961
H.M. Inspector of Constabulary, Scotland
For i960 Cmnd 1390 HMSO 1961
H.M. Inspectors of Constabulary (Counties and Boroughs in
England and Wales) For i960 HMSO 1961
Police. Choice of Careers. New Series No. 80 HMSO 1957
Royal Commission on the Police. Interim Report
Cmnd 1224 HMSO i960
The Police Service in Britain. Reference Pamphlet RF.P.4164 COI 1959
IV. DEFENCE
Brassey’s Annual: The Armed Forces Year Book i960, edited by
Rear-Admiral H. G. Thursfield Clowes i960
Jane’s All the World’s Aircraft 1960-61, edited by John W. R. Taylor
Sampson Low i960
Jane’s Fighting Ships 1960-61, edited by R. V. B. Blackman
Sampson Low i960
Kemp, Lt.-Cdr. P. K. Fleet Air Arm Jenkins 1954
 H.M. Destroyers Jenkins 1956
Lewis, Michael. The History of the British Navy Allen & Unwin 1959
Lipscomb, Cdr. F. W. The British Submarine Black 1954
Schofield, Vice-Admiral B. B. The Royal Navy Today
Oxford University Press i960
Sheppard, E. W. A Short History of the British Army. 4th edn
Constable 1950
Taylor, John W. R. C.F.S., Birthplace of Air Power: The Story of
the RA.F.’s Central Flying School 1912-58 Putnam 1958
Thetford, Owen. Aircraft of the Royal Air Force 1918-58 Putnam 1958
 British Naval Aircraft 1912-58 Putnam 1958
s. d.
17 6
7 °
1 o
1 3
3 °
12 6
8 o
7 °
3 °
10 6
18 o
3 6
5 6
1 3
1 9
1 9
5 °
free*
63 o
105 o
105 o
16 o
16 o
25 o
25 o
18 o
30 o
21 O
50 O
50 O
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Annual Estimates
Air Estimates 1961-62 HMSO
Memorandum by the Secretary of State for Air
Cmnd 1292 HMSO
Army Estimates 1961-62 HMSO
Memorandum of the Secretary of State for War
Cmnd 1280 HMSO
Ministry of Defence Estimate 1961-62 HMSO
Navy Estimates 1961-62 HMSO
Statement of the First Lord of the Admiralty
Cmnd 1282 HMSO
Annual Statements on Defence Policy
Defence: Outline of Future Policy Cmnd 124 HMSO
Report on Defence 1961-62 Cmnd 1288 HMSO
Call Up of Men to the Forces, 1957-60 Cmnd 175 HMSO
Central Organisation for Defence Cmnd 476 HMSO
Reorganisation of the Territorial Army Cmnd 1216 HMSO
Civil Defence
Manual of Basic Training [pamphlets] HMSO
531
s. d.
Manuals of Civil Defence. Vol. I.
Pamphlet No. 1. Nuclear Weapons
No. 2. Radioactive Fall-out
HMSO
HMSO
1961
1961
1961
1961
1961
1961
1961
1957
1961
1957
1958
i960
1949
to
1959
1956
1959
3
13
3
1
16
4 °
1 o
I o
4
6
to
2 o
2 6
1 3
V. SOCIAL WELFARE
State and Voluntary Services
Family Welfare Association. Guide to the Social Services. A
Year Book of Information respecting the Statutory and Voluntary
Means of Assistance, rev. edn Staples Press i960 5 o
Hall, M. Penelope. The Social Services of Modern England. 5th
rev. edn Routledge i960 28 o
Haynes, A. H. The Practitioner’s Handbook to the Social Services
Wright & Sons 1955 96
Kuenstler, P. H. K., Editor. Social Group Work in Great Britain
Faber & Faber 1955 12 6
Morris, C., Editor. Social Case-Work in Great Britain. 2nd edn
Faber & Faber 1955 15 o
Morris, Mary. Voluntary Organisations and Social Progress
Gollancz 1955 18 o
National Citizens’ Advice Bureaux Committee. Advising the
Citizen National Council of Social Service 1961 50
National Council of Social Service. Voluntary Social Services:
Handbook of Information and Directory of Organisations, rev. edn
NCSS i960 10 6
 Public Social Services: Handbook of Information, nth edn
NCSS 1961 12 6
Political and Economic Planning. Family Needs and the Social
Services Allen & Unwin 1961 30 o
Titmuss, R. M. Essays on the Welfare State Allen & Unwin 1958 20 o
Annual Report
Charity Commissioners For 1959 HMSO i960 2 o
532
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Official Histories of the Second World War: United Kingdom: Civil
Series. Problems of Social Policy, by R. M. Titmuss
Longmans & HMSO 1950
 Studies in the Social Services, by S. M. Ferguson and H.
Fitzgerald Longmans & HMSO 1954
Report of the Working Party on Social Workers in the Local
Authority Health and Welfare Services HMSO 1959
The Story of the W.V.S. HMSO 1959
Children in Britain COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.4203 HMSO 1959
Social Services in Britain
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.4246 HMSO 1959
Social Work in Britain Reference Pamphlet RF.P.4470 COI 1961
National Insurance and Related Services
Rathbone, Eleanor. Family Allowances Allen & Unwin 1949
Shenfield, B. E. Social Policies for Old Age Routledge 1957
Annual Reports
Ministry of Pensions and National Insurance
For i960 Cmnd 1458 HMSO 1961
National Assistance Board For i960 Cmnd 1410 HMSO 1961
National Assistance Board for Northern Ireland
For i960 Belfast, HMSO 1961
War Pensioners For i960 HMSO 1961
Children in the Care of Local Authorities in England and Wales,
March i960 Annual Statistics Cmnd 1237 HMSO i960
Children in the Care of Local Authorities in Scotland, November
1958 Cmnd 779 HMSO 1959
Everybody’s Guide to National Insurance, rev. edn HMSO 1961
Improvements in National Assistance Cmnd 782 HMSO 1959
National Insurance Bill 1959: Report of the Government Actuary
on the Financial Provisions of the Bill Cmnd 629 HMSO 1959
Reports by the Government Actuary on the First and Second
Quinquennial Reviews
National Insurance Act, 1946 HMSO 1954
National Insurance (Industrial Injuries) Act, 1946 HMSO 1955
National Insurance Acts, 1946-59 HMSO i960
National Insurance (Industrial Injuries) Acts, 1946-59 HMSO i960
Social Insurance and Allied Services [Beveridge Report]
Cmd 6404 HMSO i942
Work of the Children’s Department of the Home Office HMSO 1961
Social Security in Britain Reference Pamphlet RF.P.4715 COI 1961
Health
Acton Society Trust. National Plealth Services in Great Britain:
Hospitals and the State. Series of 6 Reports AST 1955
to
1959
Clarke, J. J. Introduction to Public Health Lawr Cleaver-Hume Press 1949
Clegg, Hugh, Medicine in Britain. 4th edn
For the British Council Longmans 1951
Eckstein, Harry. The English Health Service
Harvard University Press/Oxford University Press 1959
Gemmill, P. F. Britain’s Search for Health
University of Pennsylvania/Oxford University Press 1961
s. d.
25 o
22 6
15 o
3 6
3 °
5 6
free*
15 °
25 o
8 o
4 °
2 6
5 6
9
6
9
6
1 o
2 6
1 3
3 6
1 9
12 6
7 o
free*
4 °
each
12 6
2 o
30 o
32 o
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Grundy, F. The New Public Health H. K. Lewis
National Council of Social Service. Help for the Handicapped,
by J. H. Nicholson NCSS
Ross, Sir James Stirling. The National Health Service in Great
Britain Oxford University Press
Stocks, Mary. A Hundred Years of District Nursing
Allen & Unwin
Annual Reports
Board of Control (Lunacy and Mental Treatment)
For 1959 HMSO
Central Health Services Council For i960 HMSO
Department of Health for Scotland For i960
Part I Health and Welfare Services Cmnd 1320 HMSO
Part II Housing Planning and Environment
Cmnd 1361 HMSO
General Board of Control for Scotland For i960
Cmnd 1468 HMSO
Health and Local Government Administration in Northern
Ireland For 1959 Cmd 420 Belfast, HMSO
Ministry of Health
Part I. Health and Welfare Services
For i960 Cmnd 1418 HMSO
Part II. On the State of the Public Health
For 1959 Cmnd 1207 HMSO
Mental Health in Scotland HMSO
National Health Service Summarised Accounts Annual
For 1959-60 HMSO
National Health Service (Scotland) Summarised Accounts Annual
For 1959-60 HMSO
Report of Committee on Cost of Prescribing (Final) HMSO
Report of Committee of Enquiry into the Cost of the National
Health Service [Guillebaud Report] Cmd 9663 HMSO
Report of Committee on General Practice within the National
Health Service [Cohen Report] HMSO
Report of Committee on Social Workers in the Mental Health
Services Cmd 8260 HMSO
Report of Committee on Rehabilitation, Training and Resettlement
of Disabled Persons Cmd 9883 HMSO
Report of the Maternity Services Committee HMSO
Report of the Royal Commission on Doctors’ and Dentists’
Remuneration [Pilkington Report] Cmnd 939 HMSO
 Supplement (Further Statistical Appendix)
Cmnd 1064 HMSO
Report of the Royal Commission on the Law Relating to Mental
Illness and Mental Deficiency, 1954-57 Cmnd 169 HMSO
Report of the Scottish Committee on Prescribing Costs HMSO
Services for the Disabled HMSO
Third Report of the Standing Committee on Rehabilitation and
Resettlement HMSO
Health Services in Britain
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.4471 HMSO
Rehabilitation and Care of the Disabled in Britain
Reference Pamphlet RF.P.4274 COI
533
s. d.
i960 21 o
1958 7 6
1952 35 °
i960 25 o
1960
1961 2
1961 5 o
1961 3 6
1961 1 3
1960 5 6
1961 12 o
1960 13 o
1959 6 o
1961 3 o
1961 2 o
1959 6 o
1956 11 o
1954 2 6
1951 1 6
1956 5 6
1959 6 6
1960 15 o
i960 2 6
1957 10 6
1959 3 o
1955 4 6
1958 1 3
1960 3 6
i960 free*
OS O
534
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Education
Alexander, W. P. Education in England: The National System,
How it Works Newnes
Armfelt, R. The Structure of English Education Cohen & West
Baron, George. A Bibliographical Guide to the English Educational
System. 2nd edn Athlone Press
Berdhal, Robert O. British Universities and the State
University of California Press)Cambridge University Press
British Council and The Association of Universities of The
British Commonwealth. Higher Education in the United
Kingdom: A Handbook for Students from Overseas, rev. edn
Longmans
Cotgrove, Stephen F. Technical Education and Social Change
Allen & Unzvin
Curtis, S. J. History of Education in Great Britain. 4th edn
University Tutorial Press
Dent, H. C. British Education. 3rd edn
For the British Council Longmans
 Growth in English Education, 1946—1952 Routledge
 Editor. Year Book of Technical Education and Careers in
Industry F°r 1961 Black
Dongerkery, S. R. Universities in Britain Oxford University Press
Duff, Sir P. W. Universities in Britain British Council)Longmans
Education Committees Year Book, 1960-61
Councils and Education Press
Furneaux, W. D. The Chosen Few. An examination of some aspects
of university selection in Britain
Nuffield Foundation)Oxford University Press
Institute of Physics. The Postgraduate Training of Physicists in
British Universities Institute of Physics
Lester Smith, W. O. Education: An Introductory Survey
Penguin Books
 Education in Great Britain. 3rd edn
Oxford University Press
National Institute of Adult Education. Adult Education in the
United Kingdom: A Directory of Organisations
National Institute of Adult Education
Peers, R. A. Adult Education Routledge
Venables, P. F. R. Technical Education Bell
Yearbook of the Commonwealth Universities
Association of Universities of the British Commonwealth
Annual Reports
Ministry of Education
Education in i960 Cmnd 1439 HMSO
Ministry of Education for Northern Ireland, 1959-60
Cmd 423 Belfast, HMSO
Scottish Education Department
Education in Scotland in i960
Better Opportunities in Technical Education
Education in 1900-1950
Education in Scotland: The Next Step
15 to 18: Report of the Central Advisory Council for Education
[Crowther Report]: Vol. I HMSO
Vol. II (Surveys) HMSO
Cmnd 1359 HMSO
Cmnd 1254 HMSO
Cmd 8244 HMSO
Cmnd 603 HMSO
s. d.
1954 12 6
1955 12 6
i960 12 6
1959 30 o
1960 6 o
1958 25 o
1957 21 o
W55 2 O
1954 16 O
1961 35 o
1953 10 6
1959 2 6
1960 32 o
1961 25 o
1960 2 o
1957 3 6
1958 7 6
1956 5 o
1958 35 °
1955 42 o
1961 84 o
1961 15 6
1961 6 o
1961 7 o
1961 1 3
1951 12 o
1958 6
1959 12 6
1960 8 6
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Further Education. A Report of the Advisory Council on Education
in Scotland Cmd 8454 HMSO . 1952
Further Education for Commerce. Report of the Advisory Committee
HMSO 1959
The Health of the School Child. Report of the Chief Medical Officer
of the Ministry of Education For 1958 and 1959. Biennial Reports
HMSO i960
Junior Secondary Education [Scotland] HMSO 1955
The New Secondary Education (Ministry of Education Pamphlet
No. 9) HMSO 1947
Public Education in Scotland, rev. edn HMSO 1961
Report of the Committee on Grants to Students
Cmnd 1051 HMSO i960
Report of the Committee on Organisation and Finance of Adult
Education HMSO 1954
Report of the Working Party on the Curriculum of the Senior
Secondary School (Scotland) HMSO 1959
Scope and Content of the Three Year Course of Teacher Training
(Sixth Report of the National Advisory Council on the Training
and Supply of Teachers) HMSO 1957
Secondary Education for All: A New Drive Cmnd 604 HMS'O 1959
The Supply of Teachers in the 1960s HMSO 1958
Technical Education Cmd 9703 HMSO 1956
Technical Education in Scotland: The Pattern of the Future
Cmnd 1245 HMSO 1961
The Training of Teachers (Ministry of Education Pamphlet No. 34)
HMSO 1957
University Grants Committee
Annual Return from Universities and University Colleges
For 1959-60 Cmnd 1489 HMSO 1961
University Development 1952-57 Cmnd 534 HMSO 1958
Education in Britain
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.4751 HMSO i960
Technological Education in Britain
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.4265 HMSO 1959
Education and Training for Industry and Commerce in Britain
Reference Paper R.4593 COI i960
Students from the United Kingdom Dependencies in the United
Kingdom and Irish Republic Reference Paper R.4596 COI i960
Universities in Britain Reference Paper R.4768 COI i960
Youth Services
Brew, J. Macalister. Youth and Youth Groups Faber & Faber 1957
Eager, W. McG. Making Men: The History of Boys’ Clubs and
Related Movements in Great Britain University of London Press 1953
Jephcott, Pearl. Some Young People Allen & Unwin 1954
Jordan, G. W. and Fisher, E. M. Self-Portrait of Youth Heinemann 1955
Kuenstler, P. H. K., Compiler. Youth Work in England: Extracts
from Ministry of Education and other publications relating to
Statutory and Voluntary Youth Work University of London Press 1954
Citizens of To-morrow: A Study of Influences Affecting the
Upbringing of Young People
For King George’s Jubilee Trust Odhams 1955
 Progress Report The Trust 1958
535
s. d.
5 °
2 6
10 6
5 °
3 6
4 °
6 6
2 6
3 6
1
1 o
1 9
4 6
5 6
4 o
3 °
free*
free*
free*
18 o
20 o
12 6
12 6
4 °
3 °
free
R
O' O' O' VO
536
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
S. d.
Duke of Edinburgh’s Award Scheme: Report for 1959-60
Duke of Edinburgh’s Award Office
Development of the Youth Service Cmd 424 Belfast, HMSO
Youth Service in England and Wales [Albemarle Report]
Cmnd 929 HMSO
Youth Services in Britain Reference Paper R.4840 COI
VI. HOUSING AND PLANNING
Annual Reports
Ministry of Housing and Local Government
For i960 Cmnd 1435 HMSO
Department of Health for Scotland. For i960
Part II. Housing, Planning and Environment Cmnd 1361 HMSO
Ministry of Health and Local Government (Northern Ireland)
for 1959 Cmd 420 Belfast, HMSO
Housing
Ashworth, Herbert. Housing in Great Britain Skinner
Councils and their Houses: Management of Estates HMSO
Flats and Houses 1958: Design and Economy HMSO
Houses: The Next Step Cmd 8996 HMSO
Housing in England and Wales Cmnd 1290 HMSO
Housing Manual 1949 HMSO
 Supplement. Housing for Special Purposes HMSO
 Supplement. Houses 1952 HMSO
 Supplement. Houses 1953 HMSO
Housing Policy, Scotland Cmd 8997 HMSO
Housing Return, England and Wales Quarterly Cmnd Paper HMSO
Housing Return, Scotland Quarterly Cmnd Paper HMSO
The Rent Act and You
Questions and Answers for Landlord and Tenant [England and
Wales] HMSO
A Simple Guide for Scotland HMSO
Housing in Britain COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.4500 HMSO
Town and Country Planning
Abercrombie, Sir Patrick. Town and Country Planning. 3rd edn
Oxford University Press
Abrahams, Harold M., Editor. Britain’s National Parks
Country Life
Ashworth, William, The Genesis of Modern British Town
Planning Routledge
Brown, H. J., Editor. Practical Points on Planning Law
Sweet & Maxwell
Crowe, Sylvia. Tomorrow’s Landscape Architectural Press
Gibberd, Frederick. Town Design. 3rd edn Architectural Press
Heap, Desmond. An Outline of Planning Law. 3rd edn
Sweet & Maxwell
Keeble, Lewis. Principles and Practice of Town and Country
Planning. 2nd edn Estates Gazette
Lichfield, N. Economics of Planned Development Estates Gazette
London County Council. London Plan, First Review LCC
Nicholson, E. M. Britain’s Nature Reserves Country Life
1961 5 0
1961 1 3
1960 6 o
1961 free*
1961 9 6
1961 3 6
i960 5 6
1957 7 6
1959 2 6
1958 10 o
1953 9
1961 1 o
1949 3 6
1951 2 o
1952 1 o
1953 3 °
1953 6
9
1 3
1957
1957
1961 3
i960 7 6
i960 25 o
1954 21 o
1951 16 6
1956 21 o
1959 73 6
1960 25 o
1959 5° 0
1957 47 6
1960 50 o
1958 30 o
O' O' O'
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Town and Country Planning Association. Town and Country
Planning Monthly T and CPA
Annual Reports
Development Corporations of the New Towns
England and Wales For 1959-60 HMSO i960
Scotland For 1960-61 HMSO 1961
National Parks Commission For 1959-60 HMSO 1961
Nature Conservancy For 1959-60 HMSO 1961
First Ten Years: Report of the Nature Conservancy HMSO 1959
New Towns in Britain COI 1959
Town and Country Planning in Britain
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.4178 HMSO 1959
The New Towns of Britain
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.4506 HMSO 1961
VII. THE CHURCHES
Baptist Union. Baptist Handbook: edited and published under the
direction of the Council of the Baptist Union of Great Britain and
Ireland For 1961 Carey Kings gate Press 1961
Catholic Directory, i960 Burns, Oates & Washhourne i960
Church Assembly. Report by the Board of Social Responsibility on
the Task of the Church in relation to Industry
Church Information Office 1959
Church of England. Official Yearbook, 1961. For the Church
Assembly Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge 1961
Church of Ireland. The Irish Church Directory and Year Book for
1961 Church of Ireland Printing & Publishing Company 1961
Church of Scotland. Year Book
For 1961 Church of Scotland Committee of Publications 1961
Church of Wales. Official Handbook 1959
Representative Body of the Church in Wales, Cardiff 1959
Congregational Union of England and Wales. Congregational
Year Book 1961 The Union 1961
Episcopal Church in Scotland. The Scottish Episcopal Church
Year Book and Directory
For 1960-61 Representative Church Council of the
Episcopal Church in Scotland i960
The Lambeth Conference, 19581
Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge 1958
Mayfield, Guy. The Church of England Oxford University Press 1958
Methodist Church. Minutes of the Annual Conference of the
Methodist Church, i960 Methodist Publishing House 1961
Presbyterian Church of England. Official Handbook
For 1961-62 Presbyterian Church of England 1961
Presbyterian Church of Wales. Year Book
For 1961 Presbyterian Church of Wales 1961
Salvation Army. Year Book
For 1961 Salvationist Publishing & Supplies 1961
Unitarian and Free Christian Churches. Year Book of the
General Assembly For 1961 Lindsey Press 1961
United Free Church of Scotland. Handbook
For 1961 United Free Church of Scotland 1961
537
s. d.
2 o
22 o
8 o
6 o
6 6
1 6
free
2 3
2 6
17 6
20 o
1 6
30 o
10 o
10 o
15 °
42 o
8 6
7 6
18 o
15 °
7 6
5 °
5 °
5 °
2 6
Also in an abridged edition, price is. 6d.
538
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Vin. PROMOTION OF THE SCIENCES AND THE ARTS
The Sciences
Andrade, E. N. da C. A Brief History of The Royal Society
Royal Society i960
British Council. Scientific and Learned Societies of Great Britain:
A Handbook compiled from Official Sources. 59th edn
Allen & Unwin 1958
Cardwell, D. S. L. The Organisation of Science in England
Heinemann 1957
Carter, C. F. and Williams, B. R. Science in Industry. Policy
for Progress Oxford University Press 1959
Crowther, J. G. Nuclear Energy in Industry Newnes 1956
Hartley, Sir Harold. The Royal Society: Its Origins and Founders
Royal Society 1960
Horder, Lord. Fifty Years of Medicine Duckworth 1953
Hudson, Derek and Luckhurst, K. W. The Royal Society of Arts,
1754-1954 John Murray 1954
Jaramillo-Arango, Dr. Jaime. The British Contribution to
Medicine Livingstone 1953
Jay, K. E. B. Calder Hall: The Story of Britain’s First Atomic
Power Station Methuen 1956
Jefferson, S., Editor. Handbook of the Atomic Energy Industry
Newnes 1958
Jewkes, J., Sawyers, D. and Stillerman, R. The Sources of Invention
Macmillan 1958
Payne, G. L. Britain’s Scientific and Technical Manpower
Oxford University Press i960
Royal Society of London. The Year Book of the Royal Society
of London, 1961 Royal Society 1961
Turrill, W. B. The Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Past and
Present Jenkins 1959
Atomic Energy Research
United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority i960
Research at Your Service DSIR i960
Annual Reports
Advisory Council on Scientific Policy
For 1959-60 Cmnd 1167 HMSO i960
Agricultural Research Council For 1959-60 Cmnd 1362 HMSO 1961
Atomic Energy Authority Seventh Report For 1960-61 HMSO 1961
Medical Research Council For 1959-60 Cmnd 1422 HMSO 1961
Meteorological Office For 1959-60 HMSO i960
National Chemical Laboratory For i960 HMSO 1961
National Physical Laboratory For i960 HMSO 1961
National Research Development Corporation For 1959-60 HMSO 1961
Research Council of the Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research For i960 Cmnd 1365 HMSO 1961
Guide to Information on Nuclear Energy in Britain COI/HMSO i960
Hazards to Man of Nuclear and Allied Radiation. 2nd Report of the
Medical Research Council Cmnd 1225 HMSO i960
Industrial Research and Development Expenditure, 1958 HMSO i960
Research for Industry, i960 HMSO 1961
Science Museum: The First Hundred Years HMSO 1957
Scientific and Engineering Manpower in Great Britain
Cmnd 902 HMSO 1959
s. d.
10 6
35 °
18 o
21 o
17 6
35 °
5 °
30 o
25 o
5 o
35 °
31 6
45 °
21 o
25 o
free
free
1 9
9 °
5 °
15 6
4 °
4 6
9 6
1 6
4 °
5 °
7 o
1 3
8 o
15 °
3 o
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Scientific Research in British Universities, 1960-61 HMSO
Nuclear Energy in Britain [under revision]
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.4192 HMSO
Some British Records and Achievements in Science, Industry and
Technology Reference Booklet RF.P.3984 COI
Industrial Research in Britain Reference Paper R.4631 COI
The Arts
Arts Council of Great Britain. The First Ten Years. Eleventh
Annual Report 1955-56 Arts Council
  The Priorities of Patronage. Fifteenth Annual Report
i959~6o Arts Council
British Council. Annual Report 1959-60 British Council
Cauouste Gulbenkian Foundation. Help for the Arts: Report to
the Foundation The Foundation
Government and the Arts in Britain HMSO
Visual Arts
Directory of Museums and Art Galleries in the British Isles
Museums Association
Gardner, A. H. Outline of English Architecture. 3rd edn Batsford
Hendy, Sir Philip. The National Gallery, London
Thames & Hudson
Museum Calendar Annual Museums Association
The National Gallery, July 1958 to December 1959 National Gallery
Rothenstein, Sir John. An Introduction to English Painting Cassell
 Modern English Painters: Lewis to Moore
Eyre <£? Spottiswoode
Who’s Who in Art. 10th edn Art Trade Press
Annual Reports
Ancient Monuments Boards for England, Scotland and Wales
For i960 HMSO
Historic Buildings Council for England For i960 HMSO
Historic Buildings Council for Scotland For i960 HMSO
Historic Buildings Council for Wales For i960 HMSO
Royal Fine Art Commission For 1959-60 Cmnd 1336 HMSO
Tate Gallery For 1959-60 HMSO
First Report of the Royal Fine Art Commission for Scotland
Cmnd 982 HMSO
Standing Commission on Museums and Galleries
Report for 1954-58 HMSO
Literature
British National Bibliography. Annual for i960
The Council of the British National Bibliography
Library Association Year Book 1961 Library Association
Scott-James, R. A. Fifty Years of English Literature, 1900-1950,
new edn with Postcript, 1951-55 Longmans
The Structure of the Public Library Service in England and Wales
Cmnd 660 HMSO
Drama
Findlater, R. The Future of the Theatre Fabian Society
The Stage Year Book, 1961 Annual The Stage
539
s. d.
1961 32 6
1959 4 6
1959 free*
1961 free*
1956 2 6
i960 2 6
i960 2 6
1959 3 °
1958 2 o
1948 21 o
1949 15 o
1955 126 o
i960 6 o
i960 5 o
1952 21 o
1956 35 °
1960 60 o
1961 1 3
1961 I o
1961 I o
1961 6
1961 10
1961 5 o
i960 1 3
1959 4 o
1961 190 o
1961 21 O
1956 21 O
1959 3 6
1959 2 6
1961 14 6
540
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Who’s Who in the Theatre, edited by John Parker, 12th rev. edn
Pitman
Films
Field, Mary. Children and Films
Dunfermline, Carnegie United Kingdom Trust
Manvell, Roger. The Film and the Public Penguin Books
Political and Economic Planning. The British Film Industry:
A Report on the History and Organisation of the Industry PEP
 The British Film Industry, 1958 PEP
Rotha, Paul and others. Documentary Film. 3rd edn
Faber & Faber
Annual Reports
British Film Fund Agency For 1959-60 HMSO
Cinematograph Films Council For 1960-61 HMSO
National Film Finance Corporation (and Statement of Accounts)
For 1960-61 Cmnd 1398 HMSO
Music, Opera and Ballet
Ballet Annual 1961, edited by Arnold L. Haskell Black
British Federation of Music Festivals Year Book
British Federation of Music Festivals
Clarke, Mary. The Sadler’s Wells Ballet: A History and an
App reciation Black
Music Book Hinrichsen
W alker, Ernest. A History of Music in England. 3rd edn
Oxford University Press
IX. THE NATIONAL ECONOMY
Cairncross, A. K., Editor. The Scottish Economy: A Statistical
Account of Scottish Life by Members of the Staff of Glasgow
University Cambridge University Press
Clapham, Sir John. A Concise Economic History of Britain: From
Earliest Times to 1750 Cambridge University Press
 An Economic History of Modern Britain. 3 vols
Cambridge University Press
Court, W. H. B. A Concise Economic History of Britain from 1750
to Recent Times Cambridge University Press
Devons, E. An Introduction to British Economic Statistics
Cambridge University Press
Jones, G. P. and Pool, A. G. A Hundred Years of Economic
Development in Great Britain 1840-1940. 2nd edn Duckworth
Lewis, W. Arthur. Economic Survey 1919-1939 Allen & Unwin
Morgan, E. V. The Structure of Property Ownership in Great
Britain Oxford University Press
Political and Economic Planning. Growth in the British
Economy Allen & Unwin
Stamp, L. Dudley and Beaver, S. H. The British Isles: a Geographic
and Economic Survey Longmans
Youngson, A. J. The British Economy 1920-1957 Allen & Unwin
Economic Review Bi-Monthly from January 1959
National Institute of Economic and Social Research
s. d.
1957 105 o
1954 10 6
1955 3 6
1952 18 o
1958 5 °
1952 42 o
1961 6
1961 6
1961 1 3
i960 30 o
i960 6
1955 21 o
1956 25 o
1952 50
1954 30 o
1949 25 o
1938 165 o
1954 25 o
1956 22 6
1948 21 o
1953 18 o
i960 32 6
i960 30 o
1954 46 6
i960 28 o
8 o
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Official Histories of the Second World War: United Kingdom:
Civil Series. British War Economy, by W. K. Hancock and
M. M. Gowing Longmans & HMSO
Annual Abstract of Statistics. No. 97. i960 HMSO
Council on Prices, Productivity and Incomes, First Report HMSO
 Second Report HMSO
 Third Report HMSO
 Fourth Report HMSO
Economic Survey Annual from 1947 For 1961 Cmnd 11,2^ HMSO
Economic Survey of Northern Ireland (Report prepared by
K. S. Isles and N. Cuthbert) Belfast, HMSO
Enquiry into Household Expenditure in 1953-54 HMSO
National Income and Expenditure of the United Kingdom 1938-46
Cmd 7099 HMSO
1961 (prepared by the Central Statistical Office) HMSO
Digest of Scottish Statistics Twice Yearly from April 1953 HMSO
Digest of Statistics: Northern Ireland Twice Yearly from March
1954 Belfast, HMSO
Digest of Welsh Statistics Annual from 1954 HMSO
Monthly Digest of Statistics HMSO
X. INDUSTRY
Organisation and Production
Allen, G. C. British Industries and their Organisation. 4th edn
Longmans
British Standards Institution. Year Book BSI
Burn, Duncan, Editor. The Structure of British Industry: A
Symposium. Vol. I Cambridge University Press
Vol. II Cambridge University Press
Dunning, J. H. and Thomas, C. J. British Industry Hutchinson
Goodman, L. Landon. Man and Automation Penguin Books
Oakley, C. A., Editor. Scottish Industry: An Account of what
Scotland makes and where she makes it Scottish Council
Political and Economic Planning. Industrial Trade Associations:
Activities and Organisations Allen & Unwin
Robson, W. A. Nationalised Industry and Public Ownership
Allen & Unwin
Weiner, Herbert E. British Labour and Public Ownership Stevens
Distribution of Industry Cmd 7540 HMSO
The Financial and Economic Obligations of the Nationalised
Industries Cmnd 1337 HMSO
Registrar of Restrictive Trading Agreements. Report for the period
7th August 1956 to 31st December 1959 Cmnd 1273 HMSO
Report on the Census of Production for 1954
Introductory Notes HMSO
12 Volumes1 HMSO
54i
s. d.
Index of Products
Summary Tables, Part I
Summary Tables, Part II
Summary Tables, Part III
HMSO
HMSO
HMSO
HMSO
1949
1960
1958
1958
1959
1961
1961
1957
1957
1947
1961
1959
1960
1958
1958
1961
!957
1953
1957
i960
1960
1948
1961
1961
1956
1957
to
1958
1959
1958
1959
1959
30
25
2
2
2
1
3
35 °
37 6
25 o
15 °
45 °
50 o
30 o
3 6
25 o
30 o
50 o
45 °
1 9
1 9
1 o
1 6
to
3 6
3 6
9 °
7 °
8 o
1Each volume deals with individual or groups of industries.
542
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Report on the Census of Production for 1958
Introductory Notes HMSO i960
12 Volumes1 \in progress] HMSO
Review of Highland Policy Cmnd 785 HMSO 1959
Industry and Employment in Scotland and Scottish Road Report
Annual For 1960-61 Cmnd 1391 HMSO 1961
Wales and Monmouthshire: Report on Developments and Govern¬
ment Action i960 Cmnd 1293 HMSO 1961
Nationalised Industries in Britain Reference Paper R.4298 COI i960
Fuel and Power
Ministry of Power Statistical Digest Annual For 1959 HMSO
Coal
National Coal Board. British Coal, The Rebirth of an Industry
NCB
 Report of the Advisory Committee on Organisation NCB
 Revised Plan for Coal NCB
Nef, J. U. Rise of the British Coal Industry. 2 vols Routledge
Townshend-Rose, H. The British Coal Industry Allen & Unwin
Walkerdine, R. N. and Corbin, E. G., Editors. Guide to the
Coalfields Colliery Guardian
Annual Report and Accounts
National Coal Board
Vol. I. Report For i960 HMSO
Vol. II. Accounts and Statistical Tables For i960 HMSO
Coal Mining: Report of the Technical Advisory Committee [Reid
Report] Cmd 6610 HMSO
Petroleum
Longhurst, Henry C. Adventure in Oil Sidgwick & Jackson
United Kingdom Petroleum Industry Advisory Committee.
UK Petroleum Industry Statistics Relating to Consumption and
Refinery Production Annual Petroleum Information Bureau
British Industries: Oil Cassell
The Oilfields of Britain The British Petroleum Company
Our Industry The British Petroleum Company
Electricity and Gas Supply
Electricity Council. Power for the Future Electricity Council
Gas Council. The Rise of the Gas Industry in Britain Gas Council
 Fuel for the Nation Gas Council
Self, Sir Henry and Watson, Elizabeth M. Electricity Supply
in Great Britain
Sleeman, J. F. British Public Utilities
Annual Reports and Accounts
Central Electricity Generating Board
Electricity Council.
Gas Council
North of Scotland Hydro-Electric Board
South of Scotland Electricity Board
Allen & Unwin
Pitman
For 1960-61 HMSO
For 1960-61 HMSO
For 1959-60 HMSO
For i960 HMSO
For i960 HMSO
1 Each"volume deals with individual or groups of industries.
i960
1957
1955
1959
1932
1951
1960
1961
1961
1945
1959
i960
1953
1956
1959
1959
1949
1960
1952
1953
1961
1961
1960
1961
1961
s. d.
3 °
9
5 6
6 o
free*
30 o
free
2 6
3 6
56 o
12 6
20 o
4 o
9 o
3 6
21 o
free
8 6
free
free
free
15 °
free
20 o
20 o
9 6
9 6
9 6
5 °
4 6
BIBLIOGRAPHY
The Nuclear Power Programme Cmnd 1083 HMSO i960
Report from the Select Committee on Nationalised Industries: the
Gas Industry
Vol. I. Report and Proceedings HMSO 1961
Report of the Committee of Inquiry into the Electricity Supply
Industry [Herbert Committee] Cmd 9672 HMSO 1956
Report of the Committee on Hydro-Electric Development in
Scotland Cmd 6406 HMSO 1942
Town Gas: Its Manufacture and Distribution HMSO 1958
Nuclear Energy in Britain [under revision]
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.4192 HMSO 1959
Water Supply
Hobbs, A. T., Editor. The Manual of British Water Supply Practice
Institute of Water Engineers/Heffer *954
Metropolitan Water Board. London’s Water Supply 1903-53:
A Review of the Work of the Metropolitan Water Board
Staples Press 1953
Veal, T. H. P. The Supply of Water. 2nd edn Chapman & Hall 1950
Annual Reports
British Rainfall For 1957 HMSO i960
Department of Health for Scotland
For i960 Part II Cmnd 1361 HMSO 1961
Ministry of Housing and Local Government
For i960 Cmnd 1435 HMSO 1961
Surface Water Year Book of Great Britain 1958-59 HMSO i960
Water Pollution Research, i960 HMSO 1961
Central Advisory Water Committee. Report of Sub-Committee
on Information on Water Resources HMSO 1959
  Sub-Committee on Growing Demand for Water, First
Report HMSO 1959
Second Report HMSO i960
River Boards: Guide to their Powers and Functions HMSO 1950
Report on the Water Resources of Wales Cmnd 1331 HMSO 1961
Construction
Federation of Civil Engineering Contractors. The British Civil
Engineering Contracting Industry
Federation of Civil Engineering Contractors 1956
FIammond, Rolt. Civil Engineering To-day
Oxford University Press i960
Norrie, C. M. Bridging the Years Arnold 1956
Annual Report
Building Research, 1959 HMSO i960
National Building Studies series (Bulletins, Special Reports and
Research Papers) HMSO 1948
to
1961
Manufacturing Industries
Association of British Chemical Manufacturers. Report on the
British Chemical Industry 1949 The Association 1949
 Supplement 1953 The Association 1953
British Iron and Steel Federation. Annual Report i960 BISF 1961
543
s. d.
4
6 6
6 6
9
5 6
3 o
55 °
15 °
30 o
32 6
3 6
9 6
17 6
7 o
1 3
1 3
6
3 o
5 °
63 o
21 o
21 o
7 o
9
to
35 °
5 °
1 o
free
544
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Burn, D. L. Economic History of Steelmaking 1867-1939
Cambridge University Press 1940
Cornwell, E. L. Commercial Road Vehicles Batsford i960
Donnithorne, Audrey G. British Rubber Manufacturing
Duckworth 1958
Dunning, J. H. American Investment in British Manufacturing
Industry Allen & Unwin 1958
Glass Manufacturers’ Federation. This is the British Glass
Industry GMF 195 5
Hague, Douglas C. The Economics of Man-Made Fibres
Duckworth 1957
Maxcy, G. and Silberston, A. The Motor Industry Allen & Unwin 1959
Parkinson, J. R. The Economics of Shipbuilding
Cambridge University Press i960
Robson, R. The Cotton Industry in Britain Macmillan 1957
 The Man-Made Fibres Industry Macmillan 1958
Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders. The Motor
Industry of Great Britain i960 SMMT i960
Sturmey, S. C. The Economic Development of Radio Duckworth 1958
Development of the Iron and Steel Industry 1953-58 HMSO 1955
Development in the Iron and Steel Industry Special Report, 1961
HMSO 1961
Reorganisation of the Cotton Industry Cmnd 744 HMSO 1959
Report of the Iron and Steel Board For i960 HMSO 1961
Post-War Industrial Progress in the United Kingdom
Reference Paper R.3908 COI 1958
United Kingdom Agricultural Engineering Industry
Reference Paper R.4126 COI 1959
United Kingdom Motor Vehicle Industry [under revision]
Reference Paper R.3694 COI 1958
United Kingdom Pharmaceutical Industry
Reference Paper R.4957 COI 1961
United Kingdom Shipbuilding Industry
Reference Paper R.4801 COI i960
United Kingdom Steel Industry Reference Paper R.4930 COI 1961
s. d.
27 6
30 o
25 o
35 °
2 6
30 o
25 o
40 o
60 o
21 O
55 °
30 o
2 6
7 o
5
free*
free*
free*
free*
free*
free*
XI. AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FORESTRY
Agriculture
Allen, C. R. Agricultural Marketing Policies Blackwell
Bracey, H. E. English Rural Life Routledge
Crossley, E. L. The United Kingdom Dairy Industry
United Kingdom Dairy Association
Digby, M. and Gorst, S. Agricultural Co-operation in the United
Kingdom. 2nd edn Blackwell
Hirsch, G. P. and Hunt, K. E. British Agriculture: Structure and
Organisation
For the National Federation of Young Farmers’ Clubs Evans
Horace Plunkett Foundation. Year Book of Agricultural
Co-operation. For i960 Blackwell
Political and Economic Planning. Agriculture and Land Use
PEP
Sykes, Frank, Living from the Land Geoffrey Bles
Symon, J. A. Scottish Farming Past and Present Oliver & Boyd
1959 42 o
1959 30 o
1959 21 o
1957 15 °
1958 3 6
1960 35 o
1957 2 6
1957 21 o
1959 42 o
O' o
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Watson, Sir James Scott and More, J. A. Agriculture: The Science
and Practice of British Farming. 10th edn Oliver & Boyd 1956
Williams, H. T., Editor. Principles for British Agriculture Policy
Oxford University Press i960
Official Histories of the Second World War: United Kingdom:
Civil Series. Agriculture, by Keith A. H. Murray
Longmans & HMSO 1956
Agricultural Improvement Council. Fourth Report 1956-59 HMSO i960
Agricultural Research Service HMSO 1953
Agricultural Statistics, United Kingdom 1958-59 HMSO i960
Annual Reports
Agricultural Marketing Schemes For 1959-60 HMSO 1961
Animal Health Services in Great Britain For 1959 HMSO 1961
Department of Agriculture for Scotland
Agriculture in Scotland i960 Cmnd 1315 HMSO 1961
National Food Survey Committee: Domestic Food Consumption
and Expenditure 1958 HMSO 1961
Annual Review and Determination of Guarantees
For 1961 Cmnd 1311 HMSO 1961
Crofters Commission: Report For 1959 HMSO i960
Crofting Conditions: Commission of Enquiry Cmd 9091 HMSO 1954
Guides to Official Sources, No. 4. Agricultural and Food Statistics
HMSO 1958
Horticultural Marketing, Report of the Committee on
Cmnd 61 HMSO 1957
Long-term Assurances for Agriculture Cmnd 23 HMSO 1956
National Agricultural Advisory Service Report: The First Eight
Years 1946-1954 HMSO 1955
Farm Incomes in England and Wales Annual For 1958 HMSO i960
Farming Britain, by A. N. Duckham COI 1959
Rural Industries in Britain Reference Paper R.3334 COI 1956
Fisheries
Fisheries Year Book and Directory 1961
British Continental Trade Press 1961
Trout in Scotland HMSO i960
Annual Reports
Fisheries of Scotland For i960 Cmnd 1367 HMSO 1961
Herring Industry Board For i960 Cmnd 1366 HMSO 1961
White Fish Authority (and Accounts) For 1960-61 HMSO 1961
Annual Statistical Tables
Scottish Sea Fisheries For i960 HMSO 1961
Sea Fisheries For i960 HMSO 1961
The Fishing Industry Cmnd 1453 HMSO 1961
Report of the Committee of Inquiry into the Fishing Industry
Cmnd 1266 HMSO 1961
Report of the Committee on Salmon and Freshwater Fisheries
Cmnd 1350 HMSO 1961
Forestry
Edlin, H. L. England’s Forests Faber & Faber 1958
The Forestry Commission in Scotland Forestry Commission 1953
545
s. d.
31 6
18 o
30 o
2 o
2 6
3 6
6 6
6 o
5 °
10 o
1 3
2 o
5 6
4 6
6 o
8
3 6
6 6
free*
free*
20 o
6 o
5 6
3 o
3 °
5 °
5 °
1 o
8 o
8 o
30 o
free
546
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Annual Reports
Forestry Commissioners For 1959-60 HMSO 1961
Forest Research For 1959-60 HMSO 1961
Britain’s Forests [13 booklets] HMSO 1948
to
1953
Census of Woodlands 1947-49: Summary Report HMSO 1951
Forestry, Agriculture and Marginal Land, Report by the Natural
Resources (Technical) Committee HMSO 1957
National Forest Park and Forestry Commission Guides HMSO 1946
to
1961
XII. TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS
Shipping
Blake, G. Lloyd’s Register of Shipping, 1760-1960
Lloyd's Register of Shipping i960
Bown, A. H. J., Dove., C. A. and Tooth, E. S. Port Operation and
Administration. 2nd edn Chapman & Hall i960
Chamber of Shipping of the United Kingdom. Annual Report
1959-60 Chamber of Shipping of the United Kingdom i960
Corporation of Lloyd’s. Lloyd’s List Annual Review i960
Corporation of Lloyd's i960
Course, Capt. A. G. The Merchant Navy To-day
Oxford University Press 1956
Ford, P. and Bound, J. A. Coastwise Shipping and the Small Ports
Blackwell 1951
Grosvenor, J. The Port of London Staples 1957
Maxwell, Donald, Editor. Ports of the World, 1961
Shipping World 1961
 Editor. Shipping World Year Book and Who’s Who 1960-61
Shipping World 1961
Mead, Cdr. Hilary P. Trinity House Sampson Low 1947
Political and Economic Planning. The British Shipping Industry
PEP 1959
Rees, Henry. British Ports and Shipping Harrap 1959
Rodrigo, Robert. Search and Rescue Kimber 1958
Thornton, R. H. British Shipping Cambridge University Press 1959
Commercial Ports of the United Kingdom
Reference Paper R.4539 COI i960
Inland Transport
Sargent, J. R. British Transport Policy Oxford University Press 1958
Annual Report and Accounts. British Transport Commission
Vol. I. Report For i960 HMSO 1961
Vol. II. Financial and Statistical Accounts For i960 HMSO 1961
Re-organisation of the National Transport Undertakings
Cmnd 1248 HMSO i960
Railways
British Transport Commission. Facts and Figures: British
Railways, 1959 BTC i960
Ellis, Hamilton. British Railway History Allen & Unwin 1959
s. d.
5 o
12 6
6
to
1 3
9
4 °
1 6
to
5 °
42 o
45 °
25 o
1 o
12 6
10 6
9 6
100 o
60 o
4 o
18 o
21 O
21 O
free*
15 °
6 o
16 o
1 o
free
35 °
BIBLIOGRAPHY
547
Nock, O. S. British Railways in Action
 The Railway Engineers
Nelson
Batsford
Bodley Head
Rolt, L. T. C. Red for Danger
British Transport Commission: Proposals for the Railways
Cmd 9880 HMSO
  Re-appraisal of the Plan for the Modernisation and
Re-equipment of British Railways Cmnd 813 HMSO
Report from the Select Committee on Nationalised Industries:
British Railways HMSO
1956
1955
1955
1956
1959
1960
s. d.
25 o
18 o
16 o
1 9
3 °
5 6
Roads
Buchanan, C. D. Mixed Blessing: The Motor in Britain Hill 1958
Davies, E., Editor. Roads and their Traffic Blackie i960
Political and Economic Planning. The Cost of Roads PEP 1961
Strong, L. A. G. The Rolling Road Hutchinson 1956
Annual Reports
Roads in England and Wales For 1959-60 HMSO 1961
Road Research For i960 HMSO 1961
The Highway Code. 4th edn HMSO 1959
London Transport
London Transport Executive. London General: The Story of
the London Bus 1856 to 1956 LTE 1956
 London Transport in 1959 LTE i960
Annual Report
London and Home Counties Traffic Advisory Committee:
London Traffic 1959 HMSO i960
Report of the Committee of Inquiry into London Transport
HMSO 1955
Inland Waterways
Edwards, L. A. The Inland Waterways of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland Imray, Laurie, Norie & Wilson 1950
Hadfield, Charles. British Canals: An Illustrated History, rev. edn
Phoenix House 1959
Rolt, L. T. C. The Inland Waterways of England Allen & Unwin 1950
Inland Waterways. Government Proposals following the Report of
the Committee of Inquiry Cmnd 676 HMSO 1959
Report of the Committee of Inquiry into Inland Waterways [Bowes
Report] Cmnd 486 HMSO 1958
Public Transport in Northern Ireland
Annual Report
Ulster Transport Authority For 1959-60 Belfast, UTA 1961
30 o
35 °
3 6
30 o
5 °
7 o
6
5 °
2 6
4 6
5 °
30 o
36 o
21 o
6
6 6
1 o
Civil Aviation
British Independent Air Transport Association. Annual Report
For 1959-60 BIATA i960 free
Harvey, D. G. T. British Civil Aviation Adlard ColesjHarrap 1955 15 o
Jackson, A. J. British Civil Aircraft, 1919-1959
Volume I Putnam 1959 63 o
Volume II Putnam i960 63 o
Pudney, John. The Seven Skies Putnam 1959 30 o
Taylor, John W. R. ABC of British Airports Ian Allan 1959 2 6
548
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Aeroplane Directory of British Aviation. Annual Temple Press
Annual Reports
Air Transport Advisory Council For 1960-61 HMSO
British European Airways Corporation (and Accounts)
For 1960-61 HMSO
British Overseas Airways Corporation (and Accounts)
For 1960-61 HMSO
Civil Aerodromes and Air Navigational Services Cmnd 1457 HMSO
Report of the London Airport Development Committee to the
Minister of Transport and Civil Aviation HMSO
The Post Office
Kay, F. G. Royal Mail. 2nd edn Rockliff
Robinson, Howard. Britain’s Post Office Oxford University Press
Annual Accounts
Cable and Wireless Ltd. (with Report of Directors)
For 1960-61 Cmnd 1452 HMSO
Post Office Report and Commercial Accounts
For 1959-60 Cmnd 1206 HMSO
Monarchs of All They Surveyed: The Story of the Post Office
Surveyors
Post Office Prospects 1961-62
The Status of the Post Office
Telephone Policy: The Next Steps
300 Years of the GPO
HMSO
Cmnd 1327 HMSO
Cmnd 989 HMSO
Cmnd 436 HMSO
COI/HMSO
1961
1961
1961
1961
1961
1957
1955
1953
1961
1960
1952
1961
1960
1958
1961
s. d.
30 o
6 6
8 o
7 6
9
2 o
10 o
25 o
1 3
3 °
2
1 o
free
XIII. FINANCE
Armstrong, F. E. The Book of the Stock Exchange. 5th edn
Pittnan
Brittain, Sir Herbert. The British Budgetary System
Allen & Unwin
Chubb, B. The Control of Public Expenditure: Financial Com¬
mittees of the House of Commons Oxford University Press
Clapham, Sir John. The Bank of England: A History, 1694-1914.
2 vols. Cambridge University Press
Dacey, W. Manning. The British Banking Mechanism. 2nd edn
Hutchinson
Gibb, D. E. W. Lloyd’s of London Macmillan
Henderson, R. F. The new Issue Market and the Finance of
Industry Bowes Bowes
Hicks, Ursula K. British Public Finances: Their Structure and
Developments, 1880-1952 Oxford University Press
Hobson, Sir Oscar. How the City Works. 6th edn
News Chronicle
Horne, H. O. A History of Savings Banks
Oxford University Press
Macrae, Norman. London Capital Market. 2nd edn Staples Press
Morrah, Dermot. Flistory of Industrial Life Assurance
Allen & Unwin
Powell, J. Enoch. Saving in a Free Society Hutchinson
Raynes, H. E. A History of British Insurance Pitman
 Insurance Oxford University Press
1957 30 o
1959 25 o
1952 30 o
1944 63 o
1958 18 o
1957 25 o
1951 25 o
1954 7 6
1960 8 6
1947 21 o
1957 25 o
1955 i5 o
i960 21 o
1950 35 0
i960 8 6
O' O' O'
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Rose, H. B. The Economic Background to Investment
Cambridge University Press i960
Sayers, R. S. Modern Banking. 5th edn Oxford University Press i960
Annual Reports
Bank of England For year ended 28th February, 1961 HMSO 1961
Commissioners of Customs and Excise
• For 1959-60 Cmnd 1234 HMSO i960
Commissioners of Inland Revenue
For 1959-60 Cmnd 1258 HMSO 1961
Deputy Master and Comptroller of the Royal Mint
For i960 HMSO 1961
Report of the Committee on the Working of the Monetary System
[Radcliffe Committee] Cmnd 827 HMSO 1959
Civil Estimates and Estimates for Revenue Departments Annual
For 1961-62 HMSO 1961
Control of Public Expenditure Cmnd 1432 HMSO 1961
Finance Accounts of the United Kingdom for the Financial Year
Annual For 1959-60 HMSO i960
Financial Statement Annual For 1961-62 HMSO 1961
Government Expenditure Below the Line Cmnd 1338 HMSO 1961
National Oebt Annual For 1959-60 Cmnd 1221 HMSO i960
British System of Taxation
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.4436 HMSO i960
United Kingdom Financial Institutions
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.4625 HMSO i960
Britain’s Financial Services for Overseas
Reference Paper R.4881 COI 1961
Short Guide to United Kingdom Taxes
Reference Paper R.4760 COI i960
549
s. d.
40 o
25 o
1 o
8 o
8 6
7 o
15 °
4 °
1 9
4 6
2 6
1 6
2 o
3 6
3 6
free*
free*
XIV. TRADE
Overseas Trade and Payments
Bareau, Paul. The Future of the Sterling System
The Institute of Economic Affairs
British Travel and Holidays Association Annual Report
For 1960-61 BTHA
Clarke, William M. The City’s Invisible Earnings
The Institute of Economic Affairs
Conan, A. R. Capital Imports into Sterling Countries Macmillan
Gillett Brothers Discount Company. The Bill on London
Chapman & Hall
Political and Economic Planning. Trade Fairs and Exhibitions
PEP
 Commonwealth Preference in the United Kingdom
Allen & Unwin
Assistance from the United Kingdom to Overseas Development
Cmnd 974 HMSO
Customs and Excise Tariff of the United Kingdom HMSO
The European Free Trade Association HMSO
United Kingdom Balance of Payments Twice Yearly
1946-5? (No. 2) HMSO
1958-60 Cmnd 1329 HMSO
1958 5 o
1961 free
1958 5 o
i960 18 o
1959 21 o
1957 3 6
1960 7 6
1960 1 o
1958 12 6
1959 2 o
1959 10 o
1961 1 6
55°
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Accounts Relating to the Trade and Navigation of the United
Kingdom Monthly HMSO
Board of Trade Journal Weekly HMSO
Report on Overseas Trade Monthly HMSO
Britain’s Trade with the Sino-Soviet Bloc Reference Paper R.4738
COI
United Kingdom Government Financial Assistance for Developing
Countries Reference Paper R.4928 COI
Internal Trade
Caplin, Robert S. Advertising: A General Introduction
Business Publications
Jefferys, J. B. Retail Trading in Britain 1850-1950
Cambridge University Press
Political and Economic Planning. Consumer Protection and
Enlightenment PEP
Stacey, N. and Wilson, A. The Changing Pattern of Distribution
Business PublicationsjBatsford
Co-operative Independent Commission Report Co-operative Union
Census of Distribution and Other Services 1950
Vol. I. Retail and Service Trades: Area Tables HMSO
Vol. II. Retail and Service Trades: General Tables HMSO
Vol. III. Wholesale Trades HMSO
Census of Distribution and Other Services 1957 HMSO
Interim Report of the Committee on Consumer Protection
Cmnd 1011 HMSO
Consumer Protection and Guidance in the United Kingdom
Reference Paper R.4031 COI
XV. LABOUR
Chisholm, C. Communication in Industry Business Publications
Department of Social Science University of Liverpool. The
Dock Worker University of Liverpool Press
Flanders, Allan. Trade Unions Hutchinson
 and Clegg, H., Editors. The System of Industrial Relations
in Great Britain Blackwell
Heginbotham, H. The Youth Employment Service Methuen
Marsh, John. Partners in Works Relations
Industrial Welfare Society
National Dock Labour Board. Annual Report and Accounts
For i960 NDLB
National Institute of Industrial Psychology. The Foreman
Staples
 Joint Consultation in British Industry Staples
Roberts, B. C. Trade Union Government and Administration in
Britain Bell
Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents. Building
Regulations Handbook. 5 th edn RSPA
Silberston, D. M. Youth in a Technical Age Parrish
Thompson, Laurence. The Challenge of Change
Oxford University Press
Thomson, D. Cleghorn. Management, Labour and Community
Pitman
1960
1961
1959
1954
1960
1958
1958
1953
1954
1955
1959
1960
1959
1955
1955
1952
1954
i95i
1960
1961
1951
1952
1956
1959
1959
1957
1957
s. d.
22 6
1 3
3 6
free *
free*
i5 °
60 o
3 6
45 °
6 8
7 6
22 6
15 °
5 °
1 o
free*
35 °
17 6
8 6
30 o
8 6
5 °
3 6
12 6
21 o
31 6
10 o
21 o
5 °
35 °
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Williams, Gertrude. Recruitment to Skilled Trades Routledge
Annual Reports
Chief Inspector of Factories For i960 Cmnd 1419 HMSO
Chief Inspector of Mines and Quarries For i960 HMSO
Industrial Health. Report by the Chief Inspector of Factories
For i960 Cmnd 1478 HMSO
Ministry of Labour For i960 Cmnd 1364 HMSO
Ministry of Labour and National Service
For 1939-46 Cmd 7225 HMSO
Automation: Report on the Technical Trends and their Impact on
Management and Labour HMSO
Census 1951. England and Wales. Occupational Tables HMSO
Directory of Employers’ Associations, Trade Unions, Joint
Organisations, etc. HMSO
Employment Policy Cmd 6527 HMSO
Industrial Relations Handbook, rev. edn HMSO
Positive Employment Policies HMSO
Report of the Committee of Enquiry on the Rehabilitation, Training
and Resettlement of Disabled Persons Cmd 9883 HMSO
Report of the Committee of Enquiry on the Training of Supervisors
HMSO
Report of the Industrial Safety Sub-Committee of the National
Joint Advisory Council HMSO
Report of the National Advisory Committee on the Employment
of Older Men and Women Cmd 8963 HMSO
Second Report Cmd 9628 HMSO
Report of the National Youth Employment Council on the Work of
the Youth Employment Service 1953-56 HMSO
Report on Safety and Health in the Building and Civil Engineering
Industries 1954-58 Cmnd 953 HMSO
Resettlement Advisory Board. Progress Report 1957-59
Cmnd 789 HMSO
Services for the Disabled HMSO
Time Rates of Wages and Hours of Labour HMSO
Training for Skill HMSO
Ministry of Labour Gazette Monthly HMSO
Problems of Progress in Industry (DSIR series) HMSO
Labour Relations and Conditions of Work in Britain
COI Reference Pamphlet RF.P.4629 HMSO
Health at Work Ministry of Labour/COI
Education and Training for Industry and Commerce in Britain
Reference Paper R.4593 COI
Rehabilitation and Care of the Disabled in Britain
Reference Pamphlet RF.P.4274 COI
The Trade Unionist in Britain
Reference Pamphlet RF.P.4600 COI
1958
1961
1961
1961
1961
1947
1956
1956
1960
1944
1961
1958
1956
1954
1956
1954
1955
1956
1960
1959
1955
1961
1958
1957
to
1960
1960
1961
i960
i960
i960
XVI. SOUND AND TELEVISION BROADCASTING
British Broadcasting Corporation. British Broadcasting: A
Bibliography BBC 1958
 BBC Handbook 1961 BBC 1961
551
s. d.
23 o
7 o
4 o
3 6
7 °
7 o
6 o
147 o
21 o
I o
5 6
1 6
5 6
2 o
1 6
2 o
1 9
2 6
1 6
1 3
6 6
16 o
2 6
2 6
2 o
to
3 6
2 6
free
free*
free*
free*
5 o
6 o
552
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
British Broadcasting Corporation. The BBC Television Service:
A Technical Description. 3rd edn BBC 1952
 The Public and the Programmes BBC 1959
Crozier, Mary. Broadcasting Oxford University Press 1958
Gorham, Maurice. Broadcasting and Television since 1900 Dakers 1952
Himmelweit, Hilda T. and others. Television and the Child: an
Empirical Study of the Effect on the Young
Oxford University Press 1958
Paulu, Burton. British Broadcasting: Radio and Television in the
United Kingdom University of Minnesota I Oxford University Press 1956
 British Broadcasting in Transition Macmillan 1961
Political and Economic Planning. Television in Britain PEP 1958
Ross, Gordon. Television Jubilee W. H. Allen 1961
Simon of Wythenshawe, Lord. The BBC from Within Gollancz 1953
Annual Reports and Accounts
British Broadcasting Corporation
For 1959-60 Cmnd 1174 HMSO i960
Independent Television Authority For 1959-60 HMSO i960
Copy of a New Charter of Incorporation Granted to the BBC
Cmd 8605 HMSO 1952
Copy of the Licence and Agreement between the Postmaster General
and the BBC Cmd 8579 HMSO 1952
Copy of an Agreement Supplemental to the Licence and Agreement
Cmnd 80 HMSO 1957
Copy of an Agreement dated June 2, i960, between the Postmaster
General and the BBC Supplemental to a Licence and Agreement
made June 12, 1952 Cmnd 1066 HMSO i960
Copy of the Licence granted on April 6, 1955, by H.M. Postmaster
General to the Independent Television Authority
Cmd 9451 HMSO 1955
Memorandum on Television Policy Cmd 9005 HMSO 1953
Overseas Broadcasting: Report from the Select Committee on
Estimates HMSO I952
Report of the Broadcasting Committee 1949 Cmd 8116 HMSO 1951
Appendix H. Memoranda Submitted to the Committee
Cmd 8117 HMSO 1951
Sound and Television Broadcasting Services in the United Kingdom
Reference Paper R.4745 COI i960
XVII. THE PRESS
Abrahams, Gerald. The Law for Writers and Journalists Jenkins 1958
General Council of the Press. The Press and the People: Seventh
Annual Report The Council i960
Herd, Harold. The March of Journalism: The Story of the British
Press from 1622 to the Present Day Allen & Unwin I952
Leaper, W. J. Copyright and Peiforming Rights Stevens 1957
Mass Observation. The Press and Its Readers Art & Technics 1949
Political and Economic Planning. Balance Sheet of the Press
PEP 1955
 Ownership of the Press PEP 1955
s. d.
2 6
8 6
7 6
42 o
48 o
35 0
3 6
21 o
16 o
9 o
3 6
9
6
6
1 3
4
4
6 6
6 6
10 6
free*
21 o
2 o
21 o
25 °
7 6
2 6
2 6
BIBLIOGRAPHY
553
Political and Economic Planning, What’s in the News? PEP
 The Work of Newspaper Trusts PEP
Robbins, Alan Pitt. Newspapers To-day Oxford University Press
Taylor, H. A. The British Press Barker
Williams, Francis. Dangerous Estate Longmans
Business and Specialised Publications of Great Britain
Council of Trade\Technical Press
Kemsley Manual of Journalism. 2nd edn Cassell
The National Readership Survey
Institute of Practitioners in Advertising
Newspaper Press Directory 1961 Annual Benn Bros.
Willing’s Press Guide 1961 Annual Willing's Press Service
Writers’ and Artists’ Year Book 1961 Annual Black
Report of the Royal Commission on the Press 1947-49
Cmd 7700 HMSO
Training of Journalists UNESCO/HMSO
The British Press Reference Pamphlet RF.P. 4917 COI
XVIII. SPORT
Abrahams, Harold, and Crump, Jack, Editors. Athletics
Naldrett Press
Achilles Club. Modern Athletics, edited by H. A. Meyer
Oxford University Press
Altham, H. S. and Swanton, E. W. A History of Cricket. 4th edn
Allen & Unwin
Green, Geoffrey. The Official History of the F.A. Cup
Heinemann
 Soccer: The World Game Phoenix House
Lonsdale, Lord, and Parker, Eric, Editors. The Lonsdale Library
[30 vols. on various sports] Seeley Service
Owen, L. O. History of the Rugby Football Union Playfair Books
Amateur Athletic Association Handbook For 1961 AAA
Amateur Swimming Association Handbook ASA
Badminton Association of England Annual Handbook BA of E
English Bowling Association Official Year Book EBA
Football Association Year Book For 1961-62 Heinemann
The Golfers Handbook 1961 Golfers Handbook, Edinburgh
Horse and Hound Year Book 1960-61 Odhams
Lawn Tennis Association Handbook LTA
Official Rules of Sports and Games 1961-62 Kaye
Playfair Rugby Football For 1961-62 Playfair Books
Royal Automobile Club Guide and Handbook RAC
Ruff’s Guide to the Turf For 1961 Sporting Life
Wisden’s Cricketers’ Almanack Sporting Handbooks
Yachting World Handbook 1961 Ilijfe
s. d.
1956 2 6
1959 3 6
1956 12 6
1961 21 o
1957 24 o
1958 free
(limited)
1954 25 o
1959 210 o
1961 60 o
1961 40 o
1961 10 6
1949 15 6
1958 10 o
1961 free*
1951 12 6
1958 21 o
1948 15 o
1960 21 o
1953 12 6
1929 15 o
to to
1958 35 o
1956 18 o
1961 10 6
1961 6 o
1961 2 6
1960 2 6
1961 3 6
1961 30 o
i960 17 6
1960 7 6
1961 25 o
1961 7 6
1961 12 6
1961 30 o
1961 21 o
1961 45 o
Most of the organisations concerned with sport publish year books covering results and
records of the previous season and future prospects; many weekly or monthly periodicals on
sport are also published. In addition, some newspapers issue annual surveys of sport.
INDEX
Bold type in a sequence of figures indicates main references
Items are indexed under England, Northern Ireland, Scotland or Wales only where they are
matters peculiar to these countries; otherwise they are indexed under the relevant subj ect headings.
Page
Page
AAA see Amateur Athletic Association
ASLIB see Association of Special Libraries
Aberdeen:
industry . . . . . . . • • . 262
port  262, 352
press . . . . . . • • • • 496
research.. .. .. .. 221,351
University .. .. 113,171,351
Aberystwyth . . . . . . i73» 351
Accepting Houses. . .. .. 4I5> 435
Accession Council . . . . 29, 32
Accident Prevention Movement. . . . 467
Accidents:
industrial . . . . . . 466-7
road users . . .. • • • • 382
Accrington.. .. .. .. •• 261
Administrative Staff College . . . . 274
Administrative tribunals . . 94_5
Admiralty 50, 116, 118, 120, 122, 218, 266
constabulary . . . . . . ..no
Court 90
tankers . . . . . . . . • • 363
See also Research, naval
Adoption see Children
Adult Education see Education
Advertising . . . . 45°» 4^5> 4&9
Advertising Advisory Committee 486, 489
Advisory bodies (to Government Depart¬
ments) .. .. •• •• 48-9
Advisory Committee on Fishery Research 222
Advisory Committee on Medical Research
(Scotland) . . . . • . • • 223
Advisory Committee on Utilisation of
Home Grown Timber . . . . . . 361
Advisory Council on Employment of
Prisoners . . . . • • • • i°3
Advisory Council on Scientific Policy 210,
214, 226, 227
on Treatment of
. . .. 101, 109
Advisory Council
Offenders
Advocates . .
Aerosol dispensers
After-care:
prisoners
young offenders
After-Care Council
• • 97
■ • 449
105-6
. . 107
• • 105
Age distribution see Population
Agricultural Colleges .. .. 351-2
Agricultural Executive Committees . . 340
Agricultural Executive Officers . . . . 340
Agricultural Land Service . . 273, 350
Agricultural Loans Fund.. . . . . 344
Agricultural machinery industry 260, 301, 338
Agricultural Mortgage Corporation 344, 417
Agricultural Research Council 214, 217, 350
Agricultural Research Fund . . .. 217
Agricultural wages boards . . 476-7
Agricultural workers:
earnings . . .. .. . . . . 462
numbers. . . . 247, 326, 451, 452, 453
protective legislation . . . . 466, 468-9
Agriculture . . 247, 251, 326-52, 360
330,
advisory services
animal disease control . .
annual reviews ..
area available for
artificial insemination (ai)
breed societies . .
credit facilities for
crofts and crofters
crops .. . . 327-9,
dairying 327, 330, 331, 333-
education and training
expenses and income
exports . .
farm tenure
farmers’ organisations
farms, number, size and types 5-6, 326-9
feedingstuffs . . . . 330, 331, 337, 351
fertilisers . . 332, 336, 337, 342, 351
food supplies, home grown . . 247, 331
fruit growing . . . . .. . . 336
glasshouse crops . . . . . . 336
government support for 329, 336, 338-9,
340-4
grants see subsidies
.•35°
•• •• 349
339, 340 1, 342
. . 326
333, 334
. . 329
••344
••345
332-3, 337
-4, 337, 35i
• • 329, 351-2
336-8
.•338
326, 336-7, 347-8
.. 329
grass
hill farming
horticulture
land drainage
ley farming
livestock . .
6, 326, 327-9, 333, 342, 35i
• • 327, 337, 342, 343, 360
335-6, 339, 343-4, 348-9,
35L 352
  343, 347
327-9, 342
 338
554
INDEX
555
Page
Agriculture—contd.
machinery syndicates . . .. ■ • 343
manpower see Agricultural workers
marginal production scheme . . . . 342
market gardening .. . . 335_6
marketing boards and schemes 333, 341,
348 9
mechanisation . . .. 301, 338, 343
milk production and distribution 333-4, 341
329,
.•338
342-3, 349, 35i
349-50
338-45, 349
• • 339, 341-2
326, 329-36, 424
326, 327, 337
468-9
• • 344-5, 360
pedigree stockbreeding
pest clearance . .
plant health service
policy of Government
price guarantees
production
research see Research
rough grazing . .
safety in ..
smallholdings
soils .. .. 5-6,326,332,351,359
subsidies and grants 338, 339, 340-4,
345, 346
veterinary services .. . . . . 349
Agriculture, Fisheries and Food,
Ministry of 50-51, 217, 218, 221, 222,
224, 268, 273, 335, 339, 340, 350,
355, 356, 359, 393
Aid to overseas countries see Finance
Air Council .. .. 51,116,130
Air Force see Royal Air Force
Air Ministry 51, 116, 118, 120, 222, 393
.. no
151, 278-9
387-8, 469
..388
51, 116, 130, 393
••393
134, 183
constabulary
Air pollution, prevention of
Air Registration Board
Air Safety Board ..
Air, Secretary of State for
Air Traffic Control Board
Air Training Corps
Air Transport see Civil Aviation
Air Transport Advisory Council . . 388
Air Transport Licensing Board . . . . 387
Airbrokers Association . . . . . . 392
Aircraft:
and aero-engines industry 267, 297, 309,
387
civil . . . . 309, 386-7, 389, 390, 39i
Service . . . . 116, 120, 122, 124, 131-2
Aircraft and Armament Experimental
Establishment . . . . . . 120, 123
Aircraft carriers . . .. . . • • 123
Airmail services see Civil Aviation and
Post Office
Airports see Civil Aviation
Albemarle Committee . . . . . . 182
Aldeburgh Festival . . . . . . 245
Aldermaston . . . . . . . . 219
Aldermen . . . . . . . . • • 75
Aliens . . . . . . • • 14, 55
All England Netball Association . . 506
Page
All England Women’s Hockey Association 506
Almoners .. .. .. .. 156, 162
Amalgamated Engineering Union . . 366
508
5i5
511
512
158, 159-60
198
217
234
173
Amateur Athletic Association
Amateur Boxing Association
Amateur Rowing Association
Amateur Swimming Association
Ambulance services . . 139
Amenities preservation societies
Anancaun field station
Ancient Monuments Boards
Anderson Committee
Anglesey
Anglican Communion
See also Church of England
Animal Health
Antibiotics ..
Anti-Locust Research Centre
202-3
•• 349
• • 213
224
Apparel and Fashion Industry’s Asso¬
ciation* .. .. .. .. ..318
Appeal Committee of Quarter Sessions 93
Appellate courts . . . . 44, 90-1, 93, 94
Apprenticeship .. . . 175, 176, 457
Approved schools (young offenders) 63, 106-7
Approved Woodlands Scheme . . .. 360
Aquatic Sports .. .. .. 511-2
Arbitration Boards . . . . . . 477
Archbishops . . 33, 46, 201, 203, 206
Architects’ Registration Council. . . . 235
Architecture and architects . . 233-5, 294
Area Boards:
electricity . . 265, 282, 283, 286, 287
gas . . . . . . 265, 288, 289, 290
railways . . . . . . . . .. 376
Area Colleges see Education, technical
Area Consultative Councils:
electricity . . .. . . . . 283
gas . . .. .. .. .. 288
Armament Research and Development
Establishment . . . . . . . . 120
Armed Forces .. .. • •Ii5-34, 137
commissioned ranks in. . . . 119-20
equipment 120-22, 123, 124-5, tzS, 131-2
national service in . . 117, 118, 119
overseas commitments and deployment 115,
116, 119, 124, 127, 130
participation in civil defence . . . . 137
126, 130, 134,
183
pre-Service organisations
recruitment and training
research and development
reserves ..
resettlement service
staff colleges
strength ..
voting at elections
118,
Arms and ammunition exports
118-9, 125-6,
128-9, 132-3
120-2, 124,
131, 219, 221
126, 129-30, 133
119,456
.. 120
117, 118, 452
• • 35
427
556
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Army 1x5, 116, 117, 118, 119, 127-30, 137
Army Cadet Force .. .. 130, 183
Army Council . . . . . . 116, 127
Army Emergency Reserve . . . . 130
Arrest, law relating to . . . . . . 86
Art collections and exhibitions . . 230-2
Art colleges and schools . . 175, 232-3, 235
Art Exhibitions Bureau .. .. .. 232
Art societies .. .. .. .. 232
Arts Council of Great Britain 229, 230, 232,
235, 238, 239, 245, 246
Arts, promotion of .. .. 228-46
Ashmolean Museum . . .. ..231
Ashridge College . . .. . . . . 274
Assay Offices .. .. .. .. 311
Assizes .. . . . . .. • • 93
Associated British Picture Corporation . . 241
Associated Newspapers .. . . 492, 494
Associated Northern Ireland Newspapers 498
Associated Press . . . . . . .. 498
Associated-Rediffusion .. . . 169, 486
Association football see Football
Association for the Preservation of Rural
Scotland. . . . .. .. ..198
Association of British Chambers of
Commerce .. . . . . 268, 272
Association of Special Libraries and
Information Bureaux (aslib) . . 228, 237
Association of Specialised Film Pro¬
ducers .. . . .. .. .. 241
Astronomy.. .. .. .. 220-1
Athletics . . .. . . . . . . 5°8
Athlone Fellowship Scheme . . . . 180
Atomic energy see Nuclear energy
Atomic Energy Authority (UK) 121, 218-9,
266, 285, 287, 304
Attendance centres (young offenders) . . 107
Attorney-General . . . . . . 45, 57, 87
Audience research (broadcasting) 488, 490
Auditor General see Comptroller
Auxiliary Fire Service . . . . t35»
Aviation see Civil Aviation
Aviation, Ministry of 52, 81, 116, 118, 120-1,
218, 222, 266, 268, 309, 387, 392, 393
Aycliffe .. .. .. .. .. 194
Ayre  262, 352
B
BBC see British Broadcasting Cor¬
poration
BCG see Vaccination
BEA see British European Airways
BOAC see British Overseas Airways
Corporation
Bach Choir .. . . . . . . 244
Bacteriological laboratory services 157, 223
Bail.. .. . . .. .. . . 86
JBakerian lectureship .. . . . . 209
Baltic Exchange
Bangor
Bank Holidays
Bank notes..
Bank of England
Page
Balance of payments 49, 256-7, 363, 436-40
Ballet and ballet companies . . 244, 246
Ballistic Missile Early Warning Station 122,
131
366, 391, 435
173,351
. . 466
412, 413, 518
265, 402, 412, 416, 417,
418, 431, 436
Bank rate .. .. .. .. 256, 412
Banking system .. .. .. 412-5
Baptist Church . . . . . . . . 204
Barristers . . . . . . . . 97~8
Barrow . . . . . . . . .. 261
Basildon . . . . .. . . .. 194
Basket-ball.. .. .. .. ..511
Batley .. .. .. .. .. 261
Beaverbrook Newspapers .. 492, 495
Beer, consumption of . . . . 320-1
Belfast:
airport (Nutt’s Comer)
art, drama and music . .
College of Technology
Corporation
electricity supply
Fire Brigade
Harbour Commissioners
Housing ..
Industries . . .. 258,
Museum and Art Gallery
Newspaper Society
population
port
studios (BBC) ..
transport (passenger) . .
University see Queen’s University
Betting  22, 504, 513
Beveridge Report (social insurance)
Bicycle industry see Cycle industry
Bills, parliamentary
231,
• • 392
239, 244
177-8
82, 284
. . 284
. . 82
• • 37i
•• 199
262, 300, 321
231
498
17
369, 37°, 37i
488
385
5i4
140
Money Bills
Private Bills
procedure
Public Bills
Royal Assent to
Birds
Birkenhead
Birmingham:
airport (Elmdon)
art, drama and music
College of Technology
industries
Museum of Science and Industry
newspapers
population
public transport
Studio (BBC)
University
38-9
38, 39
39, 73
• 37-41, 50
38-9
30, 39
6-7, 509, 520
. . 261
..392
231, 238, 239, 244
..177
260, 262, 311, 320
.. 225
• • 495
15, 17, 19
.. 381
488
171, 2X0
INDEX
557
Page
9-10. 11
 8, 9
318-9
33, 46, 201, 203, 206
.. 261
.. 483
.. 460
147, 236
139, 147-8
.. 156
Birth rate . .
Births, registration of
Biscuit industry . .
Bishops
Blackburn . .
Blind persons:
broadcast receiving licences for
employment and training
National Library for
welfare . .
Blood transfusion service. .
Blue Streak rocket
Board of Customs and Excise see Customs
and Excise
Board of Inland Revenue see Inland
Revenue
Board of Trade see Trade
Bodleian Library ..
Boilers and boilerhouse plant
Bolton
Book Society
Books
See also Libraries
Booksellers’ Association . . .. .. 237
Borough Councils (Northern Ireland) . . 72
See also County borough councils and
Non-county borough councils
Borstal institutions . . 102, 104, 108
. . 236
•• 304
.. 261
. • 238
235-7, 324
Orchestra
5L
15
260,
Botany
Bournemouth Symphony
Bowls
Boxing
Boy Scouts Association
Boys’ Brigade
Bracknell ..
Bradford
Bradwell
Bread and flour confection
Brewing industry . .
Brickmaking
Bridges
Bristol
art and drama . .
College of Technology
design exhibition
industries
Physics Laboratory
population
port of . .
studios (BBC) . .
University
Bristol Steamship Owners’
British Academy ..
British Actors’ Equity
British Amateur Athletic Board . .
British Amateur Wrestling Association..
British Association for the Advancement
of Science . . .. .. 209-10
British Association of Industrial Editors 499
224-5
• 244
• 507
• 5i5
. 183
. 183
. 194
17, 177, 261
.. 285
ery industry 318-9
. 320-1, 336
. . 322
• 295, 380
.. 195
231, 240
• • 177
• • 233
318, 321, 322
. . 211
.. 17
• 369, 370
.. 488
171, 211, 240,351
Association.
365
238
239
508
5i5
Page
British Bankers’ Association . . . . 413
British Board of Film Censors . . . . 243
British Boot, Shoe and Allied Trades
Research Association . . . . ..318
British Boxing Board of Control . . 515
British Broadcasting Corporation 169-70,
241, 244, 265, 483-91
orchestras . . . . . . . . 244
See also Broadcasting and Television
British Coal Utilisation Research Asso¬
ciation .. . . . . .. .. 280
British Commonwealth International
Newsfilm News Agency Trust . . 491
British Commonwealth Scientific Con¬
ference .. .. .. .. .. 226
British Commonwealth Scientific Office
and Offices .. . . . . . . 226
British Council 179, 180, 181, 227, 229,
230, 235, 238, 244
British Council of Churches . . . . 207
British Cycling Federation .. ..516
British Dental Association . . .. 162
British Drama League . . .. .. 240
British Egg Marketing Board .. 341, 348
British Electric Traction . . . . . . 381
British Electrical and Allied Industries
Research Association . . . . . . 287
British Electrical and Allied Manufac¬
turers’ Association . . .. .. 306
British Empire Cancer Campaign . . 163
British Employers’ Confederation 268, 272,
273, 473-4, 478, 481
British European Airways 265, 386, 388,
390-1, 396
British Field Sports Society . . . . 508
British Film Institute .. . . 229, 242
British Film Producers Association . . 241
British Film Production Fund . . .. 243
British Food Manufacturing Industries
Research Association .. .. . . 320
British Glass Industry Research Asso¬
ciation . . . . .. .. .. 323
British Horse Society . . . . . . 514
British Independent Air Transport
Association . . .. . . . . 391
British Institute of Management 273-4
British Iron and Steel Federation . . 298
British Isles . . . . . . . . 1-7
area . . .. . . . . .. 1
climate 4-5,6,331,358
fauna . . .. 6-7, 217, 221, 342-3
flora .. .. . . .. 6, 217
geology and topography . . . . 1-4
soil and vegetation . . . . . . 5-6
See also Population
British Jute Trade Research Association 317
British Leather Manufacturers’ Research
Association . . . . . . . . 318
British Legion . . . . . . .. 151
558
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
British Medical Association 162, 208, 471
British Medical Bulletin . . . . . . 227
British Mountaineering Council. . .. 516
British Museum .. . . . . 230, 236
Natural History . . . . 225, 236
British National Committee on Space
Research . . . . . . . . 220
British Overseas Airways Corporation 265,
309, 386, 388, 389-90
British Overseas Fairs Ltd. .. 268, 434
British Productivity Council 272, 273, 449
British Railways . . 266, 310, 372, 373, 374,
376-7
area boards . . . . . . . . 376
modernisation schemes . . 376-7
British Red Cross Society 139, 160, 162, 184
British Road Services (haulage) . . 373, 381
British Shipbuilding Research Association 301
British Show Jumping Association .. 515
British Standards Institution . . 272, 450
Consumer Advisory Council . . . . 450
British Sugar Corporation . . 341-2
British Technical Assistance Programmes 180
British Transport Commission 265, 266, 369,
37°, 372-5, 376, 381, 383, 384
divisions. . .. .. .. 372-4
police . . . . . . . . . . 101
British Transport Docks . . 369, 370, 373
British Transport Hotels and Catering
Services .. . . .. . . . . 373
British Travel and Holidays Association 428,
5i9
British United Press .. . . . . 498
British Waterways .. . . 383-4
Broadcasting . . .. 169-70, 483-91
advertisements . . .. .. . . 489
advisory councils and committees 485, 486,
489
audience research .. . . . . 490
491
491
488
42
Eurovision
international relations . .
monitoring
parliamentary summaries
relations with Government depart¬
ments . . .. . . .. 484, 488
religious . . .. . . .. 485, 486
research .. . . . . 483-4, 490-1
to schools .. . . 169-70, 487, 489
transcription service . . . . . . 488
wire . . .. . . . . . . 490
See also Employment and Licences
Buchanan medal . . . . .. . . 209
Buckingham Palace art gallery . . . . 231
Buddhist Community . . . . . . 207
Budget . . . . . . . . 405-11
Building and Civil Engineering . . 251, 267,
273, 294-6
contractors’ plant .. . . .. 303
employment in . . . . 267, 294, 453
Page
Building and Civil Engineering —contd.
industrial . . . . . . 262, 295
by local authorities . . 185, 186, 187, 294
new towns, progress in . . 194-5
overseas .. . . .. . . 294, 295-6
prefabrication
private ..
production
reconstruction
See also Education,
Research
Building Research Station
Building Societies. .
Burghs see Scotland
Burnham Committees
Burnley
Bury
Bus and coach services
By-elections
By-laws
294, 296
186, 189, 294
186, 294, 295-6
. . 187-8, 195
Housing and
215, 223, 296
188, 253, 421
. . .. 169
. . .. 261
. . 261
373, 380, 381-2,
384, 385
34, 35
55,7i
CEMA see Council for the Encourage¬
ment of Music and the Arts
CERN see European Organisation for
Nuclear Research
COSPAR see Committee on Space
Research
Cabinet . . .. . . .. 46-7, 115
Office . . .. . . . . . . 49
Cable & Wireless Ltd. . . . . .. 398
Cables and wires (insulated) industry . . 307
Calder Hall . . . . . . 219, 285
Calouste Gulbenkian Foundation . . 230
Cambridge University 43, 128, 171, 173,
174, 352
Cavendish Laboratory . .
Churchill College
dramatic society
Institute of Criminology
Library . .
museums
Observatory
Press
sport . . . . .. 503, 504, 505
Cambridgeshire Village Colleges
Campbeltown
Canals see Inland waterways
Canning industry . .
Canteens
Canterbury
See also Archbishops
Capenhurst
Capital Issues Committee
Capital punishment
Cardiff 17,
211
210
240
109
236
231
220
237
5ii
179
352
319-20
.. 472
171, 201
. . 219
418, 441
100-1
173, 177, 231, 262, 367, 370,
37L 488, 496
INDEX
559
Page
Carnegie United Kingdom Trust 197, 211,
229. 232, 245
Carpets industry .. . . 260, 261, 315, 317
Catholic Child Welfare Council .. . . 149
Catholic Marriage Advisory Council . . 139
Catholic Young Men’s Society .. . . 183
Cats .. .. .. .. .. 520
Cavendish Laboratory see Cambridge
Cement and Concrete Association . . 296
Cement industry . . .. . . .. 323
Censorship:
broadcasting .. . . . . .. 484
films . . .. . . .. . . 243
plays . . . . .. .. .. 239
Census of Distribution . . 60, 447, 449
Census of Population . . . . 9, 15-19
Census of Production . . . . 60, 297
Central Advisory Water Committee 291, 292,
293
Central After-Care Association . . . . 105
Central Council for the Care of Cripples 139
Central Council of Physical Recreation 184,
502
Central Criminal Court .. . . • • 93
Central Electricity Generating Board . . 266,
282, 283, 284, 286
Central Engineering Establishment . . 279
Central Film Library .. . . .. 242
Central Fire Brigades Advisory Councils 80
Central Health Services Council . . 153
Central Institutions .. . . . . 177
Central Midwives Board . . . . .. 162
Central Music Library .. . . . . 246
Central Office of Information 48, 56, 64,
241-2, 464
Central Religious Advisory Committee
(bbc) .. .. .. .. .. 486
Central School of Arts and Crafts .. 232
Central School of Speech Training and
Dramatic Art .. . . . . .. 240
Central Statistical Office . . 49, 269
Central Treaty Organisation (cento) 115, 180
Central Youth Employment Executive . . 458
Cephalosphorins .. .. .. . . 213
Chamber of Shipping .. .. 364, 365
Chambers of Commerce . . . . . . 268
Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster 45, 96
Chancellor of the Exchequer 44, 49, 53, 403,
405
Chancery Division (High Court) . . 90
Channel Islands:
airports . . . . . . . . . . 397
area .. .. .. .. .. 1
bailiwicks . . . . . . . . 32
diocese .. .. .. .. .. 201
holidays (statutory) .. . . . . 466
language.. .. .. .. .. 19
legislature . . . . . . 26, 32
population .. . . .. .. 16
Page
Channel Islands—contd.
press . . . . . . . . . . 496
relationship with UK and Crown 26, 27,
32, 43, 55
telephone system . . .. • • 397
tourists to .. . . . . . . 22
war pensioners . . . . . . . . 54
See also Guernsey and Jersey
Chapelcross . . . . . . 219, 285
Charity Commission . . . . . . 138
Charter services (aircraft) . . 391-2
Chelsea Flower Show . . . . . . 24
Cheltenham . . . . . . . . 279
Chemical plant industry .. . . . • 305
Chemicals industries . . 215, 260, 311-4
Chief of the Defence Staff .. .. 116
Chiefs of Staff Committee . . . . 116
Children:
adoption of .. . . . . 92, 149
allowances for . . . . . . 141, 144
art, drama and music . . . . . . 232
broadcasts for . . .. . . . . 489
child guidance centres .. . . .. 170
cinema attendance and clubs . . 243-4
deprived of home life, care of. . 75, 149-50
employment .. .. .. 465, 470-1
handicapped .. .. .. 162, 170
nurseries .. .. .. .. 159
publications for.. .. .. ..236
See also Education, Family Allowances,
Juvenile Courts, Probation, Welfare,
and Youth
Children’s Advisory Committee (broad¬
casting) . . . . .. .. .. 486
Children’s Film Foundation . . . . 244
China manufacture . . . . 260, 322-3
Chiropodists .. . . . . . . 162
Chocolate .. .. .. .. ..319
Christian Scientists . . . . . . 205
Church Army . . . . . . .. 139
Church Assembly.. .. .. 201-2
Church Commissioners . . . . . . 202
Church in Wales (Anglican) . . . . 203
Church Lads’ Brigade . . . . . . 183
Church of England . . . . 200-2, 207
appointment of senior clergy . . 46, 201
archbishops . . . . . . 46, 201
bishops .. .. .. . . 46, 201
Convocations . . . . .. . . 201
dioceses . . .. . . . . 201, 203
Ecclesiastical Courts .. .. .. 202
finance .. . . . . .. .. 202
relations with Monarchy 29, 200, 201
relations with State .. . . .. 201
schools .. . . .. 165, 170, 202
Church of England Children’s Society . . 139,
149
Church of England Moral Welfare
Council . . . . . . . . . . 139
560
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
. . 183
• • 203
203-4
139, 149
. . 205
200-7
. . 207
• • 235
104, 139, 149
See also Clergy and the individual
denominations
Churches of Christ . . . • • • 205
c.i.f. (definition) . . . . . . • • 423
Cinemas . . . . . . 23, 240-1, 243-4
Cinematograph Films Council . . . . 243
Citizens’ Advice Bureaux . . I39> 45°
Citizenship . . .. • • I4> 55
Civic Trust (architecture) . . • • 235
Church of England Youth Council
Church of Ireland (Anglican)
Church of Scotland (Presbyterian)
Committee on Social Service
Church of Wales (Presbyterian)
Churches ..
co-operation between ..
preservation of historic
welfare work
52, 265, 268, 386-94
386, 390, 391, 396
• • 392, 393
391-2
.. no
265, 389-91
• •390
Civil Aviation
airmail services . .
airports . .
charter operations
constabulary
corporations
helicopter services
independent airline companies . . 391
international co-operation . . 393, 394
licences . . . . • • • • 387-8
meteorological information . . . . 393
ministerial responsibility for . . 387, 388-9
navigational aids . . . . • • 393
safety measures . . . . 388, 393-4, 469
tourist and economy services . . • • 389
traffic control .. .. • • 388, 393-4
See also Aircraft and Research
Civil Courts . . • • 85—6, 89—91
Civil Defence see Defence
Civil Engineering . . . . . . 294-6
Civil Service . . 65-70, 394, 464, 475, 478
Arbitration Tribunal . . . . • • 4?8
Commission . . . . • • .. 66
conditions of service . . . . 69-70, 478
earnings . . .. . . • • 69, 464
staff associations .. 69, 475, 478
Clarendon Laboratory and Press see
Oxford
Clean Air Council . . • • • • 279
Cleamays .. .. • • • • • • 382
Cleckheaton . . . • • • .. 261
Clergy .. . . •• • • . . 46
disqualified for House of Commons 35> 201
in House of Lords
Clerk of the House of Commons
Clerk of the Justiciary
Clerk of the Parliaments . .
Clerk of Session . .
Climate
Clinical Research Board . .
Clinics see Welfare
33, 201
34
97
34
97
4-5
163
Page
Clock and watch industry . . 305-6
Clothing industry . . .. . . 297, 317-8
Clubs:
social . . . . .. . . 23-4, 183
sports see Sport
youth . . . . . . . . 182, 183
Clyde Navigation Trust . . . . .. 371
Clydeside 15, 17, 262, 263, 300, 364, 380
See also Glasgow
Coal:
coalfields and mines 2, 247, 258, 260,
261, 262, 276, 277, 279, 289
consumers’ councils . . . . . . 278
consumption
exports and imports
industry ..
mechanisation ..
National Coal Board
277,
275, 278, 288
278, 425
276-80
..279
264, 265, 271,
276-80, 468, 472, 479
production and manpower . . . . 277
research . . .. . . . . 279-80
See also Mines and quarries
Coal Industry Welfare Organisation . . 472
Coal Research Establishment . . . . 279
Coal Tar Research Association . . . . 280
Coal Utilisation Council . . . . . . 290
Coalminers:
earnings . .
numbers employed
welfare . .
Coastal Shipping Advisory Committee
Coastguard Service
Co-education see Schools, types of
Coffee bars
Coinage
Coke consumption and production
Colchester University
Colleges see Education
Colne
Colombo Plan . . . . 180, 445, 457
Colonial Development Corporation .. 442
Colonial Office .. 52, 68, 163, 180, 387
Colonial Research. . . . .. . . 224
Colonies, Secretary of State for . . 44, 52
Combine harvesters . . 301, 332, 338
Combined Cadet Force . . . . 130, 183
Commercial Education see Education
Commission for New Towns . . . . 194
Commissioners of Irish Lights . . . . 368
Commissioners of Northern Lighthouses 368
Commissioners of Police . . . . .. 1x2
Committee on Space Research (cospar) . . 220
Commodity markets . . .. • • 435
Commons see House of Commons
Commons, Open Spaces and Footpaths
Preservation Society .. .. .. 198
Commonwealth Agricultural Bureaux and
Institutes .. .. 227, 228, 351
462
454
472
373
367
. . 24
412, 518
278, 289
.. 171
. . 261
INDEX
56l
Page
Commonwealth and Dependencies, aid
to.. .. .. 442,443,444,445
Commonwealth citizens . . . . . . 14
Commonwealth co-operation:
for broadcasting . . . . . . 491
for defence .. .. 115, 120, 121
in education .. . . 53_4, 179-81
financial and trade 342, 399, 413-4, 425,
427, 429, 436, 440, 44C 442-4, 445
for research 217-8, 220, 224, 226, 227
social service agreements . . .. 141
Commonwealth Development Corpora¬
tion .. .. .. .. .. 442
Commonwealth Development Finance
Company Limited . . . . 417, 441
Commonwealth Education Conference . . 181
Commonwealth Forestry Conference . . 361
Commonwealth Games . . 508, 511, 515
Commonwealth Institute. . .. 53-4, 236
Commonwealth Press Union . . . . 498
Commonwealth, Queen as Head of 26-7, 29
Commonwealth Relations Office 52, 68, 387
Commonwealth Relations, Secretary of
State for.. .. .. .. 44,52
Commonwealth Scholarship and Fellow¬
ship Plan . . . . . . 180, 181
Commonwealth Sugar Agreement . . 342
Communications see Post Office and
Research
Community centres . . . . 178, 195
Companies, registered . . . . . . 266
Comptroller and Auditor General 218, 403-4
Concert halls . . . . . . . . 244
Confectionery industries see Food
Conference of Repertory- Theatres . . 240
Congregational Church . . . . . . 204
Consolidated Fund . . . . 402, 410
Constabulary, Inspectors of . . ..in
Construction Industries . . . . 294-7
Construction equipment . . . . . . 303
Consumers’ Councils and Committees:
coal .. .. . . . . . . 278
electricity . . . . . . . . 283
gas . . .. .. .. .. 288
nationalised industries . . . . . . 271
transport . . .. . . . . 375
Consumer expenditure see Expenditure
Consumer goods industries see individual
industries
Consumer protection .. . . .. 450
Consumers’ Association Ltd. . . . . 450
Contemporary Art Society . . . . 232
Contractors’plant. . .. .. .. 303
Conurbations .. .. 15,17-19,191
Convalescent homes .. .. 155, 161-2
Co-operative banks . . . . •. 415
Co-operative marketing organisations .. 348
Co-operative societies . . 264, 446, 448-9
Co-operative Union . . .. . . 178
Page
Co-operative Wholesale Society 264, 415, 449
Copley medal .. .. .. .. 209
Corby . . . . . . . . 194, 260
Coronation. . . . . . . . 29, 201
Coroners’ Courts . . . . . . . . 94
Corporations, public see Public cor¬
porations
Corrective training . . . . 101, 102
Correspondence courses . . . . .. 178
Cost of living see Price, relation to income
Cotswold cloth . . . . . . . . 260
Cotton Board .. .. .. • • 315
Cotton Exchange . . . . . . . . 314
Cotton industry .. .. .. 261,314-5
Cotton, Silk and Man-made Fibres
Research Association . . . . ..315
Council for Encouragement of Music and
the Arts 229, 230, 231, 238, 239, 244, 246
Council for Nature . . . . . . 197
Conservation Corps . . . . . . 197
Council for Scientific and Industrial
Research. .
Council for the Preservation
England . .
Council for Wales. .
Council of Christians and Jews
Council of Industrial Design
Council of Legal Education
Council on Tribunals
Scottish Committee of. .
Counsel see Law, legal profession
Counsellors of State
Counties
Country sports
County Agricultural Executive
214, 215, 224
of Rural
. . 198
26
. . 207
233, 273, 45°
. . 97
. . 95
. . 95
■ • 3i
1, 71-2
508-10
_ Com¬
mittees . . . . . . . . ..340
County borough councils 72, 73, 78, 79,
158, 185, 192, 344, 379
County councils 72, 73, 74-5, 78, 79, 158,
185,192,196,344,379
County Court Rule Committee .. . . 96-7
County courts
County district councils 72, 73,
County farm institutes
County Music Committees
Court of Appeal . .
Court of the Presbytery . .
Court of Session (Scotland)
Court of the Synod
Courtauld Institute
Scientific and Educational Trust Fund 211
Courts-martial
Courts of Inquiry . .
Courts of Law see Law
Covent Garden Market . .
Covent Garden Opera Trust
Coventry . . 17, 171, 195, 231,
Crawley
Cricket
89-90
74-5, 79, 185
35i-2
.. 245
.. 91
• • 203
79, 9i
.. 203
•• 233
57, 95
•• 477
349, 446
. . 246
238, 260, 309
. . 194
22, 398, 505
562
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Criminal Courts ..
Criminal Investigation Department
Criminal records ..
Criminals, treatment of ..
Crofters’ Commission
Croonian lectureship
Crown see Monarchy
Crown Agents for Oversea
ments and Administrations
Crown Courts
Crown Dependencies
Crown Land
Crown Office
Crusade of Rescue
Culham research centre
Cumbernauld
Currency transactions
Page
..91-4
113-4
113-4
100-110
340, 345
.. 209
Govern-
68
93
26
326
64
139
219
194
247. 257, 412, 430-L
435, 436, 518
Customs and Excise, Board of 53, 243, 406,
407, 408
Customs and Excise duties see Taxation
Cutlery and flatware industry
Cwmbran . .
Cycle and motor cycle industry . .
Cycling
D
310
194
308
516
DAT AC see Development Areas Treasury
Advisory Committee
DSIR see Research, Scientific and Indus¬
trial, Department of
Dancing .. . . 23, 245, 246, 501, 508
Darwin lectureship . . . . . . 210
Darwin medal .. .. .. .. 209
Dawley .. .. .. .. .. 194
Death, causes of .. .. .. 11-12
Death duty see Taxation, estate duty
Death benefit and grant . . 144, 145, 146
Death rate .. .. .. 9-10, 11-12
Death sentence . . . . . . 100-1
Deaths, registration of . . . . . . 8-9
Decca navigational aid . . . . .. 393
Deer stalking . . . . . . . . 510
Defence .. .. .. .. 115-37
Board .. .. .. .. ..116
Civil (Home) . . .. . . 74, 134-7
Committee .. . . .. 115-6
expenditure .. .. 118,251,409,410
manpower . . . . .. 118-9, 452
Ministry of .. .. 53, 115-6, 118
policy . . . . .. . . 115-6
supply of weapons and equipment 120-22
US aid .. .. .. .. ..121
See also Armed Forces and Research
Defence Bonds . . . . . . 414, 415
Delegated legislation .. .. ..40-1
Demography . . . . . . . .7-25
Dental services . . . . 153, 155, 170
Page
Dentists  153, 154, 155, 162
Departments, see Government, depart¬
ments of, Northern Ireland, Scotland
and individual titles
Derby:
industry .. .. .. 260, 309, 322
Social Survey .. . . .. 22, 25
Derbyshire village college . . . . 179
Design Centres . . . . . . . . 233
Design and Industries Association . . 233
Detention centres . . .. . . . . 108
Development areas and districts 263-4, 454
Development Corporation for Wales . . 264
Development Corporations of New
Towns . . .. .. .. 186, 193-4
Development organisations see Industry
Development plans (towns)
Dewsbury . .
Dioceses see Church of England
Diphtheria see immunisation
Director of Public Prosecutions
Disablement:
benefit . .
employment of disabled
pensions (war) ..
rehabilitation
welfare services . .
Disablement Resettlement Service 156, 459-60
Discharged Prisoners’ Aid Societies . . 105
Discount market .. .. .. 415-6
Distributive trades 251, 445-9, 452, 453
192-3
. 261
57, 87-8
145-6
459-60
150-1
156, 456-7
147-8
District Councils (Scotland)
Divorce Court
Dock and Harbour Authorities’
ciation
Dock workers
Docks .. . . . . 369
Dockyards, naval ..
Doctor Barnardo’s Homes
Doctors:
Appointed Factory
in industry
in National Health Service 153
Dogs
Dollar area, trade with
See also individual
industries
Dollar Exports Council ..
Domesday Book ..
Domestic Coal Consumers’ Council
Domestic electrical appliances industry
Domestic help . . 22, 158, 159, 454, 458
Domestic proceedings (court) . . 92, 500
Dounreay . .
Dracones ..
Dragon (reactor)
72, 73
. . 90
Asso-
•• 369
371, 462
370-1, 373
no, 124
.. 149
470, 471
.. 471
154-5,162
.. 24, 78,520
426, 434, 440
manufacturing
 434
 231
278
307
Drainage Boards
Drama
Drinks industries
219,
287
. . 213
. . 219
• • 347
238-40
297, 320-1
INDEX
563
Page
Page
Duchy of Lancaster . . .. . . 44
Duke of Edinburgh’s Award Scheme . . 184
Duke of Edinburgh’s Prize for Elegant
Design 233
Dundee . . 173, 262, 302, 317, 496, 497
Durham . . . . . . 261, 277, 289, 317
University .. .. I7L i73> 35*
Dyestuffs .. .. .. .. ..311
Eady Fund see British Film Production
Fund
Earnings 23, 254-5, 462-5
East and West Friendship Council .. 181
East Anglia . . 6, 260, 301, 327, 353
East Kilbride .. .. . . .. 194
Ecclesiastical Committee . . . . . . 201
Economic and Social Research . . 208, 224
Economic Planning Board . . . . 270
Economy, national . . 247-57, 269
See also Balance of payments and
Finance
Edinburgh:
administrative departments in. . . . 62
industry . . . . . . 262, 311, 320, 321
International Festival . . . . . . 245
museums and art galleries . . . . 231
National Library of Scotland . . . . 236
population . . .. . . . . 17
port of (Leith) . . . . . . . . 370
press . . . . .. .. 496, 497
Royal Observatory . . . . . . 221
University .. . . 113, 171, 236, 351
Education .. . . .. . . 75, 163-81
administration . . . . . . . . 164
adult . . . . .. . . 75, 178-9
agricultural . . . . . . 351-2
architectural . . . . . . 234-5
art  175, 232-3
broadcasting to schools 169-70, 487, 489
building programme . . . . 170-1, 175
colleges . . 163, 169, 171, 175, 177, 232-3,
351-2
Education—con td.
management (for)
274
commercial
curriculum (schools)
day release
dramatic..
evening institutes
examinations
finance of
175, 178, 456
164, 166, 167, 170
175, 176
.. 240
175, 178
168, 174, 245
163, 165-6, 169, 171, 173-4,
175, 180
forestry . . . . . . . . . . 361
‘ further ’ . . . . .. 164, 175-9
General Certificate of see examinations
grants 164, 171, 173, 174
Inspectorate .. .. . . 53, 164
local education authorities 53, 75, 104,
164-71, 173, 175, 178, 179
Ministry of
music
physical ..
prisoners
religious . .
sandwich courses
scholarships
schools . .
building
health and welfare
leaving age
pupil numbers
types of
secretarial courses
special educational treatment .
teachers and teachers’ training
55, 164, 165, 166, 173, 176,
177, 179, 182, 197, 236, 501
..245
170, 501
. . 104
170, 202, 206
. . 176
165-6, 173-4, 178, 179, 180,
181, 476
164-71, 200, 205
170-1, 194, 195
170
. . 164
163, 164
163, 165-8, 171
. . 176
. . 170
168-9, 465
technical and technological 175-8, 211-2
visual aids in . . . . . . 169-70
vocational . . . . . . 456-7
See also Universities and Youth Services
Egg Marketing Board, British . . 341, 348
Eisteddfodau . . .. . . 238, 245
Elections:
local government . . 55, 75-6
parliamentary 34-5, 55
Electrical engineering see Engineering
Electrical equipment industries . . 22, 307
Electrical machinery industry . . . . 306
Electrical Trades Union . . . . • • 475
Electricity Board for Northern Ireland 265,
284, 286
Electricity Council
Electricity supply ..
consumers, number of
hydro-electric ..
nuclear power stations
See also Research
Electricity Supply Research Council
Electronic equipment:
defence
industry
265, 282-3, 287
. . 265, 282-7
..286
283, 285
285-6
287
post office
Ellesmere Port
Emigration. .
Employers’ organisations
Employment 249,
agricultural
armed forces
broadcasting
children . .
Civil Service
civil statistics
construction
. . 120
306-7
396, 397, 400
. . 261
13, 14
267-8, 366, 472-4,
476, 478
262-4, 266, 267, 270, 271,
294, 451-5
247, 326, 451, 452, 453
118-9
. . 484
465, 47°
67-8, 453
•• 453
.. 294
564
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
456, 459-60
447, 453, 454
22, 454, 458
462-5
455-9
465, 466-7
..81-2
• • 253
457-8, 521
77, 453
•• 274
266, 297, 298,
..368
266, 277, 453
45i, 456
no, 114
• • 37i
•• 394
. . 103
119, 455-6o
. . 460
460-80
456-7, 460
Employment—contd.
disabled persons
distributive trades
domestics
earnings ..
exchanges and offices
in factories
in fire service
in fisheries
foreigners
in local government
in managerial posts
manufacturing industries
301, 302, 303, 305, 306, 307, 309, 310,
311, 314, 317, 318, 319, 321, 322, 453,
454
Merchant Navy..
mining and quarrying
older workers
police
ports
Post Office
prisoners
services (Ministry of Labour)
sheltered
terms and conditions of
training centres . .
transport • • 363, 368, 372, 385
vocational guidance and training • • 455,
456-7, 459, 460
welfare and safety in . . 368, 466-72
See also Industrial injuries insurance
women 451, 452, 454, 462, 464, 465,
466, 470-1
young persons 457, 458-9, 462, 464, 465,
466, 470-1
See also individual industries, Labour,
Unemployment and Work, hours of
Engineering 210, 260, 295-6, 297, 301-10
aeronautical . . . . .. 210, 309
civil . . . . . . . . 295-6
electrical. . . . . . . . 228, 306-7
marine . . . . . . . . 210, 300-1
mechanical . . . . . . 301-6
Engines, industrial . . . . . . 302
England:
area . . . . . . .. . . 1
North-east coast . . .. . . 261
population . . . . . . 10, 15-19
South-east region .. . . 258-60
South-west region .. . . .. 260
West region .. .. . . . . 260
English Association . . . . . . 237
English Children’s Theatre . . .. 239
English Folk Dance and Song Society .. 245
English Lacrosse Union .. . . . . 506
English Speaking Union . . . . . . 181
Episcopal Church in Scotland . . 203, 207
Equal pay . . . . . . . . 464-5
Equity see Law
ERNIE ..
Estate duty see Taxation
Estimates (Exchequer)
Page
400
402-4, 408, 409,
410,411
Committee . . . . . . . . 404
European Atomic Energy Community
(Euratom) .. .. .. .. 219
European Broadcasting Union .. . . 491
European Economic Community 425, 429
European Free Trade Association (efta)
425, 429-30
European Monetary Agreement (for¬
merly European Payments Union) 428, 435
European Organisation for Nuclear
Research (cern) .. .. 220, 225
European Recovery Programme . . . . 440
Eurovision . . . . .. .. . • 491
Evidence, law of . . .. . . . . 89
Exchange control 53, 412, 430-1, 435,436,518
Exchange Equalisation Account.. 412, 436
Exchange Telegraph Company Ltd. . . 498
Exchequer see Finance
Excise duties see Taxation
Exeter University . . . . .. . . 171
Expectation of life . . .. . . 11
Expenditure:
consumer .. .. 249,251,254-5
public authorities 250, 251,254, 401, 402-12
See also Defence, Finance, Research
and Subsidies
Export Credits Guarantee Department
433, 445
Exports .. 247, 422-7, 429-30, 431-4
controls .. .. .. .. 431-2
councils .. . . . . .. .. 434
re-exports . . .. .. .. 426
See also Trade and individual industries
Extradition of criminals . . .. . . 55
Factories:
building 194, 195, 263, 295
Inspectorate . . . . .. 466-8, 470
legislative provisions .. .. .. 263
Faculty of Advocates .. .. .. 98
Families:
average size of . . . . . . 12, 20-21
welfare services for . . .. 140, 150
See also Households
Family Allowances . . . . 141, 400
Family Service Units . . .. . . 150
Family Welfare Association .. . . 139
Farming see Agriculture
Fashion House Group of London Ltd... 318
Fauna .. .. 6-7, 197, 217, 342-3
Fawley oil refinery .. 281, 370, 371
Federation of British Film Makers . . 241
INDEX
565
Page
Page
Federation of British Industries . . 268, 270,
272, 273, 434
Fen district . . .. . . 6, 327, 333
Ferrier lectureship . . . . . . 209
Fertilisers 311, 313, 332, 336, 337, 342,
346, 354
Fertility trends . . . . . . . . 12
Festivals (arts) . . . . . . 238, 245
Fife. . . . . . . . . . 262, 289
Fighting Vehicles Research and Develop¬
ment Establishment . . . . . . 120
Film production . . . . 241-4, 259, 488-9
401-21
439-4°
257, 440-5
412-5, 416
416-8
of the
. . 401
257, 439
Finance
aid from overseas countries
aid to overseas countries
banks
capital issues
Committee on the Working
Monetary System (Radcliffe)
Currency reserves
Exchequer 365, 371-2, 401, 402, 404, 410
financial institutions . . . . 412-21
financing of international trade
413-4, 434-6
inflation, counter measures 249, 256,
272, 406
local government . . 77 80, 254, 401
in Northern Ireland .. .. 4x1-2
parliamentary control of public finance
37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 401-4
public corporations 270-1, 277, 279, 287,
289, 372, 374
See also Balance of payments, Budget,
Estimates, Exchange control, Expen¬
diture, Income, Investment, National
Debt, Sterling, Taxation and Trade
Finance corporations
Fines (penalties) . .
Fire Offices’ Committee
Fire prevention research
Fire Service
Fishing:
freshwater
grounds
industry
ports
research
sport
Fitzwilliam Museum
Fleet Air Arm
Fleetway Publications
Flora
Food:
biscuits .. .. .. .. 318-9
bread .. . . . . . . 318-9
chocolate and confectionery . . . . 319
consumer expenditure on . . • . 255
distribution methods . . 355, 446, 448, 449
exports 318, 319
416-7
TOO, I06
82, 215
82
••80-3
354-5
• • 352
352-7
• • 352
221-2, 355
355, 5io
. . 231
. . 124
•• 495
6, 197, 217
Food—contd.
imports . . . . . . 247, 354, 422, 424
industries . . . . .. 318-20
ministerial responsibility for . . . . 50-1
Purity  74, 152, 45°
research  . . .. 222
Technology, College of Food .. .. 177
See also Agriculture, Fishing, School
Meals Service and Welfare Foods
Service
Food and Agriculture Organisation
(United Nations) . . . . 51, 224
Food Research Advisory Committee . . 222
Football:
22, 503-4
22, 504
•• 504
•• 5°4
.. 504
503-4
196, 198
3U, 318
. . 211
• • 223
44, 54
•• 435
• • 54
..67-8
association
pools
rugby
seven-a-side
Football Association
Football League . .
Footpaths and Bridleways
Footwear industry
Ford Foundation . .
Forecasting Research Station
Foreign Affairs, Secretary of State for
Foreign Exchange Market
Foreign Office
Foreign Sendee
Foreigners:
employment of . .
naturalisation of
visitors ..
See also Overseas Students
Forest:
21, 457-8, 521
.. 14
22, 428, 518-21
area
Parks
6, 197, 358, 359
197, 199
Forest Products Research Laboratory .. 361
Forestry  357-62
Commission 6, 54, 197, 357, 359-60, 361
360
.. 361
222, 361
. . 360
357, 359
• • 205
. . 207
204-5
319-20, 354
committees and societies
Commonwealth Conference
education and research
Fund
timber imports . .
Free Church of England . .
Free Church Federal Council
Free Churches
Freezing (food)
Fruit, production and distribution . . 336,
445, 446, 449
Fruit and Vegetable Canning and Quick
Freezing Research Association . . 320
Fuel   275-90, 424, 425
consumption . . 275, 278, 280-1, 289
efficiency . . . . . . . . 320
policy . . . . . . 276, 277, 279, 320
sources of . . . . .. . . 275
See also Coal, Electricity, Gas, Petrol¬
eum and Research
566
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Fulbright travel grants
Fulmer Research Institute
Furniture Development Council
Furniture industry
Furzebrook research station
Fylingdales Moor . .
Page
.. 181
. . 212
•• 325
325, 447
.. 217
.. 122
Page
GATT see General Agreement on Tariffs
and Trade
Gaelic .. .. .. .. .. 19
Gambling see Betting
Game Research Association .. ..510
Games . . . . 22, 164, 501, 503-7
Highland . . . . . . . . 508
Indoor . . .. . . .. 510-11
Gardens see Horticulture
Gas Council . . . . . . . . 265
Gas supply . . . . . . 287-90
by-products . . . . . . 289, 290
consumption . . . . . . . . 289
production .. . . . . 288-9
Gatwick airport .. . . . . . . 392
General Advisory Council (broadcasting) 485
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
(gatt)  428, 429, 43i
General Assembly of the Church of
Scotland.. .. . . .. .. 203
General Certificate of Education 168, 178
General Council of British Shipping . . 365
General Council of the Bar . . . . 97
of Northern Ireland . . . . . . 98
General Council of the Press . . 499-500
General Dental Council . . . . . . 162
General Medical Council. . . . 95, 162
General Nursing Council . . . . 162
General Optical Council . . . . . . 162
General Post Office see Post Office
General Practitioner Services . . 154-5
General Register Division, Northern
Ireland .. .. .. .. .. 8
General Register Office . . 8, 54, 223-4
General Registry Office, Edinburgh . . 8, 64
Geological Museum . . . . 225, 293
Geological Survey .. 213, 225, 323
Geology . . .. .. .. 2-4, 225
Geophysics . . . . . . 51, 223
Georgian Group . . . . . . . . 235
Gin industry . . . . . . . . 320
Girls’ Youth Organisations . . . . 183
Glasgow:
airport (Renfrew) . . . . . . 392
art gallery and museum . . . . 231
design centre . . . . . . • • 233
fire service . . . . . . 74, 80
Gorbals rebuilding . . .. -.195
housing . . .. .. . . 194, 195
Glasgow—contd.
newspapers
police
population
port of ..
public transport
road tunnel
Royal College of Science
Technology . .
Royal Scottish Academy
studios (BBC) . .
494,
113, 171, 210, 236, 351
University
See also Clydeside
Glass industry
Glenrothes. .
Gloucester . .
Glyndebourne (opera)
Gold and foreign currency reserves
496
.. 113
• • 17
369, 37°
• • 381
• • 380
and
.. 210
•• 245
.. 488
211, 261, 323
. . 194
245, 260
. . 246
257, 412,
436, 439
• • 311
435-6
.. 311
5°7
Gold and silver ware
Gold Market (London) . .
Goldsmiths’ Company
Golf  
Goods and services see Industry, produc¬
tion
Goods transport see Road haulage
Government . . . . . . 26-83
compositon of . . . . . . . . 44-5
departments of . . . . 27, 41, 48-65, 66
relations with industry 263, 264-6, 267,
268-71, 478
See also Civil Service, Expenditure,
Finance, Local Government,
Ministers, Monarchy, Parliament,
Privy Council and Research
Government Actuary, Department of .. 48
Government Chemist, Laboratory of 213, 215
industry
195, 262, 302, 311, 317, 321
Gramophone records, sale of
Grangemouth, port of
Grantham . .
Granton
Grassland Research Institute
Great Britain:
area
definition
population
Great Seal ..
Green belts
Greenwich Observatory see Royal Green¬
wich Observatory
Grid, electricity
Grid, gas . .
Grimsby .. .. .. 260,
Grocery trade
Guardian’s allowance
Guernsey:
family allowances
language..
population
. . 246
281, 370
. . 260
352, 371
•• 35i
..7-21
3°, 32
193
. 282, 286
. . 290
352, 353, 370
• 447, 448
.. 144
.. 141
. . 19
16
INDEX
567
Page
Guernsey—contd.
States of. . . . . . .. . . 32
See also Channel Islands
Guided weapons 120, 121, 122, 123, 128, 131
Early Warning Stations . . 122, 131
Establishment . . . . . . . . 120
Guild of British Newspaper Editors . . 498
Guild of Television Producers and
Directors . . . . . . . . 242
H
HMSO see Stationery Office
Habeas Corpus . . . . . . . . 88
Halifax .. . . . . . . 261, 317
Hall-mark (gold and silver) . . • 311
Handicapped persons see Welfare
Hand tools industry . . . . . . 311
‘ Hansard ’. . . . . . . . 38, 42
Hansard Society . . . . . . . . 42
Harbours see Ports
Harlow . . . . . . . . . . 194
Harpenden laboratory . . . . . . 221
Hartlepools . . . . . . . . 261
Harwell:
Atomic Energy Research Establish¬
ment .. . . . . 121, 219
Rutherford High Energy Laboratory . .
Hatfield
Health
220
220
• • 194
151-63
160-1
151-2, 160
• • 158, 159
470-2
54-5. 135, 153, 223, 269
.. 104
.. 163, 216, 223, 224
 74
. . 170
..159
See also National Health Service
Helicopters 125, 128, 132, 309, 380, 392
. . 194
• • 231
. . 2x9
• • 356
355-6
..90-1
• • 94
■ • 508
382, 520
447. 449
•• 449
.. 450
8, 233-5
• • 234
198, 234
235
236
centres
control of infectious diseases
home nursing
in industry
Ministry of
in prisons
research ..
sanitation
school children
visiting
Hemel Hempstead
Herbert Art Gallery and Museum
Hermes (isotope separator)
Herring Industry Advisory Council
Herring Industry Board . .
High Court of Justice
High Court of Justiciary (Scotland)
Highland Games . .
Highway Code
Hire purchase
finance companies
H.P. Information Ltd.. .
Historic buildings. .
bureau . .
councils . .
Historic Churches Preservation Trust
Historical Manuscripts Commission
197-
24, 335-6, 348-9
Trades Research
316
stry
153
154,
Page
Hobbies . . . . . . . . . . 24
Hockey . . . . . . . . 5°5-6
Association . . . . . . . . 506
Holidays . . . . . . . . 22, 466
Hollow-ware industry . . . . 310-1
Home Grown Timber Advisory Com¬
mittee . . . . . . .. .• 361
Home Grown Timber Marketing Corpor¬
ation .. . . . . .. .. 360
Home Office and Home Secretary 32, 44,
55, 80, 81, 97, 101, 102, 103, 105,
106-7, t°9> no, in, 134-5, 136,
137
Homicide see Murder
Honours . . . . . . . . 30, 46, 55
Horticultural Improvement Scheme . . 343
Horticultural Marketing Council 348-9
Horticulture
Hosiery and Allied
Association
Hosiery and knitwear ind
Hospital Car Service
Hospital Schools .
Plospitals . .
confinements in.
finance . .
mental . .
in new towns
Northern Ireland
number of
Scotland. .
staff
teaching . .
voluntary
voluntary help in
Hotels and Restaurants
House of Commons
business of
disqualification . .
election to
financial control
officers . .
party composition
privileges
See also Parliament,
Whips
House of Lords 31, 33-4;
as Court of Appeal
officers . .
privileges
Households
Houses, preservation of historic 197-8, 233-4,
235
Housewives . . . . . . 21, 451
37, 39,
• • 316
159-60
. . 170
155-6
.. 158
• • 154
• • 157
• • 194
161, 295
•• 155
154, 155
154, 155
•• 154
155-6
. . 162
• • 5i9
, 34-42, 201
• • 37
35, 201
34-5, 36
41-2, 401-4
34, 403-4
•-35-7
• • 35
Speaker, and
35, 37, 38, 39,
45, 47, 201
•• 91,93,95
33-4, 37
• • 35
21, 22
Housing
agricultural
associations
authorities
185-91, 267, 294
. . 189
186, 190
..185
568
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Housing—contd.
finance ..
furnished
for forestry workers
investment
Page
186, 187, 188-90
190-1
.. 360
251,252
local authorities’ responsibilities 185, 186,
187, 188, 267
ministerial responsibilities for. . 55, 185
in new towns
number of dwellings
old people’s
privately owned
progress in building
194, 195
..20,186,187, 294-5
.. .. 186, 187
.. 186,188, 189, 190
186, 187, 194, 195,
294-5
186, 188
190-1
187-8
.. 185
188-90
. . 20
purchase loans ..
rent control
slum clearance ..
standards
subsidies and grants
types of houses . .
Housing and Local Government,
Ministry of 55-6, 71, 185, 192, 193, 194,
291
Hovercraft.. .. .. .. ..213
Huddersfield .. . . .. . . 261
Hughes medal .. .. .. . . 209
Hull:
population .. .. .. . . 17
port and industry 261, 352, 353, 369, 370
rebuilding
telephones
University
Human Relations in Industry
Committee on ..
Human Sciences Committee
Hunting
Hurlingham Polo Association
Hydraulics Research Station
Hydro-electric power
• • 195
397
.. 171
480-2
.. 482
482
..509
. . 506
..293
283, 284, 285
224,
IBRD see International Bank for Re¬
construction and Development
ITA see Independent Television Authority
ITV see Independent Television
Immigration .. .. .. 13-14, 458
Immunisation .. .. .. 158, 160
Imperial Chemical Industries Ltd. 211, 264
Imperial College of Science and
Technology .. .. .. 175, 210
Imperial Defence College . . . . 120
Imperial Forestry Institute . . 222, 361
Imperial War Museum .. . . . . 230
Imports .. 247, 275, 290, 344, 422-5,
426, 428-30, 431, 438
licensing.. .. .. .. 431, 520
See also individual industries
Page
Improvement grants:
agricultural . . .. .. . . 343
housing . . . . .. .. 188-90
Income:
Government 254, 269, 401-2, 406-10, 411
personal .. . . 23, 252-3, 254-5, 256
See also Earnings
Income Tax see Taxation
Incorporated Association of Architects
and Surveyors . . . . . . . . 235
Incorporated Law Society of Northern
Ireland . . . . .. . . . . 98
Independent Television .. . . 483, 489
Authority 241, 483, 484, 485-6, 489, 491
News . . . . . . .. . . 486
programme companies . . 229, 241, 486
Independent Television Companies
Association . . .. .. 486, 491
Indictable offences .. . . 87, 88
Individual Efficiency in Industry,
Committee on . . . . .. . . 482
Industrial and Commercial Finance
Corporation Ltd. .. . . 416-7
Industrial Association see Industry-
Industrial building . . .. 262, 295
Industrial Civil Defence Service . . 134
Industrial Coal Consumers’ Council . . 278
Industrial Court . . .. . . . . 477
Industrial design . . .. . . . . 233
Industrial Estates . . . . . . . . 263
Industrial films .. . . .. 241, 242
Industrial injuries insurance . . 140, 143-4
Industrial Psychology . . . . . . 208
Industrial relations service . . 477, 480
Industrial Training Council . . . . 481
Industry .. . . .. . . 258-325
associations .. . . . . 267-8, 270
automation 297, 305, 323, 396, 397, 398
development areas and districts 263-4
development organisations .. . . 264
distribution policy . . . . 193, 262-4
expansion .. . . 248, 249, 271-2
health and welfare services . . 470-2
human relations in .. . . 480-2
investment in see Investment
location . . .. .. 258-62, 269
management . . . . 273-4, 464, 481
manufacturing . . 253, 266-7, 297-325
organisation . . . . . . 258-75
ownership . . .. . . 241, 264-7
production and productivity in .. 241,
249-51, 271-3, 294, 295, 297-325
Regional Boards . . . . . . 270
relations with Government 268-70, 477, 478
research in . . . . .. 212-3
restrictive practices, control of. . 274-5
structure. . . . . . . . 264-7
supervisors . . . . . . .. 467
training schemes 273-4, 460, 467, 475, 480-1
INDEX
Page
Industry—contd.
See also Employment, Exports, indi¬
vidual industries, Public corpora¬
tions, Research and Trade
Infectious diseases:
control of . . . . . . 151, 160
mortality from . . . . .. 11, 160
Inflation see Finance
Information, Central Office of 48, 56, 64,
241-2, 464
Injury benefit (industrial injuries)
Inland Revenue:
Board of. .
sources of
Inland transport
Inland waterways
145
• • 56, 78, 406, 407
254, 406-8, 409, 410, 411
372-86
363, 369, 37i» 373. 375,
383-4
•• 384
383-4
.. 384
. . 98
• • 97
• • 94
3i3, 35i
110, in, 114
466, 467, 468, 470
..468
53,
Board of Survey
development
Redevelopment Committee
Inn of Court of Northern Ireland
Inns of Court
Inquests
Insecticides
Inspectorates:
constabulary
factory . .
mines and quarries
public health
schools . .
Institute of Biology
Institute of Contemporary Arts ..
Institute of Incorporated Practitioners
in Advertising . .
Institute of Industrial Administration . .
Institute of Journalists
Institute of Physics
Institute of Registered Architects
Institution of Chemical Engineers
Institution ®f Civil Engineers
Institution of Electrical Engineers
Institution of Mechanical Engineers
Institution of Metallurgists
Instruments industry
Insurance ..
export credit
152
164
208
232
45°
273
• • 499
. . 208
•• 235
. . 208
208, 297
. . 208
176, 208
. . 208
• • 305
82, 419-21
• • 433
marine . .
See also National Insurance
365, 420
Interferon .. .. .. .. ..213
Internal Trade see Trade
International Aeradio Ltd. . . . . 394
International Air Transport Association 389
International Amateur Athletic Associa¬
tion .. . . .. .. .. 508
International Atomic Energy Agency . . 225
International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development (ibrd) . . 444, 445
International Bowling Board .. . . 507
569
Page
International Civil Aviation Organisa¬
tion (icao)  387, 393
International Convention for Preven¬
tion of Pollution of Sea by Oil . . 367
International Council of Scientific Unions
(icsu) . . .. . . . . 209, 220
International Development Association
(ida) . .  444
International Finance Corporation . . 444
International Geophysical Year . . 216, 220
International Labour Organisation 57, 227, 474
International Machine Tools Exhibition 302
International Monetary Fund 257, 428, 439
International Police Commission (Inter¬
pol) .. .. .. .. .. 114
International Telecommunication Union 491
International Theatre Institute . . . . 239
International Whaling Commission .. 357
Investment.. .. .. .. 251-3
in fuel and power industries 279, 281, 287,
289, 292
overseas .. . . 257, 427, 438, 440-5
trusts . . . . .. . . .. 418
United States and other in Britain . . 440
See also Savings
Invisible transactions see Trade
Ipswich .. .. .. .. .. 260
Ireland see Irish Republic and Northern
Ireland
Irish Football Association . . . . 503
Irish Republic . . . . . . 1, 26
airmail service . . . . . . .. 396
census .. . . . . . . 9, 14, 16
citizens’ employment in UK . . . . 458
citizens’ status in UK . . . . . . 14
citizens’ voting rights in UK . . 35, 75
insurance reciprocity .. . . . . 141
population . . .. . . . . 16
relations with UK Government . . 52
war pensioners .. . . . . 55, 58
Iron and Steel Board . . . . . . 298
Iron and Steel Holding and Realisation
Agency 298
Iron and steel industry . . . . 262, 298-9
Iron founding industry .. . . . . 299
Isaac Newton optical telescope . . . . 221
Isle of Man:
area . . . . . . . . . . 1
diocese .. .. .. . . . . 201
language 19
legislature . . . . . . .. 32
national insurance . . . . . . 141
newspapers . . . . .. . . 496
population . . . . . . . . 16
relationship with UK Government
and Crown .. . . 26, 27, 31, 43, 55
Tynwald Court . . .. . . 32
war pensioners . . . . . . . . 55
Isotope School, Harwell . . . . . . 219
57°
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Jams and marmalades industry .. ..319
Jersey:
language.. .. .. .. .. 19
national insurance agreement with UK 141
population . . . . . . .. 16
States of. . . . . . . . . . 32
temperature . . .. . . . . 5
See also Channel Islands
Jewellery industry. . . . . . 311, 436
Jewish Board of Guardians . . . . 139
Jewish Youth, Association of .. .. 183
Jewry . . .. . . . . . . 206
Jockey Club .. .. .. 512,513
Jodrell Bank radio telescope . . 211, 220
Jodrell Laboratory . . . . . . 224
John Innes Horticultural Institution . . 351
Joint consultation in industry 476, 479, 481-2
Joint Electronic Research Committee . . 223
Joint Exchequer Board .. .. .. 411
Joint Fire Research Organisation 82, 215
Joint Industrial Councils . . 77, 476, 478
Journalism see Press
Judge Advocate General’s Department. . 57
Judge Advocate of the Fleet . . . . 57
Judicial Committee of the Privy Council 44
Judicial procedure . . . . 84-95
Judiciary see Law
Jury, trial by see Law
Justices of the Peace . . . . 92, 96, no
Jute industry . . . . 262, 317, 430
Juvenile Courts . . 92, 93-4, 106, 149, 500
Juvenile delinquency 101, 102, 106-8, 109-10
Juvenile Organisations Committees . . 182
K
Kew:
Observatory . . . . . . . . 5
Royal Botanic Gardens . . . . 224
Kidderminster . . . . . . 260, 317
King George VI Foundation . . 148, 182
King George’s Jubilee Trust . . 182, 184
King’s Lynn . . . . . . . . 245
Kingston upon Hull see Hull
Kirk Session . . . . . . . . 203
Kirkbride .. . . . . . . . . 122
Kirkcaldy (Fife) . . . . . . . . 262
Labour:
arbitration and conciliation 472, 477,
478-80, 481-2
deployment of . . . . . . 448-55
industrial relations . . 270, 472-80
Ministry of 56-7, 455-60, 466-8, 477, 480
protective legislation . . 460-1, 465-72
working conditions . . 267, 460-72
Page
Labour—contd.
See also Employment, Trade Unions,
Wages and Work, hours of
Labour Party  35, 36, 475
See also Opposition
Lacrosse
Lanark
Lancashire:
industry
506
262
260, 290, 302, 310, 314, 315,
318, 320
judges . . . . . . .. .. 96
south-east conurbation. . .. 15, 17, 19
See also coalfields, cotton, Liverpool
and Manchester
Lancaster, Duchy of
Land Registry
Land Settlement Association
Land use ..
Lands Tribunal
Lands Valuation Appeal Court
Language ..
Lasswade laboratories
Law
arrest, law of
courts
criminal appeals
criminal proceedings
equity system . .
evidence, law of
judges rules
judiciary. .
jury system
legal aid and advice
legal profession . .
legislation see Parliament
penalties. .
press (legal requirements)
prosecutions
sources of
subpoena. .
Law Officers’ Departments
Law Officers of the Crown
Law Reform Committee . .
Law Society
Lawes Agricultural Trust
Lawn Tennis
Lawn Tennis Association
Lawyers
Learned societies . .
Leather industry . .
Lee Conservancy Catchment Board 291, 347
Leeds . . . . 15, 17, 231, 261, 318
University .. . . 171, 210, 290, 351
Leeuwenhoek lectureship . . . . 209
Legal aid see Law
Legal system . . . . . . 84-97
Legislation see Parliament
Leicester . . . . 18, 182, 231, 260, 302
University . . . . . . . . 171
44, 96
• • 57
•• 345
326, 344
79, 95
• • 79
7, 19
221, 349
84-100
.. 86
89-95
..90-1
..86-8
.. 84
86-7, 89
.. 86
27, 29, 96-7
..88-9
98-100
••97-8
45,
100-1
• 5°o
.87-8
. 84
• 87
57, 64
57, 64
• • 97
97, 98, 99
. . 213
•• 5°7
• • 507
••97-8
208-10
210, 317, 318
INDEX
571
Page
Leisure activities . . .. . . 21-5, 179
See also Arts, promotion of and Sport
Leverhulme Fellowships . . . . . . 211
Liberal Party .. . . . . 35, 36
Libraries .. .. 225, 228, 236-7, 246
Library Association .. . . .. 237
Licences:
aircrews and aircraft .. . . 387, 388
broadcast receiving . . 22, 483, 485
broadcast transmitting . . 483, 484, 490
cinemas and films . . . . . . 243
dog . . . . . . 78, 400, 520
driving . . . . . . . . 382, 520
export . . . . . . . . ..431
gun and game . . . . . . 400, 509
herring industry . . . . • • 356
import . . . . . . . . 431, 520
issue of, by Post Office . . . . 400
local authorities’ revenue from . . 79
motor vehicles . . . . 22, 380-1, 382
road transport . . . . . . 380-1
telephone systems (local) . . . . 397
theatres and plays . . . . . . 239
Life assurance . . . . . . . . 419
Life, expectation of . . . . . . 11
Life imprisonment . . . . . . 101
Life peerages . . . . . . • • 33
Lifeboats . . . . . . . . . . 367
Lighthouses . . . . . . .. 367
Lincolnshire . . 260, 298, 301, 327, 333
Lindley . . . . . . . . . . 308
Linen industry . . . . . . 316-7
Linen Industry Research Association . . 317
Linoleum industry . . . . . . 262
Lister lectureship . . . . . . . . 210
Literary prizes . . . . . . . . 238
Literary societies . . . . . . . . 238
Literature . . . . . . . . 235-8
Liverpool:
commodity exchanges . . . . 314, 435
Court of Passage . . . . . . 90
Crown Court . . . . . . • • 33
industry.. .. .. 261,314,321
museum and art gallery . . ..231
newspapers .. . . . . . . 495
orchestra and choir . . . . . . 244
population .. .. .. 15, 18
port of . . . . . . 261, 369, 371
Recorder of .. . . . . •• 93
University . . . . .. 171, 210
Liverpool, Employers’ Association of
Port of . . .. . . . . . . 366
Liverpool Steamship Owners’ Associa¬
tion ..  365
Livestock see Agriculture
Llangollen .. . . . . . . . . 245
Lloyd’s  365, 419, 420, 421
Lloyd’s Register of Shipping . . . . 365
Local Government . . . . 27, 71-80
Page
Local Government—contd.
arts, promotion of 229, 236-7, 238, 244
authorities, types of .. . . . .71-2
Commissions . . . . . . . . 72-3
councils, constitutions of . . . . 72
education authorities see Education
elections 55, 75-6
employment in . . . . 77. 465. 475, 479
finance . . . . . . 78, 252, 401, 410
functions and services . . . . 73-5, 291
internal organisation . . .. . . 76-7
officers . . . . . . . . • • 77
regulation of working conditions 465, 470
relations with central Government 55-6, 71
responsibility for:
aerodromes . .
amenities in new towns
approved schools
.. 392
.. 194
106-7
134, 136
74, 80, 469
151, 158-61
185-91
.. 243
• • 157
• • 5°i
236-7
379, 382
192-3
. . 291
civil defence . .
fire services ..
health . . . . . . 148
housing
licensing of films
mental defectives
playing fields
public libraries
roads and road safety
town and country planning
water supply, purity of
See also Housing and Local Govern¬
ment, Ministry of
Locomotives:
industry . . . . . . 260, 309-10
types in use . . .. . . . . 377
London:
Academy of Music and Dramatic Art. . 240
airports 392, 393
art, drama, music 230-1, 232, 233, 238
239, 240, 244, 245, 246
City area . . . . . . • • 73
City rebuilding . . . . . . . . 195
City and Guilds Institute . . 177, 481
City of London Corporation 72, 73, 175
civil defence . . . . .. . . 74
Colleges of Advanced Technology . . 175
commodity markets . . . . 366, 435
County Council 73, 74, 80, 167, 185,
232, 238, 244
Court of Common Council . . 74, 11 x
courts of law .. . . . . 90, 92, 93
as financial and trading centre 413-4,
415, 416, 417, 419, 420, 434-6
Fire Brigade
food markets
Gold Market
Greater London
industries
 80
 446
435-6
15, 17, 21, 74, 258-60,
262, 384-5, 494
258, 262, 299, 302, 308, 309,
310, 311, 318, 320, 321, 325
572
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
London—contd.
libraries and museums . . . . 230-1, 236
local government see County Council
police .. .. 74, no, in, 112, 114
population . . . . 15, 17, 18, 384
port of and docks . . . . 369, 371
press . . . . 492-3, 494, 495, 498
rebuilding of war damaged areas .. 195
Recorder of .. .. . . -.93
Stock Exchange.. .. .. .. 417
taxicabs .. . . . . .. . . 384
telephone information service . . .. 398
Television Theatre . . . . . . 488
traffic . . . . 21, 372, 376, 382, 383
Traffic Management Unit . . • • 383
transport 21, 26, 372, 373, 377, 379, 384-5
Transport Executive . . 373, 375, 384-5
University 109, 171, 175, 176, 210, 233,
236, 475
water supply . . . . . . . . 291
London Conference on Overseas
Students.. .. .. .. .. 181
‘ London Gazette ’ . . .. . . 43
London General Shipowners’ Society . . 365
Long Ashton research station . . ..351
Lord Advocate .. .. .. 45, 64, 88
Lord Advocate’s Department . . . . 64
Lord Chamberlain .. . . . . 239
Lord Chancellor 44, 45, 57, 90, 91, 96, 97, 200
as Speaker of the House of Lords 34, 37
Lord Chancellor’s Departments . . . . 57
Lord Chief Justice . . 46, 90, 91, 93
Page
• • 203
9i, 94, 97
9i, 94, 97
.. 46
• • 44
9L
, 97
505
Lord High Commissioner
Lord Justice Clerk
Lord Justice General
Lord Lieutenants of Counties
Lord President of the Council
See also Science, Minister for
Lord President of the Court of Session
94, 95
Lord’s cricket ground
Lords, House of see House of Lords
Lords Commissioners (Treasury) . . 49
Lords Justices of Appeal .. . . 66, 91, 96
Lords of Appeal in Ordinary 33, 46, 91, 96
Lothians .. .. . . .. .. 262
Lutheran churches . . . . . . 207
Luton .. . . . . . . . . 260
M
MCC see Marylebone Cricket Club
Macaulay Institute
Machine Tool Trades Association
Machine tools industry
Maddermarket Theatre
Magistrates’ courts
Mail order sales ..
Malting industry . .
3i3, 35i
. . 302
301-2
.. 240
86, 91-2, 98, 99
..448
.. 321
Man see Isle of Man
Management see Industry
Management studies, diploma . .
Manchester:
airport (Ringway)
attendance centre
College of Science and Technology
Crown Court
industries . . 261, 306, 314, 318, 321
Joint Research Council
library (John Rylands) .
museum and art gallery
newspapers
orchestra
population
port of ..
public transport
Recorder of
Royal College of Music
studios (BBC) . .
University
Manchester Ship Canal
Man-made fibres ..
Manpower..
See also Employment and Labour
Manslaughter .. . . . . 94, 101
Manufacturers’ associations . . .. 268
Manufacturing establishments, size of
266-7, 297
Manufacturing industries see Industry
Margam
Market gardening see Agriculture
Market and street traders
Market surveys
Marketing Boards, agricultural see Agri¬
culture
Markets:
178
392
108
210
93
211
236
231
492, 495
244
18
369, 37i
381
93
245
488
109, 171, 210, 211
261, 369, 371
• • 3i4, 315-6
451-5
377
446
272
Baltic Exchange
commodity
financial ..
fish
food (London)
livestock auctions and
Marriages, registration
Marshall Scholarships
Marylebone Cricket Club
Master of the Rolls
Maternity benefit .
Maternity services
Maudsley Hospital
Maydown neoprene plant
Mayor’s and City of London Co
Mayors and Lord Mayors
Meals, provision of:
for old people ..
for school children
Mechanical engineering . .
Medical Practices Committee
Medical profession see Doctors
366, 391, 435
•• 435
415-21
355
446
348
8-9
179
5°5
90
143, 144
158, 159
. . 109
.. 312
rt 90, 93
72
. . 170
301-6
■ • 155
INDEX
573
Medical Research Council
Page
156, 163, 213,
216, 223, 471, 482
Medical services:
in industry .. .. . . 470, 471
in prisons . . .. . . . . 104
for ships. . . . . . . . . . 400
supplies see Pharmaceuticals
See also National Health Service
Mental health services .. . . . . 157
Merchant banks . . . . .. 415, 435
Merchant Fleet . . .. .. 363-5
Merchant Navy 123, 363-4, 365, 367, 368
Merlewood Research Station . . .. 217
Mermaid Theatre .. . . . . . . 238
Mersey Docks and Harbour Board . . 371
Merseyside.. .. 15, 17, 19, 72, 261, 308
Metal manufacture .. 210, 260, 298-300
Metallurgical Equipment Export Com¬
pany (meeco) . . .. .. .. 305
Meteorological Office 51, 213, 222-3, 293
Meteorology . . . . .. 222-3
Methodist Association of Youth Clubs .. 183
Methodist Churches . . 104, 204, 207
Metropolitan borough councils . . 72, 73, 74,
79, 185
Metropolitan magistrates .. .. . . 92
Metropolitan Police Force no, in, 112,
113-4
Metropolitan Water Board .. . . 291
Middlesbrough . . 238, 261, 298, 299, 370
Midlands industrial area 15, 17, 19, 260,
299, 3°i, 302, 308, 309, 315, 316, 318, 322
Midwives ..
Migration ..
Milford Haven
Military Courts see Courts-martial
Milk:
for children and mothers . . 157-8, 170
marketing and subsidy. . 333, 341, 346, 348
production .. .. 327,
in schools
Mines and quarries:
accidents in
employment statistics
158, 162
13-14
281, 371
333-4, 337
.. 170
468
266, 267, 300, 453
260,277, 299-300
. . 468
222, 279-80
. . 468
industry . . .. 251
Inspectorate
research ..
safety measures . .
See also Coal
Ministers (of the Crown) 27, 30, 41, 43, 44-7
of State .. .. .. . . .. 45
ministerial responsibility .. 30, 47, 64
See also Prime Minister and individual
Government departments
Ministers of Religion see Clergy
Ministries see Government, departments of
Minitrack station . . . . .. . . 220
Mirror Group (press) .. .. 494-5
Missile Defence Alarm Station
Missiles see Armed Forces, equipment
Moderator of the Church of Scotland
Modular Society
Monarchy . .
Page
122, 131
203
•• 233
26, 27-31
29, 32
.. 31
.. 29
. . 29
29, 200-1, 203
. . 26, 27, 31
55, i°i
.. 29, 96
27, 3°, 3i, 32, 41, 42, 43
29, 3°, 32, 43
3°, 43, 55,
30, 43
.. 27
27, 29
. 401
. 1
274-5
• 275
. 217
. 205
. 261
accession
ceremonial
coronation
relations with:
armed forces
churches
Commonwealth
Home Office ,
judiciary
Parliament
Privy Council
Royal Prerogatives
Royal Proclamations
Royal title
succession
See also Royal Family
Monetary system, Radcliffe Committee
on
Monmouthshire . .
Monopolies
Monopolies Commission
Moor House field station
Moravian Church. .
Morley
Mortality see Death, cause
Moslem community
Motherwell
Motor Industry Research
Motor racing see Racing
Motor Show
Motor vehicles:
air ferry service..
industry . .
numbers licensed
post office mail vans
regulations for visitors
research ..
taxation . .
tests
See also Road transport
Motorways. .
Mountaineering . .
Mountains, heights of
Mullard Observatory
Murder, law relating to
Museums 46, 53, 63, 225, 229, 230-2, 236
Museums and Galleries, Standing Com¬
mission on .. .. .. ..231
Museums Association
Music
colleges and schools of
festivals ..
Mutual Security Programme
of
Association
260,
207
298
308
308
• • 39i
267, 297, 308
22, 380
• • 396
.. 520
.. 308
.. 406
382, 520
379-80
515-6
. . 2
. . 220
IOO-1
.. 232
25, 236, 244-6
-.245
• • 245
. . 121, 440
574
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
N
NATO see North Atlantic Treaty Organi¬
sation
NETAC see Nuclear Energy Trade
Associations’ Conference
Natal care see Welfare: children, mothers
National Advisory Committee on the
Employment of Older Men and
Women .. . . . . . . . . 456
National Agricultural Advisory Service
273, 350
National and Local Government Officers
Association . . .. . . . . 475
National Assembly see Church Assembly
National Assistance .. . . 140, 146-7
National Assistance Board 58, 140, 146-7, 154
National Association for Mental Health. . 139
National Association of Boys’ Clubs . . 183
National Association of Discharged
Prisoners’ Aid Societies . . .. 105
National Association of Prison Visitors .. 104
National Association of Training Corps
for Girls.. .. .. .. .. 183
National Association of Youth Clubs . . 183
National Blood Transfusion Service . . 156
National Book League .. . . 236, 237
National Broadcasting Councils . . . . 485
National Buildings Record . . . . 234
National Central Library. . . . . . 237
National Certificates . . 176, 177, 178
National Chemical Laboratory . . . . 215
National Coal Board 264, 265, 276-7, 278,
279, 280, 468, 472
research . . .. . . . . 279-80
National College for the Training of
Youth Leaders . . . . . . . . 182
National Colleges . . . . . . 177, 351
National Corporation for the Care of
Old People .. .. . . .. 148
National Council for Technological
Awards . . . . . . . . .. 176
National Council for the Training of
Journalists .. .. . . . . 498
National Council of Associated Children’s
Homes . . . . .. . . . . 149
National Council of Labour Colleges 178, 475
National Council of Social Service 139, 148
National Debt . . . . 402, 409, 410-1
Commissioners . . . . . . . . 414
Northern Ireland . . . . .. 411
Office .. . . . . .. . . 48
National Dock Labour Board . . 371, 463
National Economy see Economy and
Finance
National Engineering Laboratory .. 215
National Exhibition of Children’s Art . . 232
National Farmers’ Unions .. . . 329
National Federation of Anglers .. ..510
Page
National Federation of Community Asso¬
ciations . . .. .. .. .. 179
National Federation of Gramophone
Societies.. .. .. .. .. 246
National Federation of Music Societies. . 245
National Federation of Women’s
Institutes .. . . . . 24, 178
National Federation of Young Farmers’
Clubs . . .. . . .. .. 183
National Film Archive .. . . . . 242
National Film Finance Corporation . . 242
National Film Theatre . . . . . . 242
National Forest Parks . . . . 197, 199
National Foundry College . . . . 177
National Gaelic Mod . . . . . . 245
National Gallery .. .. .. .. 230
National Gallery of Scotland .. ..231
National Gas Turbine Establishment 222, 309
National Greyhound Racing Club .. 514
National Grid . . . . .. 282, 286
National Health Service 143, 151, 152-62, 163
administration .. .. .. 153-4
charges .. .. .. . . . . 154
finance 143, 154, 254, 409
general practitioner services . . 154-5
hospital services . . 153, 154, 155-6
local health services . . .. 158-61
mental health services . . . . . . 157
Northern Ireland . . . . . . 161
problems .. .. . . . . 161
specialist services . . .. 155-7
National Hospital Service Reserve . . 135
National Hunt Committee .. 512-3
National income see Income
National Industrial Fuel Efficiency
Service .. . . . . . . 273, 290
National Institute for the Deaf . . . . 139
National Institute for Medical Research. . 216
National Institute for Research in Dairy¬
ing • •  351
National Institute for Research in
Nuclear Science .. . . 219-20
National Institute of Adult Education . . 179
National Institute of Agricultural
Engineering .. .. .. •• 351
National Institute of Economic and Social
Research.. .. .. .. .. 208
National Institute of Industrial Psycho¬
logy .. .. . . . . .. 208
National Institute of Oceanography 50, 222
National Insurance . . . . 140-6
benefits . . .. .. .. 143-5
‘contracting out’ .. . . .. 141
contributions . . .. . . 142-3
graduated pension scheme . . . . 141
Ministry of Pensions and 58, 140, 149, 151
reciprocal agreements . . .. 140-1
stamps, sale by Post Office . . 142, 400
supplementation by private firms . . 471
INDEX
575
Page
National Insurance Fund . . . . 410
National Joint Advisory Council
(industry) . . . . 270, 456, 478, 481
National Joint Council for Chief
Officers of Local Authorities’ Fire
Brigades . . . . . . . . . . 80
National Joint Council for Local
Authorities’ Fire Brigades . . . . 80
National Joint Council for the Port Trans¬
port Industry . . . . . . . . 371
National Joint Councils (local govern¬
ment) . . .. .. .. .. 479
National Lending Library for Science
and Technology
National Library for the Blind ,
National Library of Scotland
National Library of Wales
National Maritime Board
National Maritime Museum
National Marriage Guidance Council
National Museum of Antiquities
228, 236
.. 147
• • 236
• • 236
366, 368
• • 231
138
231
National newspapers . . . . 492 -3, 495
National Old People’s Welfare Council. . 148
National Parks . . . . . . 196-7
Commission . . . . . . 185, 196
National Physical Laboratory- 213, 215, 224,
309
National Playing Fields Association 502-3
National Portrait Gallery (London) . . 231
National Portrait Gallery of Scotland .. 231
National product (gross) . . . . 249, 254
National Production Advisory Council
on Industry . . . . . . . . 270
National Register of Archives . . . . 236
National Research Development Cor¬
poration .. .. .. .. 212-3
National Savings .. 48, 253, 410, 414-5
National Sea Training Schools . . 366, 368
National Service .. .. .. .. 119
National Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Children . . . . ..150
National Society of Operative Printers
and Assistants (natsopa) . . . . 499
National theatre, scheme for . . 238-9
National Trusts 198, 235
National Union of Journalists . . 498-9
National Union of Manufacturers 268, 272,
273
National Union of Printing, Bookbinding
and Paper Workers
National Union of Seamen
National Union of Students
National Union of Teachers
National Union of Townswomen’s Guilds
24, 178
National Whitley Council . . 69, 478
National Wool Textile Export Cor¬
poration .. .. .. .. ..315
National Youth Employment Council . . 459
499
366
181
475
Page
National Youth Orchestras . . . . 245
Nationalisation . . . . 27, 264-6, 270-1
labour relations of nationalised
industries . . . . . . . . 479
Select Committee on the Nationalised
Industries . . . . . . . . 271
See also individual industries
Nationality.. .. .. .. ..14
Naturalisation . . .. .. .. 14
Nature Conservancy . . 197, 214, 217
Nature Conservation . . .. I97» 217
Privy Council Committee for . . .. 217
Nature Reserves . . . . . . 197* 217
Naval architecture . . . . . . 210
Navy see Merchant Navy and Royal Navy
Navy League . . . . .. . . 126
Nelson . . . . . . .. .. 261
Netball . . . . . . . . .. 5°6
New Forest . . . . . . .. 197
New towns. . . . . . . . I93—5
Newcastle upon Tyne 15, 18, 177, 321, 370
King’s College . . . . .. i73> 210
See also Tyneside
News agencies . . . . . . 497“8
Newspaper owners . . . . 494—5
Newspaper Pro v-ietors’Association .. 498
New spaper Society . . . . .. 498
Newspapers . . . . . . 492-6
Newsprint, supply of . . .. 324, 493
Nonconformists, definition of . . .. 204
Non-county borough councils . . .. 72
Non-ferrous metals industry . . 299-300
North Atlantic Treaty Organisation 115, 119,
121, 128, 226, 227
North of England Shipowners’ Asso¬
ciation . . . . . . . . .• 365
North of Scotland Hydro-Electric Board 282,
283, 285, 286, 287
Northampton, industry . . 260, 298, 318
Northcliffe Newspapers Group Ltd. . . 494
Northern Ireland {see also subject headings)
area and counties . . .. .. 1
banks and banknotes . . . . 413, 518
Boundary Commission. . .. . . 34
Development Council . . . . . . 264
Government . . 26, 42 3, 64, 101, 263
Exchequer and Audit Department. . 64
Ministry of Agriculture 64, 221, 340,
344. 347, 35i
Ministry of Commerce 64-5, 269, 355,
385-6
Ministry of Education 64, 164, 174,
177, 229
Ministry of Finance 8, 65, 234, 269, 411
Ministry of Health and Local
Government 64, 65, 71, 152, 185, 223,
233, 291
Ministry of Home Affairs 64, 76, 100,
102, 104, 106, 149, 150
576
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Northern Ireland—contd.
Government—contd.
Ministry of Labour and National
Insurance 64, 65, 140, 454, 455, 458,
459, 472, 479-8o
Grand Opera Society of . . . . 246
holidays, statutory . . . . . . 466
Hospitals Authority . . 158, 161, 223
Irish Ballet Company in .. . . 246
language. . . . . . . . .. 19
migration . . . . . . . . 13
Parliament . . 26, 42-3, 94, 262, 263
Parliamentary Draftsmen, Office of . . 65
population .. .. 15,16,17,451
press . . . . . . . . . . 496
Registrar-General . . . . 65, 150
registration of births, deaths and
marriages . . . . . . . . 8, 9
relations with UK Government . . 55
representation in UK Parliament 26, 42-3
rural districts . . . . . . 17, 71, 72
university see Queen’s University
vital statistics, registration of . . . . 8-9
See also Belfast and Ulster
Northern Ireland Council of Social
Service . . . . . . . . . . 139
Northern Ireland Electricity Board 265, 284,
286
Northern Ireland Fire Authority 80, 82, 83
Northern Ireland Housing Trust . . 190
Northern Ireland Joint Electricity
Committee . . . . . . . . 284
Northern Ireland Road Fund . . . . 386
Northern Ireland Tourist Board. . .. 519
Northern Ireland Young Farmers’ Clubs 183
Northern Irish Folk Museum . . . . 231
Norwich . . . . . . 231, 260, 318
Nottingham 18, 238, 260, 302, 308, 316, 321
University .. .. 171,211,351
Nuclear energy:
international agencies . . . . 219, 220
for marine propulsion 122, 124, 218, 226,
364
power stations . . . . . . 285-6, 304
pumped storage. . . . . . . . 286
research . . . . . . . . 218-20
responsibility for . . 59, 218, 266
weapons and equipment 120, 121-2, 124,
131, 218, 219
See also Atomic Energy Authority
Nuclear Energy Trade Associations’
Conference . . . . . . . . 304
Nuffield Foundation 148, 163, 211
Nuffield Radio Astronomy Observatory. .211,
220
Nurseries . . . . . . . . . . 159
Nursing and nurses 155, 159, 160, 162, 471
Appointments service . . . . . . 456
associations . . . . . . . . 162
Nursing and nurses
in armed forces .
in civil defence .
home
in industry
Nylon industry
-contd.
Page
125, 129, 132
••135
. . 159
..471
. . 316
o
OECD see Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development
Oban . . . . . . . . . . 352
Obstetricians .. .. .. ..158
Occupational therapists . . . . . . 162
Offenders, treatment of . . . . 100-10
Office machinery industry . . . . 303
Oil:
fish   354, 356, 357
mineral see Petroleum
prevention of sea pollution by . . 367
research . . . . . . . . 281-2
technology . . . . . . . . 211
Old Bailey . . . . . . . . • • 93
Old people:
proportion in population . . 12, 13
welfare . . . . . . . . . . 148
in work .. .. .. .. 451,456
See also Pensions
Old Vic Theatre Company and School
238, 239, 240
Oldham . . . . . . . . . . 261
Olympic Games . . . . 508, 511, 515, 517
Opera and opera companies . . . . 246
Ophthalmic services .. .. 153,155
Opposition, parliamentary . . 36, 38, 42
Opticians  153, 154, 155
Orchestras . . . . . . . . 244-5
Orders in Council, definition of . . 30, 43
Orders of Chivalry . . . . . . 30
Ordnance Survey Department . . . . 51
Organisation for Economic Co-opera¬
tion and Development . . 219, 226, 227, 428
Orkney Islands . . . . . . 1, 345
Orthodox Churches (Christian) . . . . 207
Output see Industry, production
Outward Bound Trust . . . . . . 184
Overseas constructional work . . 295-6
Overseas dependent territories, public
services . . . . . . . . . . 68
Overseas Liaison Group of DSIR 226-7
Overseas Research Council 214, 217 8, 224
Overseas Scientific Relations, Standing
Committee on .
Overseas students .
Oxford, industry .
Oxford University
43,
Bodleian Library
Clarendon Laboratory
. . 226
179-81
. . 260
128, 171, 173, 174,
179, 200, 211, 351
 236
. . 211
INDEX
577
Oxford University—contd.
dramatic society
Imperial Forestry Institute
museums
Press (and Clarendon Press)
sport
PAYE (income tax scheme)
Packaging . .
Paint industry
Paper and board industry
Parish councils and meetings
Parishes (Church of England)
Parliament 26, 27, 30, 31-
committees
control of:
armed forces
finance
40, 41-2, 201
Page
240
222, 361
225, 231
• • 237
504.505,511
.. 407
312, 324, 449
• • 3i3
• • 324
72, 73
201, 202
43. 45, 47, 65,
84, 94, 401-3
, 271, 403, 404
 115
37, 38, 39, 4°, 5°, 401-4
Government in power
local authorities
public corporations
dissolution of
duration of
election results .
electoral system,
legislation . . 31-2
Northern Ireland
party system
privileges
procedure
prorogation of .
public interest in
questions to ministers
relations with Monarchy
37, 38
37, 4i-2
. . 70
265, 271
3°, 32
22
• • 36
• •34-6
40-1, 50
•■42-3
•-35-7
35, 38
37-41
• • 3°
22
4i, 45, 47, 271
29, 3°, 32, 34,
35, 39, 4i
relationship with Church of England 201,
202
secret sessions . . . . . . 35, 38
sessions .. .. .. .. ..32-3
State opening of . . . . ..31
Parliamentary and Scientific Committee 225
Parliamentary Counsel, Office of . . 50
Parliamentary Secretaries 45, 47, 49, 62
Parochial church councils . . . . 202
Parsons and Marine Engineering Turbine
Research and Development Association
(Pametrada) . . . . . . . . 301
Passports .. .. .. .. 54, 519
Patent Office Library . . . . . . 236
Paymaster-General’s Office . . . . 58
Peers   33, 35, 74
Penal system . . . . . . 100-9
Pensions:
appeal tribunals . . . . .. 95
for dockers . . .. . . . . 371
Page
Pensions—contd.
graduated pension scheme . . . . 141
Ministry of, and National Insurance 58,
140, 149, 150-1
old age . . . . . . . . 146-7
payment of, by Post Office . . . . 400
public service . . . . . . 58, 69
retirement . . . . . . 141, 144
war  58, 150-1
widows .. .. 143, 144, 145, 146, 151
Periodical Proprietors’ Association . . 498
Periodicals . . . . . . . . 237, 496-7
Permanent Boundary Commissions . . 34
Personnel management . . . . 273, 480-2
Personnel Management Advisory Service 480
Pest clearance societies . . . . . . 343
Pest Infestation Laboratory . . • • 351
Pesticides .. .. .. .. ••313
Peterborough . . . . 260, 322, 377
Peterhead . .
Peterlee
Petroleum and petroleum products
280 -2, 284, 290, 312, 364, 424
chemicals industry
equipment industry
exports and imports
indigenous production
pipelines..
refineries and refining
352
194
275,
tankers . .
terminals
Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain. .
Pharmaceuticals
Pharmacists
312
305
280, 424
280
281
260, 280, 281, 305,
312, 370
280, 281, 363, 365
69, 370, 37i
162
• 3i1, 313-4
r54, 155, 162
Physiotherapists . . . . . . . . 162
Pig Industry Development Authority . . 335
Pilgrim Trust  i98, 229
Pilkington Committee . . . . 483-4
Pilotage 367
Pirbright research institute . . • . 351
Pitlochry laboratory . . . . . . 221
Planning, town and country 55-6, 74, 185,
I9I_9» 223, 262, 344, 351
Plastics .. .. .. ..312
Playing fields, provision of. .74, 179, 195^ 501,
502-3
Plimsoll line
Plymouth . .
Poetry:
festivals . .
societies . .
Polaris depot ship . ,
Police
cadets
Council for Great Britain
Federations
Gazettes . .
74, no
I4- 134,
367
124
238
238
122
i37
112
in
112
113
Political and Economic Planning (PEP). . 268
578
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Political party broadcasts
Political party system
Pollution, prevention of:
air
rivers
sea (by oil)
water supply
Polo
Pony club . .
Poor’s Roll. .
Population . .
age distribution
birth and death rates
censuses . .
density . .
expectation of life
fertility trends
households
increase in
mortality, causes of
nationalities
new towns
racial composition
regional distribution
Royal Commission on
sex ratio . .
social organisation
urbanisation
working . .
Port of London Authority
police
Ports
Portsdown .
Portsmouth
Post Office .
258, 260, 352
Page
484, 487, 489
••35-7
151, 215, 278 9
293
367
293
506
5i4
87
7-2i, 247, 326
10-11, 12-13, 451
9-12, 451
8, 9, 16-18
7-8, 9
10- 11
12
19-21
-8, 9, 15-19
11- 12
13-14
194-5
13-14
15-19
9
13, 45i
19, 25
19, 184, 247
249, 451-5
• • 37i
. . 110
353, 36971
124
15
.. 124
58 9, 223, 394 400, 485, 49°
Advisory Council and committees . . 394
automation . . . . 396, 397, 398, 399
broadcasting responsibilities 58, 395,
483-4, 490
cable and wireless services . . . . 399
finance    395, 485
mail services . . 386, 390, 391, 395-6
money and postal orders . . 395, 400
postage rate (minimum) . . . . 395
relations with Exchequer . . . . 395
research . . . . 58-9, 223, 396, 490
Savings Bank . . . . 58, 400, 414-5
statistics of business done 394, 395-6,
397, 398, 4°o
submarine cables . . . . 307, 399
vehicles . . . . . . . . . . 396
See also Telecommunications
Postmaster General 58, 394, 397, 483, 484,
485, 489, 490
Potato Marketing Board . . . . 341, 348
Pottery industry . . . . . . 260, 322-3
Poultry Stock Improvement Plan . . 335
Power, Ministry of 59, 218, 222, 268, 270,
276, 278, 283, 287, 288
Power stations
Prefabrication
Premium Savings Bonds .
Presbyterian Churches
Press
General Council of
Readership
Press Association Ltd.
Preston
Prestwick (airport)
Preventive detention
Price:
guarantees (agricultural)
regulation by traders .
relation to income
Prime Minister
Page
219, 284, 285-6
294, 296
.. 400, 414-5
203, 204, 205
42, 492-500
499-500
..494
• • 497
261, 379, 393
392, 393
100, 102, 104-5
. . 240, 341-2
. . 267, 274-5
• • 254-6, 463
29, 30, 36, 37, 44, 45-6,
49, 66, 97, 115, 116, 201
Prince Charles Theatre . . . . . . 238
Princess Margaret Hospital .. • • 155
Princess Mary’s Royal Air Force Nursing
Service . . . . . . . , . . 132
Prison Commission . . 101, 102, 104
Prison system . . . . . . 100-5
Prisons Board . . . . . . , , iOI
Private International Law Committee . . 97
Privy Council . . . . 29, 30, 32, 43-4
Committees .. ..43-4,214,216,217
Counsellors . . . . . . . . 43
Probate, Divorce and Admiralty Division
(High Court)  90, 91
Probation io6, 108-9
officers 108, 109
Procurator General . . . . . . 59
Procurators Fiscal. . . . . . 8, 88, 94
Production and productivity see Industry
Professional and Executive Register . . 455
Provincial Newspapers Ltd. . . . . 494
Psychiatric social work . . 104, 109, 156-7
Public Accounts Committee . . 403, 404
Public corporations 264-6, 270-1, 478-9
See also Nationalisation and individual
corporations
Public houses
Public libraries
Public Prosecutions, Director of.
Public Record Office
museum ..
Public Schools, Scotland . .
Public (independent) Schools
Public Services of Overseas Dependent
Territories . . . . . . . . 68
Public Trustee Office . . . . . . 57
Public utilities see Gas, Electricity and Water
Public Works Loans Board . . 48, 79, 186
Publishers’ Association . . . . . . 237
Publishing . . .. . . 60, 237, 297, 324
Puisne judges . . . . . . . . 90
Pumpherston .. . . . . . . 280
Purchase tax see Taxation
. . 24
236-7
57, 87
57, 236
.. 231
• • 165
167-8
INDEX
579
Page
Page
Q
Raw materials, trade in
Quakers see Society of Friends
Quarantine regulations . . . . . . 520
Quarries see Mines and quarries
Quarrying machinery industry . . . . 303
Quarter Sessions . . . . . . . . 92- 3
Queen see Monarchy
Queen Alexandra’s Royal Army Nursing
Corps . . . . . . . . 127, 129
Queen Alexandra’s Royal Naval Nursing
Service . . . . . . . . . . 125
Queen’s Bench Division (High Court) 88, 90,
93, 97
Queen’s Counsel . . .. . . . . 97
Queen’s Proctor .. . . . . • • 59
Queen’s University, Belfast 171, 229, 236,
35i
R
RAF see Royal Air Force
Racecourse Betting Control Board
Racing:
boat
cycle
greyhound
horse
motor car
motor cycle
point-to-points . .
racecourses
• • 5i4
.. 511
■ • 516
513-4
512-3
. . 516
.. 516
. . 509
•• 5i3
Radar . . 120, 131, 221, 369, 393, 469
Radiation laboratories . . .. . . 219
Radio communications 223, 393, 394, 398,
400
See also Broadcasting and Navigational
aids
Radio equipment industry . . 306 -7
Radio Officers’ Union
Radio Research Station
Radio telescopes ..
Radioactive Substances Advisory Com
mittee
Radiochemical Centre
Radiography
Railways
• • 366
215, 220
211, 220-1
. . 218
. . 219
156, 162
374, 375-7
modernisation and reorganisation
operations
safety measures . .
underground (London)
vehicles industry
workers’ earnings
Rainfall
Ramblers’ Association
Rank Organisation
Rates
water
• 374,
376-7
..376
.. 469
384-5
309-10
.. .. 462
• • 5, 292, 293
.. .. 198
.. 241
78-9, 254, 401
291, 292
247, 258, 422, 424,
426, 430, 435
Rayon industry .. .. .. 315-6
Reactor School, Harwell .. . . . . 219
Reactors . . . . . . . . 219, 285
Reading University .. .. 171,351
Reciprocity (social services) 140-1, 153, 520-1
Recorder (Quarter Sessions) . . . . 92-3
Records, gramophone . . . . 236, 245-6
Recreations see Leisure activities and
Sport
Red Deer Commission . . . . . . 340
Refineries see Petroleum
Refractories . . . . . . . . 322
Refrigeration machinery . . . . . . 303
Refugees . . . . . . . . 13, 458
Regent, appointment of .. . . . .30-1
Regional Advisory Councils (broadcasting) 485
Regional Boards for Industry . . . . 270
Regional Colleges see Education, technical
Regional Hospital Boards . . • • 153
Registrar General . . . . . , 8, 54
Registrar General of Shipping and Sea¬
men .. .. . . . . .. 367
Registrar of Restrictive Trading Agree¬
ments . . .. .. .. .. 274
Registrars of births, deaths and marriages 8-9
Registration of foreign nationals. . 519-20
Regular Forces Resettlement Service 119, 456
Rehabilitation of disabled 156, 456-7,
459 60
Religion see Churches and also Broad¬
casting and Education
Remand homes and centres . . . . 106
Remploy Ltd. .. .. .. .. 460
Rent control . . . . . . 190-1
Rent tribunals . . . . . . 95, 191
Repertory theatre companies . . 239, 240
Rescue services:
civil defence . . . . . . . . 136
sea and air . . . . 132, 367, 400
Research Council see Council for Scienti¬
fic and Industrial Research
Research, scientific and industrial 208-28
advisory councils and committees . . 210,
214, 226, 227
agricultural . . . . 213, 217, 221, 351
aircraft . . . .120-1, 210, 222, 309, 393
anti-locust . . . . . . . . 224
astronomy see space
atomic see nuclear
botanical . . . . . . 224-5
building and civil engineering 215, 296
chemical.. .. ..211,215,312,313
climatological . . . . . . . . 5 j
colonial . . .. . . . . . . 224
communications . . 223, 396, 490
criminology . . .. . . 109-10
defence .. .. 120 2, 124, 214, 219, 222
58°
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Research, scientific and industrial—contd.
Department of 59 60, 214-6, 226, 228, 273
Page
ecological
electronics
expenditure on
fellowships
fire prevention
fisheries . .
flora and fauna
food
forestry . .
fuel and power
geological
geophysical
Government responsibility for
197, 217
215, 223, 306
227-8
180, 211, 216, 217
82, 215
222-3
. . 214
222, 320, 351
222, 361
222, 276, 279-80, 281-2,
287, 289-90
 223
human sciences .
industrial
industrial health
information, dissemination of . .
land use and planning
medical . .
mental health
meteorological
5i, 223
43, 59-6o,
213-28
224, 482
210-1, 212-3, 215
. . 471
. . 228
 223
163, 216, 223-4, 227
. . 224
51,223
mines, safety in . .
National Research
Corporation . .
naval
59, 222, 280
Development
212-3
120, 124, 210
nuclear . .
overseas liaison
. 121-2, 124, 218-20, 304
121, 219, 220, 224, 225-7,
228, 361
pest control
petroleum technology . .
plant pathology . .
Privy Council Committees for
psychiatric
radio
roads
social and economic
soil
space and astronomy
215, 220-1
215
221, 351
281-2
. . 221
43, 214,
216, 217
. . 109
222, 490
222, 296
. . 224
313, 35i
211, 220-21
sponsored by industry or trusts 211, 2x2-3
in universities and technical colleges. . 174,
177, 210-2, 220, 323, 351
veterinary . . . . 217, 221, 349
water pollution . . . . . . . . 293
Wolfson Research Professorship . . 209
See also individual manufacturing
industries
Residence in the United Kingdom S1^, 5I9
Restrictive Practices Court . . 95, 274-5
  446-50
 497
254, 402, 405-8, 409, 410, 411
 514
 5i7
. . 196
Retail trade
Reuters Ltd.
Revenue
Riding
Rifle shooting
Rights of way
Risley
River boards
River pollution, prevention of
Road haulage services
Road Research Laboratory
Roads
classification
development
safety
transport
Roberts report
Rochdale . .
.. 219
• • 293, 347
• • 293, 347
•• 373, 380 i
215, 224
61,63,377-80
 379
379-80
61, 63, 382, 469
372-3, 380-3, 385-6
 236
. . 261
Rocket Propulsion Establishment . . 120
Roman Catholic Church . .35, 104, 200,205-6
marriages . . . . . . . . 9
schools . . . . . . 107, 165, 171, 206
Rope-making .. .. .. 261,317
Rose Bruford School . . . . . . 240
Rothamsted Experimental Station 213, 313,
35i
181
35i
5ii
232
246
240
236, 245
• • 352
119-20,130-4,
137, 393
• • 130
120, 222,
Round Table
Rowett Research Institute
Rowing
Royal Academy
Royal Academy of Dancing
Royal Academy of Dramatic Art
Royal Academy of Music
Royal Agricultural College
Royal Air Force 115, 118,
Reserve . .
Roval Aircraft Establishments
Royal Albert Hall. .
Royal Automobile Club (rac)
Royal Auxiliary Air Force
Royal Ballet and School . .
Royal Botanic Gardens (Kew')
Royal College of Art
Royal College of Midwives
Royal College of Music . .
Royal College of Nursing
Royal Commissions:
on Ancient and Historical
ments . .
appointment and functions of
on Local Government (Greater
on the Police
on Population . .
on the Press
Royal Commonwealth Society
Royal Court Theatre
Royal Family:
ceremonial
financial provision for . .
genealogy and succession
Royal Fine Art Commissions
Royal Fleet Auxiliary Service
Royal Fleet Reserve
3°9, 393
■ ■ 244
• • 516
• ■ 133
. . 246
224-5
• • 232
. . 162
236, 245
162, 471
Monu-
234
49
London) 73
114
9
494
181
238
3i
402
28
228, 234
123
126
INDEX
5Sl
Page
Page
Royal Forestry Society . . . . . . 360
Royal Greenwich Observatory 1, 50, 213, 221
Royal Household, political officers . . 37
Royal Incorporation of Architects in
Scotland . . . . . . . . ..23s
Royal Institute of British Architects 234, 235
Royal Institute of Chemistry . . . . 208
Royal Institute of Oil Painters . . . . 232
Royal Institution . . . . . . . . 209
Royal Marines .. .. .. 118, 125
Royal Medals (science) . . . . . . 209
Royal Mint . . . . . . 48, 412
Royal National Institute for the Blind . . 139
Royal National Lifeboat Institution . . 367
Royal Naval Minewatching Service . . 126
Royal Navy 50, 57, 115, 118, 119-20, 122-6
Royal Observatory, Edinburgh . . . . 221
Royal Observer Corps . . . . I33~4
Royal Opera House, Covent Garden . . 246
Royal Ordnance Factories . . 61, 66, 120
Royal Over-Seas League . . . . . . 181
Royal Pavilion, Brighton . . . . . . 232
Royal Prerogatives see Monarchy
Royal Proclamations see Monarchy
Royal Radar Establishment 120, 221, 222
Royal Scottish Academy . . . . . . 232
Royal Scottish Academy (music) . . 245
Royal Scottish Forestry Society . . . . 360
Royal Scottish Museum . . . . 63, 231
Royal Shakespeare Theatre Company 238, 239
Royal Society . . . . . . 209, 213
Royal Society for the Prevention of
Accidents . . . . . . 382, 467
Royal Society of Arts . . . . 209, 233
Royal Society of British Artists . . . . 232
Royal Society of Literature . . . . 237
Royal Society of Painters in Water
Colours . . . . . . . . . . 232
Royal Society of Portrait Painters . . 232
Royal Society of Ulster Architects . . 235
Royal Ulster Academy of Arts . . . . 232
Royal Ulster Constabulary . . . . 114
Royal Yachting Association .. 511-2
Royalty Theatre . . . . . . . . 238
Rubber industry . . . . . . 312, 325
Rubber Technology, College of . . . . 177
Rugby, industry . . . . . . 260, 306
Rugby League . . . . . . . . 504
Rugby Union . . . . . . . . 504
Rule Committees . . . . . . 57, 96
Rumford medal . . . . . . . . 209
Rural Community Councils . . . . 264
Rural districts:
councils . . . . . . . . . . 72
population . . . . . . . . 17
Rural Industries Bureau . . . . . . 264
Rural Music Schools Association . . 245
Rural Scotland, preservation of . . . . 198
Rutherford High Energy Laboratory . . 220
Sadler’s Wells Ballet and School . . 246
Sadler’s Wells Theatre . . . . 238, 246
Safety in Mines Research Establishment 208
Safety measures . . . . • -367, 466-70
See also Agricultural Workers, Civil
Aviation, Mines and Quarries,
Railways and Roads
Sailing .. .. .. .. 511-2
St. Andrew’s Ambulance Association 139, 160
1i3> tyi
•• 147
. . 261
139, 160, 184
. . 90
139, 183, 205
. . 128
174, 176
252-3, 414-5
45, 59, 214, 218
53, 230-2, 236
208-28
St. Andrews University
St. Dunstan’s
St. Helens . .
St. John Ambulance Brigade
Salford Hundred Court . .
Salvation Army
Sandhurst . .
Sandwich courses (technology)
Savings
See also National Savings and Post
Office Savings Bank
Scholarships see Education
School Health Service . . . . . . 170
School Meals Service . . . . . . 170
School of Air Traffic Control .. .. 394
Schools see Education
Science:
Minister for
museums
promotion of
See also Research
Scientific co-operation:
between government and industry . . 208,
212-3, 215, 296, 309, 351
between industry and universities . . 208,
211, 281, 287, 323, 351
with overseas countries 216, 217-8, 219,
220, 224, 225-7, 35L 361
Scientific Film Association . . . . 242
Scientific and industrial instruments
industry . . . . . . . . . . 305
Scientific and Industrial Research see
Research, scientific and industrial
Scientific Library and Technical
Information Committee . . . . 214
Scientific Manpower Committee 210, 214
Scientific Policy see Advisory Council on
Scientists:
number employed . . . . . . 210
training of .. .. 175-8,210-2,216
Scilly, Isles of . . . . . . . . 1, 72
Scooters see Cycles and Motor Cycles
Scotland (see also subject headings)
area and counties . . . . . . 1
banks and banknotes . . . . 413, 518
burghs see local authorities
Courts of Law . . . . 91, 93-4, 98, 99
Government departments . . . . 62-4
582
BRITAIN : AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Scotland—contd.
Government Departments—contd.
Agriculture and Fisheries 62, 221, 269,
34°, 344, 350, 355
Crown Office. . .. .. . . 64
Education 63, 164, 165, 166, 173, 240,
458, 501
General Registry Office (Department
of the Registrar-General). . . .8, 64
Health 63, 135, 151, 153, 223, 344, 355
Home . .
Information Office . .
Lord Advocate’s
Record Office
Registers of Scotland
Highlands, development of
holidays, statutory
industrial location
judges 
language. .
law and legal procedure
Law Officers
Law Society
local authorities. .
Minister of State for . .
Parliamentary Draftsmen for
peers in House of Lords
population
press
63, 71, 269
. . 64
. . 64
. . 64
.. 64
63, 283, 285,
327, 359, 360
..466
. . 262
94, 97
..7,19
84, 86, 87, 88,
89, 9i, 93-4, 97
45, 64
98, 99
..71-2
45, 62
. . 64
• • 33
7, 15, 16, 17
• 495-6, 497
Secretary of State for 25, 44, 62, 71, 76,
79, 80, 81, 95, 102, 103, 105, 109, no,
134, 152, 154, 182, 185, 292, 340, 356,
359, 501
Scotland Yard .. .. .. .. 1x3
Scottish Advisory Council on Treatment
of Offenders . . . . . . 102, 109
Scottish Agricultural Securities Corpora¬
tion   344, 417
Scottish Amateur Athletic Association 508
Scottish Amateur Swimming Association 512
Scottish Ambulance Service . . . . 160
Scottish Association of Young Farmers’
Clubs . . .. . . . . .. 183
Scottish Board for Industry . . . . 270
Scottish Central Library . . . . . . 237
Scottish Certificate of Education . . 168
Scottish Chambers of Commerce, Council
of . . . . . . . . .. 268
Scottish Community Drama Association 240
Scottish Co-operative Wholesale Society 449
Scottish Council (Development and
Industry) .. . . 242, 264, 432
Scottish Council of Physical Recreation . . 502
Scottish Council of Social Service 139, 148
Scottish Counties Industries Develop¬
ment Trust . . . . . . . . 264
Scottish Criminal Record Office. . . . 113
Page
Scottish Daily Newspaper Society . . 498
Scottish Design Centre . . . . • • 233
Scottish Film Council . . . . . . 242
Scottish Football Association . . .. 503
Scottish Football League. . . . . . 504
Scottish Grand Committee (parliamen¬
tary) .. .. . . . . . . 40
Scottish Health Services Council .. 154
Scottish Industrial Estates Management
Corporation . . . . . . . . 263
Scottish Institute of Adult Education . . 179
Scottish Land Court . . . . 91, 348
Scottish Library Association . . . . 237
Scottish National Buildings Record . . 234
Scottish National Federation for the
Welfare of the Blind .. .. ..147
Scottish National Institute for the War
Blinded . . . . . . . . . . 147
Scottish National Orchestra . . . . 244
Scottish Newspaper Proprietors’ Associa¬
tion . . . . .. .. .. 498
Scottish Office, definition of .. . . 62
Scottish Old People’s Welfare Com¬
mittee . . . . . . . . .. 148
Scottish Omnibus Group . . 373, 381
Scottish Police Federation .. .. 112
Scottish Poultry Improvement Scheme. . 335
Scottish Record Office . . . . . . 64
Scottish Standing Committee (parlia¬
mentary). . .. . . . . .. 40
Scottish Standing Conference of Voluntary
Youth Organisations .. .. ..183
Scottish Statistical Office. . . . . . 269
Scottish Tourist Board .. . . . . 519
Scottish Trades Union Congress . . 475
Scottish Valuation Advisory Council . . 79
Scottish Women’s Hockey Association . . 506
Scottish Women’s Rural Institutes .. 24
Scout satellite . . . . . . . . 220
Scunthorpe . . . . . . .. 260
Sea Cadet Corps .. . . . . 126, 183
Seamen:
conditions of employment . . 368, 469
number .. . . . . .. . . 368
organisations . . .. . . . . 366
safety regulations for . . . . 367, 469
training .. . . . . . . . . 368
Search and Rescue Organisation . . 132
Select Committees see Parliament, com¬
mittees
Selection, Committee of (parliamentary) 40
Services’ Land Requirements, Inter¬
departmental Committee on . . . . 185
Sewerage . . . . 55, 63, 74, 151, 293
Sex-ratios see Population
Shakespeare Memorial Theatre Company
see Royal Shakespeare Theatre Company
Shale mining .. .. .. .. 280
INDEX
583
Shareholding
Sheffield:
Glass technology
industries
population
press
University
Sheriffs and Sheriffdoms . .
Shetland Islands . .
Shipbuilding and repairing
Page
. 267
Shipowners
Shipping . .
cable ships
coastal . .
companies and lines
conferences
cross-channel services
fishing vessels ..
on inland waterways
insurance
medical advice, service for
merchant fleet, composition
modernisation
ore carriers . . . . 299
organisations
ports
propulsion .. 124, 218,
radio communications
relations with Government
safety
210-11,323
261, 298, 310, 311, 323
 18
 494
171, 210, 323
9i, 157
i,353
300-1, 363-4,
365, 370
tankers and terminals 280, 363, 364, 365, 371
tonnage . .
weather reports for
Shipping Federation
Shirley Institute
Shooting
Shop stewards
Shops . . . . 21, 78, 19
mobile . .
multiple stores
number of
self-service
supermarkets
turnover..
Show jumping
Sickness benefit
Silk industry
Silo grants. .
Silver ware. .
Silviculture see Forestry
Skelmersdale
Skylark rockets
Slade School of Fine Arts
Slum clearance
Smallholdings see Agriculture
Smallpox see Vaccination
Smoke control
Soap production . .
364-5
363-71
•• 399
372, 373
364- 5
366, 373
■ • 37°
•• 353
383-4
365, 420
. . 400
363-4
363-4
300, 363, 365
365- 6
369-71
304, 364
. . 400
366- 7
365, 366-7, 400
3°i,
363-4
. . 400
• • 366
•• 3i5
509-10
•• 474
195, 446-9
.. 448
446, 447
•• 447
448, 449
•• 448
446, 447
•• 5i4
143, 144, 145
3i5, 317
.. 342
• • 311
•• 194
. . 220
. . 232
75, 187-8
Social distinctions
Social services
expenditure on . .
reciprocal agreements
countries
training of social workers
voluntary organisations
with
Page
. . 23
138-63
138. 409
other
140-1
..139
138-9, 147-8,
149-50, 151, 159, 161-2
See also individual services
Social Surveys:
Central Office of Information . . 224, 464
Derby  22, 25
Society for Education through Art . . 233
Society for the Promotion of Nature
Reserves.. .. .. .. ..197
Society for the Protection of Ancient
Buildings  198, 235
Society for Theatre Research . . . . 239
Society of Authors . . . . . . 237
Society of British Aircraft Constructors 309
Society of Film and Television Arts
Society of Film Teachers
Society of Friends
Society of Industrial Artists
Society of Motor Manufacturers
Traders Ltd.
Society of St. Vincent de Paul . .
Soft drinks industry
Solicitor General . .
Solicitor General for Scotland . .
Solicitors . .
Sondes Place Research Institute. .
South-East Asia Treaty Organisation .. 115
South of Scotland Electricity Board 266, 282,
283, 286, 287
South Uist.. .. .. .. .. x2i
Southampton 195, 231, 260, 300, 312, 369, 370
University .. . . . . 171, 210
Sovereign see Monarchy
Speaker:
House of Commons 33, 34, 35, 37, 38, 42
139,
and.
242
242
205
233
• • 308
• • 139
• • 321
45, 57
45, 64
•-97-8
. . 212
33, 34, 35, 37
112, 114, 137
. . 41
. . 382
501-17
. . 219
. . 120
151
278-9
• • 3i4
House of Lords.
Special constables. .
Special Orders Committee
Speed limits
Sport
Springfields Laboratory . .
Staff colleges (armed forces)
Stamp duty see Taxation
Standard of living. . 22, 23, 247, 249, 251
Standing Commission on Museums and
Galleries.. .. .. .. 228,231
Standing Conference for Amateur Music 245
Standing Conference of Drama Associa¬
tions . . . . .. . . . . 240
Standing Conference of National Volun¬
tary Youth Organisations . . . . 183
Standing Conference of Youth Organi¬
sations (Northern Ireland) .. . . 183
584
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
Standing Consultative Council on Youth
Services (Scotland) . . .. .. 183
State Management Schemes (liquor) 55, 63
Stationery Office . . . . 60, 237, 266, 324
Statistics:
abstracts and digests .. .. . . 269
application of data . . . . .. 1
See also subject matter
Statutory bodies . . . . .. 265-6
Statutory instruments see Delegated legis¬
lation
Statutory Publications Office . . . . 59
Steel see Iron and steel industry
Steelworks plant industry .. . . 304
Sterling and sterling area 247, 256-7, 430-1,
434, 435, 436, 438, 439
•• 194
417-8
. . 261
•• 349
18, 260, 322
•• 427
• • 360
•• 446
477-8
Taxation—con td.
income tax 56, 140, 254, 406-7, 409, 518
local see Rates
Stevenage ..
Stock Exchanges . .
Stockport ..
Stormont (laboratory)
Stoke-on-Trent
Strategic goods exports
Strathoykell scheme
Street traders
Strikes and lock-outs
Students:
from overseas .. . . . . 179-81
Orchestras of Great Britain .. .. 245
See also Education and Universities
Subpoena see Law
Subsidies see Agriculture, Fisheries,
Forestry and Housing
Sugar Beet 333
Supervisor of Industries (prisons) .. 103
Supply, Committee of .. 40, 41-2, 403
Supply Services .. . . 402, 403, 411
Supreme Court of Judicature . . 90, 96-7
Surface Water Survey Centre . . . . 293
Surtax see Taxation
Swansea . . .. 173, 210, 262, 370, 371
Swimming.. .. .. .. ..512
Sylvester medal . . .. .. .. 209
Synthetic fibres see Man-made fibres
Synthetic rubber .. .. .. ..312
Tammeter .. . . .. .. .. 490
Tanker terminals .. . . . . . . 371
Tankers see Shipping
Tanning .. .. .. .. .. 318
Tariff policy . . . .407-8, 428-30, 431
Tate Gallery . . .. .. . . 230
Taxation 49, 53, 56, 254, 365, 401, 405-8,
409, 410, 411
Customs and Excise duties 53, 405, 407,
408, 409, 410, 411, 428-30, 518
double taxation agreements . . 407, 518
estate duty . . 56, 326, 406, 407, 409
motor vehicles .
for non-residents
PAYE ..
profits tax
purchase tax
reliefs from
stamp duty
surtax
Taxicabs (London)
Teachers see Education
Technical and Scientific Register
Technical Co-operation, Department of
Technical education see Education
Technical Information Service ..
Technical Monitoring Station (radio) ..
Technical Staff College . .
Technologists, Membership of College of
(MCT) 
Technology see Education, Research,
Universities and relevant industries
Teenagers ..
406, 409, 410, 411
..407
..407
56, 406-7, 409,411
407, 409, 411
.. 140
56, 406, 409
56, 406-7, 411
..384
455
60
273
491
457
176
23
Tees-side ..
T elecommunications:
overseas ..
private ..
telegraphs
telephones
Teleprinters
261, 300, 370
398-9
.. 398
• 396-7, 398
397-8, 398-9
397, 398
Television 22, 23, 483, 484, 485-6, 488-9, 490
advertising on .. .. .. .. 489
audience measurement.. . . . . 490
films .. .. . . .. 241, 488-9
licences .. .. .. 22, 400, 483
programme companies .. .. 485-6
receivers, industry .. . . 306-7
for schools .. .. .. 169-70, 489
Theatre . . .. .. .. .. 488
Television Advisory Committee . . .. 490
Telex Service .. .. .. 397, 398
Tennis see Lawn Tennis
Territorial Army .. .. . . 129-30
Test matches .. .. . . .. 505
Tests (vehicles) .. .. .. .. 382
Textile and London Fashion Organisa¬
tion .. .. .. . . .. 318
Textile industries 210, 247, 260-1, 297
314-7, 425, 452, 453
machinery industry .. .. .. 302
Thames Conservancy Board 291, 293, 347
Thames Navigation Service . . . . 369
Theatre Workshop .. .. .. 239
Theatres .. . . . . • • 23, 238-40
clubs and professional associations 239-40
Thomson Newspapers Ltd. .. .. 494
Thomson-Leng publishing group 495, 497
Tilling (bus) Group .. . . 373, 381
INDEX
585
Timber Growers Association
Timber see Forestry
Tinplate industry . .
Tobacco
revenue duty
Toe H  
Toilet preparations industry
Tolworth laboratories
Tools industry
Tourist:
information
trade
Town and country planning
Page
360, 361
. . 298
297, 321-2
.. 321
•• 139
•• 3i4
221, 3Si
.. 311
•• 5i9
22, 428
55, 63, 71, 74
185, 191-9, 223, 262-3
Town Councils . . . . 72, 73, 74, 79
Town Development Schemes . . .. 195
Townswomen’s Guilds . . . . 24, 178
Toy industry . . . . .. .. 325
Tractors  301, 338, 351
Trade .. .. .. 247-8, 422-50
Board of 44, 60, 185, 233, 242, 262, 263,
268, 270, 274, 361, 450
external .. .. .. 247-8, 418-36
balance of payments
carried by aircraft
composition ..
financing of ..
Government assistance to
‘invisible’ transactions
tariffs . . . . . .407-8,
value and volume of..
internal ..
restrictive practices, control oJ
Trade Commissioners
Trade fairs. .
Trade Unions .. 270, 46
Civil Service
local government service
musicians
political fund
press
seamen ..
theatre ..
Trades Union Congress
TUC Educational Trust
Traffic:
air
canals
congestion
London ..
Northern Ireland
ports
256-7, 436-45
• 387
423-6
434-6
432-4
426-7
428-30, 431
422-3
445-50
95, 374-5
.. 432
•• 434
474-6, 480
69, 475
77, 475
•• 245
•• 475
498-9
.. 366
.. 239
270, 272, 474-6,
478, 481
••475
387, 390, 39i, 393
372, 385
21, 379, 382-3
20, 385
..385
369, 37°
rail and road 21, 22, 372, 374, 376, 381,
385
shipping  363, 364, 369
wardens . . . . .. .. 113, 382
Training schemes for industry 175-8, 273-4,
456-7, 467
Training Within Industry
Transatlantic telephone cables
Translucent china
Transport..
administrative reorganisation
Page
457, 467
- - 399
•• 323
363-94
373-4
386-94
•• 375
383-4
consultative committees
inland waterways
London . . . . 20, 255, 372, 373, 384-5
Ministry of . . 61, 222, 269, 366-7, 368,
375, 379
nationalisation, legislation . . 372-3
Northern Ireland
rail
research
385-6
363,372, 374, 375-7
215, 222, 296
363, 372, 373, 377-83
363-71
• • 374-5,381
trade and Work,
411
road
sea
Tribunal
Travel see Tourist
travel to
Travel allowances. .
Treasure trove
Treasury . . 49, 66, 69, 269, 270, 403, 404,
411, 412, 431
bills
Counsel . .
Solicitor’s Department.
Treatment of Offenders .
Tribunals:
administrative ..
agricultural land
Civil Service Arbitration
Council on
industrial arbitration
lands
mental health
transport
Trinity House, Corporation of
Tropical Medicine Research Board
Tropical Products Institute
Trustee Savings Banks
Tuberculosis:
eradication of bovine .. .. .. 349
prevention and treatment of .. . . 160
Tyneside and Tyne ports 17, 72, 261, 299,
300, 306, 369, 370, 371
See also Newcastle upon Tyne
Tynwald Court see Isle of Man
Typographical Association .. . . 499
u
UKAEA see Atomic Energy Authority
Ullapool . . . . . . .. .. 352
Ulster Drama Festivals, Association of . . 240
Ulster Drama League . . .. .. 240
Ulster Group Theatre .. . . .. 239
Ulster Savings .. .. .. .. 414
Ulster Society of Women Artists . . 232
43i
415-6
.. 87
• • 59
100-10
94-5
348
478
95
477
79, 95
•• 157
374-5, 381
367, 37i
• • 163
• • 215
4H-5
586
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
.. 114
..385
384-5
• • 454, 455
140, 143, 144, 145
••455
418
205
205
Ulster Special Constabulary
Ulster Transport Authority
Underground railways
Unemployment
benefit . .
in Northern Ireland
See also Employment
Unit trusts. .
Unitarian and Free Christian Churches.
United Free Church of Scotland
United Kingdom:
area and composition . . . . 1, 17-18, 26
geography .. .. .. .. 1-7
population . . . . . . 7-21, 247
United Nations Organisations:
relations with . .54, 101, 180, 225, 227, 444
Technical Assistance .. .. 180, 444
United States:
defence co-operation 121, 122, 124, 128, 131
educational co-operation . . 180, 181
financial aid from . . 248, 427, 439-40
private investment in UK
Universities
agricultural degree courses
building programme
degrees, diplomas and certificates
departments of education
departments of physical education
drama clubs and societies
expansion
extra-mural courses
finance . .
forestry courses. .
halls of residence
medical and dental schools
museums and libraries . .
presses . .
Privy Council committees for
proposed
research .. 174, 175, 210-11, 216, 220
scholarships and research fellowships 174,
179, 180, 211, 216
sport . . 501, 504, 505, 506, 508, 511
students . . . . . . 171, 173, 174, 210
technological education in 174, 210-1
University College of North Staffordshire 171
• • 440
171-5
•• 35i
•• 175
• • 174,
176, 240
.. 169
• • 501
. . 240
174-5
.. 178
173, 211, 217
• • 361
• • 175
•• 153
231, 236
•• 237
• • 43
.. 171
University Film Council . .
University Grants Committee
Urban districts:
councils ..
population
Urdd Gobaith Cymru
Utilisation of Home Grown
Advisory Committee on
Vaccination
. . 242
173,211
• • 7i, 72, 76
.. 17
. . .. 184
Timber,
. . 361
158, 160, 161
Page
Valuation (for rates, etc.). . .. 56,78-9
Valves, industrial . . .. . . . . 303
Vegetation . . . . .. .. 5-6
Vehicles industry . . . . 260, 307-10
Veterinary Service and research 217, 221,
273, 349
Victoria and Albert Museum 53, 230, 232, 236
Victoria League
Village Colleges
Virological laboratories
Visas
Vital statistics
Vocational guidance and training
. . 181
• • 179
157, 35i
• • 519
..8-14
456, 459,
460
Voluntary organisations:
child care . . . . 138, 149-50
civil defence . . . . .. ..134
education . . . . . . 178-9, 181
prisoners’ aid . . .. .. 104, 105
welfare 138-9, 148, 151, 159, 160, 161-2,
179, 460
youth services . . . . . . 182-4
Voting:
in House of Commons . . . . . . 38
in local government elections . . • • 75-6
in parliamentary elections . . 34-5, 36
w
WVS see Women’s Voluntary Service
Wages and salaries 23, 69, 77, 254, 461-5
negotiations . . .. 472, 476-80
Wages Boards and Councils . . . . 476
Wales {see also subject headings):
administration . . . . 26, 45, 48, 53, 56
area and counties . . . . .. 1
Development Corporation for. . . . 264
holidays, statutory . . . . . . 466
industry 261-2, 277, 281, 285, 289, 298,
299, 308, 310, 316, 322, 379, 380
language.. .. .. .. ..7,19
Local Government Commission . . 72
Ministers for Welsh Affairs .. 26, 45
population . . . . . . 15-17, 19
496, 497
i7L 172, 35i
• . 230
. . 219
• 195
. no
press
University of
Wallace Collection
Wantage laboratories
War-damaged cities, reconstruction
War Department constabulary . .
War Office. . . .61, 81, no, 118, 120, 129
War pensioners . . . . 53, 57, 61, 150-1
War, Secretary of State for 44, 61, 116, 127
Warburg Institute . . . . . . 233
Warren Spring Laboratory . . 215, 224
Warrington . . .. . . . . 261
Watch Committee (police) . . . . 110
Water Pollution Research Board . . 293
Water Pollution Research Laboratory . . 293
INDEX
587
Page
Water polo. . .. .. .. 5I2
Water power see Hydro-electric
Water supply   290-3
Conservancies, Thames and Lee 291,293,347
sources of .. .. .. 290, 292—3
Waterways see Inland waterways
Watson House Centre .. . . . . 290
Ways and Means, Committee of . . 40
Weapons see Armed Forces, equipment
Weapons Group (UKAEA) . . . . 219
Weather . . . . . . . . 4-5^ 6
Page
bulletins for ships
forecast services
Weedkillers
Weights and Measures
Welbeck College . .
Welfare:
blind
centres ..
children . . 149, 157
in civil defence . .
industrial
mentally ill
mothers ..
old people
overseas students
prisoners and probationers
sick and handicapped
.. 400
Si, 222-3, 398,400
3i3,35i
• • 450, 521-2
. . 129
139, 147, 460
..158
159, 160, 170
..136
470-2
157, 159, 160
157, 158, 159
. . 148
180-1
• 104, 105-6
139, 158, 159, 160,
161-2, 170
151
and
53
war pensioners . .
See also National Assistance
National Insurance
Welfare Foods Service
Wellcome Foundation and Trust
Welsh Board for Industry
Welsh Board of Health . .
Welsh Department of Ministry of
Education
Welsh Folk Museum
Welsh Grand Committee
Welsh League of Youth . .
Welsh National Opera Company
Welsh National School of Medicine
Welsh Plant Breeding Station
Welsh Tourist and Holidays Board
Welwyn
Wembley . .
Wesleyan Reform Union . .
West Riding see Yorkshire
Western European Union
Westminster Press Group
Weybridge laboratories . .
Whaling
Whisky industry . .
White City. .
White Fish Authority
White Fish Industry Advisory Council. .
Whitechapel Art Gallery . .
157-8
. 211
. 270
• 55
504, 506
Whitley Councils
164
231
40
184
246
173
35i
5i9
194
, 5i5
204
115
494
1 349
357
320, 370
508, 514
356
356
232
Wholesale trade see Trade
Widnes
Widows’ benefits . .
Widow's’ pensions..
Wight, Isle of
Wigmore Hall
Wildfowling Association
Wimbledon
Windscale . .
Winfrith . .
Winkfield . .
Wire broadcasting. .
Wires and cables (insulated) industry
Wolfson Foundation
Wolverhampton . .
Women:
employment
. . 261
143-4
144, 145, 151
1
.. 244
.. 5°9
507, 5i4
219, 287
219, 287
. . 220
.. 490
•• 307
. . 209
15, 260
housewives
national insurance for . .
periodicals for . .
proportion in population
See also Equal pay
Women’s Institutes
Women’s International Art Club
Women’s Junior Air Corps
Women’s Royal Air Force
Women’s Royal Army Corps
Women’s Royal Naval Reserve . .
Women’s Royal Naval Service . .
Women’s Rural Institutes
Women’s Voluntary Service (wvs)
45L 452, 454, 456, 462,
464, 465-6, 470-1
.. 21-2,451
142, 143
496, 497
• • 13
24, 178
• • 232
• • 183
• • 132
127, 129
.. 126
125, 126
. . 24
134, 139,
160
Woodland Owners’ Association . . . . 360
Woodlands. . . . . . 6, 257-8, 360
Dedication Scheme . . . . . . 360
Wool Industries Research Association .. 315
Wool textile industry . . 261, 267, 315
Woomera . . . . . . .. . . 121
Worcester . . . . . . . . 245, 322
Work:
hours of . . . . . . . . 21, 465-6
travel to .. .. . . .. . . 21
Workers’ Educational Association 178, 475
Working conditions see Labour
Working Men’s Clubs and Institutes . . 24
Works councils . . . . .. 476, 481
Works, Ministry of 61, 185, 198, 223, 231,
233-4, 246, 269, 273
World Council of Churches
World Data Centres
Worplesden laboratories . .
Worsteds see Wool textile industry
Wrestling . .
judo
69, 77, 478 Yacht racing
.. 207
216, 220
. . 221
■ • 5i5
• • 5i5
511-2
588
BRITAIN: AN OFFICIAL HANDBOOK
Page
260, 352, 353
.. 245
.. 261
Yarmouth . .
York:
festival and mystery plays
industry ..
museum . . . . . . . . .. 231
university . . .. . . . . 171
Yorkshire, West Riding 15, 17, 19, 261, 315
See also individual industries
Young Christian Workers . . .. 183
Young Farmers’ Clubs . . .. 183, 329
Young Men’s Christian Association
(ymca) 139, 183
Young offenders see Juvenile delinquency
Young Women’s Christian Association
(ywca) 139, 183
Youth:
Employment Service . . . . 458-9
120, 124, 127,
Youth—contd.
leaders ..
orchestras
organisations
service . .
‘ teenagers ’
Theatre . .
See also Children
Youth Hostels Associations
Youth Service Development Council
Zebra crossings
Zenith (reactor)
Page
. 182
• 245
183-4
181-4
• 23
• 239
. 184
. 182
382
219
^ —~T/
^Campbeltown f' (JM
Mull of f ir^ 'tlirvanl
Kmtyre
St. Abt>’s Head
\
i Eyemouth
ierwick-uOon-Tweed
Eweedmouth
Jorth Sunderland
ENGLAND & WALES
Scale 1:2,000,000
0 10 20 30 40 50 Statute Miles
 1 t * r r1 r b r-1—, 1
10 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 Kilometres
Canals
 Railways ^
(Passenger Services)
_382 Shipping Routes 3210 Heights in Feet
(Distances in Nautical Miles)
BedlingtbriS^^h/ j\^
eWcaVSle!»>J'fne!n10^h'1-i. ..
South Shields
Sunderland \
leaham Harbou\
lartlepool \
A ^ pWest Hartlepool^
W ^' xpBedcar t ,\
ton-on- yee&w-^gflvi jddlesbrough
_fa Ho mburgjf 22
Scarborough
WoldO Flamborough Head
Withernsea / \<£
inshdm / \%.
St-
Michoe
ngham
ridge
lz
i'f/i ^ —t—| »|g r> ~tt Bexhill
* ;■ ^  \ s(^ Eastbourne,
Beachy, Head
irrmw^f . >7- . %—■ y^en201
London^
Boulogn<
Lizard Pt. Co^
To Mont
'N Gi L,
/
\le Trepop/0 | ^
Dieppe
Fecam
Alderney
Cherbourg
A°.
Guernsey
CHANNEL ISLANDS
rSark
Pan
(Br tish)
jersey
Caen
WEST FROM GREENWICH
EAST FROM GREENWICH
PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY GEORGE P«LIP ft SON. LTD.. LONDON
© 1961, GEORGE PHILIP a SQN. LTD.
D
PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY GEORGE PHILIP a SON. LTD.. LONDON
© 1961, GEORG!
<
V
\
c
Punted in England under the authority of Her Majesty's Stationery Office
by Taylor Garnett Evans & Co. Ltd. Watford.
WT. 4613. K.236.
S.O. CODE No. 70-701-0. 62*
The opening in
1825 °f the
first public
passenger
railway^—
from Stockton
to Darlington
A 2,000 h.p. diesel-electric locomotive hauling The Flying Scotsman
m.
One of the latest sports cars—the Jaguar type ‘E’ fixed head coupe
" ■
•v
1$
i * i
5SSj
1
An early (c. 1907) Rolls-Royce model
The Tyne-built Empress of Canada,
new flagship of the Canadian Pacific Line
The Great Eastern,
1859. For many
years the largest t
ship afloat )-
- *«'f* -
