■ ',V
National Library of Scotland
*B000444686*
^'-^^J:
.'
/."s
""V?
^    "^a
V
"*  .       ^
■i-iii
j.
■t'>^
-' k
n   t.
M
'< 'Tt '
*
..  «-/
"
.  r
f
'••*)
?
*
Is?.. ,
:: 1
;#f^--.V?t4| '
*/«-•
/»►
* .rf?-
.>*>. -
1-^f ■
■"i« ?-j
?%^
^?4^i
fe-^-.
"i
/*-'-,"
Via' ■* '
*iL
u. m
/
THE  LADIES'
EDINBURGH MAGAZINE.
JAN.   TO   DEC.   1880.
VOL.   VI.   NEW   SERIES.
EDINBURGH:
MORRISON   &   GIBB,   11   QUEEN   STREET.
-'c^
D    ■'
[-:   19    fiO'<
CONTENTS.
PAOi-:
Beggar of Capo di Monte, The.    By the Author of ' Mabel's
Cross'..........   35, 77
Byeways of History—Life of Halfred Ottarson.   By E. J. O.   4, 49, 97
Camp Life in Colorado.    By A. G. V. S 481
Country Subjects and Pursuits—
Dogs.    By Eve Simpson   Af^tK**. •     . 214
Entomology.    By L. H. Rogerson ....        420
My Pony Friends.    By M. S. Thomson . .        . 14
Peep into an Apiary, A.    By N. Payne Gallway    . . 259
Profitable Pets—Donkeys and Goats.    By M. M. C.      . 313
Cnisaders, Tracks of the.    By E. J. O. . . 385, 405
Dante, Six Sermons on.    By M.   . .        . . . .        515
Debates of the Ladies' Edinburgh Literary Society  42, 91, 138, 188,
234, 284, 332, 376
Earl of Aberdeen, The.    By C. L. Johnstone        .        . . 193
Economic Progress, Operation of, etc.    By Jeanie Morison .        564
Editors' Letter 570
Empress of Russia, The Late.    By C. L. Johnstone     . . 289
E. Marlitt and her Works.    By M. M. C 279
Exhibition of Royal Scottish Academy, Notes on the   . . 183
Flowers  and  their  Unbidden Guests.    By the Hon.   Mrs.
Lionel Tollemache ........        228
Ghost of Henly Cottage, The.    Part II.    By Nono      . . 26
Glass Painters, The.    By A. A 391, 447, 488, 537
H. A. Duff, The Late  2
Hints on Painting Flowers.    By M. Montgomery Camjibell.        557
Is Gothic  Architecture  superior  to  Greek, Neo-Greek, or
Byzantine ?—
I.  By L. D 12!)
II. By E. J. 0 155
Is the Acted Drama capable of elevating the Masses V—
I. By M. J. U 376
II.  By L. D 424
Library Table, Our  44, 93, 140, 189, 235, 285, 333, 381, 429, 476, 571
Magic Word, The.    By A. H. Ringer 230
Marriage Law, Threatened Change in the.    By G. .        . 511
Maxims and Aphorisms from the Writings of Goethe.    By
the Hon. Mrs. Lionel Tollemache .        .        . 136, 330, 475
Mendelssohn, die Familie.    By Hon. Mrs. Lionel Tollemache        176
Notices to Correspondents   48, 96, 144, 192, 240, 288, 336, 384, 432,
480, 528
Nursing for the Poor.    By J. W. 248
Of Music, Past and Future.    By Alma Glen ...        337
Passion Play of Ober-Ammergau.    By A. D. . . .        433
iv CoJitents.
Poetry—
A Fable.    By Alma Glen  233
Augur, The.    By C. S  226
Finis.    A Rondeau.    By E. J. O.          .        .        .        . 571
Honey-haired Ladie, The.    By Jeanie Morison      .        . 64
January 1, 1880.    By L. D  1
Knight's Tomb, A.    By E. J. 0  278
November 1.'^, 1866.    By L. D  509
One Life.    By B. F  536
Ours stUl.    By B. F  394
Songs on the Death of his Children (Riickert).    By the
Author of Translations from Heine     .... 464
Sonnet.     From the Italian.    By A. G  42
' Through a Glass, Darkly.'    By Hon. Mrs. Lionel Tolle-
mache         ......... 90
To a Certain Musician.    By Joan Scott          .        .        . 139
Vale of Rest, The.    From the Gerrflan.    By Helama    . 297
Which ]    By Joan Scott  375
Woman-like.    By B. F  213
Question Series     46, 94, 142, 191, 237, 286, 334, 382, 430, 479, 526,
572
Railway Speculations.    By Helama       ..... 254
Russian Nihilism.    By C. L. Johnstone       .... 67
Stray Notes 48, 239, 288, 335, 432, 528
Studies   from   Shakspere.  VI.—Merchant of Venice.     By
Sidney Philips  529
St. Anthony's Day.    By M. M. C 298, 347
Theodoric the East Goth.    By J. M. M'L  519
Trial of Taste, The.    By Mrs. Ramsay Laye         ... 404
Victor Emmanuel.     By Caroline Gearey        .           220, 241, 305, 357
Visit to St. Loup, A.    By L A. B  33
Women's Clubs.    By Mrs. Ramsay Laye       .... 145
Women and the Parliamentary Franchise.    By E. S.    .        . 106
EREATA.
Page 228, line 6, for scraps, read spratts.
Page 338, line 2, for St. Owen, read  St. Ouen.
Page 340, line 10, for lovely line, read lovely hue.
Page 341, line 24, for Birch, read Ivy.
Page 342, line 27, for Lewis, read Leeves.
Page 345, line 28, for Walkiire, read Walkiir-ritt.
Page 380, line 37, for Protestantism, read Puritanism.
Page 420, line 29, for man, read clergyman.
Page 408, line 35, for daughter, read mother.
Page 409, line 6, for Harem, read Haram.
Page 469, line 13, for Askar, read Aksa.
Page 479, line 37,        do. do.
Page 476, line 1, for an, read un.
Page 490, line 4,, for fois, read foi.
Page 497, line 40, for Ootive, read Octave.
Page 499, line 20, for denier, read dernier.
Page 499, line 30, for Octive, read Octave.
Page 500, line 20, for margeurites, read marguerites.
Ower True Tales. 29
appeared on her countenance, and confirmed his growing
suspicions.
' But there are many slight, pale girls in the world with
red hair and yellow eyes, and a squint,' he proceeded in¬
differently.
' Yes, sir,' she replied,' and of course I never saw Prudence.'
Mr. Scot was much annoyed by the crowds of people who
came to visit the haunted house, and interfered sadly with
his pursuits.
' Can't you keep these people out ?' he said irritably to
Eehecca, as a group of open-mouthed farmers' daughters
passed him on the stairs with Polly at their head, pointing
out the very spot where the Ghost threw the doctor on the
ground, and the identical place where it had made itself
visible to her.
' If we did,' she. answered grimly, ' people would suppose
we had something to conceal.'
' I cannot understand the impudence of people invading
their neighbours' houses in this way, interrupting every
one's work, disarranging all domestic affairs, and, I have no
doubt, not even giving a sixpence for the show. Such
meanness is intolerable,' he continued, waxing indignant.
' The bit lassie may get an occasional sixpence from the
better folks, but I M'ould scorn to touch a farthing 0' the
Deil's wages!' said the old servant bitterly.
' Well, the Ghost had better look out for itself; for if I
catch it, I will show it no mercy, I promise you,' he said
savagely, and left the house.
He was rather amused to hear, that no sooner was he out
of the way than the Ghost became lively again, and had
thrown one girl into hysterics and another into a fit. The
instant, however, that his footstep was heard in the lane it
became mum and harmless again, and he hugged to himself
the comfort that although the Ghost had not frightened him,
he had frightened the Ghost.
' I suppose you have perfect confidence in your servants,
aunt ?' he asked that evening.
' I could answer for Eebecca with my life. I have known
her for nearly thirty'years; and as for the puir lassie, she has
been more frightened than any of us. Don't get suspicions
of that kind into your head, nephew,' said the old lady in¬
dignantly.
He smiled. ' I thought you would say what you have, aunt,
but it was wiser to err on the safe side. Now I want you
to persuade Kebecca to go away for a week to visit her
The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
"What then ?    This day brings word for each,
Brave greeting and good cheer,
Whatever stage of life they reach
In the new-opening year.
Yes; only let each heart and will,
Each eye, be heavenwards cast;
Then wiser, better, happier still
Each ten years than the last.
L. D.
Site late fi^enrtetta Snne ©uff.
In looking back upon the year that is just gone, we must
number among our losses that of a valued contributor to our
pages, Henrietta Duff, whose literary work has been known
to a large circle of readers. Her first novel, Virginia,
dedicated to her great friend the author of Vera, though
only professing to be a sketch, attracted much attention by
its charm of style, and the graceful pictures it gave of artistic
life in Eome. She had begun a second novel, Lavender,
when failing health compelled her to put it aside; but her
active spirit not permitting her to remain entirely idle, she
employed her leisure in writing for Mr. Marcus Ward's
Christmas cards verses which are full of melody and
feeling.
Tliose who, last May, read in this Magazine her article on
' The Working Ladies' Guild,' will know how great an interest
she took in improving tlie position of those of her sex who,
wishing to earn their own living, find a difficulty in obtaining
employment. Being obliged to spend some winters at Cannes,
she helped to carry on the Branch of the Guild which is
established there. We are permitted to quote the following
remarks from a letter just received from the Hon. Mrs. Lionel
ToUemache:—
'... It was at Cannes that we first met Miss Dufi", and from
that time our friendship began. She and my husband had ]ong talks
on grave subjects ; for she was interested in many of the questions
which occupy modern thinkers, and had an unselfish humility which
made her eager to listen to and learn from others. A poem,
"Damascus," addressed to my husband, which appeared in this
Magazine (December 1878), gives some idea of the way in which she
welcomed intellectual light which removed some gloomy thoughts
about the future. Being herself a great admirer of Mr. Browning's
Doetrv, his kindly confratulations when her novel appeared gave her
The late Henrietta Anne Duff. 3
great pleasure. He was one of the visitors admitted to sit by her sofa
when she was too ill to leave the house ; and one of her last gifts to
me was his La Satsiaz, a poem which may well awaken in us, her
survivors, the same questionings as those of the author as to where
she is now whose steps were once beside us, believing that for her
the problem is solved which now haunts many of us :
oil '/,itfii.u'j 'hv—ii (t', ov xocvf/,^ oh voiioog 'mo'^'Ku,
oil ■Xiiuri;, oil S/i^oj sp^si a^' a?iA' oii^i ■jrodnvog
xuffpa-jrau 'in uoi fii'oro;' i^aii; ydp dfAif^'inag
oiv-/a7g i'j KxSxpxldi Qsov •yrtpi'yr'k-fiaio}) ovrog.   *
'Another friend, whose literary judgment she much valued, was
Mr. Frederic Locker ; and it was probably he who trained her in that
careful polish of style which is too apt to be neglected by young
writers, and which is so grateful to the ear often jarred by the
uncouth prose of careless authors. If she received much help from
her large circle of literary friends, she gave in return what men
value highly—the intelligent, warm-hearted sympathy of a refined
and cultivated woman.
' The outside world will judge Henrietta Duff by her writings ;
yet do we not always feel, in speaking of those whom we have known
and loved, that their writings are but imperfect revelations of the
author, that it is the character, not the intellect alone, which
attracts us and wins our esteem and aflFection ? It was the union of
bright and ready fancy with earnest thought and feeling which drew
so many friends around her while she lived, and which makes so
many now regret that her pen is silent and her earthly work
finished.'
We subjoin, for the benefit of those who may care to
preserve memorials of a friend and writer so deservedly
esteemed, the following list of Miss H. A. Duff's contribu¬
tions to this Magazine, with the dates of their publication:—
Prose —' Concerning Some Modern French Novels,' Nov.
1878; ' Cackle,' AprH 1879 ; ' The Working Ladies' Guild,'
May ] 879 : and Poetry—' The Birth of Cain/ January ; ' A
Valentine,' February; ' The Lost Piece,' March; ' Palm-
Sunday,' April; ' Only in Dreams,' May; ' Damascus,' De¬
cember of 1878; also 'In the Churchyard, Cannes,' March,
and ' Too Late,' June of 1879.
' We do not offer the following as a literal translation, but merely
as expressing the general sense of the Greek :—
Not dead—transported to a happier shore,
Where winter chills thee not, nor heat can bum,
Nor sickness waste, hunger and thirst no more ;
Nor for life's needs, nor life itself shalt yearn ;
Since there, all blameless, thou shalt ever shine
In undimmed splendour of the Light Divine.—Eds.
The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
Bsebjags of f^istorg^
I.—THE LIFE OF HALFRED OTTAESON, SUENAMED
THE TEOUBLESOME SKALD.
An old Northern Biography, translated from the Icelandic.
CHAPTER II.
[We omit the details of the slaying of Sokki, which the foster
brothers achieved against great odds. However, 'they
rushed out and let the darkness take care of them. They
got to their ship and held their course over the high seas;
they had a good wind, and considered that they had managed
their journey with spirit.' There follows the account of
their settlement in Vatnsdale in Iceland, where they had to
buy estates, as the fertile lands were already settled.
Vatnsdale is a grassy valley about thirty English miles long,
watered by a salmon river. Fine mountains, sometimes
descending in scarped precipices, sometimes in grassy
slopes, enclose it on either hand; and the few farms still
bear the ancient names mentioned in this saga. Ottar
settled in Grimstunga, the estate furthest inland; Avald at
Knjuki, further down the river, ' and married Hild. Their
daughter was called Kolfina. She grew up into a fair woman,
but fond of dress and display.' A rich man called Olaf
then lived at Haukagil, a small farm between the two
before mentioned, prettily situated by a brook which springs
in a waterfall from the dreary desert of Grimstunga Heath,
which begins on the hill-top. Ottar married Olaf s daughter
Aldis, with a large dowry. We go on in the words of the
Saga.]
Their sons were Halfred the eldest, and Galti the second;
their daughter was Valgerd, the fairest of women. Olaf of
Haukagil fostered Halfred, and brought him up well. He
was early tall and strong, manly-looking and somewhat
swarthy, his nose was rather ugly, his hair was brown and
set him well off; he was a good poet, though somewhat
libellous and whimsical, so he was not very popular.
Thorstein Ingemundson was then chief in Vatnsdale; he
lived at Hof, and was considered the principal man in the
district; he was much beloved. Ingolf and Gudbrand were
his sons. Ingolf was the handsomest man in all the northern
lands; of him says the song—
' All the pretty damsels
Wish to go with Ingolf,
Byeways of History. 5
All the grown-up maidens.
Woe's me !    I'm too little.
I, too, says the Carline—
I shall go with Iiigolf
While a tooth is left me,
While I've strength to hobble !'
An autumn feast was once held at Grimstunga, and a playing
at the ball. Ingolf came to the game, and many men with
him from the Dale; the weather was fine, and the women
sat out and watched the game. Valgerd, Ottar's daughter,
sat on the hill slope, and other women with her. Ingolf
was in the game, and his ball flew far up and among the
girls. Valgerd took the ball and hid it under her cloak, and
bade him find it who had cast it. Ingolf came up and
found it, and bade the rest go on with the game; but he
played no more himself; he sat down by Valgerd, and talked
to her all the rest of the day.
Now the games were at an end, and those people' went
home that were not invited to the house. But from that
time Ingolf came constantly to Grimstunga to talk with
Valgerd. Ottar, her father, said at last to Ingolf, 'This
haunting of yours does not suit me; you may be aware that
we have never sat down under provocations or indiscretions.
You may make proposals of marriage for her if you will.'
He replied that he would be master of his own comings and
goings, and that while the valley was ruled as now {i.e. by
his family), he would be forced to marry no one. Then
Ottar bade Thorstein look after his son. Thorstein said to
Ingolf,' You act differently from what we did in our youth,
carrying on these fooleries, you who expect to be esteemed
as a chief. Leave off trifling with the daughter of Ottar
Bondi.' Ingolf promised amendment, and left off visiting
her at first; but later he made a love poem upon Valgerd.
Ottar was now extremely angry; he brought the case before
the assembly of the people of the district. They pressed
upon him that he should allow Thorstein to arbitrate about
the quarrel, who said, ' Short shall be my speech about it.
I shall settle for both of you, however you may like it. I
shall give half a hundred of silver to Ottar, and he shall sell
his lands here and go out of the district.' Ottar said he had
not been aware how unjustly he was going to be treated.
Thorstein replied that not the less had he arranged the affair
with a view to both parties. So later Ottar went south to
North Riverdale (fifty miles off), and lived at Ottarstead.
[The attractive Ingolf's story is to be found in the history
6 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
of Vatnsdale. He was a great champion and a kindly man,
but very inconstant in his numerous love affairs. When
dying of a wound received in battle against outlaws, he
characteristically desired that he might not be buried in the
mound with the rest of his family, but close to the pathway,
that the maidens of Vatnsdale might remember him as they
passed to and fro.]
Halfred Ottarson was now nearly twenty; he fell in love
with Kolfina, Avald's daughter, and her father seeing this,
wished that he should marry her; but Halfred wished not
to marry so soon. Avald spoke to Mar his friend, telling
him his difficulty. He said, ' We can meet this in another
way; I shall get a man to propose for her. There is a man
called Griss {i.e. Hog), the son of Saeming; he is my friend,
and lives at Geitaskard in Langdale; he has been out to
Mikligarth (Constantinople), and there acquired much honour;
he is a rich man, and well thought of.'
Now Mar sends word to Griss, and he comes to Marstead.
Mar said, ' I have thought of good counsel for thee; thou
shalt ask in marriage Kolfina, Avald's daughter; there is no
want of property there, and she is a good match, and it is
told me that Halfred Ottarson merely trifles with her.' That
was before Ottar came from the north. Now came Mar and
Griss to Avald's; they were seven together, and set up their
spears outside the house. Griss had a spear inlaid with
gold. They sat and talked together, and Mar made proposals
on behalf of Griss. Avald said that they should not be
refused what they wished. Meanwhile Halfred came up
with one follower, and saw the spears. He said, ' Some one
has arrived here from far; just mind our horses while 1 go
to Kolfina's bower;' and so he did, and sat down by her and
asked who had come there. ' I shall not be pleased about it, for
they may be coming to court you, and I believe it will not
turn out well.' Kolfina replied, 'Let those rule in those
matters who have the right.' Halfred said, 'It seems to
me, that already you think more of this new wooer than of
me.' Halfred was sitting outside the bower wall, and his
arm was round Kolfina, and he talked with her so that all
might see who went in and out, and some kisses, too, passed
between them. Now Griss came out. He said,' Who are
those people that are sitting by the wall of the bower
together so familiarly ?' Griss was rather short-sighted
and blear-eyed. Avald said, 'They are Halfred and my
daughter.' Said Griss, ' Pray, is that their custom V 'It
has been so,' said Avald;' but now the trouble of setting
Byeivays of History. 7
matters right falls upon you, as she is your promised wife.*
Griss said, ' It is easy to see that he means to be my enemy,
and this is done in provocation.' Now Griss and his men
took horse. Then Halfred called out, 'Thou shalt know
this, Griss, that thou shalt have me for a foe if thou wilt try
to make this match.' Mar said, 'Your words shall count
for nothing in this case, Halfred. Avald has the right to
dispose of his daughter.'    Then sang Halfred this verse :
' Rage of the heath-dweller.
Trough-filler, beer-swiller,
Count I no more
Than the old farm-dog's yelp
At the farm door.
Howling at parting guest;
Who cares for his behest ?
My song shall praise her best,
Her I adore.'
' And I care nothing,' added Halfred, ' what you, Mar, say
about it either.'
Mar said if he were insulted he would go hard against
Halfred, who answered he would be master of his own words ;
and sung another insulting song, and then rode off in a rage.
Then said Mar, ' Let us ride after them;' and so they did,
and were nine together, as Avald had given them two men.
Olaf, Halfred's foster-father, had suspicions about this journey
of Griss and Mar, and sent word to Ottar that Halfred
might stand in need of men.
Now it is to be told how Halfred and his man rode together,
and nine in pursuit. Halfred perceived those riding after,
and said, ' Let us run away no further.' They had come up
to a hillock ; they made preparations there for the enemy, and
piled up stones. Now came Griss and his party and attacked
them. They defended themselves most gallantly ; but it came
to pass, as the saying goes, that there is no dealing with
numbers, and so Halfred and his companion were at last
taken and bound. Then Griss saw men riding in the
distance,—not fewer than thirty, he said,—so that it looked
as if his victory was to be but a short one. They turned
back and rode off hard over the river, and there they took
their stand. Then came Ottar and his men to the river.
Ottar shouted over the water, 'Where is Halfred my kinsman ?'
Griss answered, ' He is bound but not killed by the hill-side
where we encountered each other.' Ottar said, ' You have
dealt unworthily with him. Now are you willing that I
should adjust the quarrel all myself ?' Griss said that his
word should be respected, and so they made peace and took
8 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
leave of each other. Ottar now rides back along the way, and
finds Halfred, and unbinds the two companions. Ottar said,
' This journey has brought you little credit, kinsman.'
Halfred said, ' I cannot praise it, but it is nothing to me,
father, how you settle this affair, if only Griss does not marry
Kolfina.' Ottar said,' Griss shall marry the girl, as he trusts
me about it; and thou, kinsman, shaft fare abroad and win for
thyself more honour.' Halfred said,' Who shall be true to
me when my father fails me ? However, the first thing I
shall do is to challenge Griss to fight.'
Olaf thought that Halfred was not to be trusted to keep
the peace, and sent word to.Ottar that he feared some mischief.
Then came word to Halfred that his father was ill, and that
he wished to see him and arrange his affairs. Halfred came,
and then Ottar caused him to be put in fetters, and told him
he had only the choice between two things,—either to remain
fettered, or to let his father rule all his affairs. Halfred
said,' You have not dealt kindly with me in this, but rather
shall you rule all than I sit here in fetters.' So the irons
were taken off Halfred. Mar had meanwhile held the
wedding of Griss and Kolfina at his house, and now she
settled in her household with Griss out at Geitaskard; but
there was not much love on her side for Griss. Olaf at
Haukagil ^^rged his kinsman Halfred much to go abroad; ' I
shall give thee money,' he said, ' so that thou mayest fare
with good men.' His father also pressed him much to travel.
Ottar gave judgment between Griss and Halfred, and awarded
to Halfred a hundred of silver. But Halfred would not take
it, and said, ' I see your love for me, father; you shall have
it all your own way, but my mind misgives me that our
troubles about this will last long.' The winter after, Ottar,
as has been told, moved south to North Eiverdale. That
summer Halfred journeyed to White Eiver; and as he went
on board ship there, he sang this song:
' Out where the grey billows
Break on the bulwarks
Sailing, the Skald must
Remember Kolfina.
Tho' her high kindred have
Harshly repelled me,
More do I love her now
Than when more near her.'
Halfred fared out to Norway; he sought to meet Earl Hakon
the Powerful, who then ruled the land. He went before him
and greeted him. The Earl asked who he was, and he
replied, ' I am an Icelander, and my errand, lord, is this:
Byeways of History. 9
I have composed a poem about you, and I wish now to
deliver it.' The Earl said,' You seem to be a bold man in
the presence of great rulers; such your manner shows you
to be. Certainly you shall deliver your poem.' Halfred
recited the poem, and it was a Drapa, and given out with
grace and spirit.' The Earl thanked him, and gave him a
great axe inlaid with silver, and rich clothes, and invited him
to stay with him the winter, and so Halfred did. In the
summer Halfred sailed back to Iceland, and landed in the
south, and had much property. Afterwards he was on his
travels for several winters, but never went north up the
country.
One summer, when he arrived from the high seas in
Norway, his ship lay near Agdanes. There it was told tliem
that there had been a change of rulers in Norway; Earl
Hakon was dead, and Olaf Trygg\'ason had come in his stead
with a new faith and new customs. Then the crew agreed
to make a vow that they should give Frey a rich offering if
they could get to Sweden, and Thor or Odin if they could
get back to Iceland; and if they could not get off at all, that
they should submit to the king. They could not succeed in
getting off, but had to sail in to Thrandheim, and came near
the haven called Flagda, where many long ships were lying.
Heavy weather came on at night off the sea, so that their
anchor did not hold; then spoke one of the men in a long
ship,' These men are ill placed in the merchant ship, and
will not be able to hold on, for the storm comes where they
are lying ; we had better row out to help them.' They rowed
to the ship, thirty men together, and one sat in the stern;
and when they reached the merchant ship he said, ' You
have a bad berth here, and the fairway before you is not
easy to find; we will show you the way to steer.' The sea
now ran very high. Halfred said, ' What is your name ?' He
said, ' I am called Anchorfluke.' As they spoke together the
cable sprang asunder, and he who sat in the stern of the
boat threw himself overboard, dived after the cable into the
stormy waves and caught it, so the anchor was dragged up.
Then sang Halfred this verse:
D
' Haul up the cable,
Seas strike the bulwarks,
Walrus-hide's straining ;
Where's Anchorfluke now ?'
' Still extant, date 988 in circa, less original in style than his later
poems.
10 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
The boatman in a fur-trimmed green jacket answered :
' Here comes the green-coated
Lad for your cables ;
I'll change your ship's berth,
Here's Anchorliuke now.'
They rowed before the ship into a good berth. The merchant
crew did not know who they were, but afterwards it was
rumoured that the king himself had helped them. After
that they lay off Hladir, where was Olaf the king, and it
was told him that these men were heathen, and newly come
from Iceland.
[We take from Snorro Sturlason's Life of King Olaf his
version of the following conversation as the best, though
substantially the same as our Saga.]
Olaf the king was walking in the street when several men
met him, and the foremost saluted him. The king asked his
name; he called himself Halfred.    Then said the king:
'Art thou the Skald?'
He answered, ' I can compose.'
The king said,' Thou must take Christianity and become
my man.'
He said, ' That shall not be done without a price being
paid ; if I am baptized, you, king, must be my godfather;
from no other man will I suffer that.'
The king replied, ' I consent to that; wilt thou then
become my man ?'
Halfred answered, ' Formerly I was a court man of Earl
Hakon's ; now I shall not pledge myself to thee or to any
other lord, unless you should swear to me that you will never
blame me for what I may do so far as to dismiss me from
your service.'
' It is told me,' answered the king, ' that thou art not so
wise or so prudent as to make it unlikely that thou mayest
behave in such a way as I could not allow for my honour's
sake in any man.'
' Kill me then,' said Halfred.
The king said, ' Certainly thou art a troublesome Skald,
but my man shalt thou be.'
Halfred answered, ' What wilt thou give me, king, as a
gift in honour of my new name, if I am to be called the
Troublesome Skald ?'
The king gave him a sword, but no scabbard with it; and
he said, ' Compose now a song upon this sword, and let the
word sword be in every line.'
Halfred said these lines :
The Old and the New. 11
' This sword of swords is my reward; '
For him who knows to wield a sword,
And with his sword to serve his lord,
Yet wants a sword, his lot is hard.
I would I had my good lord's leave
For this good sword a sheath to choose.
I'm worth three swords where men swords use,
But for this sword's sheath now I grieve.' ^
The king praised his skill, and presented bim with a costly
sword-sheath, and said, ' The sword is not, however, in one
of the lines.' Halfred answered,' It is three times in another
line.'    ' That is true,' said the king.
Halfred was baptized, and became King Olaf's court man,
and the king caused Thorkell Silver his uncle, who still lived
in Norway, to instruct him in the Christian faith. From the
poems of Halfred are taken much of the true and faithful
accounts that are here related of Olaf Tryggvason.
{To he continued.) E. J. 0.
STfje ©III anU Etc iJ^eixi.
By Sidney Philips.
' The old order changes, giving place to new ;
Thus God fulfils Himself in many ways.'
CHAPTEE I.
' What is to become of Mabel Barnard V was the first ques¬
tion on every lip, when one gloomy November afternoon the
good folk of Ditchleigh heard the bell of the parish church
proclaim by eighty solemn strokes, that old Mr. Barnard of
Barnard Hall had passed away. ' Poor Mabel! she was so
spoilt by her grand-parents, they never denied her a single
wish ; and now that they are both gone, what will she do ?'
Such were the comments passed on all sides.
The property was strictly entailed on a distant relative;
and the opening of the will proved that though not utterly
penniless, Miss Barnard was yet not wealthy enough for her
future to be a matter of much concern to any but her im¬
mediate relatives. These were few. The only daughter of
Mr. Barnard's only son by an imprudent Scotch marriage,
she had been early left an orphan, and educated by her grand¬
father, after whose death she was certainly not overburdened
with relations.
Lady Dartrey, old Mr. Barnard's niece, did indeed suggest
^ Translated by Laing in his Sea Kings of Norway.
12 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
to her husband that when he went down to the funeral he
had better find out exactly what their young cousin's income
would be; for if there were great accumulations, it might be
worth having her up to town in case one of the dear boys were
to fall in love with her, and ' if she were quite unprovided for,
something might be done for her, poor thing.' But when it
turned out that Mabel was neither poor enough to be patron¬
ized nor rich enough to be worth flattering, her ladyship
contented herself with sending off neatly written condolences
and the Eev. Josiah Snook's Solace for Sufferers, in purple
morocco, both of which Mabel gratefully acknowledged but
never read.
]\Iabel herself was as much puzzled about her future as her
acquaintances coidd be. She had several offers of homes, but
none which attracted her particularly. The kindest letters
she received were from her mother's brothers, one of whom
was a successful lawyer in Edinburgh, the other an Estab¬
lished Church minister in a Highland parish. There was
no time to be lost. Frau von Strickstrumpf, her ex-governess,
who had remained on as companion when her education was
finished, gave several unmistakeable hints that she would like
to see the Christmas-tree in her old home again, and the new
owner was expected to return from his Mediterranean yacht¬
ing expedition in the beginning of the year. ' I suppose the
old set must clear out of the way first,' thought Mabel,
as she paid off the old servants and bade farewell to her
companion.
It was Christmas Day, and Mabel was just returning from
church, where she had almost forgotten her own loneliness as
she lifted up her heart and strove to realize the commence¬
ment of ' those sinless years that breathed beneath the Syrian
blue.' It saddened her to think as she walked away, that
she would never kneel at that altar again, or help to weave
the bright wreaths round the old grey pillars, and that she
had seen the light stream in for the last time through the
painted windows, reflecting its bright colours on the faded
figures of Sir Eichard and Dame Marjory as they lay side by
side in their stiff ruffs on the family monument.
A shower of sleet roused her from her reverie and made
her quicken her steps, hurrying through the park and deso¬
late rose-garden, past the tennis-court, into the great hall,
filled with works of art collected by Mr. Barnard during his
travels, along the corridor till she reached the dining-room,
where she could dry her crape at the blazing fire, and where
her solitary luncheon awaited her.
The Old a7td the New. 13
' I wonder if any of these women had troubles like mine,'
thought Mabel, as she looked up at the simpering beauties
by Lely and Kneller who adorned the walls. ' Well, if they
had, it's all over long ago, and I suppose it will all be the
same for me, too, a hundred years hence.'
At this moment the servant came iu with the morning
post. Mabel had grown to hate the very sight of letters.
Her girl friends meant well, no doubt, with their kind wishes
and Christmas cards, but which of them had ever sat alone
in the world with empty pockets and an uncertain future ?
They might feel for her, but how could they understand or
help her? One wrote about her parish work, her school feast
and classes; another of the merry party assembled at her
home, of her dances, flirtations, and hopes; whilst another, of a
more melancholy turn of mind, filled her letter with fears of
a coming war; for with four brothers and a fianc4 in the army,
each fresh report of complications in the East filled her with
dread. It was the first intimation Mabel had had of any
cloud on the political horizon. For weeks she had not
glanced at a newspaper. Womanlike, she was too much
absorbed in the great change that had taken place in her
individual life to care for national interests. She could not
pity her friend, far from it. How delightful it must be to
have some one to be anxious about, something at stake in
the national cause, something to make your heart beat
quicker when the daily papers come in ! With most women
a cause means an individual. Till that moment Mabel had
never fully realized her utter isolation. Now she knew ' that
not to fear because all is taken,' is indeed ' the loneliest depth
of human pain.'
But there was one letter more, directed in a stiff, business¬
like hand, that she had learnt to detest. What could these
troublesome lawyers want now ? It was a long letter, tell¬
ing her that the new owner would be at Barnard in about a
week, and that it would be as well if she were to wait there
to meet him, for there was much to settle. Old Mr. Barnard
had certainly meant to leave her all his valuable personalties ;
but some clause in the will raised a doubt whether the pictures
and statues bought in Italy did not belong to the furniture
of the house, which accrued to the new owner. So much
at least Mabel gathered, though she did not understand a
word of the long technical explanations. Mr. John Leslie
Barnard desired that nothing whatever should be removed
from the house till his arrival, and he would not promise to
keep on any of the old servants.    ' He might at least have
14 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
answered the letter I wrote to him at Naples on that subject,'
thought Mabel,' it would have been more gentlemanlike under
the circumstances.    I will not stay and be patronized by this
new owner.    I will write to one of my Scotch uncles, that he
may expect me next week; I think I will go to the one who
lives in the country.    I should like the quiet of a clergyman's
house.     What's all this ?' she added,  ' mutual concessions,
compromises; none of this for me.    I would not tight with a
vulgar wretch such as that Mr. Barnard must be for the world.
A woman is sure to get the worst of it in the end.    What
does it signify if I'm rather poorer ?     No  one will want
to marry me for money, that's one comfort; and I shall not
be able  to  encourage  vice  by wasting  my substance  on
impostors of some sort or another, as all rich women do.
I've been born under an  unlucky star, that's  certain.    I
wonder why I was born ?    It seems rather  hard  that I
should have had no choice in the  matter.    I  wonder if
people were allowed to choose whether they would exist or
not, the world would be as thickly populated as it is now ?'
The bell ringing for afternoon church, put an end to these
somewhat involved speculations.    It was raining too hard for
Mabel to attempt to attend another service, but the well-
known sound had a soothing effect on her over-strung nerves.
As she listened, it suddenly struck her how strange it was
to think that these same bells would still ring on year after
year when  she could  no longer  hear them.    They would
peal out just the same message,' peace and good-will,' ' good¬
will and peace,' and only strangers would listen to them as,
with unchanged voice, they told other wearied hearts of One
with whom is no variableness neither shadow of turning,
who would fulfil to her the promise of His Advent, not indeed
pleasure on earth, not joy on earth, not even happiness on
earth, but on earth Peace.
{To he continued.)
Coimtrg Su&jfcts anti pursuits.
XIV.—MY PONY FPtlENDS.
In a previous article in this Magazine, the right of ladies to
share in the excitement of fox-hunting has been well and
spiritedly advocated. May we hope that the humbler but
no less real enjoyment to be found in country rambles on
pony-back, either literally or metaphorically, may not prove
too ' slow ' to be worthy of a few reminiscences.    'Tis true,
Country Subjects and Pursuits. 15
' Well mounted on a horse,
Who spirited and docile too,
Whate'er ia to be done will do,'
joining the mad rush cross country, spurning the turf with
flying feet, or skimming like a bird over hedge and ditch, is
a pleasure so exhilarating that once tasted, it may well make
all other riding seem tame and inglorious. Setting aside,
however, the vexed question of propriety and womanly feel¬
ing, how few ladies there are who can command all the
adjuncts necessary to fox-hunting, viz. robust health, strong
nerves, and a very long purse ! A lady's hunter, properly
trained, thoroughbred or nearly so, represents a sum beyond
the power of any ordinary income to procure and keep.
Even apart from hunting, what may be termed conventional
riding involves nearly as much expense for ladies. No lady,
at any rate near town, can ride alone without a groom be¬
hind her, whose horse and accoutrements must be in keeping
with her own. The cost is great; and after a time the
pleasure of daily exercise on horseback along the high road
palls even on the most enthusiastic. You must ride on a
' correct' horse dressed in a correct habit, be followed by a
correct groom, go at the correct pace at the correct hour.
All this excessive ' correctness' becomes very wearisome, and
you long for the old pony and the woodland path or breezy
moorland, where you can let the reins dangle, sit anyhow,
sing or chat, jump off and gather flowers—in short, escape
from the trammels of ceremony to the freedom of liberty.
Tlie trusty companions of many such country rambles are
now waiting to be introduced to readers who, like the writer,
do not consider the horse as a mere progressing machine,
necessary but uninteresting, but as an individual whose ac¬
quaintance is worth cultivating and whose character is worth
studying.
Oh, the dear delight of finding yourself mounted on the
back of a real live pony, and for the first time allowed to
manage it all by yourself—if you can ! The bridle is put into
your left hand, the whip into your right, and you are told you
may go where you like. Donald, a dun-coloured Highlander,
stout and stolid, does not, however, seem to share your anxiety
to start. He is better accustomed to small riders and their
ways than you are to Highland ponies. You give what seems
to you sundry mighty tugs at his mouth with the rein, you
even venture to bring down the whip on his shaggy flank, with
as much success in compelling him to move as if you were
a Jenny Wren twittering on a log of wood.    A companion of
16 The Ladies' EdmburghMagazine.
your own age, the owner of the pony, stands beside you, and
tries to help by pulling at the rein with all his miglit in
the required direction. In vain; Donald indeed allows his
head to be turned, but his feet remain immoveable. You
begin to experience a depressing sense of incapacity, when,
heaving a deep sigh as if to protest against the fidgeting
ways of children, Donald wheels slowly round and walks off
calmly.    Once started, he goes along willingly enough.
The rascal knows every foot of the roads about, and adroitly
chooses a detour which brings him back to his stable in less
than a mile. But oh, joy ! at a certain turn where the road
has smooth grassy verges on either side between beech
hedges, he sets off at a canter which you imagine a gallop.
Three ha'-pencefor tup-fence, three h£-pence for tiip-pence, goes
Donald along the extreme edge of the road, in the ditch, in
fact, when it suits his fancy. Bump, bump, bump goes the
rider on his back in an ecstasy of delight. What does it
matter that Donald and the saddle are both too big for you,
that your poor little right knee can barely crook itself round
the pommel, that your left leg is being sorely grazed by the
stirrup leather, that your hat is off at the back of your head,
your hair all over your face, and your skirt wildly ballooning
over Donald's tail! All this is as nothing to the proud sense
of independence, of being the ruler instead of the ruled.
' Pride must have a fall,' and so had we before many days
were over. A new pony was sent as a present to the little
son of the house. Such a beautf^! a tiny black mare of
delicate symmetry, and so much smaller than Donald as to
make that worthy look like a dray-horse beside a blood hack.
We were so uplifted by our success in managing Donald, that
we begged hard for the first ride on the new-comer. Elbe
brought an excellent character with her as a child's pony,
gentle and well-trained. Behold us, then, mounted and led
round the lawn, Ellie stepping as meekly as any old cow.
' Now, Tom, do let her head go.' Tom, a good-natured, soft
lad, who never dreamt of refusing any request made to him
by the children, did so, and chirruped to the pony._ The
moment she felt her head free there was a bound, ending in
a vicious fiing, which landed her rider hands and knees on
the grass ahead. A quick hand secured Ellie, as quickly her
late rider was picked up and reseated in the saddle, before
the pony well knew she had been successful in throwing her.
Bewildered and crestfallen, the rider was ignominiously held
by the leg, while Ellie, with her naturally bad temper now
thoroughly roused, tried her little best to unseat her again.
Country Subjects and Pursuits, 17
This was necessary at the time to show EUie she was not to
be the mistress; but after a few more trials she was pro¬
nounced quite unsafe for children, and sent away.
We had no more tumbles off pony-back but one, and that
was so completely from our own stupidity, that it may serve
as a warning to other heedless little girls. The pony was a
brown mare, Jessie by name, fat and lazy by nature. We
were riding alone in the grounds of a country-house, and
turned into a narrow side path bordered by large trees.
Now for a canter along the grass at the side ! In one minute
we found ourselves seated on the grass with a sadly bruised
nose, and Jessie only too happy in being allowed to stop,
quietly munching the grass a few yards ahead. {Mem.—
Trees have branches.) In all our many rides, on different
steeds and unattended, these are the only falls we ever had.
Once indeed we had a narrow escape from a nasty accident
when riding a little pony in Switzerland. The pommels of
the pad were moveable, and when the pony was cantering
briskly homewards, gave way and fell. One foot went
through the iron stirrup and caught. Fortunately it was
possible to clasp the pony round the neck while retaining
hold of the bridle. This brought it to a standstill, otherwise
the rider's head would have suffered against the hard stones.
A good, well-fitting, three-pommelled saddle and double
bridle are essential to safety and comfort. A lady going out
alone should see for herself that both are properly adjusted
before starting. A very convenient plan of stirrup-strap is
one which can be altered by the rider herself when seated in
the saddle. In this way, if it is necessary to dismount when
out alone, the strap can be let down several holes first.
This gives an easy step from the ground to re-mount, and
the strap can then be pulled up again to its proper hole by
the right hand alone. A word of caution as to the care of
the whip. Be sure to fasten it through the pocket flap
before getting down. Both hands are thus free, and the
chance of incautiously flicking it in the pony's face avoided,
—a proceeding which startles the shy, offends the surly,
and hurts the sensitive feelings of the willing and amiable.
Also it is well to have two or three buttons on the band of
your skirt, with corresponding loops to fasten it up to a
walking length. Put the curb bridle over the pommel, and
take the snaffle in your hand, if you wish to lead the pony
any distance. Cantering horses exclusively for ladies, seem
to have gone out of fashion along with long, full skirts, two-
horned saddles, and slipper stirrups.   The three latter changes
No. 61.—Januaey 1880. B
18 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
are a decided riddance of bad rubbish, but the mania for
trotting horses may be carried a little too far. Who has not
watched from the footpath, with feelings of deep and pain¬
ful emotion, a band of perhaps a dozen ladies under charge
of the riding-master, at full trot along the high road, every
one of them more or less an example of one or other of the
awkward styles! No. 1 is the most excusable, generally being
the fault of novices, and arising from want of practice.
They are in such a hurry to practise their newly-learned
accomplishment, tliat they start before the horse, in fact trot
against, instead of with him. Clic-clac goes the horse,
bumpity-bump goes the rider. In bad style No. 2, the rider
suddenly stands erect in her stirrup as if shot out of the
saddle by a galvanic battery; after aftbrding a full view of the
leather, down she goes again with the return shock, to repeat
the painful process anew. Bad style No. 3 is perhaps the
most common; the rider does not rise straight, but gives her
shoulders an awkward twist from left to right. "When this is
combined with sitting too far on the off side, the effect is
painful, to the beholder at any rate.
More than one rider, however, we have followed with ad¬
miring eyes, longing to be able to do lilvewise. Sitting fair
in the centre of the saddle, shoulders square to the horse's
ears, never leaving the saddle sufficiently to show leather,
she rose and fell with each cadence of the horse's feet with¬
out visible effort. Neither jar nor jerk nor stiffness broke
the charm of watching the graceful motions of a thorough
horsewoman and a thorouohbred horse.
Much importance is attached to having a horse properly
trained to a habit. Many of our friends have been previously
totally unaccustomed to ladies' society, and we never found
any difficulty in that, if naturally of good temper and sensibly
broken-in.
Long years after our first pony friendship, there came a
day when the responsibility of choosing a suitable steed fell
upon ourselves. There is a great outcry at present against
what are called strong-minded women, and women are
credited with a determination to act independently, and
to force themselves into the places and professions of men.
There is one fact, however, which seems to us rather lost
sight of. There are an immense number of what may be
termed surplus women in Great Britain, left alone perhaps,
or two sisters together, but without father, brother, or
guardian. Surely in such a case it is better to act for your¬
self, to do your best to help yom-self, quietly and without
Country Subjects and Pursuits. 19
fuss, than to lie down helpless, bewailing your own feebleness
in audible tones, entreating the busy passer-by to pause and
help you. We say it is surely better to act for yourself
quietly if necessary; but for all that, rest assured you will
find that woman is the weaker sex, and must not expect to
come off quite so well in a hand-to-hand struggle with the
world as her more powerful neighbour. All this digression,
you will say, reader, means only that you bought a pony on
your own responsibility and were cheated. Quite natural too ;
everybody either cheats or is cheated in horse-dealing, on how¬
ever small a scale it may be. In that case we must have
cheated also, as well as have been cheated, as no money was
actually lost by our various transactions of that kind. Well
do we remember E., the one-eyed horse dealer, bearing down
upon us with a succession of screws. We had no previous ac¬
quaintance with Mr. E., and had never expressed any desire
to enter into any dealings with him ; but he seemed to have
scented the battle from afar, and bore down upon the prey.
In the first instance we were beforehand with him, and had
invested in a sturdy young New Forest pony. He was sound
and steady, but rather small for our work; so, when we saw
and fell in love with a certain little black mare, Garry was
sold, and Little Nell installed in his place, Bonnie Nell, take
her for all in all, we ne'er shall look upon her like again.
A cob, about 14"2, with rather short arched neck, high crest
and deep chest, fine head and ears and bright eye, extremely
docile, though a remarkably free goer, she made all other
ponies feel like clodhoppers, after being long accustomed
to her wonderfully light step and springy action. How
many miles have we rambled together, just our two selves,
sometimes sauntering with loose reign through winding
country lanes, with high unkempt hedgerows on either side,
festooned with honeysuckle, wild roses, and beautiful white
traveller's joy; sometimes briskly pacing along the old Eoman
road, leading straight as a dart through thick pine woods;
anon spinning along over the breezy down, redolent of thyme,
over turf guiltless of the plough since the time of Julius Ccesar;
then wending her way warily through groups of school children
playing in the narrow crooked streets of the little country
town ; and then setting off full trot along the flat stretch of
road on the side nearest home ! Now comes the playful snort
and flick of her nose as she breaks into a hand gallop up the
steep bit of hill, sometimes making a pretence of bolting, till
she slackens her pace at the turn on the left to the railway
crossing, where she comes to a stand-still with her nose on the
2b The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
bars of the gate, till the old gatekeeper has had his never-failing
joke of looking round the corner for the London express.
Let me try now to describe one among our many ride-in-
turn rambles in which Nell was a partaker.    She was so
gentle  and  sagacious in   accommodating  herself in these
walks, that we preferred her to a smaller and slower pony.
It is late spring-time, a balmy, blossoming afternoon.    A
band of young girls are standing before the door of an old-
fashioned, low-roofed country-house, covered  to  the eaves
with roses and ivy.    Nell is there, too, waiting patiently for
the first rider.    Truth to tell, her superfluous energy has
been worked off by a long run the day before, and she is
disposed to take a sober view of life to-day.    Still she seems
to think the party long of making up their minds who is to
mount first; and turning her head to her mistress, gently
takes the little whip between her lips, as much as to say,
' You don't need this.'    At last a tall, graceful young girl
springs lightly into the saddle, and we make a start.    To-day
we are bound for a certain copse famous for being the haunt
of the nightingale, who, like a public singer, has his daily
rehearsal for his evening serenade.    We shall pass on our
way the long slope of meadow land near the old farm, where
the daffodils grow in thousands.    They have come and gone,
and ' taken the winds of March with beauty,' and the buxom
luxuriance of their golden bells has faded like the tender
bloom of their delicate sisters the primroses,' e'er they can
behold bright Phoebus in his strength.'    Although most of
the primroses are over, we shall pause at the stile further
down the lane, and looking down the vista formed by spruces
and other evergreens, may still see nestling in the damp
mossy soil, primroses of many a shade of pink, from the
palest pinkish lilac to deep magenta.    They are the natives
of this glade, and refuse to migrate elsewhere.    Now let us
open the gate for Nell and her rider, and enter into the
fragrant pine wood, where the bracken grows so high as to
bend over Nell's back as she pushes her way along the
narrow track.    But a few steps and the sandy path emerges
into broad day-light; and recoiling from dangerous proximity
to an old gravel pit, mounts steeply up to the wide moorland,
which stretches to the south, and opens before us a scene of
beauty which even the single Scotchwoman of the band is
fain to confess an exceedingly good imitation of her native
land.    There is real heather, thougli those English folks will
call it common ling, miles of it, with fir-clad heights ; ' heichs
and hows,' says Miss Scotchie, with special emphasis on the
Country Siibjects and Pursuits. 21
ch in defiance of the English tongues about her. Beyond
the moorland is a narrow belt of cultivated land, bordering
the broad expanse of bay, bounded on the further side by a
range of hills magnified almost into mountains in the silvery
haze cast by the rays of the southern sun.
Time is passing, however, and we must not allow ourselves
more than a short pause on the borders of the heath ere we
turn to the cultivated and distinctively English type of land¬
scape, which in this country is linked arm in arm with that
of its northern sister. A short descent again, a winding
sandy track, past more gravel pits, and then Nell's rider has
the chance of a gallop across a wide open common, to the
great annoyance of a flock of geese, who protest with loud
outcries against this disturbance of the peace of their domain.
On the further side of the common we enter a shady elm-
bordered lane. The high banks are perfumed with violets
blue and white, and we have not far to go before we reach
the goal of our afternoon's ramble. "We stop at a gate by
the roadside; one of us remains in charge of Nell, while the
others, with hushed voice and footfall, step softly along the
little footpath through the field, then as quietly mounting
the rickety stile, disappear one by one into the copse beyond.
There is a thick undergrowth of brushwood, with a few old
trees interspersed, hardly thick enough to be called a wood.
The grassy paths are bordered by a perfect mosaic of red,
white, and blue—wild hyacinth, red lychnis, and white
stellaria, massed in richest profusion. We have not long to
wait before our listening ears can plainly distinguish the
liquid notes of the nightingale among all the many lesser
songsters. One or two of the party are fortunate enough to
catch sight of the soberly-arrayed brown bird sitting on one
of the higher trees, pouring forth his matchless melody with
swelling throat.
The scene changes. Gone are English lanes, with their
brilliant wild-flowers, woodland copses, and the song of night¬
ingales. Gone, too, is bonnie Black Nell, and naught is left to
us but a memory. We are in a certain ' beautiful isle of the
sea' not a hundred miles from the West Coast of Scotland.
Here dwelt, and for aught we know may still dwell,—for
the span of a Highland pony's life has no fixed period, in
fact, is often so prolonged as to reckon as hereditary property,
—three worthy dames, Peggy Brown, Peggy White, and Peggy
Grey. It is a curious fact that nine-tenths of the ponies on
that island are of the female sex, and of these nine-tenths
are called Peggy.    We became acquainted with our Peggies
22 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
during various summer sojourns in that land of enchantment.
(It rains occasionally, and the proper number of cubic feet
of air is perhaps miscalculated in the sleeping chambers;
but what of that, perfection is nowhere on this earth.) Our
companions were enthusiastic mountaineers; and because we
were not of equally stalwart limb to join in their long
tramps, must we, therefore, sit doleful on a rock by the sad
sea waves, and never do more than gaze wistfully at these
tempting mountain tracks, winding like threads of light up
the shadowy braes to disappear over the brow of the purple
moorland ? Where ? That was the charm. These paths led
into the mysterious unknown, and beyond were the jagged
peaks, frowning, precipitous, at the foot of which lay these
remote mountain glens, which our imagination filled with
rare mountain ferns, caves, waterfalls, and impossible beauties
of every description.
We rebelled against this enforced confinement in the
valley, and made inquiry among the natives for the loan
of a steed. Peggy Grey was recommended to our notice,
and we proceeded at once to interview her. She was rather
a good-looking animal viewed from the further side of a
patch of corn; but unfortunately she failed about the legs.
She had one tolerable limb and three stilts. To ride her
along the high road was humiliating in the extreme, from the
impression that an instant collapse of the stilts was inevitable;
but once get her among the hills, leave her to herself, and then
merely to sit on her back and feel the way in which the working
leg piloted the three dummies was, as Yankees say, ' a cau¬
tion,'—up and down steep hillsides, tangled with long heather,
bracken, and half-hidden boulders she scrambled, sliddering
down boggy banks, picking her way through treacherous peat
hags, and fording stony burns cautiously but surely.
Poor old Peggy Grey has well earned our eternal gratitude
for carrying us safely through many a weary climb to the
upper air, where the pure ozone breathed fresh life into
every vein, and the glorious panorama of mountain, sea, and
sky filled eye and heart with rapture.
Peggy Brown and Peggy White lived in another part of
the island. It had only been intended to engage the services
of the former; but from some confusion in the arrangements,
the owner of the latter insisted that his poivny had been the
one we had trysted, and was not to be put off. Peggy Brown
had already arrived, and was standing meekly conscious of
the dignity of being arrayed for the first time in a braw side¬
saddle, when Peggy White lumbered up saddleless.
Country Subjects and Pursuits. 23
' You must bring your pony another day, M'—; we have
only one lady's saddle,' said we to the old Highlander.
' Is't a sattel ye're wantin; hoot ay, she'll fin' ye a braw
sattel. It's a freen 0' her ain that has the bonnie sattel, an'
she'll pe goin' for it this moment.'
So off he went, K— going with him on the brown pony,
where we followed on foot. At the meeting of three roads,
while a pretty cottage peeped out of sheltering trees, stood the
two ponies, and leaning over the entrance gate of the house was
a youth, well-dressed and well-looking enough to have known
better than to manifest such undisguised amusement at the
scene before him. To realize it requires a word or two in
description of the ponies. K— looked as fresh and neat as
she always does, though her skirt was but a waterproof and her
hat not de rigueur for horseback, and Peggy Brown was quite
presentable. Her sleek skin, fine limbs, head and ears
showed she came of a good family on one side of the house
at least; and though she numbered some two-and-twenty
summers, she was still sound in wind and limb. Peggy
"White was, on the contrary, utterly plebeian, podgy, thick-set,
and hairy-legged. An attempt had evidently been made to
polish her up for the occasion, but this had failed to remove
the remarkable cross-pattern in pink, brown, and green on
her back and flanks, the result of numerous burdens of
herring nets! But the ' sattel'! Would that we had had the
wit to bring it away with us, and palm it off as a genuine
relic of Robert Bruce,—his own saddle, used by him during
his sojourn on the island, and left behind in the hurry of
departure! That it was the first saddle known on the island,
we have not a doubt. Imagine a very old and worm-eaten
block of wood carved into high pommel and cantle. Here
and there were suggestions that it had once been covered
with leather, chiefly in the immediate vicinity of rows of
brass-headed nails. On either side hung down large rusty
iron stirrups, and the stiff flap, when lifted up, disclosed the
one girth to be fastened with twine! We looked at K—,
and K— looked at us. Our heart almost failed us as we'
thought of the absurd figure the rider would present. The
youth was there behind us, still grinning; we saw that
distinctly through the back of our heads. Just then
came a whiff of the balmy breath of the south wind;
we looked up, and saw the distant peaks soft and clear
against the cloudless blue of the sky. Shall we lose the
pet day of the summer, and perhaps our only chance of
seeing Glen S— ?    Perish the thought, we shall go.    In half
24 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine,
a minute we had climbed into the saddle by the help of
the aforesaid stirrup, leaving it dangling far below. Button¬
ing the waterproof cloak, an excellent substitute for a skirt,
and fastening up the off stirrup close to the saddle as a sort
of handle, off we set. In time we had passed the scattered
cottages of the hamlet, smiling in sympathetic answer to the
little Highland children who stared open-eyed and open-
mouthed, but remained perfectly silent. (Eude remarks
belong to the Lowlands.) Mounting slowly up the steep
winding road, we soon came to the moorland, and before we
had gone two miles on our road we were in Elysium. We
pitied K— from the bottom of our heart. We knew
that the peals of laughter which greeted our ears as we
trotted before her, were but the hollow subterfuge of envy
and malice at our superior comfort. We insisted that
pommels, victoria stirrups, and double bridles were a delusion.
The only really perfect saddle was one with a handle on
your right, to grasp ' when so dispodged '—a peak before and
a peak behind, between which you could sit at your ease,
sideways as in a chair, backwards if you wished to review
the road you had trodden, forwards to look proper when the
rare gig or waggonette came in sight. Yes ! that was a day
to be remembered. The shimmering heat on the treeless
uplands was tempered by the soft sea-breeze, which wafted
to our grateful nostrils the refreshing fragrance of the aromatic
bog myrtle, the heather, the lemon ferns, and the peat moss.
All mingled together into a perfume indescribable, delicate,
and delicious. K— declared all her adjectives of admiration
were exhausted before we had gone half-way. The miles
passed all too quickly till we reached the farmhouse at the
entrance to the Glen. Here we expected to have the ponies
put up, to procure some milk for ourselves. The place seemed
deserted, not a soul to be seen but a farm lass, whose English
was of the scantiest.
' Is there any one to put up the ponies ?' ' Na, the're a'
at the shearin'. Ye can leave them on the grass there.'
There seemed to be no alternative; so we unsaddled the Pegs,
made a neat pile of saddles and bridles, covered with cloaks,
in a corner of the little field, and after extorting a promise
from the lass to have some milk for us on our return, we set
off on our walk up the Glen. Following a footpath by the
brawling mountain stream, clear as crystal from the granite
rocks, we sauntered on till the pangs of hunger made us
think longingly of the neat little parcels we carried. Just
at a spot where the burn had widened out into a pool whose
Country Subjects and Pui'SJiits. 25
shallows looked of softest golden sand, there stood invitingly
in the very centre, a smooth, flat rock. On that rock we
sat and ate our luncheon, and washed it down with the pure
water beside us. ' How did you get there ?' Oh! never mind,
we did, and returned after a while to the land. All we have
to relate in the matter is, that the soft golden sand was an
imposition. Every grain was as large as a pea and larger,
and was just a hard little angular morsel of granite. The
afternoon draws on, and we must think of retracing our steps.
We try a new way back to the farm, a short cut, which of
course proves a long one. Within a short distance of our
goal, we encounter a formidable obstacle in the shape of a
loose stone dyke, such as we never saw before or since.
Intended most likely for a deer-fence, it was fully nine feet
high, the lower stones being immensely large, and the upper
rows gi'adually diminishing in size till the top row was of
stones not much larger than an orange. They were all
rounded too, as if they had been gatliered out of the burn.
To climb over this without the downfall of something or
somebody, was no easy matter; but in our scrambles we two
made it a rule never to go back if we could possibly go on.
No gate or opening was near. No living bodies, save a few
uninterested cows, to witness the performance, which was
safely accomplished, with the loss only of a few of the top
stones. When we reached the farm, it was this time entirely
deserted, even the lass having disappeared; so we had to
content ourselves without the promised milk, and set to
work to saddle and bridle the Peggies as best we could.
Fortunately the poor beasts did not offer the slightest
opposition to our wishes, but patiently submitted, as if they
had been accustomed to the finicking fingering of ladies all
their lives. The relic of Eobert Bruce required the efforts of
both to hoist it to its place ; but once there the buckling was
extremely simple, no pulling at the tvidne being possible, as
the relic retained its place by mere gravity. There was a
low, flat-topped wall, from which it was delightfully easy to
seat yourself in the saddle. K—, however, could not persuade
her Peggy, who was a little uplifted with her unwonted
finery, to stand side-ways to the wall, and after she had with
no little difficulty scrambled to the saddle, down fell her
cloak, and off marched Peg.
But here we are maundering on far beyond our limits
about these island Peggies, and have not even introduced
by name our beloved Dick, maligned in his youth as ' that
wild pony,' but who possessed the sweetest temper in the
26 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
world if only allowed ' to gie a bit spoot,' as his master ex¬
pressively termed his occasional gambols, given in the very
innocence of his heart. Nor must we omit to mention
another tall white Peggy, of whom, when we asked a friend
to tell us if he saw a horse coming, it was aptly said, ' No, but
I see the ghost of one;' nor slim, fleet-footed Gipsy; nor
handsome, fiery Hotspur, a lamb in the stall, a lion in action ;
nor Topsy, that matchless little trotter over whose tomb
might be inscribed, Tor more than twenty-five years the
faithful servant of—
Farewell, friends! The sage hath said, ' He who hath
many friends hath none.' He could not have meant pony
friends. M. S. T.
©bjer Enie Scales,
THE GHOST OF HENLY COTTAGE.
PAET II.
The clergy being thus ignominiously routed by the Ghost,
Eebecca became supine, and attempted no longer to stem the
flood. People came from all parts of the country to hear
the Ghost and see its work; and Henly Cottage became
public property, especially after nightfall. Mrs. Henly
confined herself altogether to her own apartment, where,
strange to say, the Ghost did not enter, or at least did not
make its presence felt.
The only disbeliever in the supernatural agency of the
deeds done was the village doctor, a man of science. Mrs.
Henly had only a slight acquaintance with Dr. Norwich,
for she was her own doctor. She considered that she and
Eebecca had acquired, from their life-long experience, greater
skill than any College of Physicians could impart.
The doctor met Polly one day in the village, and after
asking a great many questions regarding the reputed Ghost
and its work, gave her a note to her mistress, requesting
permission to examine the premises in the interests of
science, and almost promising an elucidation of the mystery,
if he were allowed full scope for his investigations. Leave
was willingly granted on the mere chance of unearthing the
Ghost, as all efforts for laying him to rest had failed.
Dr. Norwich commenced his search in the kitchen, and
advanced from room to room making voluminous notes as
Ower True Tales. 27
he proceeded, the Ghost keeping uncommonly quiet all the
time.
Suddenly the doctor said to Polly, ' I should like to
examine your room now, and see the exact spot where the
apparition appeared to you.'
Polly blushed, and said her room was not so tidy as it
ought to be; for she was so frightened for the Ghost she
never dared to stay in it long by herself.
' Nonsense,' said Rebecca sharply; ' what harm could the
puir Ghost, if it is a ghost, do you ? Run up-stairs directly
and put it in order, and don't keep the doctor waiting longer
than you can help,' she added, as Polly crawled towards the
garret, throwing furtive glances behind her as if she expected
to see the Ghost at her back.
In a few minutes she returned to say that all was ready.
By this time it was dark, so Rebecca brought up the rear
with a light, while she sent Polly in front to show the way.
' How the candle is flickering I' said Rebecca; ' are you
sure the garret window is closed, Polly ?'
' It was shut when I ran down just now, and this door I
left open I am sure,' she added, tugging at the one which
closed in the narrow wooden staircase.
It opened with a sudden burst outwards, and Polly ran
fleetly up the steps, followed quickly by the doctor; a
sudden blast of cold wind extinguished the candle in
Rebecca's hand, and she remained at the foot of the staircase.
A distant rumble was heard, and then the whirring sound,
in the midst of which a child's voice was distinctly audible,
whispering in the doctor's ear, ' 0 doctor, dear, and what
have you given me ? and it's dying I am, och ! och !'
The doctor started back involuntarily, the steps were
very narrow, and his footing by no means secure, so when
something brushed past him he lost his balance, and fell
backwards down the steep stair, knocking down Rebecca,
who was still standing at the foot. In another second Polly
was precipitated on the top of them.
"When Mrs. Henly hastened up-stairs she found them all
prostrate, Polly screaming at the pitch of her voice, Rebecca
groaning, and the doctor underneath, motionless and speech¬
less. When at last they disentangled themselves, Polly was
found to have escaped scot free save for the fright; Rebecca
was much shaken, and had all her front teeth loosened ; while
the poor doctor was stunned, and had broken his left arm.
This catastrophe put the climax to the popular tumult.
Mrs. Henly was burnt in efligy, and Rebecca was publicly
o
28 77^1? Ladies' Edmbiirgh Magazine.
hooted as she went through the village, where for more than
twenty years she had walked respected and honoured. The
poor old woman actually shed tears of mortification on the
subject, of which the traces were perceived by her mistress,
who took no notice of what she had seen to her faithful
servant, but wrote that night to her nephew, who was an
advocate in Edinburgh, that she meant to sell her pretty
cottage and grounds on account of the Ghost.
The nephew answered the letter in person, prepared to
pooh-pooh the whole affair as old wives' fables and silly
women's fancies.
' You know it is all nonsense, aunt,' he said,' but because
of this folly you will get nothing for your house and land if
you sell; and no one will take a haunted house off your
hands. Thus you will diminish your income by a third,
besides having to seek a new home in a strange neighbourhood,
which I should say would be a greater inconvenience to you
than the Ghost is, even although it, or the cat, breaks a
piece of valuable china occasionally.'
This was too true; but when Mrs. Henly proceeded to
explain that more than the china was in danger, and when
Mr. Scot had had a long conversation with the disabled
doctor, and had himself been followed and hooted in the
village as an accessory (after the fact) to the murder of
Prudence, he changed his tone, and was heard to mutter
darkly the word ' Conspiracy.' Nevertheless he was
resolved that his poor old aunt was not to be driven from
house and home by any popular fallacy; and he set his
mind to discover the mystery or die in the attempt. His
own belief was that Prudence was concealed somewhere in
the house, and that it was herself in the body who had
appeared and frightened Polly.
' We must find Prudence,' he said.
So in all the towns and villages round, immense placards
were put, offering a reward for any information regarding
her; but of course in vain. In the meantime Mr. Scot was
not idle, and the Ghost was as quiet as a mouse,—that is to
say, a little rattle of furnitiire, or an occasional shriek, was
all the amusement in which it indulged.
One day, in the course of conversation, Mr. Scot said to
Polly, 'As you have never seen Prudence in life, I suppose
you could not swear that what you saw was her ghost ?'
' I am sure it was her, sir, from the description,' she
answered quickly.
He looked steadily at her, the slightest confusion possible
Ower True Tales. 29
appeared on her countenance, and confirmed his growing
suspicions.
' But there are many slight, pale girls in the world with
red hair and yellow eyes, and a squint,' he proceeded in¬
differently.
' Yes, sir,' she replied,' and of course I never saw Prudence.'
Mr. Scot was much annoyed by the crowds of people who
came to visit the haunted house, and interfered sadly with
his pursuits.
' Can't you keep these people out ?' he said irritably to
Eehecca, as a group of open-mouthed farmers' daughters
passed him on the stairs with Polly at their head, pointing
out the very spot where the Ghost threw the doctor on the
ground, and the identical place where it had made itself
visible to her.
' If we did,' she. answered grimly, ' people would suppose
we had something to conceal.'
' I cannot understand the impudence of people invading
their neighbours' houses in this way, interrupting every
one's work, disarranging all domestic affairs, and, I have no
doubt, not even giving a sixpence for the show. Such
meanness is intolerable,' he continued, waxing indignant.
' The bit lassie may get an occasional sixpence from the
better folks, but I M'ould scorn to touch a farthing 0' the
Deil's wages!' said the old servant bitterly.
' Well, the Ghost had better look out for itself; for if I
catch it, I will show it no mercy, I promise you,' he said
savagely, and left the house.
He was rather amused to hear, that no sooner was he out
of the way than the Ghost became lively again, and had
thrown one girl into hysterics and another into a fit. The
instant, however, that his footstep was heard in the lane it
became mum and harmless again, and he hugged to himself
the comfort that although the Ghost had not frightened him,
he had frightened the Ghost.
' I suppose you have perfect confidence in your servants,
aunt ?' he asked that evening.
' I could answer for Eebecca with my life. I have known
her for nearly thirty'years; and as for the puir lassie, she has
been more frightened than any of us. Don't get suspicions
of that kind into your head, nephew,' said the old lady in¬
dignantly.
He smiled. ' I thought you would say what you have, aunt,
but it was wiser to err on the safe side. Now I want you
to persuade Kebecca to go away for a week to visit her
30 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
friends.    It is for her own sake I ask it, that no suspicion
may fall upon her afterwards.'
' It will be ill to persuade her, nephew, for she has never
left me even for a night during the last twenty-five years,'
replied Mrs. Henly, looking grave.
' The more reason for her to visit her friends now, since
she has been so long without doing so,' he answered, smiling.
But Eebecca was utterly regardless of her friends' welfare,
and refused to put herself about to see any of them; the
only friend she valued was her mistress, and only for her
sake would she undertake a journey at her time of life.
Eortunately for Mr. Scot's schemes, they heard that a girl
answering the description af Prudence was caught stealing
linen off a hedge in an English village, and Eebecca was
sent to identify her, and in high glee she undertook the
mission.
In all the days of her absence, the Ghost never uttered a
word or pulled a chair. Every hour Mrs. Henly grew sadder
and Mr. Scot more hopeful. The girl proved not to be
Prudence after all, and Eebecca returned much dejected, but
testified lively pleasure at hearing the Ghost had been so
quiet, as there were hopes it would go as it had come.
' I feel certain I shall catch that Ghost yet,' said Mr. Scot
significantly.
Next Polly was sent for change of air to a farm some miles
away. The day she left there was a terrible rattle up-stairs,
but after that silence as complete as before enveloped the
house and the Ghost.
' I think I have found a clue at last, aunt,' said Mr. Scot
on the day Polly was to return, ' although it is no stronger
than that,' showing a long, strong, black hair, apparently
plucked from a human head.
' Do not act upon mere suspicion, nephew, I implore you ;
far sooner would I suffer wrong than inflict it,' said poor
IVIrs. Heidy earnestly.
'Trust my judgment and regard for your feelings, dear
aunt; you will not have cause to regret having given me full
powers to expose and punish the Ghost,' replied Mr. Scot
affectionately.
And after that speech, such is man's treachery, no sooner
had Polly entered the house than a policeman appeared with
a warrant for the apprehension of both her and Eebecca.
Fancy the scene,—Mrs. Henly's indignation and sorrow,
Eebecca's rage, and Polly's dismay, the calmness of the
men contrasting forcibly with the excitement of the women.
Ower True Tales. 31
Mr. Scot, not at all ashamed of himself, was ready to explain
and justify his conduct if his aunt would have listened to
him; the constables appeared intent only on doing their
duty, but were perhaps secretly not a little pleased that the
Ghost which had so impudently defied them, was finally in
their power and would feel the force of the law.
At last the prisoners were led away, and Mrs. Henly suffi¬
ciently calmed to hear her nephew's apology. He said he
was sure from the first that the whole thing was an im¬
posture and not a delusion, and that he had resolved to
expose it. His first care was to discover what could be the
motive of such a wicked deceit, and hearing that some one
in the village much admired the cottage, and had wished to
buy it, he followed that clue persistently for some time
without any results.
His suspicions next fell on the servants, because they
were the only people who appeared to benefit by the disturb¬
ances, and their fears he soon saw were assumed, and did not
interfere with their health and comfort, as was the case with
their mistress. Ordinary servants would not have stayed in
the house for a day with a violent ghost like this one, and
would have been thankful for any excuse to escape from it,
while these ones had absolutely to be driven away. He
thought both must be equally guilty; for the Ghost had not
worked in the absence of either, and this confirmed his
previous suspicions, and made them almost certainties.
Then again he found that long black hair he had shown
his aunt wound round one of the china vases, which had
made a great rattle one evening. He discovered, too, that
Polly made extensive purchases in the village of fine black
thread, and gained thereby much credit for her unexampled
industry ] but what betrayed the girl completely was that
one day, unseen, when the Ghost was skirling overhead,
apparently practising new war - whoops, he watched her
walking calmly along the passage, seeming to hear nothing
unusual, and certainly testifying no fear, while these same
sounds, when she knew any one was present, put her into a
frantic state of nervous terror. This made him think that
Polly was the chief ghost-maker, and Eebecca only kept
silence and shared the profits.
' I cannot believe it of Eebecca. I will never believe it of
a woman who has served me faithfully for more than five-
and-twenty years; she could not be so cruel to her poor old
mistress; and besides,' continued Mrs. Henly eagerly, ' she
has shared the odium with me, and it was principally on her
32 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
account I wished to leave the place, and how could a poor,
weak bit lassie make all those sounds and " cantrips " without
great assistance ? You are clean out of your wits to think of
it! And I command you, sir, to obtain the immediate release
of my faithful servants, or never to darken my doors again.'
And with this parting speech Mrs. Henly majestically re¬
tired, leaving her nephew in a most unenviable frame of
mind. He wished to goodness he had allowed the Ghost to
slip away unmolested; people never recognise either their
benefactors or their deceivers, and never wish to be set right.
He was resolved, however, to make one more effort to secure
his lawful prey; so he went to the prison and requested to
see Polly, whom he heard was in an abject state of terror
since her committal.
She threw herself at his feet, and begged him to take her
out of this dreadful place.
He said to her gravely, that he was very sorry to see
her there; but now that all was discovered, her only hope
was in making a full confession; in which case he said he
would stand her friend, and try to get a commutation of her
sentence.
The ruse succeeded admirably; the wretched girl, in her
mad terror at finding herself within prison walls, a situation
which she had hitherto managed to avoid, and had great
reason to dread, a§ it was too familiar to all her relations,
who made the gaol not only their usual habitation but
their grave,—the grave of all hope,—confessed the whole
imposition.
She was a ventriloquist, and a second cousin of the re¬
doubtable Prudence, from whom she had gained many
valuable hints as to her new place and the neighbourhood
generally. She had enacted the ghost at first merely from
fun, she said, and from the laudable desire to escape from an
uncongenial place and a hard mistress. Afterwards she had
found the occupation both pleasant and profitable, and so
had carried it on, most successfully we must admit. She
would have made an excellent conjuror, for she noticed
everything and forgot notliing she saw or heard.
No one helped her, or knew she was the Ghost; she man¬
aged everything herself. The demon's wings were caused by
bobbins in an empty drawer; the dance of the chairs by an
ingenious contrivance of strings under the door; the blast of
cold air by a convenient window; the tugs and twitches by
her own strong hands in the dark.
It was pleasant, when Rebecca made herself disagreeable,
A  Visit to St. LoHp. 33
to smash her favourite teapot, and when Mrs. Henly scolded,
to make her best china fall, and have the Ghost blamed for
it all. The story of the pastor's son she had heard from the
evil companions who had caused his ruin, and the doctor's
patient was only a good shot, caused by knowing he had been
a long time in Ireland in the days of his wild youth.
Eebecca was restored to her mistress with undiminished
credit, and Polly committed for trial. The popular fury was
now turned on the unhappy girl who had caused so much
dispeace and annoyance by her wicked pranks, and duped
for so long a whole neighbourhood. In spite of strong re¬
commendations to mercy, I believe Polly was transported,
and eventually became a great lady in the colonies.
As to Mrs. Henly and Eebecca, they lived together all
their lives undisturbed by any more ghosts, died within a
few days of each other, and were buried in the same grave.
The talents Mr. Scot had displayed in ghost-catching
brought him into notice, and he became a famous advocate
and rose to high honours. NONO.
31 Fisit to St. Houp.
You asked me to send you an account of St. Loup, the
Mother-house of the Swiss Diaconesses. We were fortunate
in having' a bright, clear September day for an expedition,
and went by train from Lausanne as far as La Sarraz, a
station on the Pontarlier line just as you approach the
mountain chain of the Jura.
St. Loup is beautifully placed on a height above the little
village of La Sarraz, which no passing traveller can fail to
notice, commanded as it is now, and doubtless in olden
times protected, by the noble castle of that name, whose
history, dating from 1049, makes it as interesting as it is
picturesque.
The buildings of St. Loup are of the simplest description,
consisting of two Asiles,—one for children, and one for
incurables,—a hospital, and a small detached house for the
Director and his family. They are well placed for invalids,
looking down across the solitary valley as far as the Lake of
Geneva and the Savoy Alps beyond, while behind they are
sheltered by the Jura, whose neighbourhood gives a distinctly
felt freshness to the summer air in hot weather. On climbing
up the hill from La Sarraz, you first pass the Children's
No. 61.— January 1880. q
34 TJi^ Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
Asile, a house lately built for the reception, in summer only,
of thirty sick or invalid children, to whom the sisters cheer¬
fully devote themselves, teaching them, playing with them,
and giving such medical treatment as may be ordered, but
relying chiefly on plenty of milk, plenty of plain food, plenty
of fresh air, and on salt water or sulphur baths only when
such are ordered. These last named can easily he supplied,
as St. Loup had a local celebrity as early as the fifth century,
a natural spring of sulphur waters being attached to the
monastery, founded there by Lupicin, brother of the well-
known St. Eomain of the Jura. In latter days it became a
bathing establishment, and it was not till 1852 that the
ground and buildings were bought by M. Buttini of Geneva,
and given by him to the Protestant Deaconesses of the Pays
de Vaud, already hard at work at Echallens, under the
direction of M. Germond, father of the present excellent
Director at St. Loup.
A few minutes' walk from the Children's Asile brings one
first to the Director's simple but pretty little cottage, and
then to the large Hospital and xisile for Incurables, beds for
twelve of these last and twelve curable cases being always
filled. Here it is that Sisters receive the training which is
to fit them for hospital work elsewhere, seven Deaconesses
being always employed at the Mother-house, while the
remaining thirty-five (there are forty-two at present) are sent
to the different institutions elsewhere that require and claim
their services. The ' Samaritain' at Vevey has three, the
Cliildren's Hospital at Lausanne has four, vchile others are to
be found at the Hospitals of Locle, Chaux de Ponds, Pleurier,
Neuveville, Iverdon, Montreux, Morges, Eolle, Turin, La Tour
(in the Vaudois Valleys), and at the Asile Evangelique at
Nice.
It was after watching the devotion to their career, the
simplicity, and high Christian tone of the Deaconesses at some
of these places in their daily work of love, and from remark¬
ing (as do most of the medical men with whom they come
in contact) that their knowledge and skill betokened first-
rate training, that I was anxious to visit M. Germond, and
hear from liimself some of the details of his most useful
work.
Tlie impression that I received was, that, given a woman
with strong sense, good education, fair health and strength,
with an earnest desire to devote herself and her powers
withont reserve to the sick and the afi^licted, a very little
training will go a long way, and that a few months would
The Beggar of Capo di Monte: a Tale of Sixty-one.    35
serve to show M. Germond and the committee of gentlemen
and ladies under whom he acts, whether they would be wise
in admitting any aspirant into their community; also that
his strong point lay in being able to discriminate justly, and
to refuse acceptance where the needful qualities for a nurse
(what we call the vocation) were wanting. And now I
should like you to know that while 35,000 francs a year is
about all the necessary expense of this most useful and little-
known institution, that of this four-sevenths must always
come from outside subscribers, the rest being supplied by the
board paid for children and for incurables at the two Asiles,
and by the payment made to the Mother-house in return for
the services of the sisters sent out to nurse at other hospitals,
£700 a year is not much to ask from the public, and those
who live near, and so know much about St. Loup, have as
yet never allowed the sum to be deficient; but there is no
surplus, and a retiring fund for those nurses who break down
through age or infirmity is greatly needed. I make, there¬
fore, no apology for asking those interested in all good and
useful work at home or abroad to remember St. Loup, and
the name and address of its Director—The Eev. M. Germond,
pasteur, St. Loup, La Sarraz, Canton de Vaud, Switzerland.
I. A. B.
W(^t Beggar of Capo Di fHontc: a Calc of Sixtg^onc,
By the Author of ' Mabel's Cross,' etc.
CHAPTEE XVIII.
In order to explain Ercole's treacherous betrayal of Filippo,
we must revert to his own capture as he fled from the grotto
of Polypheme, leaving, as he supposed, Concetta and Livia to
a horrible death from starvation. The soldiers, after carrying
him to the nearest village, determined to leave him there
bound in charge of some of their companions, who, having
given up all hope of meeting with Filippo and his band, had
assembled there. This new adventure, however, disposed
them to return to the grotto, in the hope that the man for
whose capture so great a sum was offered, might have taken
refuge in its depths. Imagining their prisoner to be either
unconscious or too suffering to attend to their discourse, if he
even understood their patois, they therefore spoke without
disguise. Ercole had recovered his consciousness before they
reached the village, but thought it best to appear insensible
until he could ascertain their future intentions towards him-
36 Tlie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
self. He now heard with terror their determination of leaving
him bound; for he knew too well the common practice of
summarily despatching wounded prisoners when their custody
became inconvenient to their rough and lawless guards. To be
knocked on the head, or left untended to die of his wounds,
was all he could expect in such a case. His cowardly heart
shrank from either fate, and he determined at once to secure
his own liberty by betraying Filippo.
The men listened eagerly to his offer of leading them to
the brigands' hiding-place, and agreed to his terms. One,
however, more cautious than the rest, made the condition that
Ercole must himself lead them to the spot, but they would
neither remove his bands nor suffer him out of their sight
till rilippo was secured. The traitor's countenance fell, but
he dared not refuse; for, having betrayed his knowledge of
rilippo's retreat, he was completely in their power. His
wound proved slighter than he imagined, and his whole
thoughts now turned on the possibility of regaining posses¬
sion of Concetta, when he should be set at liberty. He little
doubted he should be able to trace her, even should slie have
succeeded in getting out of the cavern. Ercole entreated the
soldiers to unbind his arms, for he feared the vengeance of
Eilippo or Matteo, who would probably, in their lirst rage,
attack and murder him in his bonds before he could escape.
The soldiers not only refused, but with suspicions aroused,
determined to place him in front of the party, the better to
entrap their victims. Silently but swiftly they pursued their
way, and as every league brought them nearer to the narrow
glen among the hills where Klippo lay concealed, Ercole's
craven heart sank in despair. He became deadly pale, shak¬
ing like an aspen leaf, till the soldiers jeered at him for a
coward. Was this the associate of the buccaneer whom even
their bold spirits held in dread ? A horrible presentiment
of his approaching fate overwhelmed the traitor; for who
could doubt that the coming struggle would be for life or
death ? Cold drops of sweat gathered on his forehead, nor
was his misery wholly selfish. Thoughts of the helpless
women in the cavern, of Concetta's anguish, of the possible fate
of both, rose before him in terrible clearness; the girl's cries
when she was taken from La Cava seemed thrilling in his
ears; all—all came back to him in that agonizing moment,
and he shuddered to think the hour of retribution was at hand.
One more turning of the glen would bring them in sight of
the wretched liovel where the wounded man and his family
lay.    Claudia and Maddalena, from whom he had ever re-
77^1? Beggar of Capo di Monte: a Tale of Sixty-one.    yj
ceived such kindness and affection, what a return was he
preparing for them! Captivity, perhaps death! The
thought was agony, and at that moment he would have given
all but his life to recall his promise, but it was too late. The
rapid changes in his countenance were observed by the
soldier who headed the party, and suspecting some treachery
from Ercole's evident agitation, he desired the guards to
dismount and secure him in such a manner on the horse
that there could be no possibility of his escaping. This done,
they advanced cautiously and fell back in a line behind the
horse, so that Ercole alone might be clearly seen.
At last the hovel was in sight, with Filippo reclining on
a rude couch within the door, and Claudia bending over
him with a cup in her hand. Filippo's quick ear caught the
sound of horses' feet, and rising hastily from his recumbent
posture, he seized the large horse pistol that always lay
within reach, and with a voice which had lost none of its
power, demanded sternly what brought Ercole and his
companions to that secluded spot. Ercole vainly attempted
to speak, his white lips refused to utter a sound. A shout from
the soldiers too plainly told Eilippo the snare into which he
had fallen, and how and by w^hom he had been betrayed.
Lifting his arm to take a steady aim, he pointed the pistol
at Ercole's breast, saying in a voice of thunder :
' Take that, thou heartless traitor !' and fired.
The ball went true to his aim, and Ercole fell dead on the
bow of his saddle. Eilippo now threw down the pistol, and
made no further attempt at resistance. He suiTendered
himself at once, only craving mercy for his wife and daughter.
Maddalena had fainted as she saw her lover fall, and Claudia's
attention was for a moment diverted from her husband.
All was now confusion and hurry; for the soldiers every
moment expected they should be surrounded by the men of
Filippo's band, whom they imagined might be within hearing
of the report of his pistol.
Filippo took no notice of their anxiety, his whole thoughts
were for his helpless companions; and entreating his captors
to deal gently with them, he waited his fate with a calmness
that astonished them. Ercole's baseness had wounded him
deeper far than the rude mocking of the soldiers, though
even their rough natures were moved by the stoicism of the
brigand, and the sight of the helpless, heart-stricken women
who clung round him for protection. Involuntarily they
were led to show consideration for the sufferings of the
unfortunate  family, so  unmistakeable  were  the  traces  of
38 Tlie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
hardship, even of famine, which their pallid cheeks and
drawn features revealed. There was something, too, in the
manner and bearing of Filippo that commanded respect even
from his enemies; and the men who but a short hour before
had thirsted for his destruction, now unconsciously acknow¬
ledged the influence of his brave, bold conduct in the
forbearance they showed towards him. They threw the
dead body of Ercole from the saddle almost with disgust, as
if they scorned the dastardly act of the man who could
betray such a leader; then harnessing the horse to the rough
cart which had brought Claudia and her daughter to the
glen, they helped the wounded man on the litter, which they
had now placed in the cart, with as much consideration for
his suffering limb as if he had been their own intrepid and
idolized Garibaldi. Claudia and Maddalena were treated in
the same gentle manner, and with so much respect that
Filippo's countenance told how greatly he was affected by
the sympathy of these men. They removed every instrument
of defence as a necessary precaution; but they courteously
asked Eilijjpo if there was anything he desired to take with
him that they had not already placed in his vehicle. He
thanked them for tlieir consideration, and pointing in tlie
direction where Ercole's body lay, requested them to carry
it into the hut and cover it decently, that the wild animals
might not tear it to pieces. Poor Maddalena, who had
recovered from the swoon which the first shock had caused,
now gave a piercing shriek as her eyes fell upon the ghastly
figure bathed in its own blood, and flinging her arms round
her mother, she buried her head on her bosom, sobbing
convulsively.
A visible shudder passed over the stern countenance of
Filippo as the soldiers proceeded to comply with his request,
for he had loved and trusted the youth, and admitted him to
his hearth. His child's affections, too, had been given to him
who now had fallen by her father's hand. Claudia read the
thoughts which gave such troubled expression to his features ;
but instead of her usual sympathy in all that interested or
moved her husband, she muttered in a hollow voice:
' Waste not thy sorrow on this traitor, Filippo; has he
not sold thy life and that of thy wdfe and daughter to thy
foes ? Who knows whether Matteo also has not fallen a
victim to his treachery ?'
At this mention of Matteo's name, a gleam of hope lit up
Filippo's eyes; he roused himself from his litter as if he felt
assured even now of help.
The Beggar of Capo di Monte : a Tale of Sixty-one.    39
The soldiers, having thrown the dead body into a kind of
pit behind the hut, now began to retrace their steps, taking
care to walk on each side of the cart with carbines ready
loaded in their hands, prepared to resist any attempt at
rescue, so fully persuaded were they that Filippo's band
lay concealed at no great distance from the Imt of their
leader. In this manner they travelled slowly through the
night and part of the following day, till about noon the
little band, guarding the cart with their prisoners, entered
the town of Taormina, weary and footsore, but triumphant
in the success of their expedition.
We must now return to Matteo, of whose arrival at
Taormina with Livia and Concetta we have already heard.
After conducting them to a small chapel near tlie landing-
place, he bade them remain there until he should return
from his appointed meeting with Count Eudolph. Concetta
gladly embraced this opportunity offered her; for she longed
to pour out her thankfulness to God for their wonderful
preservation from a horrible death. Before Matteo had left
them, however, he was startled by shouts from a crowd of
persons, who with rapid strides and tumultuous cries poured
into the narrow street that led from the country into the
suburb. Livia and Concetta had happily gone into the
little paved court that surrounded the building, and were
thus screened from observation. As the crowd approached,
their cries became louder and more stormy, and the populace
evidently were moved by some fierce excitement, as their
gesticulations and shrill voices indicated. Coucetta, who was
ever on the watch for some fresh complication of peril, began
now to dread the effect of these terrible sounds upon Livia's
ruined brain. Gently she drew the maniac deeper within the
shelter of the chapel walls, which prevented her seeing the
crowd. Every minute added to the numbers and the noise,
and she remarked with what intense anxiety Matteo stood
looking towards the angle of the street. A presentiment of
calamity had fallen upon him. With straining eyes he gazed
on a party now coming in sight; and when at last a small
covered waggon appeared, guarded by a file of soldiers on
each side, a groan of anguish escaped him. Concetta was
not long left in doubt of the cause of his despair; for now
the air rang with shouts of ' Filippo il Bravol and the mob
seemed fairly mad with excitement, so that the cry echoed
from street to street. The girl's heart beat almost to suffoca¬
tion as, with Matteo, she eagerly watched the cavalcade on
its way to the prison.    But he heeded her not for some
40 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
minutes, in his anxiety to follow the crowd and ascertain the
extent of the misfortune that had thus brought Filippo and
Claudia into the power of their enemies. Soon, however, as
if collecting himself after a shock, he turned quickly, and
re-entering the little court, he drew Concetta back into the
church, where she and Livia would be safe, and prevented
from seeing what might be passing in the street. He laid
injunctions on her not on any account to leave the place
till he returned, and promising to seek out Count Eudolph
and bring him to her place of refuge, Matteo departed.
Livia at once sank on her knees before one of the altars, and
Concetta gladly followed her example.
Matteo having left them, as he hoped, in safety, proceeded
to exchange once more his sailor's dress for his beggar's rags,
as being less likely to attract attention, and then hastened
to overtake the soldiers and their prisoners. He merely
wished to ascertain their place of confinement; for should
they also be taken to the prison where Paolo still lay bound,
the chance of Eudolph's liberating the supposed son of the
Vn'igand, who was now himself a prisoner, seemed fainter
than ever. Could he but succeed in giving Eudolph
Concetta's ring, which she had put into his hands on
landing from the vessel, he might still secure the Count's
good offices before he became aware of the connection
between the prisoners. Intent on this purpose, he scarce
thought of the cause of Tilippo's misfortune, supposing it to
be one of the chances of war that the soldiers should have
found the family in their place of refuge. He had been long
aware of the strict search made for Eilippo, and therefore
concluded this was the party he himself had so cleverly
eluded. Occupied with these thoughts, he scarcely noticed
that the waggon had stopped a short way before him in the
piazza opposite the quay. Taking care to keep as much out
of sight as possible, he walked rapidly towards the place of
meeting with Count Eudolph. Matteo knew he was a day
beyond the appointed time; but he trusted the Count would
suppose him to have been unavoidably delayed, and that he
might, still find him waiting his arrival. It wanted yet a
few minutes of the hour atfreed on; but even as the clocks
began to strike, looking anxiously in the direction of
the prison, a sound of drums beating awoke in him fresh
alarm. He leaped up the bank above the road, and to his
horror saw that some prisoners were being led out. Slowly
the guard marched on each side of one who walked with
difficulty between them, so heavy were his chains.    Behind
The Beggar of Capo di Monte: a Tale of Sixty-one.   41
him came an officer, who, as Matteo perceived, was no other
than Count Eudolph himself. As they drew nearer, he
caught sight of Paolo's pale, emaciated face; and forgetting
everything but his promise to Filippo to rescue the youth,
at the risk even of his own life, he flung himself wildly down
the bank and rushed towards the Count, imploring him to
redeem his promise, at the same time holding up the ruby
ring to convince him of his truth. Eudolph's face flushed
with emotion on recognising this love-token; but it came,
alas ! too late. He dared not now countermand the order to
convey this prisoner to Naples for execution. There had
been within the last few weeks such daring acts committed
by the lawless adventurers who espoused the cause of the
dethroned king, that orders had been received to show no
mercy to any taken in open rebellion against the newly-
established government. Eudolph had secretly hoped to
have recovered Concetta before this order was issued; but
as the appointed time had passed, and no Matteo had
appeared, he could only suppose himself duped, and thus had
not hesitated to obey the peremptory mandate he had received.
Calmly desiring the soldiers to proceed, he shook off Matteo,
who had clung to his arm, and moved steadily forward
towards the quay. Though he recognised the ring, he could
not believe without further proof, that Concetta had employed
such a messenger.
Matteo, in utter despair at this repulse, thought for an
instant, and then flew back to the little church as fast as
the crowd permitted him to pass. In broken accents he told
Concetta of his ill success, desiring her not to lose a moment in
following him, as their only hope now lay in intercej^ting
Count Eudolph and his charge before they reached the vessel.
Eegardless for the moment of Livia's cries, as she piteously
entreated to be taken to her son, Concetta sprang up, and
with Matteo was about to leave the church, when a priest,
who unobserved had watched the party from the moment of
their entering the building, came forward. Attracted by the
appearance of Concetta as she knelt before the cross with
tearful, agitated face and clasped hands, and supposing her
to be a sister of charity, as her dress indicated, he was in¬
terested in seeking to know the cause of such evident distress.
Thankful for this timely help, Concetta begged his protection
for her suffering charge during her absence, which she
endeavoured to assure him would be brief; then without
further explanation she hurried away with Matteo, whose
impatience could be restrained no longer.    The priest, like
42 Tlie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
most of his order, was attached to the fortunes of the exiled
king, and readily concluded that this agitation was con¬
nected with the fate of those Bourbonists who had been
taken by Garibaldi's soldiers. He kindly did all he could
to soothe the afflicted woman, whose personal interest in the
prisoner about to be taken away for execution he no longer
doubted. He succeeded in leading her into the sacristy, and
assuring her of his good offices, calmed her by promising her
an interview with her son as soon as her friends returned to
accompany them.
{To he continued.)
Sonnet.
FROM THE ITALIAN OF VITTOEIA COLONNA.
' Se il breve siion.'
If the brief sound, wherewith the trembling air
A moment thrills, and that light breath we draw
Dissolving, through our being's natural law,
In sound imperfect, yet of sweetness rare:—
If these the heart enthrall with tender force,
Till, spurning every base, ignoble care,
Our thoughts aspire, our chastened will may dare
Upwards to soar on buoyant, swift-winged course:
What will it be, when o'er the purer soul—
Her powers attuned to highest Truth alone.
In face of Him who fills Heaven's utmost height—
Th' angelic waves of harmony shall roll,
And neither discord harsh, nor feeble tone.
Shall mar her peace, or quench her rapt delight.
A. G.
©ebatcs of tije 5Latitrs' ©tiinburgl) ILitcrarg Society.
The debates of the Ladies' Edinburgh Literary Society have, during
the past year, been of much interest,, embracing a great variety of
subjects. The question for January was—'Whether the present
neglect of Italian in education was to be regretted ?' One lady spoke
eloquently in favour of the study, commending alike the beauty of
the language and the rich stores of its classical literature. The argu¬
ments on the other side were chiefly utilitarian, being based on such
grounds as the decrease in market value of Italian, its lack of solidity
in spite of its beauty, etc. The sense of the meeting, however, found
that the advantages of knowing Italian are so great, and the difficulty
Debates of the Ladies Edinburgh Literary Society.    43
of learning it so small, that whenever opportunities permit it ought
on no account to be neglected.
The February debate on ' The influence of Mr. Browning's poetry
upon the literature of the present day,' was opened by able papers on
either side. These appeared in the May and June numbers of the
Magazine ; and any who have read them without having been present
at the February meeting, may be interested to learn that while, as
a model of poetic taste, votes went against Mr. Browning, he was
unanimously allowed to be a deep and exhaustive thinker.
In March we were invited to discuss a question morally and
historically important—' Was Lady Macbeth really a fiendish queen ?'
The opponents of Lady Macbeth loaded her with accusations, and
sought to deepen the shades of her guilt by appealing to the principles
of morality and to Holy Writ; while her clever defender sought to
palliate the ofiences of the royal criminal by dwelling on her love for
her husband as her motive for action, her conviction of his right to
the throne by inheritance, and the fact of "her swooning after the
commission of the crime. Even these tokens, however, of the exist¬
ence of a womanly heart in its weakness and its warmth, could not
establish her title to forbearance in the eyes of the meeting, which
sustained the affirmative by a majority of two votes.
' Should Art express only the beautiful ?' was a question which in
April called forth an interesting and varied discussion. The term
'beautiful,' as applied to Art,—whether its place is to be sought in
the moral or the material world,—was carefully weighed, and the
scale of opinion oscillated considerably. On one side it was argued
that even repellent objects may and do acquire a certain beauty from
the able treatment of them by a master-hand, and on the otlier that
the Art that is to be 'a joy for ever' must produce things positively
beautiful; yet the scale was only finally turned in favour of the latter
view by the casting vote of the President, taken in addition to her
deliberative vote.
At the May meeting it was decided that, with all due deference
to Mr. Buskin, Mrs. Browning is not entitled to rank as the greatest
poet of the century ; that such a title is only due to one ' of imagina¬
tion all compact,' whereas Elizabeth Barrett Browning only introduces
a brilliant thread of fancy here and there. Her great work, especially
cited on this occasion,—Aurora Leigh,—is indeed a sermon, and a
most beautiful one, not to women alone, but also to men if they will.
While trusting that it had fulfilled its object, the meeting agreed
that, as an epic, it was too subjective, and too apt to wander from
the main point, and therefore not equal as a poem to Maud or 77/e
Princess.
In June the characters of the miser and spendthrift were compared,
in order to decide which is the more despicable. On both sides there
were given forcible and graphic descriptions of the misery caused in
families by both these vices ; yet it was urged on behalf of the miser
that even in his faults he shows strength and concentration of pur¬
pose worthy of a better cause, whereas selfish weakness renders the
spendthrift utterly despicable. In spite, therefore, of the greater
amiability claimed for the latter, the voting showed a majority of two
in favour of the miser.
At the small but pleasant meeting in July, the question was dis¬
cussed—' Where shall we go for our summer holiday ?' An amusing
commentary on the various tastes of the members present for wan-
44 TJie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
derings far or near, was supplied by the list of places suggested
—among others, Switzerland, Kent, North Devon, the Pyrenees,
Naples, Fife, Edinburgh, and Iceland.
In October the subject of University Education for Women was
taken up, and able papers were read by several members, each
advocating the merits of some special branch of the study, viz.
Theory of Education, Latin, Greek, Mathematics, English Literature,
Mental Philosophy, and Experimental Physics. No vote was taken,
but the meeting recorded its interest in all these subjects, and a few-
remarks were made on the Edinburgh Association as compared with
others of the same kind.
No debate was held in November, but in December the session
was closed by one which may fairly be said to have surpassed in
interest and attractiveness all that preceded it. The question, 'Is
Gothic Architecture superior to Greek, Neo-Greek, and Byzantine %'
demanded, of course, a certain amount of acquaintance with archi¬
tectural princij)les and technical details, not perhaps familiar or
interesting to all; yet the readers of both the leading papers were
able to give a freshness and grace to the subject which made it
interesting and intelligible to the hearers. On the one hand,
supremacy was claimed for the Pointed Gothic, on the ground of its
being a living style, growing out of and with Christianity, and appli¬
cable to every purpose of Christian national life, the reader quoting
from Sir Gilbert Scott's writings in support of her view; while, on
the other hand, Mr. Raskin's authority was urged in support of
equal claims of the Byzantine, as being the style which Christianity
lirst borrowed from the Greek, superadding to its colour and har¬
monious outlines and perfect proportions, the gorgeousness of mosaic
colouring, and the grandeur of the oriental dome. The vote, pro¬
bably representing the admiration of the majority for the form of
architectural beauty best known to them, recorded fifteen for the
affirmative and eight for the negative.
This retrospect of oiu- year's debates induces ns naturally to look
forward to the prospects of the opening year. The new and varied
list of subjects for discussion, which will be placed in the hands of
our members, bids us hope that a still wider interest may be stirred,
and that a still more active co-operation in the discussions themselves
may enable us to realize another series of debates as interesting, and
a session even more successful than that which we have just described.
Ex Cathedra.
©ur iLiirarg ^Tailc.
The Two Miss Flemings. By the Author of ' Rare Pale Margaret.'
London : Sampson Low, Marston, Searle, and Rivington.
This is a powerful and striking story, with a well-sustained plot,
and characters cleverly worked out. Yet to us it is thoroughly
unpleasant, though at first sight it is difficult to account for our dis¬
taste. It may be true to life—true to the young womanhood of our
day—to portray such a character as Cassandra Fleming ; but if true,
it is certainly sad. Without saying she behaves worse than many
other heroines of modern novels, she is as utterly heartless and
selfish as a girl can be, and we cannot accept her half-Italian birth
and   education  as any excuse.     Having   engaged  herself  to  Max
Our Library Table. 45
Drayton with her dying father's consent, she discovers that he is
married already, though, in extenuation of the gentleman's conduct,
he hoped the next post would bring him  news of his insane wife's
death.    The poor mad lady disobliges her husband by living on, and
Cassandra   clings to her   engagement,   utterly refusing to see   its
impropriety, and stopping her ears to the counsel of good and wise
friends, who, knowing more of the world and the world's wickedness
than   she   does, show   her  the  painful  undesirableness of   such   a
position for any woman, most of all for an orphan and homeless girl.
Up to this point we feel pity for Cassandra; but when she goes to
her English relations, and tries the effect of her beauty and other
attractions on every man she meets with, we begin to doubt even her
love for Max ; and when finally she deliberately marries a rich man
because she has discovered she cannot exist without wealth, does for
selfish ambition that which for propriety's sake and womanly regard
for her own honour she refused to do, we can only feel disgusted and
repelled, and unable to give the sympathy we are evidently expected
to bestow on   her future sufferings.    As a matter of   fact, we   are
inclined to doubt the reality of the sufferings themselves, and bestow
all our pity upon the simple, single-hearted soldier, who in an evil
hour for himself asked Cassandra to be his wife.    Dorothy Fleming
is a clever contrast to her cousin.    We like her much the better of
the two, and are only sorry that she did not persevere a little longer
in her patient endurance.    Max Drayton himself is one of the tire¬
some heroes who have no courage to be either good or bad.    Such
people are always (in novels) saved from crime by somebody opening
or shutting a door, or some lucky chance.    We are expected to be
very sorry for him, and his marriage is certainly a disastrous clog to
his career.    Still we think he might have saved himself and others
much   perplexity and   wrong-doing   by   avowing   his  marriage.    If
gentlemen will pass as unmarried, even when clogged with an insane
wife,   they  must expect entanglements — involving  others   besides
themselves in sin and shame.    That Max Drayton is not an actual
villain, is less owing to his own sense of honour than to Cassandra's
selfishness.    She loves her husband's wealth, though she cares little
for himself.    The book is so well written that it carries us on ; but
we feel indignant on laying it down, to have our interest or sympathy
claimed   for   two   such disagreeably  selfish   creatures as Max and
Cassandra, when we are wholly absorbed in pity for poor infatuated
Colonel Piers.    Without wishing a novel-writer to prose or moralize,
we think it a literary as well as a moral blemish, that the readers
should be expected to concentrate their interest on the weak, base,
or unworthy characters in the story.
The  Little  PiLOiiiAr.     Revised and Illustrated by Helen Petrie.
Griffith and Farran, West Corner St. Paul's Churchyard, London.
1880.
' The Little Pilgrim ' is the history in rhyme of a child who, fired
with the desire ' to find the road to heaven' as Christian did, sets off
on her journey with that intention. In the ' Slough of Despond' we
see her daintily stepping over quaking ground with a tall reed doing
duty as Pilgrim's staff. Her earnestness, her finding the little wicket
gate and the Palace Beautiful, with its inmates Piety, Prudence, and
Charity, is all simply told and clearly illustrated. It will, we hope,
fire many ' little pilgrims' with a desire to read the Piltp-tm^s Progre.'fn
for themselves, if they have not done so already : and we should
46 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
regard this as a most desirable result. The ' Little Pilgrim' has the
merit of outward attractiveness, being issued in a style at once
artistic, simple, and inexpensive. Already this pretty little book, as
we are told, is a favourite with children, who are often the best judges
of what suits their taste and capacity ; and we hope the little heroine's
touching journey will be read again and again, and will serve as an
introduction to that of her hero Christian.
Question Scries.
As our year's issue begins a new series, we ask for especial notice
of the following remarks:—With a view to making the Questions
useful to young students, as well as attractive to a wider circle of
candidates, a few modifications have been made in our plan of issue.
Instead of a single monthly Question and Answer, we propose to give
four subjects, following the lines laid down by the Universities of
Edinburgh and St. Andrews for the Local Examinations, and similar
in character to those in use elsewhere for students. The subjects are
four in number : English Literature from 1688 to 1789; History of
Europe from 1698 to 1789 ; Logic ; and Geology. Two subjects will
be given each month,—e.g., in January, Literature and Geology ; in
February, History and Logic. The answers must be necessarily
shorter than when a single question was given, but we do not think
there will be any difficulty in keeping them within the limits pre¬
scribed, of which three hundred words will be the maximum. Four
prizes will be given, but no competitor who only takes one subject
will be eligible for a prize. No candidate will be eligible for more
than one prize. The best answer on each subject will be inserted
in the ensuing month, and all others named in order of merit. Each
candidate must select one nom de plume (even if she undertakes all
the subjects). Her real name and address must accompany the iirst
answer only, and will not be published.
The answers, as heretofore, must be sent at the given date to Qu.
C, care of Messrs. Morrison & Gibb, 11 Queen Street, Edinburgh.
I. English Literature.—Give the author and date of 'The Deserted
Village,' with the plan and argument of the poem. Answer not to
exceed three hundred words.
II. Geology.—Describe the present distribvition of land and sea
upon the earth.    Answer not to exceed three hundred words.
Answers to be sent not later than February the 5th, addressed to
Qu. C., care of Messrs. Morrison and Gibb, 11 Queen Street,
Edinburgh. The real name and address of the sender, besides her
nnm de plume, to accompany the first answer only. It is particularly
requested that pseudonyms may be used, not initials, as these cause
confusion.    Answers only to be written on one side of the sheet.
ANSWERS TO NOVEMBER SERIES.
Best, Stella, who is excellent, shows thoughtfulness and literary
taste; second, Eromart, very good, not quite so well expressed ;
third, Thokough, fair.    Only these three have answered.
Give from Shakspere three allusions to the Trojan War, and show
how they are appropriate in eacli instance.
There is a charm in ' the tale of Troy divine' that has, in all ages,
fascinated   alike   warrior   and   philosopher,   poet   and   statesman.
Question Scries. 47
Alexander the Great, emulous of his legendary ancestor Achilles,
carried with him through all his campaigns a copy of the Iliad,
revised by Aristotle. The translation of this book into English
helped to soothe many a melancholy hour of the sensitive poet
Cowper, and formed a pleasing recreation from the cares of office of
a statesman of our own day. That it was a peculiar favourite with
Shakspere, we may judge from the frequent allusions to it in his
plays,—one of them, ' Troilus and Cressida,' having the scene laid in
Troy during its ten years' siege. We shall not be surprised that these
allusions were very generally understood and appreciated in Shak-
spere's time, when we consider that classical literature was the
fashionable study of the age in which he lived. The proficiency of
Queen Elizabeth and her ill-fated cousin Lady Jane Grey in Latin
and Greek is well known. Indeed, every young lady in those days
was carefully instructed in the classics ; and what in the nineteenth
century would be looked on as pedantry, was then thought necessary
to a good education. Shakspere puts allusions to the Trojan War
into the mouths of the highest and lowest of both sexes of his
persons of the drama. We shall give, as our first example, the
illiterate Mrs. Quickly, who was yet not ignorant of the names of the
heroes of antiquity, for she jeers at Falstaff in these words: ' Thou
art as valorous as Hector, worth five of Agamemnon.' The scene
from which our next instances are taken is a pretty one. Coriolanus
is summoned to fight his country's battles ; and his wife and mother
beguile their loneliness by the female resource of discoursing over
their needlework on the object of their mutual affection. As they
talk, the heroes of Greece and Troy rise before the imagination of
the proud Volumnia; and fancying her son a second Hector, and
herself a Hecuba, she thus reproves the fears of the faint-hearted
Virgilia—
' The breasts of Hecuba,
When she did suckle Hector, looked not lovelier
Than Hector's forehead when it spit forth blood
At Grecian swords contending.'
But the young wife does not share these feelings. She loves to nurse
her sadness, and even the good-natured raillery of Valeria—' You
would be another Penelope; yet they say all the yarn she spun in
Ulysses' absence did but till Ithaca full of moths '—cannot induce her
to ' lay aside her stitchery' and enjoy an afternoon's holiday during
her lord's absence.
Our last examples shall be from allusions spoken by the old
English nobility. The white cheeks and trembling manner of the
messenger from the fatal field of Shrewsbury, fill tlie Duke of
Northumberland with apprehension that he, like the aged King of
Troy, may be suddenly .startled by ill tidings ; and without waiting
to hear the errand he exclaims—
' Even such a man, so faint, so spiritless.
So dull, so dead in look, so woe-begone.
Drew Priam's curtain in the dead of night.
And would have told him half his Troy was burn'd;
But Priam found the fire ere he his tongue,
And I my Percy's death ere thou report'st it.'
The aspiring Duke of Gloucester, afterwards King Richard III.,
planning to usurpthe kingdom by fair means or foul, soliloquizes thus—
48 Tlie Ladies' EdinburgJi, Magazine.
* I'll play the orator as well as Nestor,
Deceive more slyly than Ulysses conld,
And, like a Sinon, take another Troj-.' Stella.
[Will Stella kindly send her address to the Editor—we have un¬
fortunately mislaid it. ]
S. George's Hall Correspondence Classes.—We are happy to
hear that there is no falling off in the number of corresponding-
students this session. Students are still enrolling themselves from
all parts of the country, and it is satisfactory to see the numbers
fairly distributed throughout the classes. Among the oral classes,
the Advanced Harmony Class is proving decidedly attractive.
W^omen's Union Swimming Club.—The first annual report of this
club has been laid before its members, and it may be considered as
most satisfactory in all its details. Our readers may remember that
this club had its origin in that widespread regret felt at the loss of
so many lives by the sinking of the Princess Alice, lives that might
have been saved had a knowledge of the art of swimming been more
common among the working classes. In order to encourage a know¬
ledge and practice of swimming among working women, a committee
was formed with the object of opening swimming baths for their use.
This object appeared at first difficult of attainment, but soon the
commissioners of the St. Pancras Baths in Tottenham Court Road
came to the help of the committee by granting the use of their Second
Class Bath on Wednesdays, j)rovided that the committee guaranteed
them against actual loss. This first step being secured, the club was
formed, and a professional teacher, Mrs. Cottrell, engaged to give
lessons to the members. The charge of admission to the baths was
fixed at twopence. The average weekly attendance of women at the
bath has been 220, and the aggregate number of admissions has
amounted to 5000. By the rules for next year, we learn that the
subscription for members is to be only 3s. per annum, and that the com¬
mittee is empowered out of these funds to offer prizes for swimming.
During the winter months the bath will be open from 8 a.m. to 8 P.ir.,
and during the summer months from 6 a.m. to 10 p.m. This liberal
choice of hours secures to the hardest working woman an opportunity
of learning this useful art. If our readers are interested in this sub¬
ject, we believe we may venture to refer them for further information
to Mrs. Grant, Hon. Secretary of the Women's Union Swimming
Club, Tottenham Court Koad.
 0 
Notices to Correspondents, etc.
Ladies are invited to contribute to this Magazine. All communi¬
cations to be addressed, Editors, Ladies'' Edinburgh Magazine, Messrs.
Morrison & Gibb, 11 Queen Street, Edinburgh.
Papers intended for immediate insertion must be in the hands of
the Editors by the first of the previous month ; attention is requested
to this rule.
The meeting of the Ladies' Edinburgh Literary Society will be
held on Saturday, 3d January, at 5 Chester Street, at 11 a.m.
Debate — Has criticism on the whole been beneficial to literary
excellence']
Byeways of History. 49
332eixiass of ^iltstorg.
I.—THE LIFE OF HALFRED OTTAESON. SUENAMED
THE TEOUBLESOME SKALD.
An old Northern Biography, translated from the Icelandic.
CHAPTEK III.
Now was Halfred for a time with the king, and he composed
a poem about him after a while, and asked leave to recite it.
The king replied that he did not wish to hear it then.
Halfred replied, ' You must have your way, but I assure you
I shall forget all the instruction that you have caused me to
learn if you will not listen to my song ; and those doctrines
that you make me learn are not more poetical than the
verses that I have made about you.'
Olaf answered, ' "Well indeed may you be called the
Troublesome Skald; however, let me hear the poem.' Hal¬
fred recited the lay splendidly, and it was a draim' (long
poem); and when it was finished, the king presented him
with a handsomely decorated sword. Then Halfred sung
this verse:
' The wide-lauded king has dealt to the poet,
The verse-decorator, a fair, naked sword ;
So forward and prospering,—yea, by the gods, are we.
Mockers see, trembling, the king's gift—the sword.'
Well did Halfred guard the sword, and much he praised
the gods, saying it was ill done to insult them. One day he
.sang when the king could hear him :
' Once to the valiant, victorious Odin
We all sacrificed.
How changed now are manners, and minds, and our customs !
His rule is despised.'
The king said, ' A very bad verse ; better it.' Halfred
•said another:
' The great race of Odin have ever delighted
To pour forth their lays ;
And fresh in my mind live the songs of my fathers,
So high above praise.
But I dare say nothing, for all serve the White Christ
In these latter days.'
Said the king, ' Thy mind is far too much set on the old
^ Still extant; supposed date, winter of 996-997.
No. 62.~Fedruaiiy 1880. p
50 The Ladies Edinbtirgh Magazine.
gods, and  that  I   consider evil  conduct  in  thee.'     Then
Halfred went on thus :
' War-glad warrior, now may we,
From our former heathendom free,
Meanly treat the sacred name,
Honoured of old and dear to fame,
Of raven-worshipping Odin.'
The king said, ' That is in no way better; now make a
verse as an atonement.'    Halfred said this verse:
' I care not for Freyja and Frey,
I fear not the wrath of Thor;
May fiends fly off with Grimur,
And far from me be Njor.
I give all love and honour
To the Lord of the Christians now ;
His wrath alone can pain me.
All people before Him bow.'
Then said the king,' That is well sung, and better than
nothing; but go on, compose more.'    Halfred went on :
' So the chief of Sogne fjord
Stops our wonted sacrifice ;
Ancient wisdom of the Norna
Must we now forsake, despise ?
Odin's race all packed together.
Chased and hurried from our shore,—
I must now become a Christian,
Njord the old I serve no more.'
Ottar was the name of an Upland man, and Kalf was his
brother; they were courtiers of the king, valiant men both,
and well esteemed by him. They envied Halfred, and
thought that he was too much about the king; and one
evening while they were drinking, they struck up a fierce
quarrel, and the king was by and spoke somewhat on the
side of Ottar, because he saw that he was no match for
Halfred in dispute; but after a while the king Avent away,
and the dispute grew hotter, and the end was that Halfred
sprang up and gave Ottar a death-wound with the axe Earl
Hakon had given him. Kalf and the men with him seized
Halfred and put him in fetters. The law was, that whoever
slew in the king's dwelling should be put to death. Then
they found the king, and said to him that now it was to be
seen what kind of man Halfred was, and how he wished to
cow all the king's courtmen; in short, they slandered him
with all their might, till at last the king ordered that he
should be put to death the following morning.    Kalf was
Byezvays of History. 51
delighted with this, and the following day they led him out
to execution.
Halfred asked, ' Wliere is the king ?' They replied,
' What matters it now to thee ? thou art condemned to
death.' Halfred said, ' Is the man dead whom I assaulted ?'
They replied that he was. ' Is there any one present
here to whom I have done a good turn ? let him reward
me for it by leading me to the king's presence, and I
shall have to thank him for my stay here.' Then it
came to pass, according to the saying that every one has a
friend among his enemies,—-and there were those there who
acknowledged that he had been good to them,—and they
brought him perforce before the king and the bishop; and
then Halfred spoke: ' Eemember this, sire, that thou didst
promise never to give me up, and be not forsworn towards
me. And another thing, thou art my godfather.' Sigurd,
the bishop, said to the king, ' Let him profit by these things.'
' So it shall be,' said the king; and he bade them set him
free, wliich was done to the great displeasure of Kalf.
Now was Halfred again one of the courtmen, and behaved
very well; and though the king showed him less favour than
formerly, yet he paid for him the blood fine for the slain
man. One day he came before the king and fell at his feet;
the king saw that he was in tears, and asked what could
move him so much. Halfred answered, ' Your anger goes to
my heart, and fain would I have it lifted off me.' The king
said, ' Thus, then, let it be: thou shalt go on an errand of
mine after Yule; and if thou canst carry it out according to
my will, then shall we two be reconciled.' Said Halfred, ' I
would do anything to cause your anger against me to cease.'
[Here, in this version, follows the story of tiie sword song,
previously related.]
The king thanked him, and said he showed much skill in
poetry; ' and should it happen,' he added,' tliat you should
not always be regular in your attendance at table and at
church, it shall be more overlooked in you than in others.'
Halfred thanked the king.
It happened at one time afterwards, when he was absent,
that Olaf inquired where he was. Kalf answered that he
was probably at his old trick of sacrificing in secret; ' and
he keeps an image of Thor carved in ivory in the purse on
his belt. Y'^ou are quite unaware of what he is, sire; you do
not see the bitter truth about that man.' The king there¬
upon bade them call Halfred to answer for himself, and when
he came, asked, ' Is it true what thou art accused of ?    Dost
$2 The Ladies^ EdinbiirgJi Magazine.
thou sacrifice ?' ' It is not true, lord,' said Halfred. ' Let
them ransack my purse ; I could not have anything concealed
even if I wished.' Notliing of the sort was found in his pos¬
session. ' But,' he said, ' this is deadly slander. Kalf would
think it ill indeed if I acted so by him. If I can but get at
him, he shall answer to me with his life for this.'
The king said, ' You two cannot remain together; so Kalf
shall go home, and thou, Halfred, shalt travel on my errand
to the Uplands and to Thorleif the wise. He will not take
Christianity; so you must kill him or blind him. He is
daughter's son to Thorleif, Horda Kari's son. I shall speed
you on your way, and you may take with you as many men
as you will.'
Halfred said, ' It is a most unpleasant journey, but all the
same I shall go as you require it.'
[This unpleasant message was duly executed by Halfred
with all the courtesy the case admitted of, for he spared one
of Thorleif's eyes; but on the way home called at Kalf's
house, fought with him, overcame him, and deprived him of
an eye—' Who complained much, like the cur that he was,'
said Halfred.]
They came back to the king, and into his presence as he
sat at chess ; and Halfred told how he had sped.
'Well have you done,' said Olaf; 'but show me, then, the
eyes.' But on looking at it—'Nay,' he said; 'how came
you by this ? It is not Thorleif's; you must have gone
beyond my orders.' Then he showed Thorleif's eye. And
the king said, ' This seems no better than half done.' Said
Halfred, ' Now Kalf pays for pricking me with the spear's
point when he was leading me to death;' and told all. The
king said, 'Wilt thou then go back a second time to
Thorleif ?' Halfred said, ' I will certainly not go there,
but to Kalf if you like, and deprive him of his other eye.'
The king said it should stand thus, and Halfred was again
taken into his favour.
Some time after, when Halfred was before the king, he
said, ' I (irave your leave to sail east on a merchant voyage
to Eyrar.' The king said, ' I shall not forbid you, but my
mind tells me that you will not be less eager to return to
me when you are away, and much will befall you.' Halfred
said, ' This must now be risked.' So he fared abroad. As
he heard that Earl Sigvald' ^v•as a great chief, he sought him
^ Then commander of a fraternity of sea rovers, the Vikings of
Jomsburg, whose winter home was a great fortress on the North
German coast, whence they sailed in ships, counted by the hundred,
' Byeways of History. 53
out, and told him his name, and that he had made a poem
on him. The Earl said, ' Art thou, then, the skald of Olaf
the king ? then why should that not suit me that he likes
so well t' Halfred said his poem, and it was a flokhr.
The Earl thanked him, and gave him a gold ring worth
half-a-mark, and bade him remain with him the winter.
Halfred thanked him for the invitation, but said he was
desirous to go on to Sweden, and Earl Sigvald bade him
please himself.
That same autumn Halfred went east to the Bay,* and was
shipwrecked on its eastern shore, with the loss of much
property. He travelled on to Konungahella, and dwelt
there for a time. One day, as he walked out in the market¬
place, a man met him, who greeted him, and said he was
called Audgisl—and ' I have just come from the West, from
England, and am in no want of goods. And is this Halfred
the Troublesome Skald that I see before me ?' Halfred said
yes. ' I have heard,' continued Audgisl, ' that you have met
with losses ; so will you strike a bargain with me, and come
east to Gothland for the winter ? I shall give you ten marks
of silver for your company, for it is said that your escort is
well worth buying.'    Halfred said he would come.
The way was dangerous, and many turned back from it.
Halfred and Audgisl had five pack-horses, and one each to
ride ; and now they fare east through the forests. One day
they met a man, whose name they asked. He called him¬
self Onundr. He was big and strong, and said he would
like to journey with them if they would give him some pay,
and all the ways thereabouts were known to him. Audgisl
did not take to him, and wondered whose subject he was,
Halfred urged that he should be taken with them, and so it
was settled, and that he should have twelve aurar of silver.
Halfred Avas the man in the fullest prime, for Audgisl was
rather elderly. Now they fared on their journey, Onundr
riding first. All day they rode, till they came to an empty
shieling in the evening. ' Now,' said Halfred, ' let us divide
the work into three. Thou, Onundr, cut wood and bring it
in, as thou hast a big axe; Audgisl shall make the fire, and
I will fetch water.' Then said Onundr, ' It were well to
bring in a good lot of wood to the house, as many need fire¬
wood who come here.' Halfred approved, and Audgisl said,
' I had rather fetch water, and do you make up the fire.'
on war or plundering expeditions over all the northern seas. Hal-
fred's poem on him is lost.
^ Vik, or the Bay, is the gulf between South Norway and Sweden,
54 '-The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
'So let it be,' said Halfred. Then he kindled a fire, and
Onundr went out on the task he had engaged to do.
Halfred thought him rather long in coming. He was stoop¬
ing over the fire, and had thrown his belt round his neck;
on it was the big knife that it was the custom to carry, and
the knife hung across his back. Now came Onundr in "\\'ith
his Ijurden. He came behind Halfred, and hewed at him
with both hands with the axe, which was turned by the
knife. Halfred seized him by the feet, and called to God,
saying, ' Help Thou me now, White Christ; if thou art so
mighty as King Olaf says, let not this man prevail over me.'
Then he sprang up from under Onundr, and with the help
of God and the luck of King Olaf, took him up and flung
him with such a fall that he stunned him. Halfred wrested
the axe from his hands, and drew his own dagger, and
with that Onundr came to his senses. 'Hast thou killed
Audgisl? ' asked Halfred, and the other confessed it. Then
Halfred stabbed him with his dagger, dragged him out of
the hut, and made fast the door.' But in the night Onundr
battered upon the door planks, and Ilalfred stood within and
held it fast, and so it went on all night till dawn. In the ■
morning, Halfred found Audgisl dead by the brook, took off
him his knife and belt, and arranged the body according to
custom. He now perceived that Onundr must have been a
villain, who killed men for their goods, for there was much
money and merchandise hidden in the hut. Halfred made
this verse:
'The wielder of raven's friend-
With silver fee I fed.
Not to mislead the generous man
Who lies in the forest dead.
All good from the fellow I earned ;
But the slaughterer got from me—
From the biting sword his full reward,
Rather more than his fee.'
Then he rode east over the mountain, and found the ways
very diflicult to find.
One day, at evening, he heard the sound of felling trees,
and rode towards it. There, in a clearing, was a man
hewing the wood.    He seemed like a peasant—red-bearded,
1 According to the grim northern superstition that bad men,
especially when unburied, often became vampires, and their partially
reanimated bodies were more dangerous than ever. Whether Onundr
was not dead, or Halfred had bad dreams in the lonely hut that
winter night, or the biograj)her added what was thought a likely
event in the life of a hero, we must leave unsolved.
'   ^ Raven's friend—periphrasis for sword.
Byeways of History. S 5
tawny, and rather ruffian-like.    He greeted Halfred, who
asked his name.
' Bjorn am I called, and invite you to be my guest.'
He consented, and the bondi took him home and enter¬
tained him well. Then he showed Halfred a locked bed to
sleep in, and took himself another; but Halfred suspected
his good faith, and instead of lying down, sat up behind the
tapestry with the king's gift, the sword, drawn. And in
the night Bjorn crept up, and struck a blow at the bed,
whereupon Halfred thrust at him a deadly wound. The
mistress of the house called out to the men to get up and
seize that evil-doer. The men flung clothes on Halfred's
weapons, and he was taken prisoner and bound. Then
word was sent to a neighbour called Ubbi (his brother was
Thorir, a chief), who had a daughter Ingibjorg, and she was
the wife of Audgisl, and a high-spirited woman. Now a
meeting was called to judge Halfred. Thither came Thorir,
Ubbi, and Ingibjorg, and they all agreed together against
Halfred, and condemned him to be sacrificed to the gods.
Then he appealed to Ingibjorg, and said he had some
valuables with him that Audgisl was bringing to her, and
she recognised some things. He told her all the story,
and said this verse :
' Woe for him in years declining,
Sorely wounded in the wood ;
Swift atonement from the felon,
Fierce revenge for noble blood,
Won I in the din of fighting,
And the foe of praise bereft,
Dead within the darksome forest,
By Audgisl's side I left.'
Then Ingibjorg asked all particulars about the affair.
' I struck the false wolf,
The fair-feigning log-cutter,
Laying swift hands upon
His lying throat.
Wild screams the eagle
At uproar of slaughter ;
Now he no longer
Betrays men of might.'
Ingibjorg said, ' I see thou hast act^d faithfully, and now
shalt thou come home with me.' Halfred went with her to
her house ; he was stiffened with bonds, but she nursed him
well. She and Thorir sent men to the mountain, and they
found all marks and traces as Halfred had described. Much
property was brought away from there, and the neighbours
56 Tlie Ladies' Ediiibui-gJi Magazine.
all agreed that Halfred should have the goods that Onundr
had had, and there was much talk about him. Halfred fell
in love with Ingibjorg, and asked her to marry him. She
said, ' This may not be considered good in all ways, as thou
art a Christian and an outlander; still thou mayest consult
my father if thou wilt.' So he brought all the matter before
Thorir, and they agreed well; and so it came to pass that
Halfred married Ingibjorg, and loved her mi;ch. Together
they were rich, and Halfred was greatly honoured in the
country. So much had he retained of the Christian faith
that he signed the cross over the cup before he drank, but
little he sang (the service). After a while he told Ingibjorg
that he longed to go off on a journey to see Olaf the Swedish
king, and recite before him a poem that he had made on
him. She said he would probably be willing to hear a song
in his own praise.
That summer Halfred travelled to Sweden, came before
the king and greeted him. The king said, ' Widely art thou
renowned as the skald of great men.' Halfred told him he
had composed a poem for him, and asked leave to recite it,
which was granted. When he had done so, the king asked
him to remain with him, and gave him good gifts. Halfred
said he owned an estate and a wife in the Swedish dominions,
and wished to live there. The king bade him farewell, and
Halfred returned to his wife.
He was there two winters; in the third year, one night he
dreamt that King Olaf came to him and was very angry,
saying he had much cast off Christianity. ' Come to see me
with thy family,' he seemed to say. Halfred sobbed heavily
as he awoke. Ingibjorg asked what he had been dreaming
of. He tells her. ' And what thinkest thou about it ? wilt
thou journey thither with me ? I have to repay thee for
many kindnesses, and yet I believe that thoii wilt be fully
recompensed if thou shouldst take the Christian faith.' She
answers, ' It is quite to be expected that thou shouldst long-
to be there again; and I can understand now that thy faith
must be a much better one than ours, and I shall certainly
go there with thee.' Audgisl Avas the name of their son,
now two years old.
They travelled to the presence of Olaf the king, who
received Halfred well, but rebuked him, however, severely,,
and bade a priest confess and shrive him. There a son was
born to Ingibjorg, and his father gave him his own name,
Halfred. Ingibjorg was then baptized with both her sons.
The king said to Halfred, ' Now must thou make an atone-
The Old and the New. 57
ment offering to God, as thou hast lived so long among
heathens, and fallen so much away from the faith.' He said
he would willingly do so, and composed the Eesurrection
Drapa, an excellent poem.
That winter Ingibjorg died, and Halfred felt his loss
keenly. In the spring he told the king that he longed to
see Iceland again. The king said,' That shall he as you
wish ; you have proved to me that you are a gallant fellow,
aiad things may turn out so in the future, that with your
disposition you would much rather have remained with me.
However, these valuable gifts shalt thou receive from me : a
mantle of fur, a ring, and a helmet; for it is all unknown
when we shall meet again. Do not leave these gifts as a
legacy; let them he borne to the church with thee (if thou
shouldst die on land), or laid in thy coffin if thou shouldst
die at sea.' The ring weighed three aurar. Halfred felt
grievously the parting from the king. Audgisl his son went
east to Thorir his grandfather; and for his second son he
found good fostering. E. J. 0.
{To he continued.)
W^t ©lt( anti Cte Neto,
By Sidney Philips.
CHAPTEE II.
' In lands where not a memory strays,
But all is new, unhallowed ground.—Tennyson.
It was on a damp January afternoon that Mabel foimd her¬
self deposited alone at the platform of a little station in the
wildest part of Inverness-shire. A piercing wind was blow¬
ing down from the Cairngorms, whose lofty summits were
hidden by snow-clouds. A more desolate scene could scarcely
he imagined. The evening was already darkening, and a
small drizzling rain concealed even the nearer hills.
'Is there any carriage waiting from Kilmuir?' asked Mabel
of a man loitering on the platform.
' It's saft the day, whateffer,' was the only answer.
Mabel stared, and repeated her question.
' Murdo ! Murdo !' shouted the man.
* Is the man mad V thought Mabel.
A young porter now approached, who seemed to answer to
the grim appellation.    ' What's yer wull ?' he asked gruffly,
' Is there no one to meet me from Kilmuir ?'
58 TJie Ladies Edinburgh Magar:ine.
' Naebody's here frae Kilmuir tlie day.'
' How far is it to Kilmuir ?' asked Mabel.
' Just saxteen miles to the 'Stablished Kirk o' Kilmuir,' said
the man slowly, as if each word cost a great effort. Mabel
was in despair, but after a time succeeded in sending off a
lad to the neighbouring farm to ask if a conveyance could be
procured. The boy soon returned, however, with the dismal
news that' there was nae machine to be had the day.'
' But what can I do ?' exclaimed Mabel; ' I cannot spend
the night in the waiting-room.'
' Well, I canna just say,' said the porter, shrugging his
shoulders, and going off to open the gate for some one who
wanted to cross the line. Mabel hurried forward, thinking
that after all they might perhaps liave sent for her from her
uncle's, but found only a dog-cart with two men in it, one
of whom was having a conversation with the porter, which
Mabel felt sure referred to her. At last she distinguished the
words, 'Kilmuir, the Manse, did you say ? She can't stop here
all night. I might give her a lift, but that wouldn't help her
much, and I couldn't take her all the way.' . . .
'Oh, please don't think of it!' exclaimed Mabel, coming
forward; ' I dare say I can manage somehow.'
The man turned round to look at her, and perceiving that
she was a lady, he pulled off his deerstalking cap and ex¬
hibited a boyish face, whose natural plainness was rather
increased by its owner being very shy and confused.
' I wish I could help you, but you see it's not quite the
same way,' he stammered; and then, as if a brilliant idea
struck him, he exclaimed, ' I say, can you drive yourself?'
' I think I could,' answered Mabel.
'Well, the old mare's inclined to be skittish sometimes;
but if you are not afraid of trying her, I'll get out at the
bottom of the Lochinloan hill, and you can just take the
trap on to Kilnmir. Evan liere (turning to his servant) will
show you the way; but he can't drive, so you'll have to get
some one there to brin^c back the dosr-cart.'
The porter seemed to approve of this arrangement; and so,
before Mabel had fully time to realize the strangeness of the
proceeding, she was hoisted up beside the driver, a small
fraction of her luggage was stowed away behind, and she
found herself driving off in the deepening twilight along an
unknown road with an utter stranger. At first her com¬
panion did not seem inclined for conversation. Having ascer¬
tained that she had no objection to a cigar, he puffed away
in silence, vouchsafinfr the shortest possible answers to her
The Old ajtd the New. 59
inquiries; but after a time he became rather more communi¬
cative, gradually thawing under the influence of her sunny
smile and pleasant manner. Though not actually handsome,
Mabel Barnard was certainly attractive. Very small, with
delicate features, bright eyes, and an ever-varying expression,
there was in fact something almost childish about her, that
would have made it difficult for the shyest person to continue
long afraid of her.
At length the young man announced that they had
reached the point nearest to his own home, and springing
from the dog-cart, he gave up the reins to Mabel.
' I hope you don't really mind driving yourself ? It's getting
awfully dark, but perhaps that's as well, as the old mare
won't shy at the puddles if she doesn't see them. Keep
straight on for the present, Evan will point when you are to
turn. I wish I could have come on with you myself, but it
would make me late for dinner.' He then added a few words
in Gaelic to the young gillie who was sitting at the back
of the dog-cart, and strode off at a great pace; and Mabel,
having ascertained that her only remaining companion, like
the man whom she had first addressed at the station, ' had no
English,' continued her journey in silence.
It certainly was not a cheerful drive. The road led through
a long stretch of rough, uncultivated ground, with here and
there a tumble-down cottage or a few larch trees. It grew
darker every moment, and the wind swept the rain into
Mabel's eyes so that she could scarcely see to drive, and the
reins grew more wet and slippery every moment. Fortu¬
nately she had been accustomed to drive from childhood, and
her nerve was excellent; still, driving a strange horse under
such circumstances was far from pleasant. Her thoughts,
too, were scarcely more cheerful than her surroundings.
What if the people to whom she was going did not expect,
could not receive her! What if they were cold and rough like
their climate! But here she remembered her uncle's kind
letter, and felt happier. Then, too, it was nice to think that
she would be near a church. She wondered whether it was a
pretty church, and if there would be a daily service there.
Mabel knew that there was some difference between churches
in England and Scotland; she had learnt about it in the
schoolroom, but could not quite remember what it was. She
thought that it had somehow to do with bishops; but then
she was quite sure that she remembered seeing some years
ago in the Illustrated a picture of a Scotch cathedral, and if
there were cathedrals, there must be bishops.    Anyhow there
6o Tlie Ladies' Edinbnrgh Magazhie.
would no doubt be many spiritual advantages in a clergy¬
man's house, and plenty of parish work to fill up the time;
probably Sunday-schools and visiting, aU under her uncle's
supervision.
At length she saw some faint lights glimmering in the
distance, and in a few moments more she Avas standing on
the threshold of her new home.
The door was opened by a slatternly maid, and out rushed
a couple of shaggy dogs, whose noisy clamour made it
difficult for Mabel to explain to the astonished servant who
she was or what she wanted. At length, summoned by the
noise, Mr. jNIackenzie himself appeared. The minister was
a tall man, with iron grey hair and a slight stoop, dressed in
a suit of rusty black, and with a rather dirty white tie. He
received his niece with solemn kindness, apologized for the
cold welcome she had received, and only wished that she had
found some means of apprising them sooner of her arrival.
'But did you not get my telegram ?' exclaimed Mabel.
' Our telegraphic communication here in the Highlands is
still rather deficient; we shall doubtless receive it with the
post to-morrow. But take off those haps, lassie, and come
awa' ben.'
So into the parlour they went; and as the door was opened,
Mabel's nose was greeted with almost as many odours as
Coleridge distinguished at Cologne. The windows had evi¬
dently not been opened for many a long day; and the smells
were so subtly blent together, that it was difficult to say
whether mutton, cheese, whisky, or paraffin oil predominated.
A tall, gaunt woman received her with open arms, talking
rapidly in the broadest Scotch, and offering her every sort of
refreshment. It was some minutes before Mabel could look
round; when she did, the sight was not encouraging A dark
flock paper, horse-hair chairs and sofa, and some bad prints of
Puritan divines, looked dreary enough, though well-filled
bookshelves, and a large table heaped with periodicals, pro¬
mised better for tlie intellectual than for the artistic taste of
the owners of the Manse. Presently Mabel heard her uncle
call, 'Maggie, where's Maggie V
The member of the family who attracted Mabel most was
the girl who answered this summons. Certainly her dress
fitted badly; her collar was crooked, and her abundant fair
hair all hung about anyhow, but still the beauty of her face
and figure was so remarkable that Mabel could not help
gazing at her in amazement, wondering to see any one so
lovely in the midst of such squalid surroundings.   Her Scotch
The Old and the New. 61
accent, too, was not unpleasing; for, in spite of her neglected
appearance, Maggie Mackenzie was not really unladylike,
and nothing is prettier than refined Scotch on the lips of
gentlewomen. There is an old-world ring about it, that
carries one back to the days when railroads did not yet exist
and daily posts were a thing of the future, when every laird
was a little king, and the ' social mill' of London and conti¬
nental life had not yet ground down the angles of individual
character, and merged ' the picturesque of man and man' in
mere outward polish.
Maggie took her cousin up-stairs to her little room, and
made sundry attempts to light a fire that would smoke.
vShe insisted on ]\Iabers lying down on the bed meanwhile,
and helped to unpack her things, talking rapidly all the
time. ' Yes, dear, I'm glad that you made up your mind to
come to us. It's lonely here at times now that Jamie has
gone out into the world. My father and I live mostly
alone, though my sister is with us just now.'
' Was that your sister who was down-stairs V asked Mabel.
' Yes ; Mary Macintosh is my half-sister, but she married
fifteen years ago, when I was quite a small child. Her
husband is factor to Lord Glentyre, and lives at Balna-
goonie, twenty miles from here. She's a good-natured body
is Mary, but you will find her a dull companion, unless you
can take an interest in her housekeeping worries and her
husband's perfections.'
' And wliat is your brother-in-law like ? Does he deserve
her good opinion of him ?' asked Mabel.
' Oh, well, Sandie's shrewd enough; you'll no' get a
shilling's change out of sixpence from Sandie. But he's no'
that bad, take him allthegether; and he doesn't drink, at
least not that you'd see it on him, except maybe at a funeral
now and again.'
'And who was the young man who so good-naturedly
brought me here ?' asked Mabel. ' I don't know how I
should have managed without him.'
' Oh, that was Hector Macdonald; he's the son of the
laird of Lochinloan, who owns most of the land about here.
Hector was the youngest son, and till his brothers died no
one paid much attention to him. Lochinloan's no' that
rich, so he never sent Hector to school, but just let him
learn what he could from my father. When the family
were abroad, he used to live here with us altogether. He's
just Jamie's age, a year older than I am; you wouldn't
think he was twenty-one, he looks so boyish.    He has got
62 Tlie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
into a Highland regiment now through the militia. He
couldn't pass his examination; but he's a good lad, though
rather shy with strangers. But there's the bell for supper ;
you must be hungry after your drive.'
Mabel was rather surprised at the primitive hours of the
meals at the Manse, having hitherto always imagined that
everywhere all civilized people lunched and dined at the
same hours, and having looked upon those old-fashioned
folks who dined in the middle of the day as almost as
mythical as those famous snark-hunters who
' Always had breakfast at five o'clock tea,
And dined on the following day.'
She now found with surprise that such benighted customs
as dining at three and supping at nine still lingered in the
Highlands.
During supper Mabel had ample opportunities of verifying
the truth of Maggie's descriptions. Mr. Macintosh (gene¬
rally called Balnagoonie) told long stories, which no one
seemed to appreciate except his wife. Mrs. Macintosh from
time to time attacked Maggie's housekeeping in audible
asides. Mr. Mackenzie and Maggie required to be started
on a subject before they would speak; but when once
started, they went off like a machine that had been wound
up, and never paused till the subject was either entirely
exhausted or forcibly changed. The evening ended with a
chapter read and expounded, or rather dilated upon, by the
minister, and a long extempore prayer, which Mabel was
far too sleepy to follow.
The next day was Sunday, and the church was the climax
of poor Mabel's disappointment. Morning service, which
was in Gaelic, was the best attended ; the English congrega¬
tion at one o'clock numbered little over fifty people, the
bulk of the population belonging to the Free Church. The
kirk itself was like a barn, perfectly bare, and very cold and
damp; and the singing made Mabel feel inclined to stop up
her ears, for it was difficult to say whether the precentor or
the congregation were the most unmusical; and the psalm
and paraphrase woimd their slow length along, unaccom¬
panied save by the howling of a troublesome collie who had
foUowed his master to the kirk. The sermon was both
earnest and learned, but far above the heads of even a
Scotch congregation. Mabel herself found the long sentences
and close reasoning difficult to follow, and probably no one
present thoroughly understood the drift of the good man's
discourse except his own daughter; and even she, ha\dng
77/1? Old and the New. 63
dabbled in German metapliysical and theological literature,
was inclined to treat with contemptuous pity the old-world
arguments of one who knew no German, and was therefore
entirely ignorant of the latest developments of religious
thought.
' I shall never like your church, I fear, Maggie,' said
Mabel as they walked away.
' What for no ?' asked her cousin.
' It all seemed so irreverent; no one looked as if they
remembered that it was God's house.'
' Why should they ?' exclaimed Maggie ; ' is not the
whole world God's house ? Does the Most High dwell in
temples made with hands ? No ; rather to me it seems ir¬
reverent to localize the presence of the Lord in certain places
at certain times, as if space or time could exist for Him.'
Mabel was thoroughly puzzled. She loved her prayer-
book and her Christian Year; she liked a pretty church and
a hearty service, and always in all trouble asked God's help ;
but she knew nothing of doctrine or theological controversy,
and Maggie's way of always going to the root of everything
both frightened and perplexed her. After a minute or two
she began again:
' But why do you not have a harmonium ?'
'Well, they do have them in some fashionable Scotch
churches now,' answered Maggie; ' but here we are still
primitive, and could never face the opposition it would
occasion. The Lochinloan people did once suggest getting
one; but the elders protested against departing from the
ancient scriptural custom of praising the Lord with the
voice only.'
' But surely they forget all that there is about trumpets
and shawms and cymbals in the Bible ?'
' Not a bit of it. When Sandie Macpherson was reminded
of that, he said, " Maybe in the Auld Testament, but a' that
was just done awa' i' the New." Indeed, I really believe
that the old precentor, who is a most original character, was
about right when he told me that there were " mony auld
bodies in the parish who would as soon see the deil himsel'
let intil the kirk as yon box 0' whustles." '
' Oh, Maggie, is it possible that people now-a-days can be
so narrow ? But there's one thing more I want to ask you :
Why doesn't your father use the Lord's Prayer ?'
' Now and again he does, though he did not do so to-day.
You see our Lord never said, pray in these words, but
" after this manner;" therefore many Scotch ministers, to
64 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
avoid formalism, use the ideas but not the words. Did you
not observe that my father's prayers to-day were divided
into ten heads, each head corresponding with a petition in
the Lord's Prayer ? He thinks it should be the model of
all prayers, though he seldom uses the exact words.'
' But wouldn't the poor people understand him better if
he used the words themselves ?' suggested Mabel.
' Maybe,' said Maggie; ' but you don't know Scotland yet,
Mabel, and haven't found out that to edify a Scotch congre¬
gation you must puzzle them. No Highlander would go far
to hear a sermon he could really understand. My father
once lent his pulpit to a friend who preached very plain
sermons. When he asked the precentor, on his return,
how they had liked his friend, Donald answered: " Weel,
minister, it wasna bad; but for jumbling the judgment and
confoonding the senses, there's just naebody '11 compare wi'
yoursel';" and an old woman complained to me afterwards
that " there wasiia muckle teaching in yon lad's sermon, a
bairn might ken what he was meaning all through." '
' Do you visit the poor people much ?' asked Mabel.
' Not I,' answered Maggie. ' I disapprove of the way in
which benevolent people now-a-days pry into cottages, as if
they did not belong to their owners as much as our houses
do to us. Besides, most of the people here " have no
English."'
' But why do you not learn Gaelic ?' asked Mabel.
' What on earth would be the good of that ?' exclaimed
Maggie; ' there's not enough literature to make it worth
while.'
{To he continued.)
A BOKDER BALLAD.
Sarah, Duchess of Marlborough, had hair of a pale honey colour.
In a rage ■with her husband, who admired it as her chief ornament,
she cut it off and laid it in an ante-room. The Duke found it and
put it in his cabinet, where, after his death, she discovered it among
his most valued treasures.—Taken from the account of Drumlanrig
Castle, in M'Dowell's History of Dumfries.
The Hassock Hoos stan's on its hill,
The Marr burn rins fu' clear;
The white kye graze i' the lang rye grass,
I' the forest feed the deer.
The Ho7iey-haired Ladye. 65 I
The wee birds twitter i' the cleugh, j
The cushat manes i' the shaugh,
Through the simmer's heat that lies like a sheet
A' roun' the castle wa'.
A ladye stan's i' the auld aik ha',
A ladye in weeds 0' woe; \
For yestreen they bore her lord frae the door, j
Whar nae mair his feet sail go. ;
The ladye's face is pale an' proud.
The ladye's step is high ;
Her hair is of the amber fair, i
Her e'e like the simmer sky.
She Stan's afore the auld wa'-press, \
Wi' its key intil her han';
What is't that turns her lily face j
Xoo red as the wat sea-san', |
An' syne as white as the burnt-out ash
0' the flickerin' log at Yule ?
What gars her knees thegither knock
As bent wi' a weight 0' dule ? I
What is't she hands i' the lily han', j
That shakes as the shaking tree ? j
Xocht but a nieve-fu' 0' amber curls 1
That drap down till her knee;
They match the locks on the head that stoops ^
Sae low ower their glisterin' gowd, \
As the liet tears drap on the silken shred
Sae lichtly roun' them rowed. -
' Then whisht ye, whisht ye, my fair ladye,' ' ■ ;
Quoth her nurse o' fourscore years; i
' An' what hae ye fand i' the auld w^a'-press \
Gars drap thae het, het tears ?
Ye stood a queen when they bore him forth,
Your lord sae true an' brave;
Then why gie the tears to the auld wa'-press ;
Ye gied na to his grave ?' ';
' Oh, whisht ye, whisht ye, my nurse I' she said, |
' Ye ken na the words ye say; j
For M'eel may I gie to the auld wa'-press \
Het tears 0' dule an' wae. \
Xo. G2.— February 1880. r
66 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
Though I drapped na a tear on the green, green sod
That hid my dear lord frae me,
Oh weel at the sicht o' this auld wa'-press
They may blin' me till I dee !
' Oh nurse ! oh nurse ! i' this auld wa'-press
He keepit his gauds maist dear,—
The wood frae the cross o' our blessed Lord
Brought by his lang-dead frier
Frae the Holy Land ayont the seas,
Whar he hung on the bloody tree ;—
The bride-ring ne'er frae his mither's han'
Parted till she did dee;—
' The siller dog-call, his father's arles
Tlie day he first shot a deer;—
The necklace o' the coral sae red
Our wee dead babe did wear.
But oh, my lord, my loving lord,
What for are thae tresses here,
Cuttet in pride to vex the heart—
The heart that lo'ed sae dear!
* The honey-locks he loved to twine,
An' say they were gowd sae bright,
An' kiss i' the simmer gloamin' time.
An' ca' them his crown an' might;
An' say, as frae Samson the power had fled
Whan his hair Delilah shore,
Whan the amber was tint frae this shining head
His life's strenffth wad be o'er.
' An' oh, my lord, my loving lord,
r my passion sae proud an' wild
I cuttet the honey locks wi' the shears
Like an angrj', wilfu' child.
An threw them on the aiken floor.
To vex that heart sae dear,
An' never again set my eyes on them
Till this day they meet me here !
' Oh nurse! oh nurse ! can ye tell me noo.
Is it sae our deeds will rise,
Trae the awfu' Book on the awfu' Day,
Afore our tear-bliu' eyes,
Russian Nihilism. 6j
An' break our hearts wi' the Love tliey grieved
As my heart is broke this day,
By the gowden locks i' the auld wa'-press
My dear lord lovet sae ?
' Oh never again sail the simmer shine
Wi' its glint on this head sae wae,
But my tears sail fa' i' the aikeii ha'
For the lord that loved it sae.
An' never again the winter's wind
Eoun' the Hassock Hoos sail blaw,
But my heart sail mane in dule an' pain
Ower the honey-locks i' the wa!'
Jeanie Morison.
By C. L. Johnstone, Author of ' Science, Art,, and Literature in
Russia.'
We must go back into the last century to find the origin
of Nihilism,^ when the French Revolution turned the heads
of most of the youth of Europe, and those who were not
frantically Conservative joined Eepublican clubs, and drank
the health of new-born liberty. In Eussia, the country of
all others where extravagant opinions find supporters, the
French leaders of the movement were lauded as heroes by
the gilded youth, when they were scornfully regarded as
mere plebeian disturbers of the peace by the hereditary
legislators of other lands. In early life the Empress
Catharine II. of Eussia had loved to call herself a Ee-
pubUcan; but several insurrections against her authority,
one of which had cost 3(J0,000 lives, made her pause in her
projected reforms, and lean for support on a corrupt and
tyrannical circle who governed the empire; so that in her
last days the prisons were filled with the Eussian imitators
of Eousseau and Voltaire, and with the admirers of the
French Eepublic.
Napoleon turned traitor to the patron who had raised him
from obscurity, and did his best to stifle Jacobinism  (as
^A Nihilist leader bequeathed his large fortune in trust for dis¬
seminating his opinions by fair means or the reverse, and wo have
therefore to take all statements from a purely Nihilist source with
proportionate reserve.
68 TJie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
Kepublicanism was then called) so soon as he had assumed
the crown of France ; but his original opinions adhered to
him in the eyes of his foreign contemporaries, and when his
exile to St. Helena produced a reaction in his favour, he
again became the idol of Eepublicanism.    Louis XVIII. was
hardly the  man  to  excite   much  enthusiasm   among  the
French; and on his second restoration in 1815 he had to
bear the responsibility of the heavy indemnity, curtailment
of territory, and other onerous terms which were imposed
upon France by the allies.    The French half-pay officers and
small farmers felt the war-tax, but were not logical enough
to trace it back to the aggression of ISTapoleon's wars; so they
abused the regime under which they lived, fondly recalling
the old days of the Eepublic when France repudiated her
enormous national debt by simply forcing the landholders
to   emigrate,  or  by  guillotining  them,   and  by  annexing
Holland,   which   was   her   largest   creditor.     The   young
Eussians in the allied army of occupation eagerly imbibed
these views during three years, till their general observed
that the Czar would do better to wreck them in the Baltic
on  their return home than to let  them re-enter "Eussia.
Before the  close of the reign of Alexander I., the elder
brother   of Nicolas,  the   empire  was   honeycombed  with
secret societies; and the 2oth of March 1826 had been fixed
upon as the date of a revolutionary outbreak Avhich was to
be heralded by the assassination of the sovereign and the
imprisonment of the imperial family.    Alexander's unex¬
pected death brought on the crisis prematurely, and the
sanguinary  contest in   St. Petersburg on  December  26t]i
1825, gave  the  new  Emperor Mcolas  a  pretext  for  re¬
establishing   the   Secret   Police  or  Third  Section  of the
Imperial Chancellery, abolished by his predecessor, and which
became such a formidable instrument of despotism during
the next thirty years.    If Nicolas still preserved any of the
Liberal sentiments which he appeared to possess in his youth,
they were utterly dissipated by the Polish Eevolution in
1830, and the rest of his reign was chiefly noted for its
persistent efforts to keep down Liberalism even in foreign
states.    Yet in 1839 an intelligent French traveller heard
at Moscow that secret societies flourished as extensively as
under Alexander I., and the stupid and ignorant practice of
incendiarism, for which unlettered country labourers were
hanged in this country fifty years ago, found favour among
the student revolutionists of Eussia.    Hence severe restric¬
tions were placed on the universities, their numbers were
Russian NiJiilisjii. 69
curtailed, and the students limited to a very small number,
who were subjected to a severe military discipline.
In 1856 Russia concluded peace with England, France,
Austria, Sardinia, and Turkey, and consented to a limitation
of her fleet in the Black Sea, besides giving up a slip of
territory on the banks of the Danube. We grumbled at so
small a concession being obtained after the expenditure on
our part of £140,000,000, and the loss of nearly 60,000 men
by wounds or disease ; but the Eussian Radicals styled it a
most disgraceful peace on the part of their emperor, and
liave made it a favourite weapon against him ever since.
The state of Russia at that period was like Trance in the
reign of Louis XVI., depressed by reverses after previous
reigns which had been marked by military triumphs, and at
the same time enjoying a relaxation of the despotism of
liicolas which enabled the people to give utterance to their
discontent. Count Munster, now German ambassador at our
court, was then at St. Petersburg, and says that he can never
forget the painful impression made upon him by the ingrati¬
tude and injustice of the Russian courtiers and officials who
owed their position, honours, and riches to their recently
deceased master, and now accused him of being the sole
author of the national calamities. ' Tlie finances of the
country,' he writes, ' were exhausted; everywhere there
existed sorrow and dissatisfaction; all confidence was lost.
Added to all this, the difficult question of the emancipation
of the serfs made the Emperor's task a really hard one.' A
caricature in Punch represented Russia as a bear with a
patch on one eye and an arm in a sling, an apt illustration
of the Czar's position, fettered by the results of the war.
The first measures taken towards the emancipation of the
serfs were hailed by assassinations and outbreaks in all parts
of Russia, although, doubtless, there was much exaggeration
in the accounts which reached this country, viz., that
twenty-five provinces were simultaneously in revolt, and
that two Russian regiments marching through Warsaw,
energetically shouted, ' Down with the Czar.' The agitators
could hardly have acted differently if they had wished to
preserve the autocracy ; for every Liberal measure passed by
the government was greeted with a fresh outrage. In 1861
a consultative chamber was bestowed on Poland, as well as
municipal privileges and the use of her own language, and
directly afterwards a third of St. Petersburg was laid in
ashes. A Russian political convict, Alexander Herzen, whom
the Czar when Grand Duke had met at Kazan in 1849 and
70 Tlie Ladies EdinbiirgJi Magazine.
persuaded his father to pardon, had withdrawn to England,
and there published a revolutionary periodical which was
smuggled into Eussia, defending assassins, and endeavouring
to induce his countrymen to rise against a corrupt Tchinocracy;
but as is invariably the case with these violent leaders, his
efforts were detrimental rather than otherwise to the cause
of liberty in Eussia. They came at a time when the prospect
of the emancipation of the serfs was profoundly moving all
classes. The council of noble deputies convoked at St.
Petersburg to arrange the measure, was thrice dissolved, and
new members assembled, because they opposed it at every
step, and tried to raise a disturbance in the capital itself.
Eidicule, menace, and abuse were levelled at the sovereign,
who had reformed the courts of justice, allowed his subjects
to travel withoi;t paying an enorinous tax, and now wished
to take away the reproach of slavery from his empire; and
even in Western Europe his views met wdth less support
than might have been expected. One member of the House
of Commons in the House itself, cheering on the Polish
insurrection, then on the point of breaking out, said that
' the Czar's attempts at reform appear only to have ended in
disorganizing everything in his empire. The nobles, the
army, the serfs, and all classes of people in Eussia were dis¬
contented, and therefore there never was a more favourable
moment for Poland to make her claims heard, and to
assert them in the face of Europe. Eussia's diificulties w'ere
Poland's opportunity. He was informed of a fact, the precise
significance of which it was not difficult to interpret. It was,
that the Emperor of Eussia during his recent tour had been
shot at, and an aide-de-camp sitting in the same carriage
severely wounded. That was a symptom of disorganization,
and therefore now was the time for Poland to assert her
rights. (Cheers.)' What would have been the opinion in
England, if such a speech had been made in the Eussian
senate at the outbreak of the Indian Mutiny ?
The Emperor presided in person over the council appointed
to prepare a scheme for tlie emancipation, and in several
long and earnest speeches gave his own views. It frequently
sat for eight hours consecutively, and he was ably supported
by the Grand Duke Constantine. Meanwhile the secret
societies made the obstacles interposed by some of the
council a pretext for exciting insurrections, and for repre¬
senting to the peasants that they ought to own their masters'
entire estates. They said the Emperor was weak and led
by his ministers, and that the ministers had resolved that the
Russian Nihilism. fX
emancipation should never take effect. Consequently in
many provinces the peasants, armed with scythes and hatchets,
rose against the gentry; in one instance, to the number of
5000, boldly attacking the troops sent to preserve order,
many were killed and wounded, and nearly 3000 of the
rebels fled into the forests. A band was commanded in the
government of Kazan by a man pretending to be the emperor
himself, while the real sovereign was at Moscow, making
journeys into the neighbourhood to appease the excited serfs
by a personal explanation, instead of using force. He also
hastened the proceedings of the committee of emancipation
by desiring that it should be completed by March 3d, 1861;
and when he still failed to obtain a majority of votes, he
used his prerogative as an autocrat, and freed the serfs on
his own responsibility.
On March 3d the great act was passed by which
25,000,000 of slaves, for they were nothing more, became
free citizens; and by working two days a week for a fixed
period for their former lords, were constituted the owners of
the cottages and gardens in which they had lived when
bound to their masters' estates. The announcement was
quietly made to them in the churches on the first day of
Lent. A fortnight afterwards, as the Emperor and his eldest
son were proceeding to inspect the Eiding-School, a deputa¬
tion of workmen and peasants, sent by several thousands of
former serfs, asked permission to speak to him in the Great
Square before the palace, and thanked him for their liberty.
He repHed with some advice as to the Christianly, honest,
and orderly conduct they must observe, if they would find
in their free condition the benefits and self-respect which it
could secure to them. He also told them that their eman¬
cipation had been the intention of his father; but he did not
add that the Emperor Nicolas never ventured to carry it out.
The want of money, which was an obstacle to the extension
of railways or to the compensation of the nobles for their
territorial losses, made the Emperor consent to the sale of
Eussian America to the United States, to assist the public
finances at the moment, and to avoid the annual expense
which its possession entailed.
The Crimean War, undertaken by the Western Powers
ostensibly in the interests of civilization, certainly hindered
it in Eussia; for money brings refinement and culture, and
without it neither can schools be established nor progress
made ; and the semi-barbarous Chartists who were at that
time spreading fire and blood over their country, made this
72 TJie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
war and the sale of Russian America their most constant
charges against the government, whose position it may at
the present moment be interesting to recall as described in a
leading article in the Daily Telegraph in 1861:—
'Five years have passed since Eussia was to be regene¬
rated by railways. The Czar abandoned Sevastopol, and made
peace, but retreated with the honours of war. He left nothing
to the invaders but smoking ashes and blood-stained ruins.
Henceforth his sole object would be to cultivate the arts of
peace instead of war; but to carry out this benevolent plan,
money was needed. The Paissians had not got it in 1856 ;
they have not got it in 1861. The money markets of "Western
Europe still look coldly on Eussian loans. The deficit in
the finances has gone on steadily increasing; the State is
desperately involved. A great portion of this all but national
bankruptcy is of old standing; it is the bankruptcy of
Nicolas, and not of Alexander II., and whatever elements of
solvency Eussia may yet possess are due, not to the late Czar,
but to his successor. Now the deluge has come, and its
waters are unhappily swollen by the very means devised by
the present Emperor in the unfeigned benevolence -of his
heart to augment the prosperity of his subjects. Inesti¬
mable boon in a humanitarian point of view as was the
emancipation of the serfs, no doubt can exist that it has
produced most serious monetary embarrassments.'
' The ruler over territories so vast,' wrote the same paper
in another article, ' that he is scarcely himself aware of their
extent, and over millions who know scarcely anything of
their sovereign be3^ond his name, must envy the lot of the
most insignificant German potentate. How devoutly the
head of the house of Eomanoif must wish himself a Hesse-
Cassel, or Schaumberg-Lippe! He is surrounded by diffi¬
culties, and menaced by dangers perpetually renewed. His
ancestral history is written in letters of gore ; there is peril
of poison in every cup he drains; beneath the glittering
uniforms of the soldiers and courtiers Avho surround and
fawn upon him, there may be lurking the dagger of Har-
modius.
' When university students turn' incendiaries, and savants
conspirators; when the most libellous denunciations against
him are penned by civilians who wear his livery and take his
wages; when military telegraph clerks garble his despatches ;
when his nobles are plotting in their palaces, and the peasants
he has enfranchised are murmuring in their hovels; when in
the very guard-house at Czarco-Selo, officers in his house-
Russian Nihilism. 73
hold troops are detected tampering with his soldiers, and
offering them bribes to murder him ;—the Emperor of all the
Eussias would be more than mortal if he looked on the
present without perturbation, or regarded the future without
fear. ... St. Petersburg is blazing from the Okhta to the
Apraxiii Dvor. Of what use are educational concessions
when even Sunday schools are seminaries for the teaching
of arson and revolt ? Bitter as is the consciousness of
instability thus forced on the Czar, it must be the more
afflicting when he remembers that he himself is not guilty
of the crimes which have alienated the Eussians from their
sovereign.' He is the scapegoat in the wilderness. Even
as the hapless Louis XVI. had to answer for the profligacy
and tyranny of his predecessors, so is Alexander II. called
upon to suffer for the sins of the maniac Paul, of the
visionary Alexander I., of the inflexible tyrant Nicolas.
' To complicate the difficulties of a situation almost unpre¬
cedented, and wholly impossible of continuance, the discon¬
tent which has been so long smouldering in Poland has
broken forth, not, it is true, in rebellion, but in the far more
dreadful form of assassination. The narrow escape of
General Luders appears to have emboldened the partisans of
murder to another criminal enterprise.
' Scarcely had the Grand Duke Constantine, the newly-
. appointed viceroy, arrived at the seat of his government,
when, on descending from his carriage at the door of the
great theatre at Warsaw, a revolver was fired at him. He
was slightly wounded, and the assassin arrested. This act
was utterly detestable and indefensible. We recognise no
distinction in turpitude between the Irish peasant who shoots
at his landlord from behind a hedge or slaughters him with
a pitchfork, and the political enthusiast who casts grenades
into an emperor's carriage, or levels his revolver at a viceroy.
Both are foul and imnatural assassins, and deserve the
extreme penalty of the law,' etc. These sentiments of eighteen
years back apply equally to the present day; and the syste¬
matic assassinations carried out by the Nihilists must be
regarded as despicable and cowardly by all right-minded
men.
In 1861 a well-informed Austrian ambassador was of
opinion that Eussia was in one of those hopeless situations
where no human power can rescue it; the nobility resisting
the emancipation, the country justices refusing to carry it
out, and the democrats desiring an equal distribution of
goods and a division of all estates, in their rage burning
74 -The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
streets of well-stocked shops, the palaces of tlie nobility,
and every government building they could ignite. At St.
Petersburg the loss amounted to one million sterling in a
single night. Sucli acts prove that the contempt with which
even the Glerman Socialist and the French Communist regard
the Eussian Nihilist while they make use of him, is well
deserved, and justifies Dr. Echardt's description of the ' weak,
womanish character of the Slavonic race.' 'Nothing in
Eussia is manly,' wrote De Maistre, ' but the bayonet; all
the rest is childish.' Some more I'easonable mode of proving
their fitness for constitutional rights will have to be shown
by the Nihilists before that part of Europe which borders on
Eussia can feel secure that, under a popular rule unrestrained
by an autocracy, they would not make themselves a nuisance
to their neighbours; for if murder and incendiary is all that
educated Eussians can show when they clamour for a parlia¬
ment, what have we to expect from their uneducated masses ?
It became M. OUivier to fete the assassin Vera Sassultsch, as
the conseqiiences of a revolutionary Eussia would be first
felt by Germany ; but we can quite understand the German
Government exercising the pressure it did last spring, to
induce the Eussian Cabinet to take more energetic steps to
ensure the safety of its own officials; and only those who
wish for the disorganization of both empires can give
support to the Nihilists.
In 1862 the Eussian revolutionists grew so bold that their
placards were found posted up in the Imperial Palace, and
it was rumoured that the Emperor's life was attempted
when walking in his garden, nearly in the same place that
it was four years later ; but this affair, if it really occurred,
was hushed up. A bold orator and a Moscow newspaper
advised the Czar to abdicate, and pamphlets were hawked
about recommending regicide. An anonymous letter warned
the Emperor not to attend a parade, whereupon several of
his aide-de-camps were searched, and on one of them was
found a loaded pocket-revolver. A circular, signed by many
eminent names, demanding that as the serfs were free the
nobles should also be freed from imperial caprice, was sent
to the Emperor. But the disunion and wanton destruction
of property, caused by savage republicans and angry re¬
actionists, was suddenly checked in the common danger
which threatened Eussia by the insurrection in Poland,
followed as it was by a note of remonstrance from Great
Britain, Austria, France, Italy, Spain, and, at the request' of
her allies, Turkey ; which at one moment seemed as if it
R!issia7i NiJiilism. 75
could result in nothing less than a war between Eussia and
Europe. The danger brought the Nihilists to their senses,
and for some years they were heard of no more.
The promoters of this Polisli revolt were all scattered in
foreign countries, many of them being foreign Communists,
one of whom has since owned tliat it failed from want of
support among the native Poles. Austria also gave it a
scarcely-disguised assistance, in the hope of making up for
her losses in Italy by the annexation of the IJuchy of
Warsaw. When Paris was partly burned by the Communists
in 1871, and their archives were seized by the Government
troops, plans were found for burning in succession Moscow,
Vienna, Berlin, and finally London, by the members of
the International Societies. The Paris police, under the
Eepublic, have taken energetic steps to keep down the
Communists, and even now, in spite of the late amnesty,
have compelled them to emigrate to other countries—chiefiy
America, Switzerland, and Great Britain. There can be
little doubt that these International Societies are the pro¬
moters of the late Nihilist disturbances in Eussia, which
they have always regarded with especial aversion as an
autocracy, although the celebrated Nihilist, Bakounin, who
visited England in 1851, declared that Englinli labourers
were more to be pitied than PMSsian serfs; and that in his
vision of a perfect government, a House of Lords could
never for a moment be tolerated. This is a specimen of the
extravagant views of Nihilism, with which no moderate
Briton can possibly sympathize. It must be said in its
excuse that the reaction of despotism is always extravagant,
and that even philosophic Germany and art-loving Italy
were guilty of greater atrocities in their Eevolutions in 1848
than have yet been alleged against the Eussian Nihilists.
The Eussians are very sensitive to European opinion; and if
they were convinced that assassination and incendiarism
were regarded as foul and dastardly crimes by other nations,
—not as heroic deeds,—it would probably liave much effect
upon them. So it is to be hoped that no pains will be spared
to convince them of that fact in this country at least, and
they may gradually learn that those in France or Great
Britain who applaud such deeds, only do it with the strong
hope that they may hasten the utter ruin of the Eussiau
empire.
In 1873 we saw in Berlin a pile of pamphlets in Eussian
and French, many of them by authors of high birth but
notoriously bad character, with the attractive notice, ' not
26 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
permitted to enter Eussia.' As most of the Eussians who
leave their own empire pass through Berlin, these were
intended especially to arrest their attention, and were offered
for sale at every station on the line. Those we examined
were remarkable for historical inaccuracy, want of logic,
inconsistency, and extravagance. The abuse contained in
them was chiefly directed against the Czar, though some of
the charges spoke better for the sovereign than for his
critics. Others complained that it was impossible to live
under a prince who had betrayed his country by surrendering
a portion of it to the Allies in 1856. A few were after the
pattern of the ordinary French libel. Prince Gortschakoif's
long term of office' was an especial grievance ; and another
complained that the Polish Uniates were bribed to join the
Eussian Church by presents of food during the severe winter
of 1872-3. We were glad to read that it was by no
harsher means. They all breathed a narrow party spirit
and personal antipathies, but hardly one of them took a
wider view, and enlarged upon or proposed any remedy for
the real abuses or shortcomings in the Eussian administra¬
tion ; and on the whole, we doubted if Europe would benefit
supposing that the writers were suddenly elevated to the
position of Prince Gortschakoff or Count Schouvaloff, or if
any real improvement could accrue to Eussia through such
vain and empty-headed reformers as the Nihilists. In short,
they are the tools of the Communists, who in 1870-1
numbered 600 Poles in their ranks in Paris alone. The
Nihilist is very different from the Pan-Slavonian, though a
Pan-Slavonian may sometimes be a Nihilist. The first is
friendly to Poland, but the second has only a fellow-feeling
for the Polish Communists, who make excellent pioneers of
revolution.
Before the late war there was a committee at Bucharest,
Vienna, and Prague, charged with the especial duty of
drawing Eussians into the International Society of Commun¬
ists, and undermining their loyalty by spreading scandalous
stories of the Emperor and Empress, though it was rather
their cue to praise the Cesarewitch. They commanded the
columns of many newspapers, and are probably continuing
the same work with any number of young Eussian dupes
ready to fall into their snares. These, debarred from a
prominent political career in a straightforward way, think
themselves exalted by influencing public matters indirectly
by secret plotting, and often devote their entire fortunes to
it; for it is young nobles in disgrace for duelling, gambling.
The Beggar of Capo di Monte : a Tale of Sixty-one.    "jy
and other vices, and men of some culture, who are Nihilists
in Eussia,—not the peasant, except when poverty and a
handsome gratuity have induced him to assist in their
schemes.
Efje Beggar of Capo lit fHontc: a Eale of Sixti3=onc,
By the Author of ' Mabel's Cross,' etc.
CHAPTER XIX.
Weakened and harassed by her previous fatigue and suffer¬
ings, Concetta scarcely comprehended Matteo's injunctions to
follow him quietly towards the vessel which they now saw
chained to the pier. Onwards they hm-ried, regardless of the
crowd which also seemed surging thither, when suddenly the
waggon containing Filippo and his family stopped close before
them, and a cry of ' Matteo! Matteo! in God's name help
us!' rang through the air. Claudia had at that instant
recognised him forcing his way through the crowd, followed
by a woman, whom, in spite of her disguise, she knew to be
Concetta.
Matteo felt as if an arrow had pierced his heart. He
dared not acknowledge this appeal; for should it be supposed
he belonged to the same party, he would also be taken
prisoner, and all hopes of deliverance either for Concetta or
Paolo would be lost. Eegardless of Claudia's cry, and with¬
out even a glance towards the waggon, he pressed resolutely
forwards. Filippo's quiet eye had also recognised Matteo
and the young girl, and this apparent indifference to the
misfortunes of his friends struck a deeper blow to his leader's
heart than even Ercole's treachery had done. A bitter glance
at the flying figure of Matteo, taking as he supposed every
means of avoiding contact with those he liad ungenerously
forsaken, was Pilippo's only sign of anger, but his sense of
Matteo's ingratitude heightened tenfold as he recalled his
promise to rescue Paolo even at the expense of his life.
Folding his arms with calm determination, an expression of
stern contempt settled on his features as if he had lost all
faith in humanity. Claudia, however, who attributed Matteo's
hurried Hight to his anxiety to seek out Paolo, and imagined
that he had not perceived his friends, once more, with all the
force she could command, cried out:
' Matteo Fratello, forsake us not in our peril!' Poor
Matteo felt he could no longer avert his fate; for Claudia's
^8 Tlie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
words had at last attracted the notice of some of the crowd,
and immediately conjecturing the truth, they seized him by
the arm, shouting triumphantly that they had secured another
of the gang. Turning towards Concetta, who was struggling
after him, he bade her, for the love of heaven, make her way
to Rudolph ere he reached the vessel, or all would be lost.
Quietly surrendering himself, he was then carried rather than
led before the waggon; and never dreaming that Filippo had
suspected him of breaking faith, he turned to address his
friends in their native dialect, and told them of the hope he
still had, that through Concetta's intercession with Count
Eudolph, Paolo and they might yet be saved.
What were his feelings when Filippo sternly accused him
of equal treachery with the coward Ercole, declaring that to
him they owed their present cruel position ! Matteo became
as pale as the unfortunate Paolo, whose livid countenance
still haunted him, not with anger, but with utter despair; for
he had well-nigh sacrificed his life in their cause, and now,
when the object of this sacrifice was all but obtained, to be
himself a prisoner, and accused of treachery by the man for
whose sake he had undergone all the trials of the last week,
was the climax of his grief, and his head sank on his breast
without a word.
Claudia now interrogated him in her native tongue as to
the meaning of liis being there with Concetta, and demanded
where they had left poor Livia. This question seemed to add
to his distress if that were possible ; for he remembered their
promise of returning for Livia, and now he was being carried
away without even the means of communicating with her.
He briefly told Claudia the principal events that had occurred
since he parted with tliem, and after this explanation he had
the satisfaction of seeing the expression of distrust and anger
gradually clear from Filippo's brow. Matteo's worn and
wasted form bore testimony to the truth of his statements,
so much so that Filippo stretched out his hand in the direction
of his friend, though he could not touch him, and said frankly :
' I have wronged thee, Matteo, and ask thy forgiveness.
The dastardly conduct of Ercole—may God have mercy on
his soul, traitor though he was—made me distrust even my
best friends, and seeing thy averted face at the cry of Claudia,
I coupled thee with the base wretch whose life has paid the
forfeit of his treachery. Thou hast now to forgive us for
bringing thee into this peril. I could almost wish thou hadst
not found Paolo, poor lad ! Better it were to lose him perhaps
than thou, my faithful Matteo.'
The Beggar of Capo di Monte : a Tale of Sixty-one.    79
Matteo's face soon recovered its former open expression;
for all traces of the bitter mortification he had experienced
from Filippo's doubt had passed away, and now every thought
was given to Concetta, as his eye followed her through the
crowd. Her youth and beauty, as well as the sacredness of
her calling, seemed to favour her passage, nor was it in vain
that she prayed to be led directly to the captain of the guard
of soldiers who had now reached the ship, and was standing
close to the ladder w^atching the prisoner Paolo, who was
being dragged up the vessel's side. Coucetta had marked
his every step, and being still many yards from the pier, and
fearing the anchor mi£;ht be raised before she could reach the
ship, she turned with a beseeching glance to the people
surrounding her, and with uplifted hands exclaimed :
' For the sake of our Holy IMother have pity on me, and
some one of you bear me to that vessel! The life of a brother
hangs upon my being able to speak to the captain of the
troops before he sails.'
In an instant she felt herself lifted from the ground by
the powerful arms of a gentleman, who, forcibly carried
forward by the crowd, had been an unwilling witness of the
capture of Matteo, for his sympathies were not with the
conquering party. With an air of authority he demanded to
pass with lus burden unmolested, and carried her with all
speed to the side of the ship, w^hich had not yet unloosed its
moorings. Count Eudolph, whose attention till this moment
had been given to Paolo, now turned to give some orders
respecting the other prisoners, and was startled at the sight
of a sister of charity being carried on board. He still
suspected some attempt at a rescue, but before he could utter
a question, a heart-breaking cry of ' Kudolph! Eudolph!
save him for my sake !' burst from the girl who now fell
fainting on the deck. To carry her below and give orders to
stay the sailing of the vessel, was the work of a moment; and
Piudolph, hardly daring to trust the evidence of his senses,
hung over his betrothed in an agony of fear as she lay
insensible, and to all appearance dead, on the little couch in
the cabin. The gentleman who had assisted her, lingered
on deck, unwilling to go till he heard she had recovered,
Eudolph answered his anxious questions by entreating him
to seek medical help from the town; this done, he returned
to kneel by the fainting girl and watch for returning con¬
sciousness. A full half hour passed before she recovered
sufficiently to realize her position, but at length Eudolph's
well-remembered accents  seemed to bring back  new life,
8o Tlic Ladies Edinburgh Magazitie.
though the over-strain of her mind during the last week had
left its traces in a heavy stupor which she could not at once
throw off.     After  some  time, the  shouts from the quay
recalled Eudolph to his duty.    Leaning tenderly over her,
he entreated her to remain quietly where she was, gently
checking her as in tremulous accents, but with nervous haste,
she began to relate the events which so deeply interested her
in the fate of the prisoners.   He feared lest her story might
unfit him for the stern measures enforced upon him by his
duty.    But Concetta could not sit calmly by while Matteo,
to whom she owed so much, was suffering imprisonment, as
galling perhaps as that of Paolo, solely for  his generous
attempts  to restore the poor  youth to life and herself to
liberty.     Clasping Paidolph's hand, she would not let him
leave her till he had promised to treat Matteo mercifully,
and to use all his influence with the authoi'ities at Naples
for liis pardon.    Again, as he turned to leave the cabin, she
suddenly remembered   Livia,  and   calling  him   back,   she
implored him to send in search of and bring the poor creature
to the vessel, where her own presence might be a comfort.
So earnest Avas she in this last request, that Eudolph saw
there was some history attached to this woman, and partly
to soothe Concetta, whose agitation increased as she spoke,
he did not hesitate to promise all she wished; and with one
more fond pressure of the little hand that rested so confid¬
ingly in his, he sprang up the cabin stairs and made his way
to the piazza on the quay.    He was not surprised to see
Matteo in custody, for he fully believed him to be one of the
brigands' gang; but who was the demented-looking woman
who now flung herself on the ground before the waggon,
imploring Filippo and Claudia to tell her where her son was
hid, for she did not realize the fact of their being prisoners
also, and now waiting tlieir sentence.    The good priest stood
at her side vainly endeavouring to calm her, for he, too, had
become anxious and alarmed at the   long absence of the
sister of charity and the man   she called Matteo, and he
wished to find some one to whom he could deliver ^^p his
charge.    Eudolph at once divined that this was the woman
for whom Concetta had so unaccountably interested herself;
and calling to the soldiers, he bade them lift her gently and
bring her with the rest of the party to the vessel.    Pilippo
heard this order with surprise;   he knew not that tlie young
man was acquainted with the relationship between them, for
as yet neither he nor Matteo knew  of Concetta's having
succeeded in her eflbrts to gain speech of Eudolph.    Livia,
Tlic Beggar of Capo di Monte : a Talc of Sixty-one.    81
exhausted by the force of her emotions, was now scarcely
conscious, and in that state, unable to offer resistance, she
was conveyed on board. It may be imagined Avith what
sensations of relief Concetta gave to her new-found protector
the full explanation he sought. He had also his tale to tell,
and he detailed his meeting with her father, and the motives
which had induced him to serve under the new Italian
"'overnment, after hearing Concetta'a narrative of her owu
capture at La Cava, and separation from her father and friends
ever since. She then returned to the subject of Paolo's and
Matteo's release from bondage, for she could not feel happy
while any uncertainty with regard to their fate remained on
her mind.
Rudolph, unwilling in these first brief moments of con¬
fidence and love to cast a shadow on her recovered happiness,
would gladly have waived the subject; but her extreme
anxiety and earnestness would not be put aside, and after
much hesitation he was obliged to confess, especially as
regarded Paolo, his hopes were few. The authorities at
Naples were more than ever determined to make a terrible
example of all persons who were known to have set the laws
nt defiance and incited the populace to revolt. As to Paolo,
who had been taken in the act of conveying arms and stores
to the rebels, an order for his execution would probably be
issued as soon as he reached Naples. Here Piudolph was
interrupted by a piercing cry as Concetta started from her
seat, exclaiming passionately:
' Nay, Eudolpli, say not that my father's son shall die as a.
common malefactor!'
Taking her hand, and drawing her tenderly towards him,
Pudolph looked in astonishment at the anguish and horror
expressed in her countenance. ' What means this, Concetta?
Speak, love, and put an end to this suspense. Suffering has
surely confused your brain, or you have been strangely
<leceived.'
' Oh ! no, no !' gasped the poor young creature, who seemed
almost paralyzed with conflicting emotions, till, controlling
lierself by a strong effort, lier cheeks and brow crimsoning
with shame, she lifted her eyes to Eudolph, and in a voice
.scarcely audible continued:
' I have spoken the sad truth ; this wretched outlaw, with
a price set on his head, is no other than Count Torcelli's son.'
Here her strength failed, and she could support herself no
longer. Eudolph, shocked as he was, could no longer doubt
iier story.    Eeplacing her on the couch, he gently and by
No. 62.—February 1880. j.
82 TJic Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine,
degrees drew from her the whole of the sad story already
known to the reader, as told by Filippo to his unfortunate
captive on her arrival at his j)lace of retreat. Eudolph also
could recall to memory many particulars nan'ated by his
father in years gone by, which lent support to the story.
He paced the little cabin for some time in troubled thoiight,
and Concetta marked with anxiety the gloomy and perturbed
expression of his brow. Suddenly he stopped before her
couch, saying:
' But whence this interest in the prisoner Matteo, Concetta;
surely he deserves the punishment which has fallen upon
him ?'
For a moment Concetta was silent; then taking the hand
of her lover, she said: ' But for this man's faithful service,
Eudolph, we had never met on earth again.' She then gave
him the particulars of her deliverance from the Cave
of Polypheme, of Ercole's baseness, and of Matteo's
unwavering fidelity, till he had placed her under Eudolph's
own protection. Eudolph shuddered as he listened; but
thanking God fervently for her marvellous escape, he
began to soothe and calm the agitated girl by his assur¬
ance of leaving no efforts untried to secure the pardon
of both these men. She now consented to his entreaty that
she would rest, and he soon had the happiness of seeing her
sink into a profound slumber, in which her sweet countenance
resumed its usual placid expression. As soon as Eudolph
had made arrangements for her comfort, he again ascended
to the deck, and as he paced up and down the ship's length,
his thoughts turned anxiously on the best course to be
pursued with regard to his promise to Concetta. Livia was
placed with Claudia and Maddalena, with strict orders for the
kind treatment of all the three. He had also so far consulted
the wishes of Concetta as to leave Tilippo and Matteo
unshackled in their berths; but much as he now grieved for
Paolo, he dared not relax the severe confinement ordered for
this prisoner. Since listening to Concetta's story, he coxild
not but acknowledge that the Count Torcelli had deserved the
retribution, even though the means used by Tilippo and his
comrades were unjustifiable. When he thought of Concetta's
sufferings and her terror in the Cavern of Polypheme, he
upbraided himself for allowing any thoughts of mercy to
mingle with his sterner feelings towards the authors of these
sufferings; and yet Concetta herself had so awakened his
interest in Matteo's fate, that he resolved therefore to do his
utmost for the man's release, besides undertaking the onerous
TJic Beggar of Capo di Monte : a Tale of Sixty-one.    83
task of pleading for Paolo's life.    He would at least acquaint
the Count Torcelli with the actual relation existing between
the young man and himself.    Filippo had known nothing of
Paolo's being on board with himself until informed of it by
Matteo, and fearing to excite the clamorous distress of the
women, they studiously avoided mentioning the fact.    Livia's
exhausted condition seemed to presage a speedy end to her
sufferings.    Filippo appeared strangely apathetic about his
own destiny, and scarcely cared to inquire whether it were
possible  they might  find a friend in Count   Rudolph, for
Matteo had revealed his name.    His interest in the Kevolu-
tion had received a check; for with his keen intelligence he
foresaw that the new rule in Italy was likely to be per¬
manent.    It seemed as if his one object in life had been the
avenging Livia on her betrayer; and having accomplished
that, he was content, if need be, to forsake his brigand life
and dwell in seclusion with  his faithful Claudia.    As to
Concetta, her gentle care of his poor sister had won his
heart.    He expressed no bitterness at her returning to her
father; perhaps his own sufferings and long suspense con¬
cerning Paolo had taught him to feel for others.    He spoke
little, and Matteo began to fear his wound was of a more
dangerous nature than he had as yet admitted.    A few hours
at most would decide their fate; for the favouring breeze
bore them rapidly towards Naples, and before sunset on the
following day the vessel was anchored in the Bay.    Leaning
on Rudolph's arm, Concetta eagerly watched for the first
glimpse of the beautiful city.    Well did she remember the
evening when the Beggar of Capo di Monte first crossed her
path, just at this hour, under a sky as serene as this, forging
the first link of that  mysterious  chain of suffering   and
suspense which for long months had separated ber from all
she loved.    What an age of terror and doubt i!t had been
to her, and what a world of treachery and cruelty had it
disclosed!     Rudolph felt her tremble as she clung to his
arm, and looked anxiously in her eyes to discover the mean¬
ing of this sudden tremor.    She did not tell him of what
was passing in her mind, but begged that she might speak
to JVIatteo before leaving the vessel.    She could not bear him
to think her ungrateful and unmindful of his services; and
when at her request Rudolph sent for him to the cabin, she
was shocked to see his haggard face and shrunken figure, for
now that the excitement had passed, a terrible weakness had
ensued, and it was with difficulty the poor man dragged his
weary limbs  down  the  cabin  stairs.    His  face,  however.
84 The Ladies' Edinbui-gJi Magazine.
lighted up with some of its wonted fire when Concetta
assured him of the interest felt for him by Count Ifudolph
and herself, and of their earnest efforts to obtain his release.
The interview was brief, as the guard of soldiers was waiting
to convey him and the other prisoners to their place of
confinement.
After some consideration, it was agreed between the
lovers that Concetta should seek the house of her friend,
Signer Ciprani, and send for Carlotta to join her there, until
her father could be gently prepared for the meeting. His
weakened state of health rendered such precautions but too
necessary, and Eudolph's military duty required his superin¬
tendence of the prisoners.
A boat was soon in readiness, and in another quarter of
an hour Concetta found herself on the well-known route to
Pausilippo, safe under the protection of her devoted liudolph.
What words can express her thankfulness at this unexpected
restoration to her home and friends ! Fortunately for their
proposed plan, Signer Ciprani was at home, and when
Rudolph entered the apartment where he sat with his wife
over their evening meal, they started and exclaimed in
astonishment at beholding him accompanied, as they sup¬
posed, by a sister of charity. For Madame Ciprani, however,
no second glance was needed. With feminine quickness she
divined the truth, and Avith a cry of joy she flung her arms
round her long-lost friend. To Ciprani's thousand eager
questions, Eudolph could only give brief replies ; duty, he
said, required that he should at once return to the vessel, to
ensure the safety of his prisoners. As soon as they were
properly disposed of, he would rejoin his friends at the Casa
Torcelli. Leaving them with this promise, he hastened back
to the ship, and it was well he did so with little delay; for a
rumour having somehow spread, that on board the little
vessel lay in chains the buccaneer Filippo with his gang, an
angry and excited crowd was already gathering to witness
the disembarkation, vociferating threats of vengeance on the
men so hated and feared.
On Eudolph's departure, Madame Ciprani innnediately
proposed a change of Concetta's dress, for which purpose she
placed her own wardrobe at her young friend's disposal.
This done, and refreshment supplied to her, she was ready
to accompany Signer Ciprani to the Casa Torcelli, for he
judged it expedient to have her close at hand before making
known the fact of her arrival to the poor heart-broken old
man.    During their rapid drive to Capo di JVIonte, what a
TJie Beggar of Capo di Monte : a Tale of Sixty-one.   85
flood of recollections came over Concetta! Her heart beat
almost to suffocation on reaching her father's gates, and Ciprani
was obliged to carry her almost fainting from the carriage
into the hall. The servant, who looked with astonishment
at the veiled figure, was told to summon the Signora Caiiotta
to a lady who wished to speak to her, and in a few moments
the two friends were locked in each other's arms. Long and
tenderly did the bewildered Caiiotta hang over and gaze upon
the beloved friend, whom she had almost despaired of ever
seeing again, Cipraui meanwhile availing himself of the
opportunity to seek the Count, and prepare him to expect
some tidings of his long-lost daughter. After a quarter of
an hour's anxious expectation, during which time Ciprani
was gradually leading to the subject, a cry of ' Concetta, my
child, my child'' burst upon her eagerly listening ear, and
scarce knowing how, she found herself clasped in her father's
convulsive embrace. We will not attempt to describe the
scene which followed. Many minutes passed before tliey
could speak, but again and again the Count raised her from
his Ijreast, putting back the golden hair that had escaped
from its fastenings, to gaze into the sweet face once more.
Happily the effects of joy are not so overwhelming as those
of grief, and before long the father was sufficiently recovered
to sit holding his child's hand, while with Carlotta on her
other side she gave such particulars of her escape as she
could venture upon without unduly agitating him. Eudolph
also, who joined them in a few hours, received his full share
of Count Torcelli's gratitude. For that brief hour Concetta
tried to banish her secret terror as to the fate of Paolo and
his fellow-prisoners; a strange reluctance to enter upon tlie
subject with her father seemed to weigh upon her.
With the morning light came the conviction that the
effort to save them must be made this day, or it might be
too late. Count Torcelli seemed as if new life had been
granted to him in the restoration of his daughter. With an
energy as amazing to himself as to his household, he not only
joined them at an early breakfast, but spoke of an official
appointment before noon, though for weeks past he had been
unfit for public business, or any mental occupation, except
through his secretary. As he gave the order for his carriage,
Concetta signed to her friend to leave them alone. Clasping
her father's hand, she prayed him to defer hi.'=t departure till
she had spoken to him. On the success of her petition, she
said, hung the liberty of the man who had saved her from
hopeless exile from her home.
86 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
' Dear father,' she continued, ' you remember Matteo,
that strange beggar who at Capo di Monte risked his life to
save ours from peril ? You will not forget his past services,
his present sufferings ? You will use your powerful interces¬
sion in the trial now hanging over this man ?'
' Child! you would have me forget that this wretched
beggar was implicated in your capture ?' said Torcelli, with
a return of his former sternness.
' Nay, father, never had you held me in your arms again
but for Matteo. His part in the outrage was but a seeming
one, and saved me from worse endurance. Had we but time
I could explain this—be assured you will never regret
clemency or favour shown to him.    For my sake promise' . . .
Her voice broke, but she clung with such agonized looks
to his arm, that as he heard the sobbing breath, and marked
how agitation seemed to convulse her slender frame, he
hastily promised all she wished, and turned to go, but Concetta
clung closer, saying:
' For another, too, I plead, a child of your own, my dear
father.' Supposing her to mean Eudolph, he looked fondly
in her face, saying:
' Yes, dearest, fear nothing there; Rudolph has done a good
son's part, and a son's place in my affection is his due reward.
Calm yourself, Concetta, your request was granted before it
was made.'
' Not for Rudolph, father, not for him—mercy, mercy for
another, for' . . .
Paolo's life hung upon the next word, and the poor girl
could not bring her lips to frame it.
In real alarm at her condition, the Count promised every¬
thing she could desire, only imploring her to trust him and
say quietly what was her wish.
Drawing his head down till their faces met, she gasped:
'Paolo, the son of Livia, lies in the common prison. I
would save my father's son from an ignominious death.'
The Count was thunderstruck. Utterly unprepared for
such intelligence, he was overwhelmed in his turn, and it
was Concetta's part to soothe him. Placing him on a couch,
and kneeling at his side, she dreaded lest she had been too
abrupt in her communication. His face was hidden, and
when at last he raised it, she was shocked by his haggard
looks. Never before had Concetta seen tears on her father's
face; but after a struggle he regained composure, and drew
from her much of the sad story of her meeting with Paolo
and his mother, and the details of his capture.    Her generous
TJie Beggar of Capo di Monte : a Tale of Sixty-one.    8/
spirit made her dwell slightly on her own wrongs, nay, she
expressed thankfulness that they had brought about the
opportunity for her father's mediation in behalf of these
captives, as now at least he could make some reparation to
the deeply-wronged and suffering woman, by exerting him¬
self to the utmost to save her son.
These were moments of bitter humiliation to the proud
Torcelli, but there was, in spite of all his faults, a generous
nature beneath a cold exterior. As this better spirit
prevailed, he could even acknowledge that Matteo's liberation
would be a simple act of justice; while even Filippo's
lawless conduct, shown in the abduction of Concetta, might
well be excused by Concetta's father, when he recollected
his own base and unjustifiable betrayal of Filippo's dearly-
loved sister. It would, he felt, be only a tardy and
inadequate act of reparation, to put forth his whole powers
of influence in procuring a mitigation of their sentence. At
that moment Eudolph entered the room, and putting a
strong constraint upon his emotion, the old Count begged
him to come at once to the Hall where the trial would take
place. A hasty embrace, a whispered promise, and he left
Concetta, and, with Eudolph's support, entered the carriage.
Little was said during their drive to the city. Eudolph
spoke a few words on the difficulties of pleading for the
prisoners, but the old Count was scarcely able to reply, and
both were relieved to see Signer Ciprani waiting for tliem
as they alighted at the Hall. Although Torcelli had nerved
himself to endurance, he could scarcely raise his eyes to
meet the dreaded glance of Filippo. AVeakened by his
sufferings of mind and body, the undaunted spirit of this
prisoner showed itself in a bearing as haughty as that of
Torcelli himself In consideration of his wounds, he was
permitted to recline upon a rude couch, and the attitude
served to display more fully the powerful and athletic figure.
With stoical indifference to the general gaze, his eye glanced
over the various groups, and fixed itself on Torcelli, to whom
it was torture. Matteo stood unfettered by Filippo's couch,
and again at sight of him a flush of anger crimsoned the
Count's haggard cheek, as he recalled this man's share in
Concetta's capture and sufferings. But a yet worse spectacle
was in store for him, as beyond the others he now perceived
a third prisoner, bent imder the weight of heavy irons, worn
with pain and hardship, whose large dark eyes meeting his,
seemed to reproach him for the wrongs of a lifetime. There
was no mistaking the face and features of Paolo, Livia's
S8 T/ie L allies'' Edinburgh Magazine.
unhappy son ; and Torcelli, beholding him, felt that in his
own humiliation and wretchedness she was justly avenged.
He sank upon a seat, regardless of the notice which his
agitation might attract from the bystanders, most of whom,
however, merely supposed that the poor old father was
overcome by the sight of the outlaws from whose power the
Signorina had so recently been rescued. Great was the
astonishment, tlierefore, when Count Eudolph, on obtaining
permission to speak, urged Count Torcelli's entreaties as
well as his own, that, as the reward of service rendered to
the government—service, he said, which had called forth
repeated acknowledgments from their noble General Gari¬
baldi—Filippo and his whole family should be released.
With the quick impulse of an Italian audience, the crowd
broke into cries of ' Viva Garibaldi! evviva il Conte Rudolfo
Batthyani!' and for some minutes a further appeal Avas
impossible. Order being restored, Paidolph proceeded to
say that these men being Hungarians, they were scarcely
amenable in the same degree to the laws broken by them as
if they had been subjects of the King of Italy; that, like
many others, they had been misled by the promises of
interested parties. Had their enterprise succeeded, they
would have been richly rewarded; as it was, they had
been shamefully deserted by their own partisans, and left,
when the chances of war turned against them, to bear the
whole consequences of defeat without any acknowledgment
of their services. He himself would undertake to send these
his countrymen back to their native land, with a promise
that they would never again bear arms against the established
government.
Murmurs of mingled impatience and applause ran through
the Hall, and a consultation was seen to take place among
the authorities, after which the jailors were ordered to undo
Paolo's fetters, and the prisoners were declared to be free
upon the conditions stated. Again Eudolph asked permis¬
sion to speak, and this time it was to urge, in a voice which
betrayed considerable emotion, an additional plea for Matteo.
All were aware, he said, of the domestic trial which had so
crushed the noble Count Torcelli. That he had received his
lost daughter back in perfect safety was, under Providence,
solely owing to the generous courage of this man. Though
bound by ties of blood and friendship to Pilippo, he had not
Isaken an actual part in the acts for which the brigands had
suffered, and therefore the imconditional pardon of the
prisoner Matteo, in recognition of his services to the Signorina
The Beggar of Capo di Monte : a Tale of Sixty-one.    89
Torcelli, would be regarded as a personal favour by her
father.
This request met with a ready response; and as the words,
' free and unconditional pardon,' struck on the captive's ears,
Matteo started, and seemed scarcely to realize their import,
while Filippo's face glowed with pleasure, and raising his
hands, he invoked blessings on Rudolph's head, as he slowly
raised himself and prepared to leave the Hall with his
comrades. A guard was placed over them for fear of insult
or molestation from the crowd, who, beyond the precincts of
the court, had awaited the execution of a capital sentence.
Torcelli, who had for some time kept his face buried in
his hands, now looked up, and begged Eudolph to see to the
comfort and welfare of these poor men. He should, he
declared, make suitable provision both for their journey and
their future comfortable maintenance, and Signer Ciprani
offered his services for the present arrangements; so that,
wearied and agitated, yet with a thankful and chastened
spirit, Torcelli could return home and gladden Concetta with
the news of his success.
Before the evening closed, Claudia and Maddalena had
been surrounded with every comfort, Concetta delighting to
repay the kindness shown by the former to herself; while
the poor sorrowing girl scarcely dared to look up at the
(jran Sifpiora, whom she had treated as her servant. As to
Livia and Paolo, they thanked Concetta as the author of all
their present happiness, and showered forth blessings and
good wishes upon her.
Little remains to be told. Not long after these events
Count Torcelli gave up his official appointment, and returned
to his estate in Lombardy. With him went Eudolph, till
the arrangements were completed for his union with Con¬
cetta ; and Carlotta, who had proved herself so valuable a
friend in the time of their distress, yielded to the pressing
entreaties of her friends, and made her home with them.
Eudolph gave up his commission, having no further interest
in continuing his service in Italy, and every consideration
attracted him to his own country and estates.
Before leaving Naples, Concetta, completely restored k)
health and spirits, and happy in Eudolph's presence and her
father's sanction of their love, delighted in revisiting the
various scenes associated with her past experiences. It was
on one of these expeditions, as their carriage rolled slowly
down the Capo di Monte, that Carlotta laughingly reminded
her of Matteo's audacity in demanding her betrothal ring as
90 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
the rew'ard of his services, and as she proceeded to narrate
their accident to Eudolph, and to comment playfully on
Matteo's conduct:
'Nay, jest not at him, Carlotta,' said the blushing girl.
Placing her hand in Eudolph's, she continued in a soft,
sweet voice :
' Never let us forget that we owe my safety, and all our
present happiness, to the generous devotion of the faithful
Beggar of Capo di Monte I'
Concluded.
I KNOW a garden \vhere the soft green lawn
Lured me to linger in the early dawn;
The flowers, freshened by the drops of dew,
Greeted my eyes with every varied hue.
Onwards I wandered under flickerino- shade
Of oak and beech, a wistful, dreaming maid.
And now a poet's verse I called to mind.
Or strove, in mighty tliinkers' prose, to find
Some problem solved; for oft, to those who think.
Old puzzles with new faces bid them shrink
Trom rashly grappling with tlie world of thought
Or human life, ere they have humbly sought
The great old teachers, Plato, Paul, and Him
Whose life was more than words, for they are dim. I
His deeds are lamps, that brighter, further shine, |
That men may see, and seeing, hail Divine. |
But oft, when weary of each sect and school, |
I wandered down to where a sheltered pool, I
Par from trim beds and planted alleys lay; I
Here nature ruled, and wildered was the way. |
The fresh air off the rippKng waters blew, |
And thoughts in feeKngs merged, and cares withdrew, |
While the loved scene engraved itself in me, |
Which now, though years have passed, I plainly see.— j
I see the lilies, each a iairy bed, |
Yellow and white, with smooth green leaves outspread. \
The gleaming drake sails on w4th shining track, !
And sunbeams linger on his glossy back; :
I see the shy coot gliding near the bank, j
Where the tall rushes in their serried rank !
Peel the cool wind above, the waves below, I
And shelter tender broods with whispers low. I
Debate of January \Z%o. 91
Here the bright heads of purple loose-strife peer
Out of the tangled growth around the mere,
And the rich scent of drooping meadow-sweet
Like incense rises the new day to greet.
Upon this bank I rest; my eyes and heart
Are filled with all the beauty, which is part
Of Beauty higher, born of perfect Good.—
I rose, as one who in that Presence stood.—
Had a new sun, with mighty power endowed,
Shone on my soul ?    My humbled spirit bowed
To Love revealed anew; for the pure liglit
Broke through the film, and I received sight.
Have I not since oft striven to unwind
Some tangled problem of this life, and find
That love of nature leads to love of God,
And love divine is like the magic rod
That points to hidden treasures ?    Men of old
Followed its guiding till they found the gold.
B. L. T.
©cbate of Sanuarg 1880,
[To meet the wishes of a large number of our readers, we have
agreed to give a short abstract of the monthly Debates held by the
members of the Ladies' Edinburgh Literary Society.]
Debate held on January 3d: Has criticism, on the whole, been
beneficial to literary excellence ?
ABSTRACT OF THE AFFIRMATIVE.
The debater began by stating that the absence of great works of
genius in this age must not be attributed to the critical system which
prevails, and that that system is the necessary outcome of the literary
conditions of the time in which we live. It was further stated that
criticism was neither necessary nor attainable in the earlier stages of
the literature of any nation, but that it immediately followed any
important development; and the progress of criticism in our own
country was sketched down to the beginning of the present century,
when the great critical reviews were started. Criticism was stated
to have two great objects to fulfil, viz. to interpret and explain the
past, and to exercise a restraining influence on contemporary litera¬
ture. Both of these were shown to be important and beneficial to
literature : the former indirectly, by keeping up the remembrance of
the greatest authors of this and other countries, and directing the
attention of writers and readers to the best models of literary excel¬
lence ; the latter immediately and directly, by subjecting all publica¬
tions to a severe and searching test. The influence of the popular
criticism of our weekly papers on works of fiction and other ephemeral
productions, was pointed out, and the more iirofound and lasting
criticism embodied in our larger reviews was referred to. The
debater went on to state that authors, in abusing criticism, were too
apt to consider it simply as a system of fault-finding, but that the true
92 Tlic Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
^ "- ■"■' "-^'
critic looks upon censure and reproof merely as the unavoidable
counterparts in his great task of expounding what is really excellent
in Art. The advantages of criticism, as a test of literary merit, were
compared with the evils resulting from such a system as that of patron¬
age. In conclusion, it was stated that autliors have often found a fresh
stimulus to exertion in a severe and harsh criticism ; and that, while
such criticism might have the desirable effect of utterly crushing a
worthless or foolish book, nothing that was really excellent and
worthy to live could ultimately be harmed by it. Nemophila.
ABSTRACT OF THE NEGATIVE.
While freely admitting that there is a possible and ideal criticism
to which literature would gladly bow as at once its wisest censor and
its truest friend, it is contended that it only needs to be considered
what a rare union of qualities such a criticism demands in order to
show that it can never be other than the rarest of exotics in such a
world as ours. What absolute honesty of purpose and clearness of
eye—what unwavering steadiness in the hand that is to hold the
delicate balance of praise and blame—what breadth and keenness of
insight to grasj) the whole, undistracted by the parts, and catch the
lirst glimmer of the flame of genius, though it may burn among clouds
of smoke and struggle into life under heaps of blackened coal—what
quickness to detect imiDosture or mistake, and fearlessness to unmask
it in the face of day—all crowned by the warm, generous, noble
heart that beats back as by an irresistible impulse to all that is
generous and noble and great in human thought or feeling! Merely
stating the requirements of true criticism, is enough to show any one
who knows anything of actual criticism into what depths of condem¬
nation it must be sunk. Two or three pages of a book, which has
cost the writer years of thought and pains, glanced hastily over—a
false quantity pounced on perhaps, or an awkwardly turned phrase,
and hung up to public amusement in to-morrow's paper, with a few
smart, flippant remarks meant to show what a clever fellow the critic
is ! But is it not true that, on the whole, authors and books are not
overlooked who deserve a better fate ? Certainly it is true ; but it is
seldom thanks to the critics that it is so; and that it is so often in
spite of them, is a conclusive proof that the common sense and
literary judgment of the community is in itself not a sufficient or
satisfying criterion indeed, yet, on the whole, a far more honest and
reliable standard of literary excellence. And there is another view
in which, in a far sadder sense, professional criticism has had a
most painfully injurious effect on literature. The case of John
Keats and the Qiiurterly is an outstanding instance of an all too fre¬
quent fact. Here we have one whose works live to tell the sad tale,
after the sensitive, quivering poet-heart was broken, whose flame of
genius still shines to light the world, though the trembling, vital
spark that lit it went out in despair and death. If it was so with
Keats, how many an unnoticed spark that might have brightened
into radiant flame may not the clutch of the same cruel hand have
crushed out ? how many a tender shoot that would have bloomed into
beauty and grace may not the cutting, icy breath of unappreciative,
remorseless criticism have withered, and even where it did not kill
the body, have driren back the tender buds that fain had blossomed,
and left instead a stunted, blighted life, flowerless and fruitless for
the good of mankind ? Jeanie Mori.son.
Our Library Table. 93
At the close of the discussion the voting resulted in a majority
for the Affirmative.
©ur 3Librarg ^a&lf.
Young Heads on Old Shoulders.    By Ascott R. Hope.    Sunday
School Union, 5G Old Bailey, London.
Under this title, the prolific pen of Mr. Ascott Hope has given us
some half-dozen tales for boys, which by their interest and sparkling
humour may well afford diversion to older readers also. Mr. Hope
can give a little moral advice as well as amusement to his young
friends, and this in so kindly a spirit that we think it will not be
unacceptable to those for whom it is intended. In the story of ' The
Penitents ' (one of the most interesting and amusing in the book), he
has warned them against the misery caused to themselves and to
others by thoughtless mischief. In the ' Injured Innocent' he has
given us a very happy definition of the word hoy in the following
terms :—'A boy may be considered as a male human creature during
that second octavo of life in which he is least under the influence of
the other sex. When a child is free from the power of the nursery
maid, and can no longer be constrained to put on a clean pinafore, he
becomes a boy ; and he is ceasing to be one as soon as he voluntarily
wears his best clothes to gain favour in female eyes.' The very
pretty binding and numerous illustrations will contribute to the
popularity of this little book among the young folks, for whose
profit and pleasure it is mainly designed.
The Greatest Heiress in England.    By Mrs. Oliphant.
London : Hurst & Blackett.    1880.
We invariably expect, on taking up a novel with this authoress' name
prefixed to it, to be amused and interested in no ordinary degree.
Nor are we wholly disappointed on the present occasion, although
we cannot consider this book equal to the inimitable Carlingford
series, or to the still prettier Scottish novels from the same hand.
The story is kept strictly in that region of middle-class English life
which Mrs. Oliphant depicts so well ; and the poor little heroine,
encumbered with wealth which brings her little or no real enjoyment,
and, as it appears to her sorely perplexed heart, no real friends,
is a very pathetic figure. Only a writer of Mrs. Oliphant's calibre
wovild have hazarded making her so unattractive and unropulsive, or
would have succeeded in keeping up this quality of incoiispicnousjwss—
if we may so term it—to the very last. Even when we have come
thoroughly to like poor Lucy Trevor, we can only do so for her
simple goodness' sake, and feel that if a Mrofi de roman of higher
stamp than Sir Thomas Randolph had come in her way, she would
have failed to appreciate him ; whereas this kind and unromantic
middle-aged lover will supply that which has caused her much sorrow¬
ing heart-hunger in the midst of a large circle of tsoi-ditmnt friends.
It is impo.ssible in our narrow limits to give anything like an
outline of the story, which depends mostly on clever description and
delicately-touched portraiture of character. The book gave us an
intense sense of the vulgarity of mere money, divorced from all
association with beautiful, high, or ennobling ideas. Lucy Trevor
is a sweet, good little girl, and we feel ourselves doing exactly as we
might have done to such a 'Lucy' in real life—i.e., beginning our
94 'J-1^^ Ladies EdinburgJi Magazine.
acquaintance by thinking her very dull and commonplace, and
growing to like her better each day as we discovered her genuine
honesty, simplicity, and unselfishness. She tries to lighten the
burden of wealth by making her mischievous little half-brother happy
in childhood; Jock, boy-like, being seldom outwardly civil, or
grateful for his indulgences. We recollect once asking a child of
four years old, ' What would you do if you had plenty of money ?'
' Give some to everybody,' was the reply. As unsophisticated as our
four-year-old friend, Lucy, at eighteen, sets out to do good by giving
some to everybody who seems to want it; and learns, by a series of
cruel shocks, from those she would benefit : ' They all despised her,
or what was worse, thought of her money, shutting their hearts
against herself ; and she was so willing—so anxious that they should
have her money, so little desirous to get any credit from it' (vol. iii.,
p. 235).
The whole book is a clever satire on the debasing and vulgarizing
eflFects of the love of money upon characters of every type and
stamp. One after another shows his or her worst traits of character
on coming into contact with Lucy's money-bags, and we follow with
considerable amusement the defeat of the friends of the Rushton,
Stone, Russell, and Phil Rainy class, till we are left alone with the
poor, tormented little girl after her battle-royal with Mrs. Rushton,
sobbing with her faithful little Jock in her arms, each going without
dinner for the other's sake. Jock has forfeited his for his loyal
defence of Lucy, and she goes without hers for sympathy ; so that it
is quite refreshing to have the famishing garrison relieved by Sir
Tom's opportune appearance. A few hours later, when his proposal
is duly laid before one of Lucy's six guardians, we feel inclined to
get up, like Jock, from the rug under the table, and say, ' Sir Tom
was always the one I wanted.'
If not one of Mrs. Oliphant's very best, this is greatly above the
ordinary run of novels, and will repay the reader.
(I^uestion Series-
I. Ilistory.—Give a short sketch of the war of the Spanish Succes¬
sion.    Answer not to exceed three hundred words.
II. Logic.—People reason without a knowledge of Logic; why
then should Logic be studied ? Answer not to exceed three hundred
words.
Answers to reach Qu. C, care of Messrs. Morrison and Gibb, 11
Queen Street, Edinburgh, not later than March 5th. The best
answer in each subject will be inserted in the next number of our
Magazine, and four prizes are offered for competition during the cur¬
rent year. It is requested that pseudonyms may be used, not initials.
Answers only to be written on one side of the sheet.
ANSWERS TO DECEMBER SERIES.
It has been diflicult to adjudge the order of their merit.    Not one,
we think, has entirely caught the poet's idea.    Akialpik is the best,
and after her come Stella, Thorough, Eeomart, F. H. C.    This
last (a new competitor) exceeded her limits by two hundred words,
Question Scries. 95
or her paper would have ranked first. She has the merit of originality,
as she makes Mariana a sister yearning for the return of a brother
falsely accused of a crime. Eeomakt's story is much better written
than Stella's or Thorough's ; but she informs us ' it is true.' That
may be, but it in no way resembles that of Tennyson's ' Mariana'
either North or South. Stella and Thorough adhere closely to the
poem, but instead of ' writing up ' to it, they repeat the description
in not very forcible prose.
Write a story to Tennyson's ' Mariana,' either North or South as
you prefer.
' Surely there never was so dreary a place !' sighed a girl of about
four-and-twenty, whose listless movements and dissatisfied though
pretty face was a strong contrast to that of her companion, who
answered briskly :
' You could not have said that last evening ; the sunset from here
—looking across the flats—must have been glorious.'
'I did not notice,' was the reply. ' When I looked out, the bats
were flitting past and the wind moaning ; the poplar shadow was
flickering across the curtain when I went to bed, and the moon was
glinting on that eerie water,—it always makes me shudder! '
' Ah! you don't know what fun we have had in old days skating
on that water. We used to call this the Moated Grange, and plan
how it would look when it was inhabited and surrounded with flowers
creeping up to the thatch;' and the speaker smiled, though her heart
was sore at the recollection of the merry band of friends and brothers
long ago dispersed, among them one whose soldier-death had ren¬
dered her future solitary.
' Must you go ?' said Marian as her cousin rose. ' If you only
knew how lonely I am, and how wearily the hours go by, you would
not leave me so solitary.'
' I cannot let my mother be longer alone. It is seldom—now she
is ill—that I can get so far, only to-day she sent me for these mosses
from the moat; but do you not talk to Bridget % she has a store of
old legends of the place.'
'Yes, sometimes,' said Marian, 'till I fancy I hear the old foot¬
steps overhead, and see the very pictures looking at me I This
morning strange sounds woke me before daylight, but Bridget says
it was nothing but the creaking of the doors, and the noise of rats
and mice in the wall. Oh, it is a dreary, dreary place !' she repeated.
Six years before, Marian had been wooed and her he£»rt won by
Lewis Angelo; but her father would not allow any engagement to
his only child and heiress till she was of age, and the young engineer
had departed to his work in foreign parts with many assurances of
Ms undying afi'ection, but no tidings had ever reached Marian of him
since. Then came the crash of their fortune, followed by her
father's death, and all that now remained to Marian was this old
grange, which her father had inherited from distant relatives, and
which for years had been uninhabited save by old Bridget.
It was not a lively home for a young girl, and Marian, as she
leant against the window in the autumn evening light, had bitter
thoughts in her heart of her lover and her cousin. ' She does not
care; she does not know what it is to be left alone,' she repeated
to herself, little guessing of the daily anxiety of the life under
straitened circumstances, with the sufiering mother, and of the
grave in the distant battlefield.    ' No one was ever so lonely as I
96 Tlic Ladles Edinburgh Magazine.
am!    I am very dreary—he will not come,'she said,—she wept.    'I
am aweary, aweary, I would that I were dead.'
Did Lewis Angelo ever return ] or did the deserted bird continue
to dash her weary wings against the iron bars of her cage V It is not
for us to say ; we only know during the long and weary years of
waiting Marian missed that spirit of contentment which to ' an
innocent and quiet heart' takes even the ' stone walls' of a ' prison'
for a peaceful ' hermitage.' Akialpin.
These being the last answers of the series, we have now to
announce the prize-holders. Stella ranks first; she has indeed
been a fixed star, shining uninterruptedly since she first appeared.
Thorough comes second ; she, too, well deserves her name, only
having missed one month (June). In point of excellence, too, it has
often been difficult to rank her below Stella. The third prize is
Eromart's, also a persevering competitor. There is a second group
to be noticed, some of whom gave excellent answers for a time ; we
were only sorry they dropped oft" so soon. A Chylde was very pro¬
mising ; but with Heather, Adelphe, Enia, Janeda, and Segna, she
deserted the ranks too soon. The same may be said of Nacol and
of Bretwalda, who disappeared into a ' byepath of history.' Mariana
gave us two answers, and then retired, whether to pine in the North
or South we cannot say. Peasant, one, so pretty we hoped for more.
Pellegrina was brilliant, but she must have gone on a distant pil¬
grimage to the icy North or burning East, for we have quite lost sight
of her. As to our insects, Apls was a credit to her hive. Spider hung
her silver webs, and Mayfly buzzed merrily for a time, but all three
lacked perseverance. As to Lucciola, one flash of her tiny lamp, and
like her namesake she vanished into darkness. To her, and to
several others, we wish a large increase of patience and steadiness,
and express a hope that our competitors will this year feel pleasure
in doing their best, with or without a prize. Our new series is
selected with a view to assisting young students, and the power of
answering questions in torse, well-chosen language, is greatly in¬
creased by such practice as this.
Notices to Corrcsjjonlimts, tit.
Ladies are invited to contribute to this Magazine. All communi¬
cations to be addressed, Editors, Ladies'' Edinburgh Magazine, Messrs.
Morrison & Gibb, 11 Queen Street, Edinburgh.
Papers intended for immediate insertion must be in the hands of
the Editors by the first of the previous month ; attention is requested
to this rule.
We must warn our correspondents that no MSS. can be returned
unless _/«W postage be sent, that letters needing reply must contain a
stamp, and that the Editors can forward no communications left with
them unless stamped. Poems sent in letters will not be returned,
unless a stamp be sent. No anonymous communication either to
the Editors or the Office-bearers of the Literary Society will be
noticed.
The meeting of the Ladies' Edinburgli Literary Society will be
held on Saturdaj', 7th February, atjo Chester Street, at 11 a.m.
Debate—Is law sacred ?
Byezvays of History. 97
BseiHags of f^istorg.
I.—THE LIFE OF HALFRED OTTAESON, SURNAMED
THE TROUBLESOME SKALD.
An old NorlheiTi Biography, translated from the Icelandic.
CHAPTER IV.
Halfeed then put to sea, and his ship came in at Kolbein-
river-mouth (in North Iceland) after the Thing meeting.   He
said to his shipmaster, ' A journey lies before me south over
the desert, to find my father again, and we shall ride twelve
together.'    Now the ship was drawn up on land, and they
rode away, twelve men, and turned west into Langdale.   They
were all in coloured clothes,' and held on towards the moun¬
tain dairy farm of Griss.    Kolfina was there, and several
women with her.    There were several huts, and the farm
stood in Laxdale, between Langdale and Skaga fjord.    Kol-
fina's shepherd told her that twelve men were riding up to
the farm, and all in coloured clothes.     She says, ' They
cannot know their way.'    He answers, ' They ride as if they
knew it, though.'    Now they come to the dairy huts, and
Kolfina greets Halfred kindly, and asks what tidings.    He
says, ' Tidings are but few, and they may be told at full
leisure, for here we shall stay.'    Afterwards Halfred asked
Kolfina how much love there was between her and Griss.
She said all was well.    Halfred said, ' That may be so, but
otherwise it appears to me from the verses that thou hast
made upon Griss.'    She said she had never made any.    He
answered,' I have been here but a little while, yet I have
heard such verses.'    ' Let me hear,' said Kolfina,' what work
is said to be my doing:'
' Sitting here in the stye.
Here with the pig I pine.
Hardly can I abide
The weary, desolate day,
So drear the life I lead—
A swan alone on the water ;
Once a maid so fair,
And formed for the love of a hero.'
' That sort of thing is no reparation,' said Kolfina ; ' and it is
a scandal that a valiant man like you should behave in this
way.'    Halfred said, ' And I have heard besides'— . . .^
' Thus evidently from foreign parts, as dark blue or black was the
nsual Icelandic wear.
2 These songs of insult to Griss are, as far as I have deciphered
them, not worth translating, but they are all in the style of the
No. 63.—March 1880. q
98 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
. . . Kolfina at last became very angry. She said, ' Griss
makes no songs upon you, and it would become you better
not to show yourself so insolent to him, for no one knows
what men can do till they meet.' The shepherd rode off in
the night and told Griss what had happened, and he rode
from home with twenty men. As Halfred sprang on horse¬
back to go, he laughed. Kolfiua asked, ' What are you
laughing about now ?'    He sang this verse:
' I mixer ^ of giants' mead,
I laugh for my heart is light;
Oh wearer of glittering gold.
Oh lover of wave's - daylight,
I love thee ever as old.
And laugh in the hog's despight!'
As they were starting he sang thus :
* Girls of the dairies,
Smooth-faced and rosy,
Marvel not men from ships
Wander your way.
Sweet are the land hills
After wild sea waves,
Sweet angry mistress
And laugh-loving maids.'
Then they all rode away.
Now comes Griss to the dairy, and finds Kolfiua very
melancholy. With him was Einar, the son of Thorir. Griss
wishes to ride after Halfred, but Kolfina said she did not see
how things would be mended by that. Griss all the same
would ride in pursuit; so they went by Audolfstead to
Blanda river. Halfred and his men were fording it. Griss
cast a spear at Halfred, who caught it in the air and flung
it back. Einar fenced it with his axe, and the point turned
on his breast and killed him. Griss taunted Halfred with
running away, and he said he would go no further than out
of the river, and bade them seek him there, but Griss did not
ride through. Then Halfred was advised by the others to
offer Griss some compensation, and he asked what would be
required. Griss answered, ' I shall demand both those rings
(or armlets), the king's gift, and the earl's gift.' Halfred
said, ' Before that must other things happen.' And with that
they parted. Halfred rode to his brother Galti (for his
father was dead), and stayed there the winter.
above, only worse.    It is as if the sight of the old country and his
early love had caused a wild outbreak of Halfred's half-tamed nature;
and his love for the fair, vain woman became turned to a bitter,
mocking jealousy.
1 Poet. " Gold.
Byeways of Hisioiy. 99
A man named Hunrod lived at Moberg, and Griss was his
liegeman. Thorkel Krafla lived now at Hof, as Ingolf his
uncle was dead. This winter Halfred made an insulting
poem on Griss, and Griss, on hearing it, went to Hunrod and
asked his counsel, ' as Halfred hardens in his enmity to me.'
Hunrod said, ' This I desire, that thou shouldst take up a
lawsuit and summon Halfred to Hunavatns Thing.' Griss
did so, riding south in the spring to Hreduvatn, where Galti
and Halfred lived, and summoning Halfred to the Thing for
the slaying of Einar. When he had gone, Galti asked Hal¬
fred what his intentions were with regard to the suit. Halfred
said, ' I wish to seek support from Thorkel, my brother-in-
law.' ^ So they rode from the south in the spring, thirty
men together, and were received as guests at Hof. Halfred
asked Thorkel what support he should receive from him, and
Thorkel promised his assistance if some honourable compen¬
sation were offered.
Now men came to the Thing, and when it was going on,
Halfred and Galti went to Thorkel's booth to consult with
him. He said, ' I shall offer to arrange matters if both of
you will consent to it, and so I shall bring about peace.' Now
they go out of the booth, and Brand Avaldson, brother of
Kolfina, is lying in wait behind the wall; and he struck at
Galti a death-wound as he was walking past. Halfred
turned, and told Thorkel of the slaying. Thorkel ran with
him to the booth of Griss, and bade him deliver up the man
at once, or they would break in. Then Hild, Brand's mother,
ran to the doorway, and asked what Thorkel wanted. He
said his demand. Hild said, 'You must never think of
killing my son after I sheltered you under my cloak, and
saved you from death—after the slaying of Glasdis, when
Thorgil and Thorwald wished to kill you.' Thorkel said,
' All that is past. Let the women go out of the booth, and
we will see to the man.' Brand, however, was disguised
and veiled like a woman, and slipped out with the others,
so they did not find him. Thorkel said that he must have
gone to Hunrod's booth. Halfred said, ' I doubt now having
sufficient support, so I shall challenge Griss to the Holm-
gang.' Griss, when challenged, said he had offered that
before, as indeed he ought to have done.    And so it was
1 He was now married to Vigdis, Olaf's daughter, Halfred's foster-
sister. His nickname krajla, or scratcher, was given because he was
exposed to perish by his father when an infant, and the man who
rescued him found that he had vigorously scratched away the snow
all around him;
loo The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
arranged. Griss had a good sword, that the emperor at
Constantinople had given him. Halfred, as he saw Kolfina
walking in the Thing Meadow, made these verses on her :
' The slender lady seems to me,
When she is all alone,
As swift ship moored in glittering sea
Between two islands lone.
But when in woman crowd she moves,
In gold-embroidered robes, she proves
As summer goddess sweet;
So war-ship light, with graceful lines,
And gilded rudder and rigging, shines
Amid a herring fleet.'
It was the night before the duel, and Halfred slept on his
bed. And it seemed to him that King Olaf came to him,
and he was glad, and j^et afraid. The king said,' Sleep is
upon thee, and yet must thou be as if thou wert awake.
Thou hast an evil purpose to fight with Griss in an unjust
cause, and he has so spoken and also prayed to God that the
one of you two should have the victory who has the right.
Take my counsel, show thyself ready to be reconciled, so
that no fight shall take place, but oft'er a fine of atonement.
And when morning comes, go out up the hillside from the
Thing Meadow to where the paths meet. There thou shalt
see men riding; speak to them, and it may be thou wilt find
that talk more important and weighty than the Holmgang
with Griss, and care not thou though he think thou art
afraid of him.'
He woke, and thought over what had come before him,
and told the man about it who slept near him, who answered,
' Art thou now afraid of the pig ? it would have been better
to have considered that while he was well inclined towards
thee. And now it will appear to thine enemies as if thou
darest not to fight with him.' Halfred answered,' Let that
be as it may. I shall follow the counsel of Olaf the king;
he was wont to give the best.'
Next morning he goes out to the hillside, and sees men
riding towards him in coloured clothes. He asked their
tidings, and they told him of the fall of Olaf Tryggvason.
Halfred seemed as if smitten by a heavy blow from a stone.
He went straight back to the booth in great sorrow, and lay
down on his bed. Then said the men of Griss, that he
showed little manliness. Griss said to them, ' It is not that;
I had less honour from the emperor at Constantinople than
he had from King Olaf, and yet I should have felt the loss
of my chief as the heaviest tidings.    That comes from the
The Glass Painters. 463
painting; at least, I may preserve the knowledge that is on
the verge of being lost.'
The simple-hearted glass manufticturer continued to dilate
upon his hopes and fears concerning the well-doing of his
profession, and asked the abbot's advice as to how to obtain
permission to stxidy documents contained in the libraries of
different religious houses. The abbot promised to write
letters which would obtain Pierre the loan of some valuable
documents, and listened patiently while the young man told
of his projects, his failures and successes.
At last the priest said: ' You frequently make tours in the
provinces, do you not ?'
' Yes; I shall set out on one to-morrow, through part of
Normandy, Picardy, and perhaps Champagne. Will you
entrust me with any mission, father ?'
' Yes, I am going to give you an important one. I wish
you to note the temper of the people, the state of the country,
how much the taxes have really ground the peasants down,
or whether they complain unreasonably, how much the
Huguenot heresy is spreading; and if you come upon any of
their strongholds, inform me of all you observe there. It is
for the interests of the Church I ask you to do this. I
believe you wHl be glad to render her this service.'
Pierre's heart failed him as he listened to the abbot's
words; he would have given much to have avoided the part
assigned to him. The extreme rigour with which the Hugue¬
nots were treated filled him with sadness. He entertained
no thoughts of rebellion against the dictates of his former
superior, and replied: ' My heart is wholly with the Church,
and, father, if you require this at my hands, I implicitly
obey you, but you might find others far more fitted for this
service than I am.'
Perhaps Pierre's voice was tremulous, and somehow re¬
vealed the dread he felt of the task set before him. At all
events there was severity and coldness in the abbot's accents
as he answered: ' It cannot be that I am mistaken in you ?
It cannot be that you are unwilling to render the Church
and King such slight service as this ?'
' No, father, it is not so, but I really believe myself
unfitted for the mission. Father, you are merciful and
liberal; you are aware we do not all think alike. Do not
force me to undertake what may cause me to break with
those I love ;' and Pierre paused, the boldness and incaution
of his own words filling him with dismay.
'You grieve me, my son.   Because a house may be divided
102 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
ascertain with full certainty whether the king had survived
or not.
' Kolbjorn the Marshal had defended the prow during the
day of battle with other forecastle men. He was accoutred
in weapons and clothes exactly in the same way as the
king; and he had so attired himself because he thought if
that should be needed that now was, to afford some shelter
to Olaf the king. And when the slaughter of Olaf s men
became at its worst in the forecastle, he went up to the
poop to the king. It was not easy to know which was
which, because Kolbjorn was one of the tallest and hand¬
somest of men. There was such a hurtling storm of weapons
on the quarter-deck, that the shields of Olaf and Kolbjorn
were fringed with darts. And as the earl's men pressed up
on the quarter-deck, there seemed to them that so bright a
light came over the king that they could not look at it;
and when the light was gone, they saw nowhere Olaf the
king.
' There were many accounts of what had happened.' Snorri
Sturlason says, that when King Olaf saw that most of his
men had fallen, and that Earl Erick and many men
rushed aft upon the quarter-deck, Olaf and Kolbjorn the
Marshal both leapt overboard, each on his own side; and
some of the eaiTs men were lying out in small boats, and
killing those who leaped into the sea. And when the king
himself had leaped overboard, those in the boats wished to
take him prisoner and bring him to the earl, and he drew
his shield over him and dived down. But Kolbjorn the
Marshal drew his shield under him to defend himself from
the spears that were aimed by those in the boats that lay
under the ship, and he fell so into the sea that his shield
got under him, and thus he could not dive before he was
made prisoner.
' What follows is taken from the words of Kolbjorn the
Marshal himself—that when he came up to the poop, and
the king was shooting at Earl Erick, Kolbjorn saw what
other men had seen before, that blood ran from under his
sleeve of mail. And a little after, he thought he saw the
flash of the king as he leaped overboard, in his armour and
all the accoutrements he had worn through the day ; and he
drew over him his shield when his enemies tried to take
him. And just at that moment Kolbjorn looked at his
antagonists, and saw that so many had come up upon the
Serpent that you might say the ship w-as full of them.
^ The compiler, who apparently preferred this account.
Byeways of History. 103
Kolbjorn said afterwards that a little fright came over him
just then. He turned to that side of the ship where Olaf
the king had been before; and as he did not see the king,
he left his shield behind him, and leaped overboard. And
as he came down into the sea, there was under him a
beautiful shield, that he thought he recognised as the shield
the king had borne that day. And as Kolbjorn came on the
shield, he was aware that a man swam skilfully under the
shield; and that man let go the shield when he felt
the weight on it. Next Kolbjorn was taken prisoner, and
dragged up into a boat. They supposed him to be the
king. He was then led before Earl Erick; and when the
earl was aware that it was Kolbjorn, and not the king, he
gave Kolbjorn quarter. And this is the story of Einar
Thambarskelfir, that when Earl Erick charged up from the
forecastle to the poop of the Serpent, Einar saw that
drops of blood ran down King Olaf s cheek from under his
helmet. And as Einar wished to find out how the king
would act when the earl should win up to him, there came
on Einar's ear so heavy a blow from a stone that he fell
senseless. And when he revived and rose up, he saw
nowhere the king.
' Thus says the Icelander Skuli Thorsteinson, Egill's son, of
Borg, that he saw Olaf the king standing on the quarter¬
deck of the Serpent, when he, Skuli, charged aft the ship
with Erick the earl. And he said he stooped down to drag
a man's corpse from before the feet of the earl, and when he
raised himself up, the king had disappeared. And a little
later, when the shout of victory arose, several of the men
who fought against Olaf saw that a man clad in scarlet
swam to the Wendish Cutter, which it was believed
belonged to the men of Astrid, the princess, wife of Earl
Sigvald. And these men in the ship came to meet him,
and dragged him up into the ship, and they rowed away
their hardest. And ever after there was a rumour among
the people that these men had carried off King Olaf alive
with them, though various men spoke against it. On the
whole, Halfred says that to him it seemed more likely that
the king had not escaped with life because of the great odds
against him. . . . Afterwards, when there were rumours of
Olaf being in foreign lands, all doubt disappeared in the
minds of many that he had escaped. But Halfred was
bound to make his record according to what he was told at
the time. As he witnesses himself, and laments that he
was not there to fight on the side of Olaf the king.'
I04 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
So much did the loss of King Olaf giieve him, that he
cared no more for anything, but was restless everywhere.
He wished to go south to Denmark or east to Sweden next;
and in the course of the voyage they lay to in a creek. There
he was informed that Earl Erick was up the country, not
far inland. Then it came into his mind to kill the earl,
though he should be killed himself afterwards; but in the
night he dreamed that King Olaf said to him,' Useless work
thou desirest now to do; compose a poem in honour of the
earl rather than kill him.' Next morning Halfred went up
to the house where the earl was, and entered the room where
the earl sat drinking within. Halfred was well known; he
was therefore taken prisoner, and led up before Erick, who
said that he ought to be slain for the injury he had done to
Thorleif the Wise. He bade that he should be put in irons;
but when the fetters were brought, Halfred seized them,
wrested them from the man who should have put them on,
and gave him such a blow on the head with them that he
was killed. The earl commanded that he should be put to
death at once, lest he should do further mischief. An old
man then rose up from the outer benches, and went before
the earl and begged of him to give him Halfred's life, and
that was Thorleif the Wise.    The earl answered:
' It is most undeserved that you should ask for grace for
him ; have you forgotten how he hurt you ?'
'And yet I will, sir, that Halfred should have grace,'
answered Thorleif; and the earl said it should be as he
wished. Thorleif took Halfred into his following, and asked
Halfred if he would let him adjudge between him and the
earl, and Halfred assented willingly. 'Then shalt thou
make a poem on the earl, and have it ready on the third
night from this.' When the third night was come, Halfred
recited the poem, and these are the first lines:
' 'Tis meet that warrior so renowned
Should hear in song his glory sound.'
The earl rewarded him richly for it, saying, ' Yet I will not
have thee stay with me, for the sake of Olaf Tryggvason.'
Thorleif asked Halfred to stay with him, and they went
to his home together, and Thorleif showed himself the best
of comrades to him.    In summer Halfred sailed to Iceland.'
1 It is needless to give the details of Halfred's travels, as they
introduce various persons whose histories are written elsewhere, and
who are mere names to those who have not read other sagas of the
period. The conclusion is probably added to by a clerical copyist,
anxious, as usual, to give King Olaf credit for supernatural power.
Byeways of History. 105
Halfred was long on his travels, for he never liked any
place again after the fall of King Olaf. His last voyage was
first to Sweden to see after his son and his property there.
He thought he would settle there, as he was now about forty
years of age, but he wished first to go to Iceland to seek his
goods there. His younger son, Halfred, was with him.
They were long at sea with a bad voyage. Halfred took his
turn at the pumps, although he had a bad Ulness. One day,
after leaving the pump, he sat down to rest beneath the
yard-arm, when a heavy sea came on board, and the wave
dashed him down into the ship's waist, and the yard-arm also
over him. They asked him if he was badly hurt. Halfred
answered in this verse :
' Down on my heart and side
Crashes the weather-worn spar ;
Scarce ever so heavy a wave
Has swept o'er a boat before.
Wet am I, wave-washed, and worn,
And shattered at heart and breast,
And the sea is aboard our craft;
And nowhere the Skald can rest.'
He seemed to the others very ill, and they took him aft and
laid him down and tended him, and asked what he thought
about himself.    He said this verse:
' The binder of her wimpled brow
Will shade her lovely eyes, I know,
With white hands soft and tender.
The rain-storm flood will have its way.
When she has heard how dead I lay,
Though once I did ofi'end her.
When overboard the warriors cast
Her Skald, her love,—of all the past
The love she will remember.'
Then they seemed to see a giant form, as of a woman, going
after their ship, clad in armour, and gliding over the waves.
Halfred gazed at it, and said it was his ' Fetch,' and called
out, ' Utterly asunder from you I declare myself.' Then said
the young Halfred,' I will receive you,' and she vanished.
Halfred said, ' To thee, my son, will I give the sword, the
king's gift, and these other gifts shalt thou lay in my coffin
beside me if I die here in the ship.' Then he said this
verse:
Now should I die without a care.
If but my soul were pure and fair.
'Tis true I had a bitter tongue,
And led a wild, fierce life when young;
io6 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
Yet nought am I concerned with more,
Except His mercy to implore,
Who never fails, Who reigns on high.
For each of iis in turn must die.'
A little afterwards he died, and was laid in a coffin, and
his jewels with him,—cloak, helmet, and rings,—and cast
overboard all together. The coffin was cast up in one of the
southern islands (Suderey), and found by the servants of an
abbot. They broke open the chest, and stole the property,
and sunk the body in a bog. The abbot dreamt in the night
that King Olaf came to him in anger, and said ill had his
servants acted: ' They have broken into the ship of my
Skald, and stolen his jewels, and bound a stone to his neck;
now make them tell you the truth, or some strange evil will
befall you.' The servants confessed to the abbot what they
had done, and were pardoned. The body of Halfred was
taken to the church and buried honourably. A chalice was
made of the ring, an altar cloth of the cloak, and altar
candlesticks of the helmet. The other men in the ship
reached Iceland, and the young Halfred set up his dwelling
at Ottarstead. He also was called the Troublesome Skald;
he became a great man and honourable, and many people are
descended from him. And here is the end of the Story of
Halfred. E. J. 0.
Concluded.
Momen anti tfje ^arliamcntaig Jrancijise.
A GOOD deal has been heard during recent years of an agita¬
tion among women for political rights, an agitation which is
often sneered at as being merely a desire on their part to
unsex themselves and to assimilate themselves as much as
possible to men. It seems time to examine candidly whether
there are really any reasonable grounds for this demand for
the suffrage, or whether it is one to be discouraged as much
as possible by all right-thinking women.
During this century many efforts have been made by the
male portion of the community to bring about the wider
distribution of the parliamentaiy franchise, which before 1832
was confined to comparatively a very smaU number. These
efforts met with their first success in the passing of the first
Eeform Bill, which granted it to all those in the towns who
rented houses of £10 a year and extended it in the counties
to all leaseholders and copyholders, and thus gave to the
Women and the Parliamentary Fratichise.        107
people a greater participation in the government than they
liad enjoyed for several centuries. The question after that
slumbered for some years, but gradually a conviction greAv
up that even yet the basis of representation was not wide
enough; and after several abortive reform bills, Mr. Disraeli
finally carried one in 1867, by which every householder in
the boroughs became entitled to vote for members of Parlia¬
ment. Yet again, during the last two or three years, there
has been a further desire to assimilate the borough and
county franchises, thus admitting the agricultural labourer to
a share of political power, and thereby introducing into
politics an exceedingly ignorant and unintelligent element.
This additional reform has not been at present carried out,
but it doubtless will be at no very distant time, and there,
probably, the question will for some time remain, at least as
far as concerns men. But meanwhile, in consequence of the
extension of education and the great development of the
press, a certain amount of political knowledge has become
diffused among all classes; and women have begun to consider
whether it is just that they, by reason of their sex, should be
debarred from a share of political power, and an agitation
has sprung up for the removal of their disabilities,—an agita¬
tion which has not as yet been successful, which could
perhaps hardly be expected to meet with success very soon,
in view of the immense amount of prejudice it naturally has
to contend with.
Up to the time of the Reform Bill of 1832 there was no
legal impediment in the way of a woman's exercising the
suffrage if she chose to do so. Under Henry III. and
Edward I., abbesses as well as abbots were summoned to
appear in Parliament, and Edward III. commanded peeresses
to appear by proxy. By a statute of Henry VI., the knights
of the shire were to be chosen by the people dwelling in the
same who had freeholds to the value of 40s. a year. ' There
are extant,' says Mr. Chisholm Anstey,'' many parliamentary
returns for counties and boroughs from the earliest times
which were made by female electors, and yet were received.
Some of these are enumerated in the Commons' journals
themselves ; others are to be found in the repositories of the
learned or the curious.' There is one case on record of a
lady actually returning two burgesses to Parliament on her
sole responsibility. However, the right was probably but
rarely exercised at any time, and at length fell into complete
^ ISntes on the Representatioii of the People Act, by Thos. Chisholm
Anstey.
lo8 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
disuse. The new qualifications created by the Eeform Bill
of 1832, for the first time definitely restricted the suffrage to
the male sex, and no claim was made on behalf of the
women until 1867. Before the introduction of the Reform
Bill of that year, a committee was formed in London to
endeavour to bring about that its provisions should include
women as well as men. During its passage through
Committee, Mr. John Stuart Mill moved that the word
' person' should be substituted for ' man,' and supported his
amendment by a petition with 13,000 signatures. The
amendment was rejected by 196 votes to 73. Since that
time a bill or a resolution to extend the franchise to -women
has been introduced into Parliament every year, with varying
results, but hitherto with no very near prospect of success.
This year, however, the C?iancellor of the Exchequer, speak¬
ing in defence of his adverse vote, explained that he thought
the women's claim ought only to be considered in conjunction
with a further readjustment of the franchise, and that when
that time should come he was not prepared to say that it
should be refused. There the question rests at present;
and it remains to be seen how it will fare in a new Parlia¬
ment, and whether the Chancellor of the Exchequer will be
as good as his word when the time for action comes.
Meanwhile an agitation is carried on by a party by no
means small or uninfluential, who do not intend to relax
in their efforts until they attain their end. Committees have
been formed in many of the large towns in England and
Ireland, and also in Edinburgh, who endeavour to promote
the removal of women's disabilities by all the means in their
power. It should be clearly understood that the change
they wish to bring about, is merely to enable those women
who possess the same qualifications as male electors to vote
for members of Parliament. There is an idea in many
people's minds, that married women will be enfranchised as
well as widows and spinsters; but under our present electoral
system that will not be the case, except when they own land,
as they will not possess the requisite qualifications. This
change is merely the final step in the enfranchisement of
women; for female ratepayers are in England already in
possession of the minor franchises: they can vote for the
municipal councils, for the school boards, for poor-law
guardians. They appreciate the privileges they already have,
and exercise them fully; why, therefore, are they supposed
to be incapacitated by sex for the exercise of the last and
most important franchise ?
Women and the Parliamentary Franchise.        109
It is the fashion among many people to laugh at this
movement, to turn it into ridicule, and to sneer at its
advocates as strong-minded, unfeminine, etc.; but, as we all
know, ridicule has in some cases done duty for argument,
and so it may be in this instance. Let us, then, candidly
examine whether there are any serious reasons why women
should desire political influence, or whether those who think
that they are travelling out of their sphere in mixing them¬
selves up in such matters, are justified in their opinion.
Here we may ask, what is woman's sphere ? We shall of
course be told that it is the home and the family, and all the
duties pertaining to them. Certainly these should be a
woman's first concern ; but consider for a moment the great
number of women to whom this sphere is wholly or partially
closed by the force of circumstances. Many do not marry,
it being impossible for all to do so in a country where there
is a considerable excess of women over men, and consequently
they have no families depending upon them ; others there are
who are obliged to leave their homes to go out into the world
to earn a maintenance; others possess genius or talent, whicli
entitle them to take part in the world's work, and who make
themselves famous in art or literature ; now and again one is
called upon, like our present sovereign, to preside over the
destinies of an empire, and to exercise immense influence in
the councils of nations; and many make it the business of
their lives to ameliorate the condition of the poor and
miserable. In the face of all this, it is a little difficult to
say what is and what is not woman's sphere ; but we can
hardly be far wrong if we say, wherever she can do good,
there is her sphere.
The question, then, narrows itself down to this—Can
women do any good to themselves or to mankind in general,
by becoming possessed of a share of influence on politics ? or,
on the other hand, will their intrusion into this hitherto
exclusively masculine province be productive of evil in one
way or another ? When we speak of politics, we are a little
prone to think merely of the struggles of party, the overthrow
of ministers, and all the strife and contention in connection
therewith, or of the great questions of international policy,
of the insincerities of diplomacy, and so forth. But a
good deal is comprehended in that word besides all these.
Women are ready at all times to take part in works of use¬
fulness which benefit all those around them, and to alleviate
the lot of those less happy and well off than themselves; and
far be it from us to underrate their services in such ways to
I lo 77^1? Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
their fellow-men. But what are the questions with which
statesmen and politicians have to deal during the greater
part of their time ? What sort of legislation is it that occu¬
pies the House of Commons for the larger part of every
session ? They deal on a large scale with some of the very
subjects that women deal with on a small scale. Parliament
is constantly occupied with schemes of all kinds, good, bad,
and indifferent, for the bettering of the condition of the
people of this country and of those dependent upon it; pro¬
jects, propositions, suggestions pour upon it from all quarters,
which it has to examine, reject, amend, or pass into law. Bills
with regard to the regulation of labour, to the inheritance
and transfer of property, to marriage, or for promoting the
extension of education, for the better regulation of the liquor
traffic, for the provision of suitable dwellings for the poor,
for improved sanitary arrangements, and many other like
matters, are every j'ear introduced into the House of Commons.
Why should it be thought unwomanly for women to wish to
exercise influence on questions such as these ?
Legislation of this kind affects the well-being of the popu¬
lation at large, and must therefore affect women who form
the larger half of it. From time to time, indeed, laws are
passed which affect women only, and which may make
enormous differences for better or worse in their lives.
Surely, therefore, we can hardly be justified in saying that
women have no business to interfere with matters which often
vitally affect their well-being. It would rather seem that
it is their duty not only to become acquainted with them, but
to form careful opinions upon them, and to seek to make their
influence felt with regard to these matters. There is too much
of a disposition among those of us whose lines have fallen
in pleasant places, to think that we are very comfortable
and well taken care of as we are, and we had better leave
well alone, and deliver over our interests to the care of men,
who will look after them as well as we could do ourselves.
But are not those happy and well-satisfied ones a little
tempted to forget that there are others in the world very
differently circumstanced ? Do they remember the very
large number of women who have no one to take care of
them, who have to struggle with a world by no means too
much inclined to give them a fair field, handicapped as they
are by physical weakness, by lack of training, by the customs
of society, and sometimes by the laws of their country ? It
is not perhaps quite as generally known as it ought to be,
that there are something like three millions of women in
Women and the Parliamentary Franchise.        111
Great Britain who earn their own living, many of them,
especially in the middle-class, under great difficulties. A
slight acquaintance with some of the numerous employment
agencies will prove to us how hard the struggle often is, and
with what adverse influences many of them have to contend.
Ought the fortunate ones among us to stand aloof, and refuse
to help our struggling sisters, and insist on leaving their
interests entirely in the hands of men ? In the struggle for
existence, chivalry is forgotten, and the weaker will only too
surely go to the wall. Look for a moment at the laws and
enactments with regard to women, both by Parliament and
other corporate bodies, during the last few years. Take, for
instance, the Married Women's Property Act passed a few
years ago. The abuses arising out of the principle that
husband and wife are one, and that one the husband, were so
numerous and patent to all beliolders, that something had to
be done to remedy them. Tlie House of Commons passed a
rational bill, enabling married women to possess property as
if they were single; in the House of Lords the measure was
so mangled that the Lower House, on its being sent back to
them, only consented to its becoming law because the need
for even so much relief as it granted was so exceedingly
pressing; but the Act is such a confused piece of legislation,
that it is constantly the subject of litigation in the law courts,
where the most extraordinary interpretations are put upon
its clauses. Under it, women may possess what money they
can earn, but not that which they inherit beyond a small
sum, and rich men have still to put into the care of trustees
any money which they wish to give or to leave to their
married daughters. Again, the present state of the law with
regard to the relation of mothers and children is a relic of
barbarism; it comes down from a time when women were
nothing but chattels ; it frequently gives rise to great hard¬
ships, and yet no alteration has been made in it. Yet again,
the law of divorce is not the same for both sexes; it is much
more difficult for a woman to be separated from a bad husband
than a man from a bad wife. In legislation affecting factories
and workshops, there is a tendency to place undue restrictions
on the labour of women, and to place them on the level of
children, and to deprive them of their freedom of contract.
Again, innumerable difficulties have been thrown in the way
of female medical education, which have only been overcome
with very great difficulty. As soon as it was found that
some adventurous young women were desirous of entering
the profession of medicine, the various bodies having power
112 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
to grant diplomas and licences to practise, passed regulations
with the express purpose of excluding them. For a long
time they could not get the necessary education in Great
Britain, and were driven to the more liberal universities on
the continent of Europe; then, after they had obtained
degrees in Paris, Zurich, or elsewhere, further regulations
effectually prevented them from having any legal status in
their own country.
It has long been a recognised maxim with regard to other
extensions of the franchise, that the interests of no unrepre¬
sented class could receive adequate attention. The House
of Commons has always more to do than it can possibly get
through, and any matter not backed up by importunate
voters must of necessity retire into the background. This
was urged repeatedly when it was a question of enfranchising
the working man; it is being urged now on behalf of the
agricultural labourers; it is only when it comes to be applied
to women, that the cogency of the argument is denied.
And yet, if there is any truth in it at all, it must be more
true with regard to women than to men, for women differ
far more from men than men do from each otlier. It must
of necessity, therefore, be very difficult for men to look at
questions from a feminine point of view, and yet it is obvi¬
ously just that all questions which concern women ought
to be so regarded. And these very mental differences would
cause female influence to be very useful in politics in many
ways. For the subjects which are comprehended in that
word stand in need of all the light which can be thrown on
them from any quarter whatever; and, as Mr. Gladstone has
somewhere said, every class of the community can tell the
other classes something which they would not otherwise know.
This is as true of women as of different classes of men.
There are many questions which would distinctly gain by
the advocacy of women, and of which their possession of
power would tend to hasten the settlement,—social and
moral questions which are always pressing for solution. For
instance, what assistance might they not give to the move¬
ment for the better regulation of the liquor traffic? They
are, it is true, slaves as well as men to the drinking customs
of this country, but then their vested interests in them are
not nearly so large. Again, they have always been deeply
interested in the cause of education, and have not only the
power to vote for the school boards, but also to be elected as
members of them; they have been foremost in all private
movements, for the provision of better dwellings for the poor,
Women and the Parliamentary Franchise.        113
and for the diffusion of sanitary knowledge ; therefore legis¬
lation on such subjects would receive their most earnest
attention.    Numbers of women and girls are employed iu
factories under Government supervision.   Any change in the
labour laws affects them closely; and yet at present there is
no way in wliich they can make their wishes and opinions
known with regard to legislation so nearly concerning them.
And even in the department of what we may call the
higher politics,—that department to which belong our rela¬
tions with other countries, and all questions involving peace
and war,—women have also their point of view to present for
consideration.    It is often said that, as we cannot fight, we
have no right to have any voice in these matters; but is the
actual fighting all that we have to think of in connection
with war ?    Women cannot fight, it is true, but that does
not prevent their being called upon to make heavy sacrifices
whenever,. unhajjpUy, their country is involved in war.   Their
sex does not prevent them from having to pay the increased
taxation which is its inevitable accompaniment; in coun¬
tries where military service is compulsory, they must be the
bread-winners of their families during the absence of hus¬
bands and brothers; in case of invasion, their houses are
burned and their crops destroyed, and they in many cases
go through much hardship to   attend upon the sick and
wounded.    We may truly say, that if men get all the glory
of war, women take their share, perhaps an equal share, of
suffering.    As a natural consequence, they are less likely to
be blinded by the desire of military glory, and would there¬
fore have the cooler heads in times of discord and commo¬
tion ; there is, in fact, every reason to hope, that when they
become possessed of a share of political power, they will be
a heavy weight in the scale of peace, and so tend to hasten
the day, apparently yet so far distant, when there shall be
no more war.
This demand is sometimes objected to, because it is sup¬
posed that it would be only the thin end of the wedge, that
the possession of a right to vote would of necessity involve
the right to be elected as representatives to Parliament. There
are two or three answers to this argument. First, it has
never been an axiom in our political system, that the fran¬
chise conferred the right to be elected ; there is even now a
body of men, the clergy, who are entitled to vote, and who
are supposed to exercise a good deal of political influence,
but who yet are disqualified from sitting in the House of
Commons. If there are good reasons why women should not
No. 63.— March 1880. H
114 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
be members of Parliament, does not that fact make it all
the more necessary that their interests should be directly
represented there, and that they who cannot legislate for
themselves should be able to say who shall legislate for
them ? Moreover, it is rather apt to be overlooked that
imder present circumstances no woman could possibly be
elected as member of Parliament, unless a large number of
men were to combine together to send her there; for the
number of women to be enfranchised is so small in any in¬
dividual place, that under no conceivable system of voting
could they hope to return a member of their own sex. Of
course it is possible that the basis of representation will not
always remain the same; but as far as appears at present, the
day is a very long way off when any radical alteration will
be made in it, and we may surely leave the distant future to
take care of itself, and endeavour to do right, as far as in us
lies, in the present.
Again, it may be urged that as the number of women voters
would be so small,—about a seventh part of the whole voting
power of the country,—they will not be able to exercise any
appreciable influence on legislation; therefore it is hardly
worth while for them to struggle for what will be of no use
to them when they get it. But though they would not be
numerous enough to elect representatives of their own, they
would be numerous enough to cause their opinions to have
a good deal of weight, and to make it necessary that their
point of view should be taken into account and their
interests consulted ; they would, in fact, be from that time
an influence not to be overlooked or made light of. The
mere demand for the suffrage has already been productive
of good; for men, discovering that there were some real
grievances at the bottom of it, have done something towards
remedying a few of them. The actual possession of it would
add enormous weight to the opinions and wishes of women,
and cause an improvement in their status generally.
It may be said, and with a certain amount of truth, that
women do even now exercise considerable indirect influence
on public affairs, both in this country and in others. We
are sometimes exhorted to be content with that, and to seek
for nothing more. But such power as they at present
possess is wholly without responsibility, and all experience
goes to prove that irresponsible power is nearly always
harmful. In Trance, for instance, the law has stedfastly
excluded women from taking a legitimate share in politics;
yet in that country women have exercised enormous influ-
Women and the Parliamentary Franchise.        \ 15
ence, and for the most part for evil. Power is dear to the
female heart, and when that power is devoid of responsibility,
it will almost certainly be used for merely selfish and
personal ends, and will result in evil deeds. France has
little reason to be thankful to the long train of queens-
consort and kings' mistresses who have at various periods
swayed her destinies, who gained their selfish ends by
cajolery and dissimulation, and whose chief object ever was
to preserve their perilous pre-eminence. Here in England,
on the other hand, where women have not been debarred
from inheriting the crown, their influence on the politics of
their time has been on the whole good, and the two reigns
which will be regarded by posterity as epochs of peculiar
greatness, are both those of female sovereigns. Once give
women their legitimate influence, and their sense of duty,
always powerful, will lead them to endeavour to use their
responsibilities rightly. This is even now apparent in the
elections for the municipal councils, and will be yet more
so when further political duties devolve upon them.
A fear has been often expressed that the effect on women
themselves of a participation in politics will be exceedingly
harmful; that it will rob them of the softer graces of
womanhood, and substitute a species of spurious manhood;
—in fact, that it will unsex them. But experience will
certainly show—nay, has already shown—that nature is
not quite so easily overcome; that the differences between
the sexes are far too deeply seated to be eradicated in such
a manner. Certainly no woman and few men have had so
much to do with public affairs as our present Queen, but
she is well known to be as thoroughly womanly as any of
her female subjects. She may have her faults, but they do
not lie in the direction of unfeminine attributes. Her
writings, on the contrary, proclaim her to be more openly
affectionate and emotional than the ordinary Englishwoman ;
no trace of unfeminine hardness to be discovered in them by
the sharpest critic. Is it not fair to suppose that as in this
case, so in others, the participation in these larger interests
will not work mischief ? May it not, on the other hand, be
exceedingly beneficial ? It is not possible to deny that
there is a certain tendency to narrowness in the feminine
mind, a tendency born proljably of the necessary absorption
in petty interests, induced by the ordinary course of women's
lives. The occupations and interests of most of us lie
almost exclusively in the family circle and at home. We
are not, as are men, brought into daily contact with the
116 Tlie Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
outside world, and the consequences are—a certain inability
to sympathize with those larger interests which lie outside
our immediate surroundings, and a somewhat one-sided way
of looking at them. There is a want of sense of proportion,
leading us to magnify all those affairs which immediately
concern ourselves, and to neglect those with which we have
no connection.    Says Mrs. Browning in Aurora Leigh :
' Your quick-breathed hearts,
So sympathetic to the personal pang,
Close on each separate knife-stroke, yielding up
A whole life at each wound ; incapable
Of deepening, widening a large lap of life
To hold the world-full woe.    The human race
To you means such a child, or such a man
You saw one morning waiting in the cold
Beside that gate, perhaps.
All's yours and you,
All coloured with your blood, or otherwise
Just nothing to you.    Why, I call you hard
To general suffering.'
There is a certain amount of truth in this indictment;
women are too apt to care only for what lies near to
themselves, and so lose breadth. Now, to take an intelligent
part in politics necessitates a certain amount of acquaintance
with some of those things which concern mankind in the
mass; and this more extensive knowledge could not fail to
widen the mental horizon of those who became possessed of
it, and enable them to take truer and deeper views of every¬
thing around them. It is not possible to conceive that, in
consequence of this increase of breadth, women would be
unfitted to fulfil their more special duties—duties upon
which the well-being of the world depends. Experience
teaches us that the more the general intelligence of a man
is brought out, the better he does whatever he has to do;
and if it is so with men, surely it will be found to be the
same with women. A woman will not be the worse wife
or mother for knowing something of the great currents of
thought and action which are flowing over the world; she
will be the more fitted to be a companion to her husband
and a mother to her sons. Let it not be supposed for a
moment that any antagonism of the sexes is advocated by
the supporters of this movement. On the contrary, their
desire is rather that they sliould be drawn closer together.
It is a great misfortune for any country when its women do
not share in the progress and development of its men. Such
a country will find out to its cost that it cannot rise beyond
a certain level, for its women wiU act as a dead weight to
The Old and the New. 117
keep it down. At this moment one of the most difficult
problems we have to deal with in our Indian empire, is how
to bring about the enfranchisement of the women, to impart
to them something of our western civilization; for it is found
that a great chasm is arising between the enlightened and
educated Hindoos and their wives, mothers, and sisters, who
refuse to allow the wall of bigotry and ignorance to be
broken through. There cannot be a surer sign of the moral
progress of a country, and of its advance towards a higher
stage of enlightenment and civilization, than the desire of
its women for a full participation in the welfare—material,
moral, and intellectual—of its men. The present movement
is but a development and continuation of that which has
been going on, with more or less vigour, since the primitive
pastoral times when women were but the chattels of their
husbands, and were held by their masters to possess no
souls. It is not merely in the region of politics that this
forward movement is noticeable; it is evident also in the
cry for more and better education, for entrance into the
professions, for freedom from the trammels of conventionality
and fashion. It is, in common with all efforts of the kind,
accompanied by a certain amount of extravagance and folly,
but that ought not to blind us to its real significance, or
make us keep aloof from it. Eather should we endeavour
to understand instead of ridiculing it, to eliminate from it
its non-essential parts, to direct and guide instead of
impeding it. Eemove all disabilities, and we may safely
trust to nature to do the rest. It may be that women are
being gradually fitted to play a higher part than any they
have been called upon to perform in the world's history.
Let us therefore be sure that we are not throwing obstacles in
their path of progress before we decide to oppose any move¬
ment which seems to take them a little out of the ordinary
groove, and which may bring them into closer connection
than ever before with the larger currents of the world's life.
E. S.
2rf)e ©Iti anti Efte Ncin.
By Sidney Philips.
CHAPTER III.
' What is often called flirting is but the give and take of society.
One person cannot always tell the moral position of the other, or
the impression which every unstudied word may give.'—A Lost Love.
Much has changed since Shakspere's day, but young girls
118 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
still exhibit a tendency to go about like 'Juno's swans,'
' coupled and inseparable,' and may now as then be seen
employed
' Both on one sampler, sitting on one cushion.
Both warbling of one song.'
Such a friendship soon arose between Mabel and Maggie.
Two more different beings could hardly be imagined, yet
before long Mabel's devotion to her cousin enabled her to
put up with many inconveniences which appeared unendur¬
able at first. So she stayed on and on at the Manse, talking
vaguely of engaging a companion and travelling later in the
year; but as time went on she became more reconciled to
her surroundings, and less inclined to leave Kilmuir. A
short visit which the two girls paid to their relations in
Edinburgh in the early spring, made Mabel feel very glad
that she had chosen the Highland home. Her uncle himself
was a clever man, and by no means devoid of culture; but
his wife and daughters were pretentious and commonplace,
and the society in which they moved was so unlike that
to which Mabel had been accustomed, that it was quite a
relief to her when they returned to the solitude of the
Manse.
Maggie considered Mabel quite a child, though in reality
there was only a difference of a few months between them.
She alternately patronized and petted her, and became
herself more womanly by contact with another girl. The
house, too, underwent many changes. The drawing-room
was no longer kept only for state occasions, and untenanted
save by bead mats, stove aprons, and Indian boxes. The
more objectionable of these articles gradually disappeared,
and gave way to Mabel's refined knick-knacks; and Maggie
watched with astonishment while Mabel arranged little
brackets and other contrivances of which no one else would
even have thought, till, notwithstanding the crumbcloth
and stiff chairs, it looked almost like a lady's room. Some¬
times Mabel even penetrated as far as the study, where the
minister was always sitting at a writing-table, littered with
papers and heaped with huge tomes of S. Augiistini Of era,
and where he was generally employed writing that great
commentary which M-as to supersede Thomas Scot, and to
supplement and perhaps rival even Matthew Henry himself.
He would look up from his work for a moment as she
entered, and then turn back with a sigh, wondering how an
immortal being, with a whole eternity wrapped up in her
mind and soul, could devote her energies to dusting the
The Old and the New. 119
covers of books and furbishing their clasps, instead of
seeking to learn from their contents the great truths that
would make her wise unto salvation ; and he would lift up
his whole soul in earnest prayer that some day both this
bright creature and his own beloved Maggie might be
plucked as brands from the burning, and shine as the stars
for ever and ever.
It was a lovely day towards the end of July ; the heather
was in full blossom, the last patches of snow had almost
melted from the highest mountains, and here and there a
bright bunch of golden broom gleamed in the sunshine.
Not a sound was heard save the hum of the bees amongst
the wild thyme, and the cry of the grouse not yet scattered
by the sportsman's appearance.
The only cloud that morning was on Mabel Barnard's
brow, as she read a long letter with the Ditchleigh post¬
mark.
' Oh, Maggie!' she exclaimed, with her eyes full of tears,
' the new master at home must be such a horrid man !
Here's a long letter from old Tapton the butler, who had
been there twenty years, saying that he is sent away; so is
the old gamekeeper, who was quite a part of the place; and
they've cut down the iinest elm trees, and Widow Ball has
notice to quit her cottage, and the plantation gate is always
kept locked now, so that the poor people can't get through
the short way to church, and so many of them don't attend
both services now as it's too far to go round. Isn't it all
cruel and unjust ?'
' I don't see that,' said Maggie, who liked contradicting
every one. ' The trees probably wanted thinning ; the new
owner was by no means bound to keep on your old pen¬
sioners. How can a landlord keep up game if he allows
every one the run of his plantations ? No, I cannot see
what reason you have to be so angry with the new owner.
As to the old woman, it's a pity landlords do not always
make old people go to the workhouse, where they would be
better cared for than in their own wretched cottages. No
places can keep on in the old groove always. It's only
natural that he should make some changes. But come
along, Mabel; do not let us waste the whole of this fine
morning in the house. We shan't get many days in the
year like this. Let's just go down to the river, and have a
nice lazy morning over a book. I want to finish the new
volume of Daniel Deronda that Douglas & Foulis have sent
me.'
I20 The Ladies^ Edirtburgh Magazine.
So they started off together across the moor, Mabel silent
and preoccupied, and Maggie trying to distract her attention.
' Now, Mabel, isn't this better than a stuffy town ?' she
exclaimed, as they walked along a sheltered dell. ' I must
say frankly,' she continued, ' that it was a great relief to me
when we left Moray Place. Uncle Donald is all very well, and
so is Aunt Elsie, but those girls put me out of all patience
by their constant flirtations with officers from the Castle.'
' I wonder how poor Jeanie feels now that the regiment is
ordered away for the autumn manoeuvres,' said Mabel.
' Oh, silly little thing! before the week is out she will
console herself witli some one else. She's no sooner off with
the old love than she's on with the new. I do dislike girls
who always talk about their flirtations to me.'
' I shall take care never to annoy you in that way,' said
Mabel.
' For my part,' continued Maggie, ' I never can understand
why some women look upon the conquest of a man's
affection as a thing to be proud of. I myself should be
ashamed to receive love that I could not return; I should
feel as if I had committed a robbery, and should never
hold up my head again. I am thankful to say that no
man's heart has ever been the worse for me.'
' Are you quite sure of that, Maggie, dear ?' said Mabel
archly. ' I have often suspected that it is not only the cold
wind that makes young Mr. Macdonald blush so often when
he calls at the Manse, and he certainly seems to know the
road from Lochinloan here very well.'
' Nonsense, silly child !' exclaimed Maggie, colouring; ' I've
known Hector Macdonald ever since he was a child; but our
friendship is perfectly Platonic on both sides, I assure you.
People who have known one another all their lives don't
often fall in love. Besides, the old laird of Lochinloan is
very proud, and would look higher for his son than a poor
minister's daughter; for even when a minister is a man of
some family like my father, he rarely associates with Scotch
gentlemen on a footing of equality. No, no, Mabel, that's
out of the question. Indeed, I always think that it's
ridiculous to talk as if all women must marry. I am sure
that I should be very much bored if any one made love
to me. I feel convinced that women's characters would
develop far better if they were left to themselves, and not
hampered by having men's lives tacked on to theirs. I
hope that it may be my fate to remain free and unfettered.'
' Well, well,' laughed Mabel; ' perhaps some day you will
The Old and the New. 121
descend from your pedestal  and  be as  foolish  as  other
women.'
By this time they had reached their favourite seat, a
convenient ledge of rock shaded by birch and rowan trees,
and overhanging the river, within sight of a little fall, where
the dark-brown water dashed over the rocks that hemmed
its passage, breaking out into feathery spray. Close by
there was an artificial salmon leap, where tlie girls had often
enjoyed watching the silvery monsters dart down on their
way to the sea. On this occasion they found that their
solitude was invaded by a couple of young men, one of
whom was wading up the stream, and the other was fishing
from the bank within a few yards of their retreat.
' These must be the new tenants at the Lodge,' whispered
Maggie. 'Hector told me that Lochinloan had let the
fishing with the shooting this year. We had better come
away.'
' Certainly not,' said Mabel, advancing towards the stream,
* I want to see whether they catch anything or not.'
However, Maggie's shyness prevailed, and they returned
home after watching the fishers only for a few minutes.
That same afternoon Mabel was sitting playing the piano,
while Maggie devoted herself to Sir "William Hamilton's
Lectures on Metaphysics; but somehow, whether it was the
music of the future that was ringing in her ears that dis¬
tracted her attention, or whether the sun that morning had
given her a headache, certain it was that the learned pro¬
fessor's arguments did not interest her as much as usual.
Her thoughts were straying in many directions, and amongst
other things she could not help wondering what the new
neighbours at the Lodge would be like. It had been let
before to a rich cotton-spinner, who used occasionally to
patronize ' the people at the Manse ;' but even her hasty
observation that morning was enough to convince her that
these new tenants were men of a very different stamp.
New acquaintances were so rare in Maggie's life that each
one was an event.
Presently the door opened, and Mr. Mackenzie entered
with the objects of her thoughts.
' Margaret, my dear,' he said, ' with his stiff, old-fashioned
politeness, I have the pleasure to present to you our new
neighbour Captain Molyneux, and also Mr. Ian Leslie of
Craigdallin, the nephew of my old college friend. My
daughter, my niece.'
All four bowed, and Mr. Leslie advanced towards Maggie,
122 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
holding out Daniel Deronda, and said, ' I think that you are
the owner of this book, Miss Mackenzie V
' Thanks; yes, it is mine,' said Maggie rather awkwardly.
' How stupid of me to drop it!    Did you have good sport V
' Anything but,' replied Captain Molyneux. ' The fish
wouldn't rise a bit. I expect we hadn't right flies ; yet they
did very well in Norway last summer. I remember killing
six fine salmon one morning before breakfast with the very
same fly I couldn't get a rise with to-day.'
' I suppose that fish are like people,' said Maggie, who
never lost an ojjportunity of moralizing; ' some like one
thing, some another.'
There was a pause. ' I am so glad to have got my book
back,' said Maggie, breaking the silence, as the shyest person
present invariably does. ' I should have been so disappointed
if I had not found out how the problem of Gwendoline's
life was solved.'
' I glanced at the book before I brought it back, to see
what the end of it all was,' said Leslie. ' I got quite tired of
the subject last season, every one was speculating about it
so much. Are you fond of novels ?' he added, looking at
Maggie.
' I never tire of the old standard works,' she replied. ' I
must confess that I know but little of modern novels. I
can't think why people attempt to write novels or poetry
either, now that the world has lost its youth. Novel-writ¬
ing especially, which depends so much on characterization,
has become a well-nigh hopeless task; for in these days of
advanced civilization, there are no characters to describe.
Every one wears the same dress, does the same things, and
reads the same books.'
' I don't agree with you,' said Mr. Leslie ; ' the surface of
life, I grant you, may present less variety, but under the
surface the variety is endless. You yourself remai'ked not
ten minutes ago how tastes differed.'
Poor Maggie, who, like all great talkers, constantly contra¬
dicted herself, hated nothing more than to hear her own
words quoted against her, yet she felt a little flattered
that a man who was evidently clever should remember what
she said ; but she knew that she was getting the worst of it,
so she was not sorry to see that Captain Molyneux had
persuaded Mabel to finish playing the 'March from the
Tannhiiuser,' in the middle of which they had interrupted
her. Then Maggie was asked for a Scotch song, and began
Lady Nairne's lovely and pathetic ballad of the ' Auld Hoose.'
The Old and the New. 123
'No, not that; anything but that, Maggie!' exclaimed
Mabel, her eyes filling with tears. ' I cannot bear that to¬
day ; it always makes me think of my old home.'
' Were you so very fond of your home ?' asked Mr. Leslie
in a pitying voice.
' I would rather not speak about it, please,' said Mabel.
' Maggie, let's have something cheerful instead.' So Maggie
played the ' Cock of the North' and sang the ' Laird of
Cockpen;' then followed duets and part songs, in which the
two men joined. It was late before the visitors left. The
visit was often repeated; for there was no piano at the Lodge,
Mabel was a first-rate accompanist, and Maggie, though her
voice wanted training, could join well enough in duets and
part songs, so the young men congratulated themselves on
having found such musical neighbours in the wilds; and
whenever the fish wouldn't rise. Captain Molyneux fetched
his violin, and the two friends sauntered over to the Manse.
Old Mr. Mackenzie rather enjoyed these visits. Shut off
as he was from all intellectual society, it was a great
pleasure to him to associate with a clever and agreeable
man like Mr. Leslie; and though it sometimes struck him
that his guest's knowledge was slightly superficial, still the
variety of subjects on which he possessed a little informa¬
tion, and the readiness with which he was able to impart it,
and make the most of what he knew, enchanted the old man.
He would often come into the room where they had been
singing, and would begin a long conversation with Mr.
Leslie about that Oxford life which had been the object of
so many fruitless longings in his own younger days. He
would question his guest about the tendency of modern
thought there, and the characters of its leaders; and though
sometimes he was rather disappointed and even scandalized
at the accounts he received, he never failed to listen to them
with the keenest interest.
In the whole course of his experience, Mr. Leslie had
never met any people who puzzled him as much as this
strange, old-world father and daughter. To him they seemed
like specimens of an earlier stage in the world's history, as
interesting as fossil mammoths or flint arrowheads; rather
dry, perhaps, but still they did well enough to pass an idle
hour with now and then, just as one might saunter into a
museum if there were no bric-a-brac shops at hand.
Maggie listened intently to these conversations, which
revealed an entirely new side of life to her. There was a
critical keenness and an absence of real enthusiasm about
124 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
Mr. Leslie's conversation, and he was entirely free from all
pedantry; yet he talked well and liked talking, and he was
interested in theories and enthusiasms that he did not share,
and could describe the views of other men sympathetically.
Maggie had never before met any one who was clever with¬
out being narrow-minded; and as she listened to her own
favourite ideas, which she had either worked out for herself
or picked up in stray reviews, or in such works of Arnold,
Euskin, and Pater as had come in her way, expounded with
intelligent appreciation even if without approbation, she felt
as if slie had indeed found the missing notes that were needed
to make up the full harmony of her life. The marker in
Hamilton's Metaphysics did not change its place much during
the next few weeks, and the dust lay quite thick on Bain's
works and Mill's Logic. After aU, it is not easy for any girl
to give her attention to problems as to whether Space and
Time liave any real existence independent of her conceptions
of them when her mind is fully occupied with that still more
important question, ' Will he come ?' Nor is it pleasant for
her to analyze the different forms of consciousness when she
herself is strongly conscious of somehoclys approach without
being indebted either to eyes or ears for the information.
Detecting fallacies, too, is but dreary work for a mind that
is itself busy constructing most fallacious hopes oil very
insulficient premises.
Mabel, meanwhile, kept more in the background. Captain
Molyneux was, like herself, a musical enthusiast, and they
had many subjects and interests in common; so she talked
much less to Mr. Leslie, till one Sunday, when her uncle
and cousin being both away, she was left to her own devices,
and wandering alone by the river she came suddenly upon
Mr. Leslie, who was standing looking at the Falls.
' Come along. Miss Barnard,' he exclaimed when he saw
her,' do let's go for a walk. I can't get that lazy fellow
Molyneux to come out at all, as there's no sport to-day. He
grumbled half the morning at not being able to fish, and
then took out his violin and tried to console himself with a
fugue or something equally scientific and discordant. I
shouldn't wonder if sucli a desecration of the Sabbath were
to horrify that worthy old lady who looks after us at the
Lodge, into drowning herself in the burn. No loss either,
except for her hotch-potch, which is excellent. If she only
leaves that recipe behind her, I shall be grateful to Moly¬
neux for getting rid of her anyhow.'
]\Iabel, who was rather tired of her own society, by no
The Old and the New. I25
means objected to a companion.   So they started together up
a steep path which led on to the moor.
' How have you escaped the kirk to-day ?' asked Leslie.
Mabel explained that her uncle and most of his congrega¬
tion had gone to a neighbouring parish, where they had the
sacrament, and that there was no service at Kilnmir that
day.
' Which I don't regret as much as I ought to,' she added.
' I'm not over fond of my uncle's discourses. I'm afraid it's
very wicked of me, but I always think of something which
happened when I was driving with him near Glentyre
Castle one day soon after I first came here. It was raining
hard, and we got very wet. And a queer-looking, gaunt
woman they call Bell came out of one of the lodges and
wanted my uncle to come in and see a relation of hers who
was bedridden, but he said that he was too wet and must
make haste home.
'" Hech, man," said she, "just gang yer ways to yer ain
pulpit, ye'll be dry eneuch there, I'se warrant ye." '
Mabel told this story with great spirit, and Mr. Leslie
came to the conclusion that the quiet little brown - eyed
thing, whom he had never noticed much before, was not
half bad fun. He dawdled about with her most of the after¬
noon, and it was getting quite late when they returned to
the Manse.
'Now, hasn't this been much jollier than a stuffy kirk.
Miss Barnard ? I'm siire I feel much better than if I'd
listened to an hour and a half of your good uncle's argu¬
ments.    Don't you ?'
' Yes,' said Mabel; ' still I do wish that we were nearer
an English church. I miss my own church very much. I
believe that there is a little Episcopal chapel the other side
of the Toiseach Ferry, but that's a great deal too far.'
' Toiseach! why, that's the place you pass going to Glen¬
tyre. Why, it's nothing of a distance; can't be more than
six or seven miles.'
' N"o; but on Sunday it would be impossible to get any
sort of conveyance here, and I don't think that I could
possibly manage to walk.'
' I'll tell you what,' said Leslie, after a moment's pause.
'Why shouldn't we drive you there in the dog-cart next
Sunday if it's a fine day and you really want to go ?'
' Oh, that would be delightful!' exclaimed Mabel. ' Would
you really take me ? How good of you ! I will certainly
come, that is if my uncle will allow me,' she added, suddenly
126 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
waking to the fact that even in the Highlands sucli a very
unchaperoned expedition might be thought peculiar.
The minister was very tired when he returned that
evening. He had preached to a large Gaelic congregation in
the open air in front of the church, but somehow a sense of
failure was on all that he did that day. Before service
began he had been talking to some of his younger brethren,
and they had described to him revivals and meetings that
had taken place in their parishes, and cases of powerful
awakenings that had cheered them on in their labours.
Were these things really necessary ? If so, how remiss he
must be in his duty! During all the years that he had been
at Kilmuir, and had never failed to preach two sermons
every Sabbath, he could not even point to one such case as
they described. But then these very men exhibited an
ignorance with regard to fundamentals that was really dis¬
tressing. Surely it became those who had the charge of
souls, to seek carefully amongst the gathered wisdom of
centuries for the purest and truest form of words in which
to clothe the eternal verities. But then, on the other hand,
he could not quite escape from an ever-recurring suspicion
that it might after all have been better if he had left the
dead past to bury its dead, and had studied more in those
living books, the characters of the men and women who were
still suffering and struggling round him in the living present.
Mabel's voice broke in upon his reflections.
' Uncle Norman, would you mind letting me go to the
chapel beyond Toiseach Ferry next Sunday ? I haven't
been to my own church for a long time, and if it's fine they
—that is, at least Mr. Leslie said that they—would give me
a lift in the dog-cart from the Lodge if you didn't object.'
' Ah! lassie,' said the minister sadly, breaking out into
the homely Scotch dialect which he only used under the
influence of strong emotion, ' I'm feared I'm just ower auld
noo for the ministry. I canna even keep my ain household
from straying after the strange teacliers wi' their newfangled
ways. I mind when the English families came to the
North langsyne ; they would just go to the parish kirks wi'
the people, and now they maun aye be bringing their ain
kirks wi' them, like the snails wi' their shells on their backs,
or like Eachel wi' her father's images in the tent. Weel,
maybe it's we that are maist to blame in the matter. And
it' ye canna find the Lord's word with me, it isn't I that
would keep ye from those that would teach it to ye
differently.    But beware lest ye find only the form o' godli-
The Old and the New. 127
ness, and no' the power thereof. I'm not denying that
many of these prelatists are godly men, and maybe there's
often here and there a grain o' pure wheat amongst the tares
0' their corrupt ordinances, even as the Lord knows that
notwithstanding our ain purer and mair primitive form 0'
doctrine, there's ower mony a tare wi' our ain sel's, and that
not the least in my ain heart,' he added with a sigh.
' Then I may go to Toiseach next Sunday with Mr.
Leslie ?' broke in Mabel, blushing furiously, but determined
not to do anything which might be disapproved of after¬
wards.
' Ay, ay, child, gang your ain ways; but the time will
come maybe when ye'll find that the mair spiritual
doctrine, though not sae attractive to the senses, will help*
ye maist in the hour of need. If the seed's good, it canna
fail to spring up sooner or later. They talk much of evi¬
dences in these days,' he added, recurring to the morning's
conversation, 'but I'm thinking that many of us are ower
like the bairns, who, when they've planted a potatie, maun
aye be digging round it and looking to see if it isna
beginning to grow, as if the Lord wouldna take care of it,
how much more of his ain word i' the hearts of His ain people!'
The following Sunday, soon after nine o'clock, a dog-cart
driven by Mr. Leslie arrived at the Manse.
' That's right, Miss Barnard, I see you're quite ready, not
like that idle fellow Molyneux ; he wasn't out of bed when
I started. Shall I give you a hand ? Why, you're as light
as a feather.    I suppose that your cousin isn't coming ?'
No indeed, though poor Maggie, as she watched them
drive oflP, almost wished that she too had been born to the
south of the Tweed. It would have been impossible for
the minister's own daughter to have deserted the parish
kirk; so she was left to the enjoyment of her father's
eloquence, the study of Tulloch's Rational Tlieology, and the
consoling reflection that Mr. Leslie really must be a very
good-natured man, or he would never have inflicted himself
with the society of a silly little thing like Mabel, who Mas
utterly incapable of sustaining a rational conversation.
'Ar n-Athair a ta air neamh, Naomhaichear d'Ainm;
Thigeadh do rioghachd,' etc.
Such were the uncouth sounds that greeted the ears of
Mabel and Mr. Leslie as they entered the little chapel.
The congregation, consisting of about a couple of dozen
old people, mostly women in white mutches, were kneeling
on single planks stretched across a rough floor of trodden
128 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
mould, enriched with scraps of paper and other accumulated
rubbish of at least half a century. Down the centre of the
chapel was a gangway paved with large uneven slabs of
hewn sandstone, on which the damp of years had developed
a slimy green moss. The whitewash on the walls was
peeling off in many places, revealing glimpses of unsightly
lathes, and from the principal pew in front of the gallery
hung long shreds of red cloth and fringe, which told of a
period of long-vanished splendour. On one of the side
walls a forgotten hand had traced a rude scroll in blue
paint, with the inscription, ' Whmi shall I come to appear
hefore the presence of God ?' a pious wish doubtless long since
fulfilled. On the little altar was a rough cross of moss and
white heather. Through the unadorned eastern window
there was a glorious view of the firth they had crossed,
gleaming like an opal in its setting of deep purple moun¬
tains.
' If there is nothing but Gaelic, it's no good our stopping
here,' whispered Mr. Leslie; and as the doxology, ' Gloir
don Athair, agus don Mhac, agus don Spiorad Naomh,' etc.,
commenced, they quietly left the chapel.
' Had you the least idea that they ever had the English
service in Gaelic ?' exclaimed Mr. Leslie. ' I did not know
that the Prayer-book had even been translated. I always
imagined that the Episcopal service in these parts was quite
a new importation. But I did not tell them to bring the
trap to the other side of the ferry before one o'clock; what
shall we do till then ? '
' Let's ask this man who's coming in late whether there's
an English service at all to-day,' suggested Mabel.
The man fortunately knew a little English, and replied
that the afternoon service would be in English, beginning at
one o'clock.
' Oh, do let's go if we're still here !' exclaimed Mabel; ' it
would have been such a pity to have come all this way for
nothing.'
' What, do jou really mean to say that you actually like
the idea of a service in that hideous, damp place ?' said
Mr. Leslie, gazing at her with mingled envy and astonish¬
ment, wondering how it was that most women—and those
generally the best women—really seemed to enjoy church-
going, a duty no doubt, but one which to the ordinary male
mind conveys no more idea of pleasure than paying one's
debts or visiting one's relations, except, indeed, on the rare
occasions when the music is good, or the still rarer instances
Gothic A rcliiiecture. 129
when one is fortunate enough to come across a preacher
with original ideas.
So they determined to wait for the afternoon service, and
very soon established themselves in the neighbouring wood,
where Mabel sat down on the trunk of a fallen tree, and
Leslie stretched himself at full length on the soft heather at
her feet. Beneath them lay the little firth, its blue depths
sparkling in the sunshine ; beyond it rose the heather-clad
hills in somewhat gloomy grandeur, though here and there
intersected by a little patch of cultivation, where the sun¬
beams fell softly on the yellowing corn. Perfect stillness
reigned round them, broken only by the rustling of a squirrel
in the branches overhead, the monotonous note of the
wood-pigeons, and the dreamy moan of the wind in the fir
trees. The hours passed only too rapidly. In after years,
they both often looked back on that morning as one of those
moments which most people have experienced at some time
or anotlier, in which they really felt of this life ' that,
behold, it was very good.' Not that they, either of them,
were fully conscious at the time of the strange new sense of
happiness which seemed to make
' A livelier emerald twinkle in the grass,
A purer sapphire melt into the sea.'
Their existence was merged in a feeling that had not yet
had time to shape itself into a thought. Thus it is often
with the feelings that influence human destiny. Few people
are really conscious at the time of the exact moment
when they cross the Eubicon. Their lives drift on, and
by and by the stream widens into the river, the river glides
on into the sea, then return becomes impossible ; and once
fairly launched on the tempest-tossed ocean, it is few
indeed who ever reach the haven where they would be.
{To he continued.)
B ffiot!)ic ^rc!)ttecture superior to ffirccJt, i^eo^ffirecft,
or Bgjantme ?
(Read at the Ladies' Debating Society.)
I.
As usual, we had better begin with a little definition of our
terms. Is this ' superiority ' positive or relative ? It might
be fairly possible to show that each style, having its own
special beauty and fitness, should be acknowledged ' superior'
No. 63.—Maech 1880. j
130 The Ladies Edinburgh Mixgazinc.
in its own proper place—specially adapted to this necessity
or that, this asra or that of human history.
But if, passing by relative, you come to speak of positive
superiority, I shall try to show—though the vastness of the
topic, the smallness of my limits, and let me add, the
incapacity of the speaker, make my heart sink—that Gothic,
or rather Pointed Architecture, addressing itself most to all
necessities of life, and admitting the greatest beauty both of
construction and decoration, is the, best, the superior to all
other styles.
Architecture, the art of building. Eeligious buildings
supply the best illustrations ; as, wlien you want the best
thoughts of the greatest thinkers, you ask tlieir religion, so
the most lasting, visible expression of a nation's religious
thoughts will be its temples.
So this clears our ground a little. Christianity the best
religion; w^e can shut off Greek and Neo-Greek, which is
only the Eenaissance revival of the classic, capable of fine
development, but hardly an independent style. As pre-
Christian we shut them off; but why shut off Byzantine?
That is the earliest Christian, arising in the Eastern Koman
Empire, borrowing its splendour from the East, and rolling
westward witli Christianity. In Europe it became confused
with the Eoman, and from these sprang the Pomanesque.
It is difficult to dissever this latter style from Byzantine;
but the Eomanesque flourished in Italy, and thence travelled
northwards,^ where to a certain extent it fraternized and
blended with what is often called pure Gothic, which I
prefer calling Pointed; and of the two were made beautiful
combinations, though some of the best features of Byzantine,
especially the dome, were gradually left out. When I shut off
Byzantine, including Eomanesque, it is not upon tlie ground
of its being not a Cliristian style,—which it emphatically
is,—but simply on what is after all a sorely-vexed question
on a matter of taste and liking. I think that Pointed
Gotliic has nobler features, more beautiful cajiabilities, fewer
awkwardnesses, and deeper religious thoughtfulness than
any other style; and, above all, it is lifelike.
A very few words in support of my assertion.
Not for a moment would I be thought to undervalue
Greek—classic Greek architecture. I follow here the leading
of the great master, whose lovely ' last work' greets our eyes
from this very window.    He divides Architecture into two
1 In the cathedral at Coire, the Apostelkirche, and San Gereon at
Cologne, we have beautiful examples of Romanesque-Gothic.
Go tide Architecture. 13I
enormous sections—the trabeated, or that which deals in
straight lines and vertical pressure, and the arcuated, dis¬
tinguished by curves and multifold pressure. The one has
arches and the other has not; a dome, of course, is a con¬
geries of arches.
It may seem strange that the nation of Archimedes and
Euclid never used an arch, for in the first Proposition you
can see both round and pointed arches ; but so it is, they
never did use it. If they had, it would have broken up the
whole system and character of their construction—Eest.
Greek architecture evokes the same sense of calm majesty
that Greek statues do, and for its ' religion ' this nation may
well speak to the piety of those whose hands carved the
Parthenon frieze.^    Yet it is a beauty of Death :
' So calmly sweet, so deadly fair,
We start, for soul is wanting there.'
Listen to Sir Gilbert Scott's weighty words:—
' As a style, the sentiment of Greek architecture may be said to be
a quiet, calm solidity and repose, free from all question as to its
stability, because it admits of no pressure but what is vertical. . . .
It is, as I have heard, a saying among the Moslem builders in India,
that "the arch never sleeps;" it is always, night and day, pushing
outward. Thus, purely trabeated architecture sleeps in safety, while
arcuated never ceases to exert force. The one is a static, the other
a dynamic style, only becoming static when its abutments are of
undoubted sufficiency. Thus repose belongs of a right to the one,
but has to be purposely secured in the other.'—Led. on Med.
Architecture, vol. ii. p. 302.
Greek architecture embodies for us, then, the wDf, the
■^^i-X/i, and the mtviMct, of the classic ages. Till Sir Gilbert
Scott put it into words for me, I never could account for the
restful feeling given by the straight lines, the simple pressure
all one way. But 1 wondered why a Greek ruin calmed,
while a Pointed Gothic one made one cry ; one is statuesque,
still, while the other was alive and is dead. One never had
life—the other has lost it.
You see, then, Greeks, even if they knew of arch-building,
could not adopt it, so entirely would it have been at war
with the constructive principles of their work.
Take, now, the forms which demand the curved line.
Why do I draw the hard and fast line between the round
and the pointed curve? Because there lies the whole
difference. The great secret of Gothic beauty is folded up
in the pointed arch.
' See the Church Quarterly, October 1879, ' The Works and Faith
of Phidias.'
132 TJie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
The round arch must be half of a circle, which cannot
increase beyond a certain size; the pointed may be the
smallest segment of an infinite circle, nay, of a curve that
need never return upon itself, as the round must do. Then
the higher, in architectural phrase, you ' stilt' a round arch,
i.e. raise it on side shafts, above the pillar capitals, the less
dignified and beautiful it becomes. For doorways, which
are not high in proportion to their width, it is grand, so also
in crypts which are low, and in arcades where you want
delicate curves and slender pilasters; in all these the round
arch is capable of exquisite treatment. The palace-fronts of
Venice, the arcades of the Ducal Palace, the facade of S.
Mark's, San Vitale, Eavenna ; we need not go further. Then
the dome is a magnificent feature, borrowed from the far
East. S. Mark's is a noble specimen of the peculiar beauties
of this style. Mass, grandeur, dignity, and illimitable scope
for colour and mural decoration. The Italian revels in these,
and the splendid Duomo demands frescoes ; one is dis¬
appointed in the fine Church of San Giustina, Padua, to find
a plain white dome. Let me read a sentence, written years
ago in my own journal, on first seeing S. Mark's:
' I began to take in the general efi'ect, . . . how un-Gothic, how
Oriental it is. Grand from its weight and mass and regal colour, it
is entirely without the look of life and growth and elasticity of a
Gothic building. Its ornaments and sculptures are rich, but as if
done at once and left there. In Gothic, one can sometimes almost
believe that the ornamentation had a principle of life and would
grow—that leaf, blossom, and fruit would come ; as Mr. Ruskin
writes: " It stands out in prickly independence and frosty fortitude,
jutting into crockets and freezing into pinnacles, here starting up
into a monster, there germinating into a blossom."' .  .  .
There lies the secret. Byzantine comes from the quies¬
cent, sultry East; Gothic and Pointed is the creation of the
active, ever-growing, inventive Goth or Teuton. True, he
adopted the Eomanesque, and beautified it. We can only give
one example, the arch. The Byzantine arch cuts right through
the wall with no sub-orders. As an instance, look at the
ugly church-facade in Palmerston Place, and then glance
across the way to the western door of the Cathedral. When
arches are small, it may be well enough to cut them straight,
especially with rich inlayings of marble and mosaic, as at
San Vitale; but it becomes clumsy, and leaves deep awk¬
ward shadows, where arches are large. When northern
nations made arches, they needed not only light, but drip¬
stones and  head-mouldings; so  they began to  splay and
Gothic Architecture. 133
subordinate their arches whether round or pointed, and
thence derived the lovely characteristic arch - mouldings.
Look at them anywhere, the Cathedral will do; be they
plain or rich, they mud be lovely! The delicate lines, arch
retreating within arch, the light and sliade; and then the
varied beauty of the richer styles, the somewhat awkward
Byzantine turned into a Norman arch, with l>illet or bell-
moulding, roll and scroll, zig-zag, dog-tooth—the doorways
of Melrose, Dry burgh, Winchester, Westminster, Canterbury,
can anything be more beautiful ? Even in Italy, large
arches are sometimes moulded, but this is borrowed from the
Gothic.
The great principles to which Pointed Gotliic owes its
superiority may, I think, be arranged under four heads. A
very few words on each of these. 1. Construction and
decoration are kept distinct. By this law, it is possible to
make the simplest building as noble as the richest. Alas
for Scotland, she has destroyed herself! but go through
England, and mark her village churches, as beautiful iu
their degree as her cathedrals. I could point out to you
towers in Lincolnshire and Norfolk as fine in their way as
the Bell Harry of Canterbury; village spires as well-propor¬
tioned as Chichester and Lichfield. Leave a design simple
or decorate it like lacework, the lines, the curves, the lair
jjroportioiis, the fitness of part to part, will be just the same;
good Pointed Gothic cannot be unlovely.
2. Construction is never sacrifi(^ed to mere decoration.
Vulgar and debased Gothic abounds where this principle
is set aside. Of many instances, I will take one (it is a
violation of both these first principles), wrong use of
statues. These are beautiful when properly subordinated
to the design, but in good Gothic are never made an integral
part of tlie construction. The white marble Cathedral at
Milan is rich beyond compare, but vulgarized by the statues.
They are pinnacles and pillar-capitals, and everything they
ought not to be, utterly destroying the curves of the pillars,
and looking very awkward as pinnacles from a little dis¬
tance. Thorwaldsen's Angel as the Baptismal Eont, is a
common un-Gothic mistake. Make your font, and carve
angels all over it, but never make the angel an integral part
of the font. Here is a photograph of another violation of
this rule, at San Domenico in Bologna—this angel of
Michelangelo's, holding an altar-light. Look at the child
acolyte, witli his half-grown wings, and serene young face,
and  hair  which the  airs  of  Paradise have lifted  off his
134 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
i>" -' ' "a'
level brow; one is angry at his being made to hold an ugly,
cumbrous candlestick, which could stand as well alone !
3. No necessity is ignored or concealed. Ex.: In a
northern clime one needs warmth, therefore fire, smoke,
chimneys. A bad architect is ashamed of his chimney,
hides it, or makes a pinnacle, nay worse, a perforated cross,
do the duty. A noble designer makes his chimney look
like one, and do its work, but not an ugly, intrusive,
awkward chimney, no, a beautiful one, carefully harmonized
with the whole building. A noble Pointed building is truly
a fit emblem of the Church Catholic; no member saying to
another, ' I have no need of you.' One stone for stability,
another for beauty, but the whole ' fitly framed together,'
unity preserved in diversity, in the Great Architect's Plan !
4. Each necessity is made a vehicle of new beauty. This
grows out of Principle 3. See how it wrought. As archi¬
tecture existed in Southern Europe, the roof was a mere
covering. I except, of course, the dome, sucli a feature in
Eomanesque that the Duomo and Dom-kirche are the
equivalents for our ' cathedral' in Italy and Germany. But
the moment you turn northwards, even at Verona, before you
cross tlie Alps, you are conscious of the higher pitch of
roof, and gradually this feature becomes prominent. Ex¬
quisite are its outlines, its sharp, delicate finish, boundless
its capability of fine treatment. Every roof in an old
German or Belgian town is beautiful, and we have good
examples in our old Scotch houses. With steep roofs you
get all the beauty of gable-fronts, crow-toes, weather-boards,
and a hundred adjuncts, each necessary, mark you, but each
a new source of harmonious, beautiful developments. Nureni-
burg Castle and Eathhaus, the gables of Malines, Bruges,
Antwerp—is not each a separate 'joy for ever'? Then, as
Sir Gilbert Scott reminds ns of the tremendous 'activity'
of the arch, the buttress either wall or roof, the latter
called a flying buttress—what a store-chamber of beauty
this architect^^ra.l necessity became ! Such light and shadow
to the simplest, rudest building!—how one misses buttresses
in Byzantine!—and when the great strain upon them made
them larger and higher, the weight of pinnacles was required
to keep them down. Thus a new necessity became a new
beauty. Gurgoyles too, to carry water off the building, were
generally carved in grotesque heads—demons, wild beasts, etc.
This might seem a violation of Principle 1, but it arose from
the quaint belief that devils were peculiarly active in a
storm, and were carried off the holy j)lace with rain-water.
Gothic Architechire. 135
It has been said, too, tliat gurgoyles sometimes contained a
clever satire on vices in Church and State.^ So with vaulting ;
its rib-mouldings were always weakest at their intersecting
point, thence came the need of the bosses, so exquisite in
later styles. As to windows, we should need a separate
paper to show how the open lancets of Early Pointed
needed gradually the dividing tracery which became the
glory of the Decorated or Late Pointed styles. I could take
every separate feature in the same way, from base to spire-
top, and show how truly the Pointed is a living style,
evoking fresh beauty out of each constructive necessity, and
bringing every part into accord with the whole. A Gothic
building is to me a symphony in stone ; never am I within
one but solemn music (such as our Professor well knows
how to give us, and which all who hear long to hear again)
seems to wake around, rise and fall, float in and out of pillar
and aisle, vault and choir. I must hasten on; but let me
quote Sir Gilbert Scott once more. After an exquisite
panegyric on the calm restfulness of classic styles, he thus
contrasts the Pointed; its characteristics were
' an upward soaring, an apparent inversion of gravitation, into a
striving towards heaven, and a vivacious wakefulness in every feature.
Constructively, instead of the mere support of dead weight, its prin¬
ciple is tlie systematic balancing of an infinity of diagonal pressures ;
yet this, though a constructive fact, is not an artistic characteristic ;
for in its more spiritual effects weight and thrust seem to be annihi¬
lated and converted into upward striving, so that the archivolt, the
flying buttress, and the ribs of the vaulted roofs, seem rather the
medium of upward than of downward pressure. In elegance and
expressiveness of detail, no previous style had surpassed it; in endless
variety of imagination or in spirituality of sentiment, none had ever
approached it. It was the greatest marvel that architectural art had
produced, and it united all these magic qualities with a gravity and
solemnity in the temple, a stern solidity in the castle, an asceticism
in the monastery, a quiet, retiring sentiment in the seat of learning,
a cheerfulness in its civic and domestic structures, and a deeply
touching expression in its sepulchral monuments, which no style
could possibly go beyond, and none has yet equalled.'—Medixval
Architecture, vol. ii. p. 310.
I could not strengthen such words! Surely Pointed com¬
pared to other styles, is as Christianity to religions; it
addresses human life as a whole. A Christian's life is
covered and embraced by his religion; an architecture, then,
which makes lovely every need of daily life, is the best for
Christian nations.
' I have sometimes wondered if the Melrose gurgoyle of a pig play¬
ing on a bagpipe, was a satire on the church-music of the day !
136 T]ie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
We have taken a great step in the right direction in this
fair city; may it be rightly followed up. It is well to see a
nation trying to undo a great national mistake. We pride
ourselves on our modern lights; but we see that in the days
when building was a religious act, vien built ivell:
' They built in marble, bnilt as they
Who wished those shrines might see the Day
When Christ returns, and those vast walls
Stand over them when Judgment calls.'
It may be, when education was scanty and modes of
expression few, an artist would carve into his stone the
heart and soul which he can now pour forth in quicker
ways. Let us trust that never again may our land have to
deplore the iconolatry which led men to stop at the outward
symbols, or the iconoclasm which vainly thought to honour
God by sweeping the outer symbols away. And when we
try to expiate oiir national folly by restoration of what may
yet be restored, let it be done in the spirit of teachable
reverence, owning that
' 'Mid all the light a happier day has brought,
We work not yet as our forefathers wrought.'
L. D.
(The answer will appear next month.)
 0 
STo a Crrtam iHusician.
RUBINSTEIN.
'TwAS meet thou camest with the touch of Spring,
The opening bud, the quickening.
The blackbird's wakened songs.
And soft winds breatliing health;
For unto thee belongs
Power that arouseth souls
To sense of their infinity,
Their distant siimmer wealth;
And whatsoe'er that winter be
That bound us, thou dost set us free.
Joan Scott.
iHaxitns aiiti ^[pljortsins.
FROM  THE WRITINGS   OF GOETHE.
'As in water face an.tu-eretli to face, so the heart of man to man.'
Every one must think in his own way, for he will always
find, in his way of thinking, a truth, or a kind of truth.
Maxims and Aphorisms. 137
which will help him through life. Only he must not let
himself drift; he must control himself. Mere blind instinct
is not suitable to man.
' Men must live not by custom only, but by ideas and principles
which will survive custom.'—Juwett on Plato.
Uncontrolled activity, of whatever kind, produces bank¬
ruptcy at last.
In the works of man, as in those of nature, it is the final
aims that are most worth noticing.
Men make mistakes about themselves and others, because
they treat means as ends; and thus from mere activity no
result ensues, or perhaps just the opposite result to what
was intended.
' Is not the secret f)f true doing simply the finding what wants
doing, the reason for doing, the regarding that and that merely ?'—
Life and Letters of James Hinton.
Tt is difficult to correct whole errors, and to winnow
half and quarter errors, so as to set wliat there is of truth
in these latter where it should be.
It is not always necessary that truth should embody
itself; it is enough if it hovers in spirit around us and
causes harmony, and if it vibrates with earnest, friendly
tones through the air, like the sound of a bell.
General ideas and great self-conceit are always liable to
cause dreadful misfortunes.
Bentham was fond of quoting the old maxim, Error lurks in
generalities {'latet error in generalibus').
When you play the flute, blowing is not enough: you
must move your fingers.
Botanists have a class of plants which they call Incom-
pletce; one may also say that there are incomplete men.
They are those whose yearning and striving is out of
proportion with their actions and productions.
The most insignificant man can be complete if he moves
within the boundaries of his capacity and skill; but even
great advantages are obscured and destroyed when this
indispensable proportion is lost.   This mischief appears more
138 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
frequently in modern times; for who can satisfy fast enough
the claims of a present whose demands have everywhere
increased and are increasing %
Swift somewhere says, that no man ever cut a bad figure in the
world if he knew the limit of his own powers, and that no man ever
cut a good iigure if he did not know that limit.
It is only those wise, practical men who know their own
powers, and use them with moderation and prudence, who
will do much in the affairs of the world.
It is a great fault to think oneself more than one is, and
to value oneself less than one is worth.
Aristotle, in the Etliicfi, pronounces the fault of esteeming oneself
too little to be worse than the fault of esteeming oneself too much.
From time to time I meet a youth, in whom I wish
nothing altered nor improved ; but I tremble when I see
how many young men are quite prepared to swim with the
stream of time. And here let me again and again call
attention to the fact, that man has had the rudder of his
fragile bark placed in his hand that he may follow, not the
caprice of the waves, but his own enlightened will.
But how can a young man by himself learn to consider as
blameworthy and hurtful what every one practises, approves,
and encourages ? Why should not he, too, allow himself to
follow his own inclinations ?
Beatrix L. Tollemache.
IBcliate of Jrbruarg 1880.
Debate held in February by the members of the Ladies' Edinburgh
Literary Society : Is law sacred ?
ABSTRACT OF THE AFFIRMATIVE.
On the affirmative side it was contended that the sacredness of
law, as law, does not depend upon what the law ordains, but upon
the right to rnle of the Authority from which it proceeds. That all
legitimate law is sacred, but that just because it is so, no Jaw of a
lower authority can be legitimate which violates the law of a Higher;
thus all human law which violates Divine Law ceases to be legitimate.
That there are two sources from which legitimate human right to
rule may proceed,—1st, God-given right, or the authority arising
from nahiral relations, as that of a parent over a child; 2d, man-
given, or that which proceeds from covenanted agreement, either
between individuals, as in the relation of master and servant, or
Debate of February 1880. 139
between a community and an individual or set of individuals to
whom it entrusts its government; and that in all right to rule
thus conferred by covenanted agreement, the right is necessarily
restricted within the limits of the agreement. That no law can be
legitimate which does not proceed from legitimate authority, or pro¬
ceeding from legitimate authority, yet oversteps the bounds of the
agreement whicli conferred the authority, and that that agreement
itself is only legitimate within the rights of the contractors to make it.
That in all the cases which can be brought forward of rightful resist¬
ance to existing law it will be found, on examination, that the law
resisted violated one or other of these conditions of legitimacy, and
consequently was in no true sense law at all, and that resistance to it
was therefore no offence against the sacredness of law, but a protest
against the unlawful usurpation of its sacred name. That the
sacredness of law is thus identified, in the one case with the
sacredness of God-created relationships, and in the other with the
sacredness of contract. And that, while injudicious laws should
unquestionably be altered as quickly as possible, the safety, well-
being, and even existence of the community imperatively demand
that legitimate law should be universally respected and obeyed while
it continues law, however it may run counter to the wishes or
opinions of the individual. Jeanie Mokison.
ABSTRACT OF THE NEGATIVE.
Law, or the rule of conduct prescribed by the sovereign, state, or
government on its subjects, is not in itself sacred. It is only so when
it is in accordance with the really sacred rights of man, which it often
is not. The right of personal liberty, the right of liberty of con¬
science, the right of property, are morally inalienable, except through
the fault of the possessor, and truly sacred; for without them neither
can the individual properly realize his essence, nor can society
develop healthily. Custom, in the history of civilization, generally
precedes law, and the source of law is to be found in social contract.
But society is an aggregate of individuals, whose personal rights and
authority are all they can convey, and no one has a moral right to
alienate his own rights, far less to abrogate the rights of another.
What, then, is the basis of right? Some say that self-interest is the
only reasonable principle of action ; that each has a right to all, but
abstains from exercising that right, to secure his own greater happi¬
ness. He abstains from plunder from fear of reprisals. But we
observe the general good of society can then only be of importance
to him so far as it is a particular good to him. I would, on the
contrary, find the basis of these rights in their other side, in the duly
which a free, responsible, reasonable man owes to his Creator to
develop himself, to become in reality what he is in essence. Any
laws which oppose or interfere with these rights, should be resisted
by the citizen—altered, if possible, or opposed by accepting the
penalty, or opposed sometimes even by evasion ; rebellion against
them may be a mistake, but it is no crime. Governments are more
or less founded on contract; for protection and other benefits,
individuals resign certain of their rights. But they cannot resign
what they have not got, the riglits of others. The sacredness
attached by some to the monarchical form of government, is probably
derived from the idea of the authority of the father of the family
140 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
unduly prolonged. The infant has only the right of life—a right, how¬
ever, not recognised by the Roman law. This paternal authority
has often been considered absolute, inalienable, and sacred, and
extended to the chief of the tribe, the sovereign of the realm, or the
despot who holds all his subjects' rights in trust as if they were
minors.
There is, indeed, a sacred moral law binding on the conscience, which
is quite another thing from human law and government. It should
only be maintained by persuasion, whereas the authority of tlie
latter has to be backed by force. Hence all the mass of legisla¬
tion directed against beliefs and opinions is a mistake. The law
cannot change an opinion, nor has it any right to stifle one till the
rights of others are invaded, till the idea arms itself against society.
If this moral law were observed, no doubt criminal law would be no
more, and civil law reduced to a few rules about contract and
property: but law as we have it is the result of many evils, of
infringed rights suggesting remedies, crimes and their reactions, a
heterogeneous mass of tyrannies and compromises, customs, make¬
shifts, and fictions about projierty, forming a confusion requiring
great administrative powers to extract justice from it, and altogether
rather to be considered as better than nothing than as inherently
sacred. ' The safety of the people is the highest law' is the
conclusion of the Roman Tables, and, says Bacon, 'Judges ought to
know that laws, except they be in order to that end, are but things
captious and oracles not well inspired.' E. J. O.
©ur ILi&rarg Eaftle.
The Letters of Chakles Dickens.    Two Vols.
London : Chapman & Hall     1880.
We live in surprisingly biographical times. Here, in addition to
the three thick volumes of Dickens' life by Forster, we have now two
more substantial volumes consisting entirely of hisletters—five volumes
of biography of this one man ! Nor are we about to pronounce them
superfluous. Dickens was a great favourite with his generation, and
we like to know all we can about our favourites. The books are
written for us, not for a distant posterity ; and whether they will live
much beyond our time matters very little. It is to be hoped, indeed,
that many distant generations may still understand and enjoy Dickens'
peculiar wit and humour, and that some of his works may take their
place among English classics, as those of Fielding and Sterne have
done ; and perhaps in those days, when a moderate memoir of the
author, such as we now prefix to an edition of Milton, will suftice, the
biographer will even then feel grateful for the abundant choice of
material furnished him by contemporary enthusiasm. So let us take
our big books and be thankful.
The letters are edited by Dickens' daughter and sister-in-law ; and
they remark, with justice, that their object is to supply a blank un¬
avoidably left by Mr. Forster, in whose book are contained hardly any
letters but those addressed by Dickens to himself.
Now, letters all addressed to one person certainly will not show the
writer all round; the choice of subjects and the tone of  the letter
Our Library Table. 141
is guided by fresh circumstances in the case of each correspondent,
and it needs many to develop the character. In tlie present volumes
we certainly feel that, as far as letters can possibly convey him, we
see the man as he was. We have letters covering nearly forty years,
and addressed to nearly 150 persons of all ranks, ages, and degrees,—
noblemen, clergymen, lawyers, actors, authors, publishers, artists,
children, and above all for showing the true nature of the man—to his
own family. After reading them we feel that we know him better,
and, moreover (most readers will agree), we like him better. We
have always known his kindness of heart; here we see a sincerity of
religious principle and feeling that perhaps rather takes us by surprise.
This is shown eminently in his letters to two of his sons on their
starting in life ; while in a letter to his friend M. de Cerjat there are
remarks on the Essay and Review and Colenso controversies, which
show a serious apprehension of the matter in hand, and considerable
skill in summing it up on the liberal side, though of course, being in
a mere friendly letter, there is no attempt to guard expressions or to
attain completeness. The serious subjects treated of in the book are,
however, as we should expect, its least abundant elements, and on
such topics he never seems so much at his ease as on lighter ones. A
letter of condolence or advice generally has an appearance of effort
about it which is wholly absent from his pleasant every-day pen.
The effusions of this latter have a marvellous ease and fertility of in¬
vention and expression, which is in nothing more apparent than in
their extreme pleasantness when read aloud; they are running over with
affection and kindliness, with rattling fun and high sjiirits. We defy
any reader to go through many at a time and preserve his gravity or
(if he happen to be in ill-humour at the time) his ill-humour.
To give any idea of the variety of their topics would be impossible
in this short notice. Some of the most charming are the letters, on
all conceivable subjects, to ' his dearest Macready.' There are letters
to his artist friends touching the illustration of his works ; there are
many to his contributors to Household Words, and others, on literary
matters ; and it is to be noted that his language towards other authors
always appears to have been dictated by the kindest feelings, not only
joining in the praises of those who have stood the test of public judg¬
ment, but often commending with enthusiasm works of which tlie
world has been contented to hear no more. As might be expected, he
himself figures very largely on his own stage ; showing though, let it
be said, rather an intense belief in himself and in the value of his
creations than any mere vanity or self-importance. His realization
of the characters in his books was singularly vivid ; he writes about
them as if they were alive—as when he tells Master Hastings Hughes
all that the personages in Nicholas Nickleby are doing and going to
do, or dead—as when he owns to Cattermole that he is breaking his
heart over Little Nell. Again, when trying to make a 'reading' out
of Copperfield, he confides to Mr. Ryland, ' I never can approach the
book with perfect composure (it had such perfect possession of me
when I wrote it), and I no sooner begin to try to get it into this form
than I begin to read it all.'. . . A great number, and some of the most
lively of his letters, give accounts of these same ' readings' in England
and America, and the reader gets worked up to be as anxious for full
rooms and enthusiastic audiences as Dickens and his devoted suite
could have been.
The drollery of the book is in a style which we all know well from
142 Tlie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
our youth up,—those of us who have properly read our Dickens,—and
we enjoy coming across it again, with its old delicious exaggerations,
and its old wonderful power of perceiving the comic element in every¬
thing, and seeing that to the exclusion of eoerythim/ else, so that it can
ponnce upon its prey without scruj)le or drawback.
Take, at random, the following description of a boat-launch from a
letter to Wilkie Collins, "Vol. i. 404 : ' They launched the boat, the
rapid building of which j'ou remember the other day. All the fisher¬
men in the place, all the nondescripts, and all the boys, pulled at it with
ropes from 6 a.m. to 4 p.m. Every now and then the ropes broke,
and they all fell down in the shingle. The obstinate way in which
tlie beastly thing wouldn't move was so exasperating that I wonder
they didn't shoot it or burn it. Whenever it moved an inch they all
cheered, whenever it wouldn't move they all swore. Finally, when
it was quite given over, some one tumbled against it accidentally (as
it appeared to me looking out of my window here), and it instantly
shot about a mile into the sea, and they all stood looking at it
helplessly.'
Exaggeration is not usually strength, but weakness ; and probably,
if we wished to take the matter quite seriousli/, we might consider the
following description of the law (written from his heart as it is) want¬
ing in sober strength ; nevertheless it commends itself to us. Writ¬
ing to Mrs. Pollock (vol. ii. 440), he says, ' I have that high opinion of
the law of England generally which one is likely to derive from the
impression that it puts all the honest men under the diabolical
hoofs of all the scoundrels. It makes me cautious of doing right,
an admirable instance of its wisdom.'
But we must take our leave of the fascinating book, certain that
all our readers only want a hint to make its acquaintance eagerly
for themselves.
(J^uestion .Series.
I. Enf/lish Literature.—Give a short account of Addison and his
influence on our language, with specimens of his style. Answer not
to exceed three hundred words.
II. Geolofij).—Give proofs that the relative positions of land and
sea were different in past geological periods from those of the present
day.    Answer not to exceed three hundred words.
Answers to reach Qu. C., not later than April 5th, care of Messrs.
Morrison and Gibb, 11 Queen Street, Edinburgh. Only one side
of the sheet of paper to be written upon, and it is especially requested
that nothing but the answers may be sent to Qu. C. Any other
communication must be addressed in the usual form to the Editor,
or no notice can be taken of such enclosures.
ANSWERS TO JANUARY QUESTIONS.
The new series starts with a fair number of competitors. Five
have answered in both subjects, and of those who take only one,
seventeen have made Literature that one ; while one competitor starts
in Geology alone.    The order of their merit is as follows : —English
Question Scries. 143
Zi7«ra/«re.—Thorough and Pink almost equal, Thokough best in
point of finish and completeness ; Pink describes prettily, but uses
faulty terms sometimes. In a second group are Eoossaise, Apis,
Irrlicht, Miss Betty, Dot, Arialpin, Arachne ; in a third group
Bianca, Greta, Linda, Eromart, Senmas Beag, Bice, and
Nagol. This last writes very prettily, but misses the point, and
exceeds her limits. Ali Baba sent a good answer, too late for
competition.
Geology.—Best, Arachne ; very good indeed, except for the state¬
ment that in early ages the surface of our earth was entirely covered
by water; this cannot be proved of any period. Bianca, second ;
good, but wanders from the point. Linda and Brktwalda, equally
good ; but the former is scarcely full enough, the latter is too fond of
statistics. It is fair to extract figures from books, but merely to
copy these and add nothing else does not make a good answer.
Next comes Apis, good as far as it goes. Eromart and Pink begin
well, but branch off to points untouched by the question, a serious
error in any answer. On the whole, the competitors have acquitted
themselves well, but there is a slight want of neatness and point in
many of the papers which we should like to see amended.
Give the author and date of 'The Deserted Village,' with the plan
and argument of the poem.
Oliver Goldsmith's fame was already established when his poem,
'The Deserted Village,' appeared in the year 1770. The author's
intention in this work was to expose the evils resulting from the
possession of large and insufficiently cared for estates by absentee,
careless, or luxurious landlords. The good result of this exposure
was, however, marred by some of the faults of the poem, more
especially the impossibility of the prosperous village and the de¬
serted village being the same place. "The first is so essentially
English, the second could only be found in Ireland. The following
may be taken as a brief sketch of the argument of the poem :—'The
former beauty and life of the village are most poetically described,
and graphically contrasted with its present desolation. The cause
of this contrast is then sought for. All hopes of returning to die in
the once happy home are frustrated. The former village preacher
described, and his charity and ministrations in church and homes
dilated on. Then are passed before us the village schoolmaster, the
inn, once so flourishing, now ruined. Then the poet grows contem¬
plative, compares nature to art, and condemns luxuries and their
results, which are here exemplified by the turning ont of the poor
from their village homes. They are forced to take refuge in towns,
but are no better off there. Emigration is thus forced on them.
Our author ends by thus apostrophizing poetry :
' Aid-slighted truth, with thy persuasive strain,
Teach erring man to .spurn the rage of gain;
Teach him, that states of native strength possessed,
Though very poor, may still be very bless'd ;
That trade's proud empire hastes to swift decay,
As ocean sweeps the laboured mole away ;
While self-dejjendent power can time defy.
As rocks resist the billows and the sky.'
Thorough.
144 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
Describe the present distribution of land and sea on the earth.
The surface of the globe is nearly three quarters sea, and rather
more than one quarter land. The distribution is very unequal;
the quantity of land in the northern hemisphere is three times
greater than in the southern. Europe, Asia, and Africa together,
have an area of 24,000,000 square miles; Australia and Polynesia
nearly 3,000,000; and America 11,000,000. The superficies of the
continents, including Australia, is twenty-three times greater than that
of all the islands taken together. That continent which exhibits the
greatest mental activity on the part of its inhabitants is Europe, which,
in proportion to its area, possesses a greater amount of coast than any
other quarter of the world. Sir John Herschel pointed out that
England is nearly in the centre of the greatest mass of land, and
London therefore becomes the natural focus, as the industry of its
sons has made it the artificial capital of the world.
Strictly speaking, there exists but one single ocean ; the gulfs, bays,
channels, etc. are but detached portions of this universal sea. In the
early ages of the world its surface was entirely covered with water.
The formation of the continents by marine sediments, or by eruptions
thrown up from the interior, has since confined the waters within
the great depressions of its solid crust, i.e. its principal basins. The
Pacific is the largest body of water, being 9000 miles from north to
south, and 12,000 from east to west. The Atlantic is 9000 from north
to south, and 3000 to 4000 from east to west. The Indian Ocean about
GOOO miles eacli way. The xlrctic and Antarctic Oceans are supposed
to extend to the North and South Poles respectively; their extent
cannot be exactly ascertained. Arachne.
Notices to Correspontrmts, etc.
Ladies are invited to contribute to this Magazine. All communi¬
cations to be addressed. Editors, Ladies' Edinlmrgh Magazine, Messrs.
Morrison & Gibb, 11 Queen Street, Edinburgh.
Papers intended for immediate insertion must be in the hands of
the Editors by the first of the previous month ; attention is requested
to this rule.
We must -warn our correspondents that no MSS. can bo returned
unless/(«// postage be sent, that letters needing reply must contain a
stamp, and that the Editors can forward no communications left with
them unless stamped. Poems sent in letters will not be returned,
unless a stamp be sent. No anonymous communication either to
the Editors or the Office-bearers of the Literary Society will be
noticed.
The meeting of the Ladies' Edinburgh Literary Society will be
held on Saturdaj', Gth March, at 5 Chester Street, at 11 a.m.
Debate—Is the acted Drama capable of elevating the masses ?
145
SEomen's Clu&s.
By Mrs. Ramsay Laye.
We have before us the rules of no less than four Women's
Clubs now established in London; two, that is, mixed, for
which ladies and gentlemen both are eligible, viz. the
Albemarle and the Eussell, and two for women only, the
New Berners and the Victoria.
The fact of these clubs having been successively called
into existence is very significant, and fraught with interest
from a broad point of view. They owe their origin, not to
any isolated social movement, but are as a link in a chain,
and may be regarded as at once the token and the outcome
of that demand among women for a wider, freer, more varied
life, which is one of the most marked features of the day,
and is making itself seen and felt in so many different
directions.
It is now ten or twelve years since the first attempt was
made to institute a club for ladies. It was projected on a
scale of some pretension, and its promoters were for the
most part ladies of social standing. The scheme, however,
coUapsed, owing to a split in the committee on a point of
the constitution, the admission of gentlemen as visitors,
if we remember rightly. The fact was, that this early effort
was but a feeler in the direction of clubs for ladies; the time
had not arrived when such institutions were likely to prove
a success. At the present day, no amount of dissension
among the members of the organizing committee could
result in the entire abandonment of the undertaking. The
question at issue would have to be fought out, the defeated
party would either bow to the majority, or if much aniimos
had been excited, perhaps resign,-—act, in short, as minorities
do on other questions,—but the defection of even a consider¬
able number of supporters would not endanger the very life
of a club. The first which was opened in London was one
in Newman Street, for ' Working Women,' the term being
taken to include, or rather used with special reference to,
women who were working as teachers, or in any branch of
art; the name was significant of a change which is taking
place in the more thoughtful sections of society, and especially
in women themselves. The day is past, or passing away
very rapidly, when idleness and uselessness were supposed
to conduce to a woman's happiness, or add to her attractions;
No. 64.—April 1880.' K
146 T]ie Ladies Edinburgh Magazijie.
the belief that labour is a curse, is giving place to the con¬
viction that it is a dignity and a blessing, and ladies claim
to work as a privilege in which they have a right to share.
Thus we have, on all sides, authoresses, from the ranks of
royalty downwards, and we may remind our readers that the
production of even a very simple book implies a considerable
amount of real, steady work, both of brain and hand. Ladies,
too, are year by year becoming better known as painters,
lecturers, to say nothing of the energetic few who are forcing
their way into professional careers hitherto monopolized by
men. The object, then, of this club was to afibrd to women,
whose avocations took them some distance from home, a'com-
fortable resort, where they could rest, and obtain refreshment
at almost cost price, and at the same time recruit the mind
by a perusal of papers and periodicals.
It was shortly removed to Berners Street, i.e. early in the
year 1871, where, iinder the name of tlw Berners, and with a
slightly more ambitious programme, it was fairly started on
its career as a pioneer Ladies' club ; if it shared the fate,
not unusual to pioneers, of being outstripped in the race by
younger rivals, circumstances, easy to explain, account for
this.
The promoters of the Berners may be said to have borne
the burden and heat of the day as concerns the movement
for Women's clubs; the subscription was fixed too low to
make it possible that it could be a financial success, or even,
as was proved, self-supporting, while the rent and taxes
were heavy, and the number of members limited. Had the
Berners been a mere business speculation, it would certainly
have been abandoned as a very losing and troublesome
concern; but its truly public-spirited promoters were con¬
tending for a principle, viz., the conviction that Ladies' clubs
were a desirable social innovation, and they accordingly held
on their way, in spite of many discouragements.
The real obstacle to the success of the Berners was, no doubt,
that it was not founded on a sound commercial basis; but it
strikes us, that another disadvantage under which it laboured
was, that its object was scarcely suthciently defined. A club
may be either on the purely utilitarian principle, in which
case the subscription must be low, and in the arrangements
nothing need be aimed at beyond neatness, general cleanli¬
ness, and wholesomeness in food. Such a club, once
sufficiently known, may serve a most useful purpose; but if
the aim be to attract as members ladies whose homes are
replete with refinement, the  arrangements  must be on a
Women's Clubs. 147
handsome and liberal scale, with proportionably high entrance
fee and annual subscription. But while the Berners was the
only club existing in London for women, an effort was made
to draw both classes into it, in other words, to combine
opposing principles.
After a struggling existence of some years, the Berners
died calmly a natural death in 1877, but from its ashes arose
the New Berners, in the same street, though removed to No.
64. The managers are beginning very prudently; instead
of incurring the expense of an entire house, they have
secured no more accommodation than is absolutely necessary
for a limited number of members. The sitting-room is pro¬
vided with daily papers and periodicals, books from Mudie,
and a well-selected little library, which belonged to the club
under its former designation, and was purchased by the
present managers; refreshments, plain though good, are pro¬
vided at an extremely moderate tariff, and a respectable person
is in charge. The subscription is one guinea a year. Every
candidate for admission must be able to supply respectable
reference. As a useful, not a showy institution, the New
Berners merits success, while a certain degree of interest
must always attach to the name, as associated with the first
club formed for women in London.
The Albemarle was opened in 1875. It was formed by
some ladies and gentlemen, and is a high-class club. A house
at a large rent was taken, and handsomely furnished, and the
situation, in the immediate vicinity of Piccadilly, leaves
nothing to be desired. Ladies of position, and many well known
in literature, were ready to join it; while the novelty of a
mixed club attracted gentlemen who were already members
of London clubs ; and from the time of the prospectus being
issued, so numerous were the applicants for nomination, that
it was sometimes thought there would be diflBculty in keep¬
ing the numbers within the limits decided on. The rules,
providing that none but eligible persons be elected, are
stringent; each lady or gentleman seeking admission must
find a proposer, and at least one supporter, who, it is under¬
stood, vouches from personal knowledge for the fitness of
the candidate. Members are elected by open vote in
committee, and one adverse vote excludes. The entrance
fee is six guineas, and the annual subscription four. The
management of the club is entrusted to a committee, con¬
sisting of eighteen members, half of whom must be ladies.
The number of members now is about six hundred. The
accommodation consists of dining-room and drawing-room,
148 TJie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazitie.
writing and reading rooms (the latter regularly supplied
with the leading papers and periodicals), open to all members;
a tastefully furnished drawing-room appropriated to ladies
only; also dressing - rooms for their exclusive use. In
another part of the house are dressing-rooms and a smoking-
room for gentlemen.
Perhaps the greatest proof that clubs for ladies, from a
purely practical point of view, are deemed likely to succeed,
may be gathered from the fact of the Eussell having been
started as a rival to the Albemarle as a mere business
speculation. This is a proprietary club. No expense or
pains have been spared in embellishing the premises; the
accommodation is ample and convenient, much the same as
that which we have just described, with the addition of a
billiard-room.
The Eussell is less fitly termed a Ladies' club, than a club
for which ladies and gentlemen alike are eligible. An
error in the organization has, we think, been committed,
viz., that the managing committee is composed of men only.
This arrangement is wrong in principle, has no advantages,
and certain practical drawbacks; let men be as well disposed
to further the views of ladies as possible, they cannot
understand their tastes and requirements so thoroughly as
women themselves. We think, also, that there should be no
difference in the annual subscription; but while that of ladies
is three guineas, gentlemen pay four or six, according to
their being resident in town or country. The entrance fee is
ten guineas for all alike. Such difference is the less called for,
since gentlemen, if they can, as a rule, aflbrd to pay higher
fees, will always contribute, indirectly, more towards the
support of a club by drinking more wine. The number of
members belonging to this club amount, we believe, to nearly
one thousand.
In this club also, careful precautions are taken to main¬
tain its selectness. Every person desiring to be nominated
for election, must find a proposer and a seconder, or if
unacquainted with any who are eligible to do them this
service, must provide satisfactory reference.
The Ladies' Victoria Club, Argyle Street, Eegent Street,
may be described as, in some respects, rather a house of call
for ladies than a social club. With little show, and less
pretension than either of the two last described, it has one
distinctive feature which is a very great recommendation;
besides the usual accommodation, there are five bedrooms,
which can be taken by the night or for a week.    Ladies
Women's Clubs. 149
living witliin a radius of say ten miles from London, and
Avishing to go to the theatre, or parties in town, are often in
a great difficulty. They do not like returning home by late
trains, nor can they travel in evening dress. If alone, they
do not like to put up at a hotel, which involves, besides, a
considerable expense, and the best class of lodgings are
rarely let for a single night. At the Victoria, a lady, by
bespeaking a room beforehand, finds the very resort she
requires, or even if coming to town for several days, she may
make it her home, than which nothing could be more pleasant
and independent; it would ensure her comfort as to bed and
board, relieve her of the trouble of catering for herself, with
the guarantee of absolute respectability. Being limited to
ladies, the most youthful members can use the club freely ;
and we know that some mothers have found it convenient
when their daughters were returning from school, to let them
stop there for a night, and meet them the following day.
The housekeeper in charge is a superior, lady-like person,
and from her every civility is received.
But the greatest use made of this club will be by ladies
who either live at some distance in London, or come in for
a few hours' shopping from the suburbs. In this way it
supplies a want that has long been felt, and as the terms of
membership are more moderate than at the two last-named
clubs, many a lady who would feel connection with the
Albemarle or the Eussell an expensive luxury, will more
readily join the Victoria, and find it a great convenience and
good economy. There she can make an appointment with a
friend, rest, arrange her dress, write letters, take luncheon or
tea, the refreshments supplied being excellent, varied, and
strictly moderate in price; if she wish to dispose of an hour
or two, she can pass them pleasantly by means of the papers
and periodicals, of wliich there is a good assortment.
Tliis club also is proprietary, the enterprise of an energetic
lady who is at once proprietor and manager. She dispenses
with the aid of a committee, though many ladies of distinc¬
tion have given their names as patronesses. There is no
formal election of members, though suitable references are
required. The terms of admission are—Entrance fee, two
guineas; annual subscription, two guineas. Members can
introduce others of their own family, who, by the payment
of one guinea per annum, without any entrance fee, enjoy
all the privileges of the club.
The number of members at present enrolled is about four
hundred.
150 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
Such are the clubs which within the last few years have
been formed in London for ladies. The innovation has been
accepted by the public very quietly; it has not been the
object of anything like the bitter opposition that many of
the movements for the benefit of women have excited.
Nevertheless it has its opponents; what progressive measure
has not ? The argument of those who object to Ladies' clubs
is, either that they tend to wean women from domestic life, or
that they are unnecessary, on the ground that her drawing-
room is to a lady what his club is to a man. There, it is
said, she can gather round her sources of amusement and
intelligent interest; she has her own servants at command,
and can order what she pleases. If you point to the palatial
buildings into which tlie club system for men has developed,
the answer would be, that so far from there being any
selfish wish on the part of men to enjoy luxuries in which
their wives have no share, it is the delight and effort of most
husbands and fathers to surround the ladies of their families
in their home with as much ease and comfort as their means
at all permit. But this ai'gument, though it sounds
specious, is little to the point; for while the home is,
undoubtedly, what a club can never be, neither is it all that
clubs may be and are.
An almost inevitable characteristic of domestic life is,
that it runs in a groove. No matter how large one's set of
acquaintances may be, still it is a set, and the very word
implies not only a degree of uniformity as to social position,
but a prevailing tone as to politics, religion, mode of viewing
things, all, in short, that goes to make up the daily life, and
this local colouring will be found to extend to the books
which are brought into the house, the newspapers which lie
on the table; the latter will be Liberal or Conservative,
according to the proclivities of the head of the family;
and the lady's opinion, so far as she is interested in public
questions, will be formed from hearing one side only. If
the family be somewhat cultured, the books may be in one
sense varied in character, yet only within certain limits ;
though the whole contents of Mudie's shelves lie before her,
she—the representative lady of whom we are speaking—will
select only such works as have been recommended by others
of her set, or favourably reviewed in the organs she has
been taught to esteem. Of course a woman of full age can
obtain any boolv or newspaper she chooses, but practically
not one in a hundred goes out of her groove; countless fine,
invisible, gossamer-like threads fetter her freedom of will.
Women's Clubs. 151
What a change to a woman so circumstanced, to sit down
before the table in her club reading-room, littered with
magazines and journals, representing many different shades
of opinion,—how her own mind, if she have any, will be
stimulated,—how from first learning with surprise the many-
sidedness of almost every question, whether bearing on
social life, politics, or religion, she will at last try to form
principles for herself out of the conflicting opinions presented
to her ! She will also make pleasant new associations ; she
will encounter women of a different stamp from those who
compose her own set, and she will be drawn to those who
are congenial. She will meet ladies distinguished in litera-
ture and art,—for such are always amongst the first to avail
themselves of the advantages of any new liberal movement,—
and the varied phases of life and character with which she
is thus brought into contact will bring brightness into her
own life, and give breadth to her views.
Women charged with domestic duties need even more
than most men the stimulus and refreshment which a club
supplies. In making this admission, we do not mean to
imply the slightest disparagement of those home obligations
which are linked, in fact, with the dearest interests of life;
but there is no doubt that many of the duties which devolve
on the mistress of a family are, as we heard a lady once
pointedly express it, occupation without either interest or
amusement, while others, such as the care of children, keep
the mind very much on the strain in one and the same
direction.
When a woman has been attending conscientiously for
half a morning to affairs connected with the conduct of her
house, and is, perhaps, fretted by petty annoyances, or
wearied with the chatter of little ones, if not by their trouble¬
some tempers, it is not exactly rest that she requires, but
something to divert and refresh her jaded spirits, and this is
hardly obtained by sitting down in her drawing-room, how¬
ever prettily furnished, surrounded by objects which she
knows by heart so to speak ; calls, either paid or received,
do not help her much,—for the conversation is likely to be
solely conventional,—a drive, for the mere sake of a drive, or
shopping, is not more efficacious ; and when her husband
comes home he finds her languid, perhaps thinks her fretful,
less bright and sweet-tempered than she used to be, or she
may grow fanciful and complain of being unwell: it does
not occur to him to ask how it would be with himself were
his life passed in as monotonous a routine.    He may have
152 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine,
responsibilities which throw hers into the shade-, but house¬
hold cares and worries, if nothing is offered to counteract
them, are like a moth fretting a garment. But suppose the
lady puts on her bonnet and goes for an hour to her club,
her thou"'hts are diverted into an altogether different
channel.
And if clubs be such a resource, even to ladies who have
settled homes and family surroundings, there are others to
whom they offer far greater advantages. The numbers of
solitary women, single and widows, are, if statistics be
reliable, very great. To them the club may make all the
difference between a bright and cheerful existence and one
of loneliness and shade. The life of a woman without ties,
save in the exceptional cases where means are decidedly
ample, is veiy apt to become narrow and meagre, not only
as regards mental interests, but physical comforts. In the
matter of the table, it is very difficult to cater for one, as
any person who has tried knows, so as to afford variety
without waste and undue expense; on the other hand, the
member of a club walks, time and again, into a brightly
lighted dining-room, where a number of small tables are
invitingly laid with snowy damask and burnished glass;
she selects one, perhaps has a friend opposite to her, though,
even if alone, she does not feel lonely amid the life and
animation around; she consults the menu, orders what she
fancies, and though it be but a mutton-chop it will be more
relished, and consequently do her more good than the same,
or daintier fare, partaken of in the solitude of her own
dining-room. If, as too often is the case, means are very
limited, still the solitary lady will do well to strain a point
to become a member of a good club, and she will acknow¬
ledge, we anticipate, at the end of a year, that no money has
ever brought her in so good a return.
Another class who will benefit by clubs, are ladies who
come periodically to London. On these occasions, be it for
a few days or a few weeks, they either avail themselves of a
friend's house, in which case their time is little at their own
command, or they go into lodgings, which during the season
are extremely expensive, if at all good. What does a
gentleman do in like circumstances ? He takes merely a
bed-room in a convenient locality, and lives, practically, at
his club.
There he has his letters addressed, and there his friends
call on him. The same course is now open to a lady; if
she pays somewhat higher for her dinner than she would
Womett's Clubs. 153
have to do in lodgings, by ordering in her own provisions,
the difference will be far more than made up by not having
to pay for a sitting-room, to say nothing of escaping the
proverbially indifferent cooking of lodgings, and the risk of
being defrauded by her landlady. Any one who desires to
make any return for hospitality shown her, can ask whom she
pleases to dine with her at her club. And while we are on
the subject of dinners, we would remark that even a married
couple, with a settled home in town, might do worse than
sometimes avail themselves of the club when friends are to
be entertained. In a small establishment, the giving of a
dinner is rather an undertaking; the cook is not a chef, and
when extra demands are made on her, is apt to get flurried, and
fall rather below par. The waiting, too, is a difficulty, the neat
table-maid or one man is not enough, and has to be supple¬
mented by hired waiters, a course open to many objections;
the lady herself has to give an amount of personal super¬
vision which too often converts the occasion for her into one of
trouble and anxiety rather than of pleasure. All this would
be avoided by inviting their friends to meet at the club.
There, whatever they choose to have they may be sure will
be well dressed and nicely served ; they can order what they
deem appropriate, from the simplest to the most elaborate
repast, and know to a shilling what it Avill cost, while the
guests will probably bring the best sauce, viz. the spirit of
enjoyment, to an entertainment a little out of the usual
routine.
As for the objection of which much is sometimes made,
that clubs, from their very attractions, will tend to alienate
ladies from domestic duties, all we can say is, there is the
use versus the abuse of any and every thing. No advance
in social progress, no acquired privilege, but brings its
attendant responsibility and temptations; but not for that
reason should we hesitate to develop new faculties, and
multiply our sources of enjoyment.
Moreover, and this we say confidently from observation
and experience, that the more a woman's range of thought
is enlarged, and her character strengthened, the better and
more earnestly she will fulfil all relative duties. Is it
expecting too much of clubs to imply that they will be a
centre of influence acting on a woman's life and character—
an influence which will not be wholly, or even for the most
part, frivolous ? From the reading-room she will carry
away subjects of thought which will exercise her mind in
the quiet retirement of home.    The varied associations there
154 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
formed will open up to her new views of life and fresh
sources of interest,—the more intelligent she is herself, the
more this will be the case; she will learn, if she knew
nothing of them previously, something of those important edu¬
cational and other public movements which are engaging the
attention of the best and noblest ladies of the day, not alone
in England, but in almost every country ; she will, perhaps,
feel stimulated to take part in some which commend them¬
selves most to her individual taste and judgment; she will
learn that much of the evil and sufFerins; in the world which
benevolence tries, often how vainly ! to palliate, and can at
best only palliate, is traceable to wrong or mistaken legisla¬
tion. She will find that politics, so far from being out of a
woman's province, do very specially concern her, since the
laws have a direct bearing on domestic life, and social and
family relations.
But here we must stop. "We undertook but to describe
some ladies' clubs, and the subject has expanded before us
until we are ending with the claims and duties of woman as
a citizen. That-is not the purport of the present paper, and
it is time for us to drop the pen.
The programme has been sent us of a proposed political
club for women, to be named the Somerville. The subscrip¬
tion is to be merely nominal, viz. five shillings a year, the
object being to include women, irrespective of class, who are
interested in political and social questions. The fact of such
an association being even contemplated, says more than words
can enforce of the intellectual advance of women at the
present day. Those who combine to form this club will be
drawn together by no prospect of amusement; there will be
no social prestige attaching to it, no observance of those
conventional distinctions which ladies, as a rule, hold so
dear ; the sole bond of union will be congeniality of opinion
on subjects which have hitherto been supposed to have no
interest for women. The intention of the provisional com¬
mittee is not to open the club until one thousand members
are enrolled.
This is a necessary resolution, as an income of two hundred
and fifty pounds, with the most careful management, will be
required to meet current expenses.
[Some of our readers may not be aware that a very pleasant little
club for ladies was opened in Shandwick Place, Edinburgh, about
two years ago. It contains two rooms ; one is prettily and comfort¬
ably furnished as a sitting-room, and is supplied with various daily
Gothic A rchitecUire. 15 5
newspapers, as well as with weekly and monthly periodicals. A well-
appointed writing-table is one of the chief attractions to members.
Off this room there is a smaller one, in which luncheon and afternoon
tea are served to members and any friends they may like to bring
with them. The food tariff of the club is good and reasonable, and
the attendance sufficient. This unpretending club seems to ua
exactly suited to the wants of ladies, who, living in the suburbs or
the country, often feel when in town the want of a convenient place
in which to rest, to have luncheon, or to meet friends by appointment.
Parcels may be directed with perfect safety to the Club-room, and
servants may be seen there. The terms of admission are:—
Entrance fee, one guinea ; annual subscription, thirty shillings. For
fui-ther particulars we refer our readers to the Hon. Secretary, School
of Cookery, Shandwick Place.—Eds.]
Is Sotfjic ^rcijitEcturc superior to ffirccft, 0tO;ffireefe,
or By^intitte ?
(Read at the Ladies' Debating Society.)
II.
Three chief styles of architecture have been recognised in
Eui'ope—the old Greek, the Eomanesque or Byzantine, and
the Gothic, distinguished respectively by the horizontal
lintel, the round arch, and the pointed arch. The first
Euskin considers inferior to the other two. The comparison
of the second, or Byzantine, with the Gothic, is the subject
of this paper. The term Gothic, applied to the last by the
Italians, who considered that development of Teutonic art
to be a barbarous style, is rather a misnomer; but we can
hardly do without it, unless we follow some German critics
by calling it the Pointed Style. I wish to meet that Gothic
where it is considered most triumphant,—that is, in ecclesi¬
astical architecture,—narrowing the subject by comparing
the Southern Basilica with the Northern Cathedral, and
claiming for the former that equality in religious feeling, in
beauty, and in symbolic expression which I believe it to pos¬
sess. Inferior in some points, superior in others, this style is
truly as noble a development of art, and as glorious a symbol
of the aspirations of humanity, as the more familiar Gothic.
To appreciate the differences between the two styles, a
description of the Basilica seems necessary, as there are
few or none in this country to refer to. Early Greek archi¬
tecture, transplanted to Eome, modified by Eome pagan and
Christian, we may call Eomanesque or Byzantine. The
later Eomanesque, was further modified by a touch of
Tevitonism from Lombardic influences. But Lombardo-Gothic,
as it is sometimes called, did not strongly exemplify the
156 The Ladies^ Edmburgh Magazine.
Teutonic element; the Greek idea still predominates, and
true Gothic is rare in Italy.
The Basilica, then (Basilike Stoa or Vestibule of the
king), was a building that first belonged to the king Archon,
the second magistrate of Athens. It was his hall of justice,
the place where much of the public business w^as carried on,
and where the altar of sacrifice often stood. First, in Greece
there are columns outside the central building; afterwards
the building became, as it were, turned inside out. The
columns were surrounded by the outer wall, and the space
outside them roofed in. Such was a common form of the
Eoman Basilicas—a form frequently adopted, with certain
additions and changes, by the Christians, when they became
powerful, for their churches. One of those changes we may
call physical, another ideal. The early Greek Basilicas show
us pure horizontal lines; their long blocks of marble were
safely poised on their strong columns, and satisfied the
builders' love of symmetrical beauty. But brick was used
in Eome, and brick demands and depends on the arch.
Hence the round Eomanesque arch. The ideal change was
produced by Christianity, and its germ is found in the
mysterious, religious, underground catacomb. The Christian
idea is no mere addition to the Eomanesque architecture;
on the contrary, the earliest, purest Christian spirit found
expression in it, and was blended with the earthly splendour
and grace of early Greek architecture. Indeed, the link
with the earliest times and with the purest faith is more
direct in the Byzantine than in the feudal Gothic, which
developed and flourished in darker ages. In exploring the
ancient Eoman catacombs, you constantly come, among the
merely funereal cubiculas, upon a little chapel which is a
miniature of the future Basilica; the semicircular apse at
one end, the tomb of the saint (which served as an altar)
placed before it, the two reading places or ' Ambones,' and
the step between the choir and the nave. This sacred tomb
was afterwards placed at the end of the old secular Basilica
or its copy, and became the ' confession' of the great
Christian Church. The tomb generally still continued sub¬
terranean, and steps descended to the shrine, where lamps
burned perpetually round the resting-place of the saint.
Above the sacred spot the old, round Eoman temple some¬
times rose, incorporated with the long hall which became
the nave and aisles. A new feature was thus suggested and
added by the Eastern Church, to which Eome left the glory
of inventing a truly original form of Christian architecture—
Gothic A rchitecture. 157
the central dome. When this was added the Basilica usually
became crucifonn, the pillared avenue of the nave led up to
the dome and the apse just beyond, and the two short
transept aisles met it beneath the dome. This cruciform
church, with its four converging aisles, was the first great
Christian invention in architecture—invented by the last
strength of old Eome, the first strength of Christendom.^ In
it are preserved Greek perspectives, the arcades of Eome,
and the symbolic ground plan of the Cross.
First in a Basilica comes the entrance porch or atrium, if
enclosed in the building. But it was often open to the air,
as in S. Ambrogio at Milan, a secluded, cloistered enclosure
withdrawing the church from the bustle of the outer world.
Here catechumens and penitents found their assigned place.
Second, the centre aisle, called the Nave or ship of safety, the
place of assembly of the faithful. Third, the usually slightly
raised Cancillium or Choir for singers and inferior clergy.
Fourth, the Hieron hema or Sanduarium—in its centre the
altar, sometimes under a canopy; round the altar, the seats
for the clergy and the bishop's throne. Fifth, the Crijijt or
Confession, with the tomb of the saints under the altar.
' The finer Basilicas,' says Fergusson,' presented an ensemhle
more purpose-like and complete than any Gothic Cathedral
ever displayed. All Gothic Cathedrals fail in having the
principal point of grandeur about half-way down the church,
at the intersection of the transepts, beyond which the
interest declines to the east end. But in a fine Basilica the
interest increases to the climax of the hi"h altar.' Through
the simpler atrium you entered the long Nave, with its two
side aisles and its long perspective of columns, leading the
eye up the steps of the Cancelleriuni, under the great arch¬
way called the Arch of Triumph, and symbolizing the
passage from earth to heaven, to the High Altar underneath
the semicircular apse, one blaze of changeless mosaics.
There is much simple grandeur in this form, and it is
enhanced often by the wall frescoes up the aisles, succeeding
each other in ever-heightening interest as they approach the
altar. Often mosaics above the columns lead the eye to the
culminating splendour of the great mosaics of the apse.
There, on a background of deep blue or pure gold, they were
wont to portray our Lord and the apostles or elders; or
the Lamb and the living waters, and jewelled palm trees,
symbolizing Paradise, all in colours that never dim nor fade
' See papers on ' The Basilica' in the Monthly Packet for last year,
by the E.ev. R. St. John Tyrwhitt.
158 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
through all the centuries. Such, with an elaboration of
splendour it would take an hour to describe, is the style of
the apse of San Vitale at Eavenna. And at S. Apollinare
Nuova, in the same city, an indescribably grand effect is
produced by a procession of saints in life-sized mosaic—the
men on one side, the women on the other, advancing, as it
were, to the high altar with palms in their hands, and their
names blazoned below, forming an invaluable calendar of
the saints of early Christendom. These mosaics, thirteen
centuries old, are fresh as if finished 3^esterday. No archi¬
tectural decoration is so impressive and so effective as
mosaic, for neither painting nor sculpture tells with anything
like the same force to the remotest end of the building.
The inlaid marble Alexandrine pavements were another
feature of the Basilica; not merely the conventional tiling
of ancient and modern Gothic, repeating a few forms every¬
where. The Neo-Greek pavements were laid differently in
different parts of the building, to suit the different forms.
Often they were elaborately beautiful, both in design and
colour, and full of symbolism. Fergusson sums up by
saying: ' All made up an extent of polychromatic decoration
which, in those dark ages when few could read, the designers
of the buildings seem to have considered of more importance
than the architectural work to which it was attached. . . .
The pictures go far to ex])lain and redeem many points in
which the architecture is most open to criticism.'
For instance, the outside of many Basilicas is very plain,
and even dull. ' Never mind the outside' seems sometimes
the motto of the builder. Nor would I claim as equal to
Gothic the Palladian exterior, however handsome, of, for
instance, St. Peter's at Eome, or our own St. Paul's. When
the ancient Greek pillars were enclosed, the result was, of
course, long dead walls and a facade with a pediment.
These fagades are often made beautiful with deep arches,
fair sculptures, rich mosaics ; and in latest work, as at Pisa
or Florence, the whole expanse of outer wall is sometimes
encrusted witli line marbles and exquisite workmanship of
detail. Still many Basilicas turn but a heavy, formless mass
to the street, symbolizing the aspect of rebgion to the outer
world in early days,—still defiant, still reserved. While in
the mediaeval age of faith, men flaunted their religion in the
face of the sun, the Cathedral was the glory and boast of
the city, for the world and the church moved outwardly
side by side. But enter the grave Basilica, and all is
changed.    You find, in the subdued light within, all glows
Gothic A rchitecture. 159
and blazes Avith pure colour; and those persons to whom
colour speaks more powerfully than form will probably
admire a fine Basilica more than the grandest Cathedral,
where the colour depends on the windows, and is more an
accident than an essential.
Here we find one of the chief differences between the
Byzantine and the Gothic, which latter is indeed founded on
the former, and modified by climate and national character.
' Never let us fancy,' says Kuskin,' that the earlier Christians
were not quite as heavenly-minded when they built Basilicas
as were ever the Norman knights and barons when they
built Cathedrals.'    But, to dwell a little more on this differ¬
ence, we have colour of roof and wall in the Greek, as
distinguished from colour of window in the Gothic.    All
attempts to colour strongly both walls  and windows   are
failures—one must predominate.   The windows are generally
small and unimportant in the southern style, where tlie hot
air and sun glare have to be excluded, and a cavern-like
coolness is to be desired.    In the north, too, they had to
build their walls strong against cold and tempest; but they
needed more light—a larger window, so had to strengthen
their walls with  the  buttresses, which  are  so  important
outside a Gothic building.    These large windows were con¬
spicuous, and therefore made beautiful with tracery; they
let in grey dull weather often enough, and therefore were
brilliant with the jewel-like colouring of stained glass.    We
may observe how much a Gothic church loses if the glass be
white or transparent.    But the narrow Basilica window let
in an intenser light, to win a brilliant reflection from the
rich internal colouring already noticed.    Again, the Greek
perspective led the eye inevitably towards the horizon (in
a  Basilica  to  the apsidal arch  and  high  altar), even as
columns  under  arches lead the eye to their  diminishing
diameter—that is, to the roof, one reason of the upward
springing effect of the Gothic.    Again, the snows of the
north required a steeper roof, hence the tendency to high
vaulting, spires, and pinnacles in the Gothic, contrasted with
the low mosaic-set or sculptured pediment and the dome of
the south.    One style further sought ornament more in the
play of architecture.itself—finials,corbels, clustered columns,
and mazy intricacies of arches.    Some idea of the northern
forests touched the northern  architecture.    If any natural
form is recalled by the Basilica,—and it certainly is some¬
times,—it is the dark, cool cavern of the East, a refuge from
the heat and the tempest, the shadow of a great rock in a
i6o T]ie Ladies' EdinburgJi Magazine.
weary land. The architectural lines are simpler, often less
varied and interesting than the Gothic, but the utmost
richness of device is found in the treasures kept in these
caverns—the altars with their marble gates, the capitals of
columns, the tombs, the sanctuaries, the shrines. Fine as
the Gothic work is in some of these departments, I follow
the authorities who call it somewhat rough and barbaric
compared to the exquisite workmanship and intense feeling
for beauty of form and colour that Greece left as a heritage
to Italy—beauty that for a while, no doubt, lingered only in
decorative carving and colouring, till the Florentines caught
the sacred fire of art again from the old Greeks.
Nor, though the symbolism of Gothic architecture has
been spoken of, was it at all equal to the subtil form and
colour language of the Greek mind—equal either in expres¬
sion or in depth of meaning. Ruskin says of some ornament
in S. Mark's, Venice: ' If you will read it, you must
understand once for all the method of utterance in Greek
art here in Greece, in Ionia and the Isles, from its first days
to this hour. Its intense, first character is symbolism. The
thing represented means more than itself—it is a sign or
letter more than an image. This is true, not of Byzantine
art only, but of all Greek art fur sang. Let us leave to-day
the narrow word Byzantine. There is but one Greek school
from Homer's days down to the Doge Selvio; and those
S. Mark mosaics are as truly wrought in the power of
Dcedalus with the Greek constructive instinct, and in the
power of Athena with the Greek religious soul, as ever chest
of Cypoclus or shaft of Erechtheum.'
This legitimate daughter of ancient Greek architecture
was never, indeed, without her heritage of Greek beauty.
In the darkest ages, we have seen, this beauty lay in colour—
colour symbolizing the Heavenly City, with its jewelled
gates and battlements of gold; also in the ^\TOught marble
symbolism of its ornamentation. But it revived at last in
Italy, in forms truly Greek in their exquisite grace and pure
truthfulness, in the work of such men as Giotto, Ghiberti,
and many others. The deliberate Grotesque, the result of
the play of northern imagination, had indeed no place in the
works of the southern architects. It is well that we have
that element in the Gothic ; it is well, also, that we can
contrast it with that love of the beautiful which rejected it.
As, for instance, the grotesque delight in the skeleton and
hideous portrayal of death and corruption (common in
Gothic work), in contradistinction  to the  quenched torch
Gothic Architecture. i6l
and death angel of the Greeks : or the goat-footed, quaintly
monstrous devil of the north, contrasted with the symbolized
evil of the serpent, crocodile, and dragon of the south.
Want of space obliges me to notice only one other differ¬
ence, but it is an important one. The element of aspiration
belonging to the Gothic vaulting, lantern, and spire, is found
in a splendid form in the dome of the Basilica. This central
dome, just where the sanctuary begins, leads the eye, by its
upward curves, higher and higher into the space with an
overwhelming sense of sublimity. Often the effect is further
aided by mosaics or frescoes of circling choirs of angels,
rising and soaring, till form and colour are lost in the dim
heights. In the Basilicas of the Eenaissance, with all their
drawbacks, this magnificent architectural triumph redeems
much. Can we doubt it, any of us who have stood under
the dome of St. Peter's at Eome ?
I have been induced to take this side of the question,
because the church and buildings which seem to me most
beautiful of all that I have ever seen, are S. Mark's, Venice,
with the rest of the square. It is a Byzantine Basilica, with
an enclosed atrium and five domes. In the dim mysterious
interior, the decoration, magnificent as a whole, is delicately
beautiful and wonderfully significant in every part. Every
detail has its inner meaning as well as its outer beauty, from
the splendid mosaics that gleam from the domes above, to
the inlaid dragons and birds in marble that you trample under
foot. It is a religion and a history expressed in colour and
form — a very triumph of architecture. Euskin gives a
magnificent description of it in the Atones of Venice, of which
I shall quote a few passages. He first contrasts it with an
English Cathedral in its quiet Close, with the shaven grass
plots and trim walks, and leads us to the West front:—
' and there stand for a time looking up at its deep-pointed porches
and the dark places between their pillars, where there were statues
once, and where the fragments here and there of a stately figure still
are left; . . . and so higher and higher up to the great mouldering
•wall of rugged sculpture and confused arcades, shattered and grey,
and grisly with heads of dragons and mocking fiends, worn by the rain
and swirling winds into yet unseemlier shape, and coloured on their
stony scales by the deep russet-orange lichen, melancholy gold ;
and so higher still to the bleak towers, so far above that the eye loses
itself among the bosses of their traceries, though they are rude and
strong, and only sees like a drift of eddying black points, now closing,
now scattering, and now settling suddenly into invisible places among
the bosses and flowers, the crowd of restless birds that fill the old
square with that strange clangour of theirs, so harsh and yet so sooth¬
ing, like the cries of birds on a solitary coast between the cliffs and sea.
No. 64.—Apkil 1880. L
1,62 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
' Think for a while of that scene, and the meaning of all its small
formalisms, mixed with its serene sublimity—then turn to Venice. . . .
We find ourselves in a paved alley some seven feet wide, full of people,
and resonant with cries of itinerant salesmen. . . . Overhead inex¬
tricable confusion of rugged shutters and iron balconies, and chimney
flues pushed out on brackets, and arched windows with projecting
sills. . . . We will push fast through them into the shadow of the pillars
at the end, and then we forget them all; for between those pillars
there op)ens a great light, and in the midst of it, as we advance slowly,
the vast tower of S. Mark seems to lift itself visibly forth from the
level field of chequered stones; and, on each side, the countless
arches prolong themselves into ranged symmetry, as if the rugged and
irregular houses that pressed together above us in the dark alley had
been struck back into sudden obedience and lovely order, and all
their rude casements and broken walls had been transformed into
, arches charged with goodly sculpture, and fluted shafts of delicate
stone.
' And well may they fall back, for beyond those troops of ordered
arches there rises a vision out of the earth, and all the great square
seems to have opened from it in a kind of awe, that we may see it far
away;—a multitude of pillars and white domes clustered into a long
low pyramid of coloured light ; a treasure heap it seems, partly of
gold, and partly of opal and mother-of-pearl, hollowed beneath into
five great vaulted porches, ceiled with mosaic, and beset with sculpture
of alabaster,—sculpture fantastic and involved, of palm-leaves and
lilies, and birds clinging and fluttering among branches, all twined
together into an endless network of buds and plumes ; and in the
midst of it, the solemn forms of angels sceptred, and robed to the
feet, and leaning to each other across the gates, their figures indis¬
tinct among the gleaming of the golden ground through the leaves
beside tliem. . . . And round the walls of the porches there are set
pillars of variegated stones, jasper and porphyry, and deep-green
serpentine, . . . their capitals rich with interwoven tracery, rooted
knots of herbage, and drifting leaves of acanthus and vine, and
mystical signs, all beginning and ending in the'Cross ; and above them,
in the broad archivolts, a continuous chain of language and of life—
angels, and the signs of heaven and the labours of man, each in its
appointed season; and above these, anotlier range of glittering
pinnacles mixed with white arches,—a confusion of delight, amidst
which the breasts of the Greek horses are seen blazing in their breadth
of golden strength, and the S. Mark's Lion, lifted on a blue field
covered with stars, until at last, as if in ecstasy, the crests of the
arches break into a marble foam, and toss themselves far into the blue
sky in flashes and wreaths of sculptured spray, as if the breakers on
the Lido shore had been frost-bound before they fell, and the sea-
nymphs had inlaid them with coral and amethyst.
' Between that grim cathedral of England and this, what an interval!
There is a tj'pe of it in the very birds that haunt them ; for, instead
of the restless crowd, hoarse-voiced and sable-winged, drifting on the
bleak upper air, the S. Mark's porches are full of doves, that nestle
among the marble foliage, and mingle the soft iridescence of their
living plumes, changing at every motion, with the tints, hardly less
lovely, that have stood unchanged for seven hundred years.'
E. J. 0.
The Old atid the New. 163
Wqz ©lu anil Wqz Kcto*
By Sidney Philips.
CHAPTEE IV.
' If happiness means the satisfaction of desire (and I can conceive of
no other definition), then there is necessarily something greater, viz.
religion, which implies constant yearning and aspiration, and there¬
fore non-satisfaction of desire. In trutli, that which is deemed the
happiest period of life must pass away, before we can sink into the
deep secrets of faith and hope.'—James Maetineau.
Some people thought that Lady Glentyre's sudden civility
to her neighbours was occasioned by a desire on the part of
the Master to stand for the county. Ee that as it may,
preparations were made at the Castle for Highland games,
to which every one who lived in the neighbourhood was
invited. Her ladyship actually drove over herself to Balna-
goonie, and told Mrs. Macintosh to bring her lovely sister
and that charming cousin whose fame had reached tlie Castle,
and whose grandfather had often stayed at Glentyre in
former years. Mabel rather disliked the idea of reappearing
in general society under altered circumstances, but then she
had never seen Highland games; Maggie seemed inclined
to go ; and Mr. Leslie and Captain Molyneux were sure to be
there, as they were staying at the Castle for the stalking.
Twenty miles was rather far to drive, so it was settled that
the two girls were to stay at Balnagoonie for the festivities.
On this occasion Maggie actually displayed a little feminine
vanity, and Mabel had difficulty in preventing her from
appearing in a white tulle bonnet and ribbons of ibur
diilerent colours.
Highland games are generally rather an imaginary amuse¬
ment. Umbrellas and waterproofs not unfrequently mar the
beauty of the scene, a pouring rain often damps the spirits
and spoils the temper of the spectators, while as for the
unfortunate performers, no one troubles their head to look
at them, except, perhaps, some inexperienced tourist, who may
occasionally be seen standing with eyes and ears wide open,
trying vainly to detect in the pipes something resembling an
air, and wondering how people in the nineteenth century can
still be uncivilized enough to tolerate ' that barbarous Eeel
of TuUoch.' But, for a wonder, though it was late in August,
the Glentyre Games that year actually had the advantage of
164 TJie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
a fairly fine day. Though it rained a little in the morning,
it cleared up about noon, and soon after Mrs. Macintosh,
followed by Mabel and Maggie, entered the grounds.
' Do come and sit in the marquee with our party, Miss
Barnard. I think that you will find some old friends
amongst them,' said the hostess.
A hasty glance at the party assembled there showed
Mabel that Mrs. Macintosh and Maggie would not be wel¬
come amongst them, so she answered at once:
' Thanks, Lady Glentyre, I shall be delighted to join your
party for a little while presently, but now I must follow my
cousins. I see tliat they are turning towards the further
end of the ground.'
Lady Glentyre hesitated; it seemed a pity to let this
pretty, lady-like girl go off and hide herself among the rough
sheep-farmers; but then to ask Mrs. Macintosh to come and
sit amongst the county families was a strong measure;
besides. Lady Glentyre had a son, and nice-looking girls
with undesirable connections are best at a distance. But
then she was really a good-natured woman, and had sundry
tender recollections connected with a ball at the Barnards'
long ago; so she felt for the change in the poor girl's position,
and was beginning to murmur something about Mrs. Mac¬
intosh, when Lady Dartrey bustled up and embraced Mabel
with ostentatious affection.
' Yes, dear, I thought that you would be surprised to see
us here. Julia will be so delighted to meet you again;
indeed we should have invaded your solitude before now,
but they told us that you lived twenty miles from a station,
and the roads are so heavy since the rains. But you must
come and sit with me, dear child. Julia will be here pre¬
sently, and meanwhile we can have a nice long talk about
old times at Barnard Hall. Only think who we have met
staying at the Castle! John Barnard, the new owner.
Such a nice creature! Between you and me, I think that
he is rather taken with Julia, for he never left her side the
whole of yesterday evening. I will introduce him to you
presently, and then you will be able to talk about Barnard.
He is very clever and agreeable, and I think him good-
looking,—at least it's a pleasant face. There he is over
there, leaning against the rope.'
Mabel looked in the direction indicated, and saw that
there were only two men leaning against the rope that
marked off the ground for the performers. One was Mr,
Leslie, the other a tall, coarse-featured man with a red tie.
The Old and the New. 165
who inspired her with quite as much aversion as the
imaginary Mr. Barnard had done.
' No, Lady Dartrey,' she answered firmly ; ' nothing would
ever induce me to be introduced to Mr. John Barnard. It
may be a prejudice on my part, but I certainly think that
he has behaved badly, and have therefore no wish to make
his acquaintance. I will just go and tell my cousin Mrs.
Macintosh where to find me, and then I will come back
and talk of old times. I shall be so pleased to see dear
Julia again.'
Mabel was obliged to pass quite close to Mr. Leslie on her
way to the part of the ground where Mrs. Macintosh was
sitting. As she did so, he started visibly, and hastily joining
her, exclaimed :
' When did you arrive ? I have been looking out for you
for the last half-hour. What makes you so late ?' And
then, when Mabel asked him how he liked his visit, he
shrugged his shoulders and replied, ' To tell you the truth,
the last few days have passed very slowly ; the sport wasn't
bad, the house was full of people supposed to be pleasant;
but I can't tell how it was, I often wished myself back at the
Lodge. But look, Miss Barnard, there's such a nice seat
vacant over there under that large tree; shall we go and
take possession of it ? You will be so tired if you stand all
the afternoon.'
A few moments more and Mabel was comfortably estab¬
lished in a quiet corner of the ground with Mr. Leslie close
beside her, and the whole world of Macintoshes, Dartreys,
and new owners were entirely forgotten; while as for Donald
Dinnie's famous leap, and the celebrated pibroch played by
the Glentyre piper, they might as well not have existed for
Mabel, who was listening to that old story, old yet ever ne,w,
—a story told not in so many words, but in every glance and
every inflexion of the voice,—in a conversation that might
seem dull enough if I were to write it all down here, but
which under the great beech trees in Glentyre Park thrilled
Mabel Barnard more than any other story, whether old or
new, that she ever heard, and of which she will still
remember every word when the most brilliant conversations
have faded from her mind.
' What a swell you are, Maggie !' exclaimed Hector Mac-
donald, as he made his way up to her and Mrs. Macintosh.
' It's all Mabel's doing,' said Maggie; ' I'm glad you think
my new gown pretty.'
' Pretty ! I should just think it was,' said Hector, gazing
166 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
at her with evident satisfaction. 'Now, Maggie, do come
with me for a walk round the park, you won't see any one if
you stick in this corner.' The last part of Hector's argument
proved successful; for Maggie was just beginning to fear
lest Mr. Leslie should not find her in that out-of-the-way
part of the ground, so she accepted Hector's ofter unusually
graciously.
' I say, Maggie,' said Hector, as they walked off together,
' I never saw you look so well before; only why don't you
always get yourself up like that V
' Don't be silly. Hector. Think how ridiculous it would
be for me to feed the chickens at Kilmuir in light blue
cashmere !    Besides, I never could keep things tidy.'
* So poor old Jessie used to say. Do you remember how
she always scolded Jamie and me when we brought you
back from fishing expeditions, with your clothes all torn to
bits?'
' By the by, I must go and see old Jessie before I leave
Balnagoonie,' exclaimed Maggie. ' How stupid of me to
forget it!'
' She'll be very pleased to see you,' said Hector. ' I generally
stop for a crack with the poor old body when I come to
Glentyre by the West Lodge; and she always asks me if I've
seen you or any of the people from the Manse lately. But
what an appalling she-dragon that is who looks after her!'
' "Who do 3^011 mean ?' asked Maggie absently.
' Why, the woman with the sticking-out teeth, who always
bites one's nose off if one goes to the Lodge.'
' Oh, yes, that's her niece Bell; she's a good creature, and
has nursed Jessie ever since she was bed-ridden. But, Hector,
what's become of my cousin Mabel ? I don't see her any¬
where.'
' Oh, no doubt she has found lots of friends; she seemed to
be talking to every one as she came in to the enclosure.
But don't go bothering after her. Here's a capital place.
Look at that fellow who's just going to throw the hammer,
he's one of our under keepers.    Well thrown, Geordie !'
' I think that I should see better. Hector, if I went over
there under those trees. Besides, it would be shady. This
hat at the back of my head doesn't shade me a bit. And I
don't want to put up my umbrella if I can help it, as there's
a big hole in it.'
' How fidgety you are to-day, Maggie ! Well, come along
if you like it better. How long shall you stay at Balna¬
goonie f
The Old and the New. 167
' Only tUl to-morrow; we go back home then.'
'Isn't Balnagoonie a jolly old house V said Hector. 'We
liked it so much when we lived there while Lochinloan was
being done up.    Which room have they given you ?'
' The little east room at the top of the stairs,' said Maggie.
' AVhy, that's the one with the window over the road. I
shall think of you as I pass to-night. Do you sit up late at
night reading, as you used to do V
But if Hector expected an answer to his question he was
mistaken; for Maggie had not heard a syllable of his last
sentence. Following the direction of her eyes, he caught
sight of Mabel, and exclaimed, ' Why, there is your cousin,
flirting her head off with that fellow Leslie. I told you that
she wouldn't want you.'
' I think we'll just stop here. Hector. This is a charming
place. I can see beautifully. What fun it is to watch the
vaulting! Have you really to go off to-morrow ?' And
Maggie suddenly became wonderfully animated, and talked
and laughed in a way that was very unusual to her. She
entered into all his interests with the greatest sympathy,
expressed much regret at his having to go away before the
end of the grouse-shooting, discussed Jamie's last letter, heard
all about the row Hector had had with his father a few days
previously, took a keen interest in cricket and in regimental
stories, and never once let her attention wander, an unusual
thing for any one so absent. Hector thought that he had never
seen her so soft and gentle, and admired the change in her
manner as mu.ch as in her dress. He lingered by her all
day, much to the amusement of some of the bystanders,
greatly to the indignation of others.
Some little time afterwards, Mabel was standing alone in
the crowded tea-room, feeling rather ashamed of herself, as
Lady Dartrey had just rallied her about deserting them for
more interesting society, when Mr. Leslie returned with her
tea.
' I thought that I never should have got back to you. Miss
Barnard. First, the servants were very slow ; then Lady
Glentyre made me get tea for several old ladies; and finally,
just as I was coming back, an old friend of my father's
buttonholed me with a long story. At last I broke forcibly
from him, and left him talking still. I hope that you are
not very angry with me.'
' I, too, have met old friends meanwhile,' said Mabel.
' Lady Dartrey has been talking to me, and so have several
other acquaintances.'
168 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
' Ah ! yes, you must find the Mackenzies and their friends
a great change from the society to which you have been
accustomed.'
' I did feel it a good deal at first,' said Mabel,' but all
that is nothing to the pain that it gives me to feel that my
dear old home belongs now to a man whom I particularly
dislike, and who has behaved to me in a way that I could
never forgive.'
' Do you know of whom you are speaking ? ' said Leslie,
looking very uncomfortable.
'Yes, Lady Dartrey has just told me,' said Mabel; then,
catching a glimpse of the individual in a red tie, who was at
that moment chaffing ]\Iiss Dartrey in a most objectionable
manner, she thought that Mr. Leslie, as he was staying in
the same house, might wish to make peace between them, so
she exclaimed in her vehement, excited way :
' Don't attempt to excuse him. Nothing could ever make
me change my opinion of his conduct.'
' Are you really serious ?' asked Leslie, looking very
white.
' Yes,' rejoined Mabel, ' I mean what I say. I have no
wish for Mr. John Barnard's acquaintance.'
There was a moment's pause. Then she heard a husky
voice murmur: ' Then good-bye, good-bye, Mabel!' And
at that very moment she was seized by Miss Dartrey, and
before she could extricate herself from her cousin's embrace
Mr. Leslie had left the room.
' Found at last!' exclaimed Julia Dartrey. ' I've been look¬
ing for you everywhere, dearest Mabel. Why, you look as
white and scared as if you'd seen the famous Glentyre
ghost. I should have thought that the row those pipers are
making would have been enough to frighten even a Scotch
bogie. Oh, Mabel dear,' she added, ' I am so glad that
horrid man is gone at last. He's the son of a rich Liverpool
merchant, Avho has taken one of Lord Glentyre's shootings.
I wouldn't introduce him to you for the whole world, he
did bore me so.'
' Oh! then it was not Mr. Barnard to whom you were
speaking.'
' Mr. ]3arnard ! good gracious me, no. You needn't look
so innocent. We all know to whom Mr. Leslie Barnard has
devoted himself all this afternoon. What frantic letters you
used to write to me about the way in which he behaved to
you. But now that you know him, you must confess that
he really is very agreeable.'
The Old and the New. 169
'Julia, dear, I don't know how it is, but those bagpipes
really have given me a very bad headache.'
' iSIo wonder! Come up to my room, and lie down, dear.
Oh, never mind your cousins. Miss Mackenzie does not
look in a hurry. What a handsome girl she is, to be sure !
People would make a great fuss with a face like that in
London. But I'm told that she's alarmingly clever ; that
she made her brother teach her Latin, Greek, and philosophy
and logic, and Heaven knows what. Aren't you very much
afraid of her ? She must be quite a blue-stocking. I am
sure that she would frighten me out of my wits. Captain
Molyneux says that they call her the icicle in the county,
because she's so cold and stiff. She doesn't look either
to-day; but then Mr. Hector Macdonald has been always
beside her, and if lie doesn't thaw an icicle, I don't know
what would. Did you ever see such fiery red hair % It's a
shade more brilliant than his tartan, and I do believe that
his face is redder than either.' In this strain Julia Dartrey
rattled on, tiU at length the Balnagoonie party took their
departure.
Mrs. Macintosh was highly delighted with the success of
her day. She talked the whole way home about the party,
and was much puzzled by the silence and evident depression
of both her companions. On arriving at Balnagoonie, how¬
ever, she felt sure of an interested listener in Aunt Jean,
as every one called Mr. Macintosh's invalid aunt, who lived
with them, and who was indeed one of those rare beings
blessed with
' A heart at leisure from itself
To soothe and sympathise.'
Though a great sufferer, a martyr to rheumatism, she
never allowed her own sufferings to engross her thoughts,
but Avas always ready to enter into her companion's mood,
whatever it might be. She greeted the party returning
from Glentyre with her usual patient smile, and began:
' Weel, lassies, tell us a' aboot it.'
Mrs. Macintosh at once commenced a voluble account of
the day's proceedings. It had all been quite delightful.
Every one was most civil, and the girls had been much
admired. It was easy to see who would be mistress of
Lochinloan some day; while as for Miss Barnard, she
evidently found no one good enough for her in the Highlands,
for she would speak to nobody but a Lowlander, Mr. Leslie
of Craigdallin.
' And what for should she no' ?' exclaimed the old lady,
I/O The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
who always knew every one's family history. ' Is he no' her
ain bluid relation. His name is really Barnard, but he just
took the name o' Leslie for the CraigdaUin estates ; his
mither was a Leslie, an heiress, but his father was a
Barnard, a far-away cousin o' her father's.'
' Why, Mabel, only think of that!' exclaimed Maggie.
'Had you the least idea that Mr. Leslie was your own
cousin ?'
' Yes, I heard all about it to-day,' said Mabel, as she went
up-stairs to take off her things. Mrs. Macintosh followed,
and Maggie was left alone with the old lad}^ For some
time neither spoke. Maggie stood in the bow-window,
absently playing with the string of the Venetian blind.
Presently she heard a voice say, ' Lassie, come here.'
In a moment she was beside Aunt Jean's wheel chair.
' Lassie, you've no enjoyed yoursel' the day. That's no a
face that's had a day's pleasure.'
' Does one ever get the pleasure one looks for in anything,
auntie ?'
' jSTo pleasure will come in the looking for it, childie. Do
ye no ken the lines which say that
" They who make
Pleasure their only end,
Shaping their whole life for its sake,
Miss that whereto they tend.
While they who bid stern duty lead,
Content to follow,—they,
Of duty only taking heed,
Find pleasure by the way." '
' But, Aunt Jean, it's not pleasure I'm wanting, it's
happiness.'
The old lady looked at her sharply.
'Ye'll no' get that either, lassie,' she said. 'We're no
made for happiness. Ye canua put water into a pot wi' a
hole at the bottom. Noo, I'm thinking we've most of us
just a hole or a crack somewhere, so that we canna hold
ower much happiness.'
' But why weren't we made without holes, able to bear
happiness ?' murmured Maggie.
Aunt Jean was silent for a minute, then she said
solemnly,' Because there's something better than happiness.'
' And what is that ?' asked Maggie.
' It's no that easy to put it into words,' said the old lady;
' if ye've never felt it, ye'll no ken what I mean, but I'm
thinking it's just the feeling the presence o' the Almighty.'
The Old and the New. i/l
' But you surely can't mean that He's further from us
when we're happy ?' exclaimed Maggie.
' N"a, na, lassie, the stars are nae further from us i' the
day, only we canna see them then wi' our een sae fu' o' sun;
we maun just wait for the nicht for that'
There was a pause, and Maggie knelt down beside Aunt
Jean's chair, and laid her head on her knee, as she used to
do when she was a very little child.
' Yes, Aunt Jean,' said Maggie,' I think I know what you
mean, but I cannot quite feel it now. Life seems altogether
hard to understand.'
' Nae doot, nae doot, puir mitherless bairn,' said Aunt
Jean, taking off Maggie's hat and gently smoothing the fair
hair back from her forehead. ' It's no book-learning that'll
teach ye to live. I saw that something was wrong, lassie,
but I'm no asking what it is. Dinna ye gang talking and
asking this one and that. Whatever trouble ye may be in,
just tell it all to the Lord Hirasel', and He'll bring ye
through wi' it. And, lassie, whatever happens, just be true
to yoursel', to your ain best, noblest self, that'll be best for
ye and for others too i' the end. Some day, maybe, ye'U
learn that there's a deal mair joy in seeing the happiness o'
others than in ha'ing it oursel's; but that will no come to ye
just yet,' she added, more to herself than to Maggie. ' Noo
run up-stairs an' tak' off your haps. Supper will be ready
even now, and your sister will be coming doon.'
When the two girls went up to bed that evening, Maggie
followed her cousin, as usual, into her bedroom, and said, ' I
don't understand this at all; how comes it that Mr. Leslie
really is Mr. Barnard ?'
' Did you not hear Aunt Jean say that he took the name
of Leslie when he succeeded to his uncle's property of
Craigdallin ?' answered Mabel.
'Yes; but how came he never to mention his home to
you % ' continued Maggie.
' You see, I had once said that I could not bear to talk
of home,' said Mabel. ' And then we had always so much
to say about music and life and all sorts of things. Besides,
it's only just three weeks since we first got to know them.
But what do you think I found here, when we came back
from Glentyre ? The letter I wrote him to Naples last
winter, returned through the Dead Letter Office; so he could
never have received it, and I was blaming him all for
nothing. Oh, how foolish and wrong I have been! What
must he think of me !'
1/2 Tlie Ladies' Edmbtirgh Magazhie.
'I never could account for your extraordinary prejudice
against a man whom you had never seen, and whose conduct
might have proceeded from perfectly laudable motives,'
observed Maggie.
' Yes; but, Maggie,'—and Mabel grew very red,—'there was
something else I never told you. I found among my grand¬
father's papers a letter in answer to one he had written to
Mr. Barnard in America. What do you think my grandfather
had done'? He had actually offered to pay Mr. Barnard's
debts and settle an allowance on him, if he would come
back and marry me!—me, when he had never even seen
me, and lie refused of course. That was why my grandfather
latterly never would allow his name to be mentioned. I
knew he was angry with him about something. Isn't it
maddening to think of ? I determined when I read it tliat I
would never see or know him if I could help it, and now'—
And she burst into tears.
Maggie looked at her with a perplexed expression for a
miniite or two.
' Do you love the man, child ?' she asked. Silence fol¬
lowed ; then Mabel hid her face on Maggie's shoulder, and
at last she whispered :
' I did think that he was beginning to like me too, at
least he said so many things to-day that made me think so.'
Maggie did not speak for a few minutes; at last she said,
rather roughl}-:
' Why didn't you tell me this before, little one ?'
' I was afraid,' murmured Mabel. ' You once said that
you disliked girls who talked of their love affairs to you.'
' Yes, it was all my own fault,' muttered Maggie, as she
stooped to pick up the letter that Mabel had dropt. ' I ought
to have seen it all long ago. But I am so ignorant of the
ways of the world,' she added, confessing for the first time
in her life that there was something of which she was
ignorant.
When Maggie got back to her room that evening, she felt
as if a new light had suddenly broken upon her, which made
everything seem quite different. How unlike the day had
been to the dreams in which she had pictured to herself
how she and Mr. Leslie would resume a conversation in
which tliey had been interrupted the other day, on the
effects of higher culture in developing the poetic instinct in
nations and individuals ! So many new ideas had occurred
to her on the subject, and she wished so much to hear his
opinion about them.    It was so nice to hear about the world
The Old and the New. 173
from somebody who had lived in it, instead of merely reading
about it. Certainly, latterly Mr. Leslie had often seemed
rather absent. Perhaps any one else would have seen that
he really cared for Mabel, but then he so seldom talked
seriously to her. They seemed to do nothing but laugh
when they were together ; and Captain Molyneux had always
monopolized a good deal of Mabel's attention. Maggie
wondered why she disliked the idea of Mr. Leslie's caring
for Mabel so much. The room seemed stifling. Half
mechanically she went to the window, opened it and leant
out.
How still everything was ! Not a sign of life, except a light
shining in the window of the Glentyre Lodge. It reminded
Ma""ie that she had never been to see her old bed-
ridden nurse. She felt thoroughly ashamed of herself.
How little she did for those around her ! Even a thoughtless
boy like Hector could stop his dog-cart for a minute to say
a few cheery words to an old woman whom he remembered
as a child. Mary Macintosh, too, was always doing little
kindnesses to old Jessie, and to other sick people on the
Glentyre estates; Aunt Jean's whole life was spent in
thinking of others; and Mabel too, how much she did, with
less opportunity than Maggie !
Aunt Jean was right; something more than book-learning
was necessary to teach her to live. But then she did long
so to know the meaning of everything. At that moment
Maggie's life seemed to her a mystery surrounded by
mysteries. That moon whose rays were even now bathing
one of the turns of the river with a weird glory, how cold
and passionless it seemed, gazing down, century after century,
unaffected by human sorrow or joy! Those light fleecy
clouds flitting rapidly over the sky, where were they going ?
What did it all mean ? Was she indeed a part of a mighty
whole, which included all around in earth and sky, all work-
in" in accordance witli a Higher Will, though seeming
discords to real harmony, or was she, after aU, only a dis¬
connected atom ill a universal chaos? Something within
her seemed to answer that perhaps, after all, the truest
wisdom would be gained not by merely speculating about
her fellow-creatures, but by helping those who actually
came in her way. Of course it would be hard to have to
abandon the wild dream of some day becoming a really
clever woman, whose advice and opinion would be sought
by the thinkers of the day, and who would show the world,
and above all, Mr. Leslie, what a woman's brain could do;
174 The Ladies' Edinbm-gh Magazine.
but then would she not be amply repaid for any sacrifice if
she could only feel, with the calm assurance that shone
through every line of Aunt Jean's suffering face, that she
too, however feeblyand imperfectly, was working in harmony
with a divine will that guided all within and around?
Engrossed with these thoughts, she scarcely heeded the cold,
but remained at the window far into the nicjht.
That same night old Jessie Cameron was seized Avith spasms
of pain, and obliged to wake the relation who took care of
her.
' Eh, Bell,' she said, after her niece had given her an extra
pillow, and was sitting up trying to make her some tea,—
' Eh, Bell, but it's awfu' to think how mony nichts' rest ye've
lost along o' me. I wonder whiles why the Lord doesna
send for me; there's Mackay's young lassie took aff last
week, and mony ithers, while a puir useless auld body's left
still, a burden to hersel' and her freens.'
' Weel,' said Bell roughly, stirring up the tea-leaves in the
little brown pot to make the tea draw faster,—' weel, maybe
there's a rizzon for't. There's a rizzon for maist things,
I'm thinking, only we canna see't the noo. But ye've had a
sair shake o' late. I'm thinking it wull no' be sae very lang
either till I'll hae the laying oot o' ye,' she add6d, as if that
was the most cheeiful prospect in the world.
'And, Bell,' resumed the old woman for the hundredth
time at least, ' ye'll no forget all I tauld ye aboot the
buryin'. There's twanty-six shillin', forbye pence, i' the
stocking for the whisky, but it maun be the best Ferrintosh,
lassie. An ye'll gie the job for the coffin to Jock Macphaidin,
he'll do't mair rizzonable nor Allister. And ye'll tell the
minister, that if it's a damp day he's no to tak' aff his hat i'
the kirkyard. Mony's the time I've seen him come back
fra' thae buryin's wi' a sair housten, honest man; an' I'm
thinkin' the corpse wadna be the waur buried for the
minister's head bein' keepit warm.'
' Ay, ay, I'll no forget, dinna fash yoursel'; but noo the
tea's ready, and I'se gang back to bed. Ye'll no be wanting
ony ither thing V
' Na, na, lassie, sax hoors to day ! Eh, the weariness o't!
An' to think that but for me ye wad ha' had a hoose o' yer
ain lang syne, Bell, and maybe mony bonnie bairnies even
noo. No but what I'm thinkin' there's them as ought to ha'
M'aited for ye.'
' Na, na, aunt, dinna say that,' exclaimed Bell as she gave
a parting shake to the old woman's pillow.    ' Sandie wa'
The Old and the New. 17 5
richt. When I tauld him I couldna gang to Glasgie and ye
sac helpless, he just waited sax year, an' then he took a bit
wifie, a dacent body, to keep the hoose clean till him. An'
I'll never say but that he wa' richt. I can fend for mysel'
w'eel eneugh; no but what when tatties is heavy it wad
whiles be weel to hae a man to help's wi' the liftin'. Still a
man's a puir cratur when he's left till himsel'. It wa' the
Lord Himsel' that said, " It isua guid for the man to be
alane." Noo, I never heard that the Lord or ony ither body
said that it wasna guid for the woman to be alane.'
' Weel, weel, lassie,' said old Jessie, fretfully shifting her
position, 'it's just the Lord's wull, and ye'll mind that I
tauld ye aye that Sandie wasna but a ne'er-do-weel.'
'There's nae better cratur nor Sandie in all Scotland,'
exclaimed Bell, ' let alone that he's making mair nor thirty
shillin' a week the noo,' she added regretfully as she went
back to bed.
But her rest that night was doomed to be but short. She
had scarcely lain down again before she was roused by the
unwonted sound of approaching wheels. Hastily throw-ing
on her clothes, she ran out to open the Lodge gates.
' An' wha's oot sae late the nicht ?' asked Jessie when she
■returned.
' It's just the young laird ga'in back to Lochinloan. He
maun hae stayed to the dancing at the Castle.'
' Eh, but isna that strange noo !' exclaimed Jessie. ' I wa'
just prayin' for Master Hector and for Miss Maggie too.
They wa' tellin' me that he never left her side at the Castle
the day, nor tak's his een aff' her at kirk either, an' he gangs
to Kilmuir ilka Sabl^ath. Eh, but they wad mak' an unco'
bonnie pair if the Lord wad only bring it aboot; and whiles,
when the pain will no let me sleep, I pray for them baith,
dear bairnies,' she added, as the sound of the wheels died
away in the distance.
Maggie, too, heard those wheels, and retreated hastily from
the window, but not before Hector had caught a glimpse of
a light and of the outlines of her well-known form.
' Then she really does care after all,' he muttered. ' She's
not the girl to lead a fellow on without meaning anything.
I wish I were half good enough for her. How the governor
will swear, though, when he hears of it! Hang it all; I
must have her though, somehow. It's an awful bore having
to go back to the regiment just now; but Maggie won't
change, it isn't in her. In three months I shall come back on
long leave, and then'—   And Hector gave such a jerk to the
176 The Ladies Edutburgli Magazine.
reins in his excitement, that the old mare started forward at
twice her usual pace, and there was no holding her in till
they reached the Lochinloan gates, where they arrived in an
unusually short time, at least so it seemed to Hector, whose
mind was full of wild schemes for the future.
{To he, continued.)
Mit Jamtlie iHenticlsso|)n, XZ29-X845.
(By S. Von Hensel.)
By Hon. Mrs. Lionel Tollemache.
Eather more than twenty years ago, tlie last great political
distinction between Jews and Christians in England was
removed. It was a sign of the position they had won in the
commercial and social world; for England has long been in
advance of continental nations in the welcome she has
given to the Jews. Even so liberal a writer as Geor£fe
Sand has made one of the characters in Valvedrc speak of
the Jews as a race antagonistic to other races, though the
qualities which make it so are the result of the treatment
it has received from Christian nations.
' C'est done un etre puissant que je redoute pour I'avenir de
la soci^te, comme je redoute pour cette foret ou nous voici la
chute des blocs de granit que les glaces retiennent au dessous
d'elle. Je ne hais pas le rocher. ... Je respecte son origine,
et meme je I'^tudie avec un certain trouble religieux; mais
je vois la loi qui Tentraine, et qui, tout en le desagr^geant,
r^unit dans une commune fatalite sa mine et celle des etres
de creation plus mod erne qui out pousse sur ses flancs.
Notre sagesse, notre science, religieux et sociale, out pris
racine dans le cendre du monde Hi^braique, et, ingrats
disciples, nous avons voulu I'aneantir au lieu de I'amener a,
nous suivre, il se venge. . . . Alors, selon toi, les juifs sout
les futurs maitres du monde ? pour un moment, je n'en doute
pas; apr^s quoi, d'autres cataclysmes les emiDorteront vite,
s'ils restent juifs; il faut que tout se renouvelle ou perisse,
c'est la loi de I'univers.'
George Sand lived to see the increasing influence of the
Jews in politics; but she had no sympathy with them as
a nation. It is interesting to compare this passage with
numberless passages in George Eliot's Daniel Veroiida and
ThcophrasUis Such, where the Jew is no longer regarded as an
intruder in our nation, but as a giiest, exiled from his own
Die Familie Mendelssohn, 1729-1845. 177
land, whom we have hospitably received, but whom we must
aid to return to his native country.
The position of the Jews in Germany is still an unpleasant
one in social matters. They are not received into the best
society (with the exception of those eminent scientific and
literary men whom the Court patronizes); and before 1848
no Jew was allowed to spend a night in the free town of
Lubeck. At the same date in Wiirtemburg, the inhabitants
of a Jewish, were forbidden to pass through a Chris¬
tian village on their way to the Jewish cemetery, and
were obliged to go at night by a circuitous road to bury
their dead. They are now allowed to do this by daylight,
but are stUl afraid to take the direct road through the
Christian village. We realize the still more painful position
of the alien race in Germany in the eighteenth century when
we read the opening chapters of this book. The Jews were
hemmed in on all sides by disabilities which prevented
their sharing the culture of the time, or pursuing any learned
profession, except medicine and the study of their laws.
The consequence of this isolation was a narrow bigotry
among the Rabbis, and a tenacious clinging to old customs
and minute ceremonials, which tended still more to keep
them apart from other nations.
The man whose energy and wisdom broke through the old
boundaries, which he felt were checking the development of
his people, was Moses Mendelssohn.^ He was born at
Dessau in 1729; but not content with the education he
could get there, he went to Berlin, and studied under great
difficulties, having to earn his bread at the same time. He
had also to conceal from the Eabbis that he was studying
German; for the Jews in Germany spoke a barbarous jargon
of Hebrew and German, which Goethe as a boy heard in the
Jewish quarter of Frankfort, and Moses was determined to
learn the language of the nation whose life and culture he
*' In Germany the public mind was surprised at the unusual pheno¬
menon of a Jew suddenly starting forward in the career of letters,
and assuming a high and acknowledged rank in the rapidly
awakening literature of that country as a metaphysical and
philosophical writer. This was the celebrated Moses Mendelssohn,
who by genius and unwearied application broke through the most
formidable obstacles, poverty, dependence, and the spirit of his sect.
It is impossible to over-estimate the influence of Mendelssohn in
Europeanizing, if I may so say, and civilizing his German brethren,
in throwing down the barriers behind which the Jews were self-
exiled, or exiled by the scorn and hatred of mankind, and introducing
them imperceptibly within the pale of society.'—Milman's History of
the Jews.
Xo. 64.—April 1880. jl
178 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
wished to share. He translated the Pentateuch and the
Psalms into German, in order to make the language
familiar to his own people ; and lest he should be hindered
in the task he had undertaken of freeing his brethren from
their bondage, he refused to become a Eabbi and to devote
himself to Talmudical lore, choosing rather the wider sphere
of German literature and national interests. His iirst im¬
portant work was a series of letters, in which he severely
criticised the imitation of the French, which was the fashion
among German writers, and advocated the cause of the
national literature. In this way he became the forerunner of
Goethe and Schiller, and of his own friend Lessing, whose
Brmnaturgie appeared later. Lessing's admiration of
Mendelssohn is shown by his drawing his portrait in
Nathan der Weise, where the wise and upright Nathan, whose
religion is one of deeds, not words, and who recognises good
in other religions besides his own, fitly represents the noble
character of Moses Mendelssohn himself. He was so far in
advance of his Jewish brethren and so liberal in his views,
that Lavater, thinking he was about to become a Christian,
invited him to declare himself openly; but Mendelssohn
had not given up the faith of his forefathers, and the corre¬
spondence with Lavater was very painful to him.
Before passing on to the other members of the family
described in this book, we must give the charming story of
his courtship. Eabbi Gugenheim met him at Pyrmont, and
one day said to him, ' You must come and see my daughter
at Hamburg; she has heard much of you from me, and would
like to make your acquaintance, and I would gladly have
you for a son-in-law.' Moses Mendelssohn, being deformed,
was very shy, and hesitated some time. At length he de¬
termined to visit Hamburg; and during his stay there
he called several times on Eabbi Gugenheim and his
daughter. One day he went to the Eabbi's private room,
and asked him what his daughter said of her father's friend;
the Eabbi hesitated and answered, ' Well, you are a philo¬
sopher, a great and wise man, you wiU not be angry with
the child; she said she was frightened when she saw you,
because'— ' Because I have a hump ?' asked Moses.
Gugenheim nodded. ' I thought so, but I will go and take
leave of your daughter.' He went up-stairs and sat down
by the daughter, who was sewing. They talked pleasantly
together for some time; but the girl never raised her eyes
from her work, and avoided looking at Moses. At length
he skilfully turned the conversation on marriage.    ' Do you
Die Familie Mendclssohi, 1729-1845. 179
believe that marriages are made in heaven?' she asked.
' Certainly,' he answered, ' and a strange thing happened to
me. When a child is born, God says, " This or that woman
is for this or that man." When I was born you were chosen
as my wife, but I heard that, alas ! you would have a fearful
hump; then I said, " 0 God, thou knowest if a maiden is
humpbacked she may become sad and bitter; give me the
hump, and let the girl grow up straight and pleasant to the
eyes." ' He had scarcely finished speaking when the girl rose
and threw her arms round his neck. Soon after she became
his wife, and they lived happily together, and had good and
beautiful children, whose descendants are still alive.
Abraham Mendelssohn, the son of Moses, and the father
of Felix, the well-known musical composer, humorously
remarked, that formerly he was known as the son of his
father, but now as the father of his son. Though it is true
that the world knows little of him, yet we learn by the
letters given in this book how much his children owed to
his calm and wise judgment, and that Felix especially
looked up to him through life as his adviser and friend. He
brought up his children as Christians, not from personal
conviction of the truth of Christianity, but in the same
liberal spirit which made Moses Mendelssohn eager to break
through the barriers of a narrow Judaism, and share the
wider culture of the time. Abraham's letter to his daughter
on her confirmation is that of a man standing, as it were,
on a bridge between the home of his ancestors and the new
land where his children will settle. Like his namesake the
patriarch, he is full of confidence in God's goodness and
mercy, but he is a wanderer who knows not where he is
going, except that it is to the I'romised Land. He set a
high aim before his children—that of constant progress to
something better; there can be no standing still—this was
his teaching.* He served as ballast to the more impulsive
nature of his son Felix. He urged him to diligent prepara¬
tion for his musical career, and, though himself ignorant of
the science of music, had such a delicate ear that his son
placed much confidence in his criticisms.
The family group which gathered round Abraham in his
house at Berlin, seems to have been an unusually united
one; intellectual sympathies as well as domestic affection
1 ' Who, not content that former worth stand fast,
Looks forward, persevering to the last,
From well to better, daily self-surpast.'
Wordsworth, Tlie Happy Warrior.
I So The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
bound it together. Telix visited England for the first time
in 1829, and was charmed with the kind reception he met
there. His long, playful letters show that he had that
imaginative power which enables a man to enter into the
lives of others, so that by insight and sympathy he gains a
truer knowledge of them than a more narrow-minded, self-
engrossed man would. This openness to impressions is as
essential to the artistic nature as the keen observing eye is
to the physician; these impressions are the material out of
which the genius of the artist fashions his creations, as the
accumulated observations of the physician are the premises
from which he deduces new conclusions. Felix, during his
travels, failed not to cany away many fruitful ideas, sug¬
gested by what he saw and heard,—as witness the Scotch
Symphony. In one of his letters he says, ' On the way I
reflected on what has long been in my mind—namely,
whether it is quite right to be wandering about like this for
a month, as one may say, anyhow, without a purpose,
spending much time and money for my pleasure. This
question has troubled me for the last few days ; but then I
said to myself that I was seeing something which I could
never see again—that I was looking at England with a mind
free from business cares, . . . that I should probably never
spend a summer here again, that Scotland has made an
impression on me which will never be forgotten, that I have
never found that time to be lost during which I felt
joyous and refreshed (and if I was idle I did not feel
joyous); but especially I reflected that much new matter is
forming in my brain, which shows me that I have got over
the cold-blooded state which was the result of society and
life in London, and that I feel again urged to compose
freely, which was a power that seemed to have deserted
me. So I dismissed the vexing thoughts, and almost ac¬
quitted myself! (Now there is the question, if you also,
dear father, acquit me!)' The musical genius of Men¬
delssohn, like the poetical genius of Goethe,' might, then,
be compared to one of those intermittent streams which are
the overflow of some deep and hidden well. A French writer
says paradoxically, 'Ze tmi'ps le mieicx employe est celui que
Von percl,' but this is probably true only because he who
fears most to lose time is he who values it most; and Felix
was one of those whose leisure moments, spent in the enjoy-
^ Goethe says, in his Wdhrheit und Dichtung, that the poetical
faculty seemed at times to forsake him, and that lie found it well to
have some prose writing which he could work at steadily.
Die Fa7nilic MendelssoJin, 1729-1845. 181
ment of natural scenery and the society of friends, have left
a fruitful legacy in the music which was an echo of those
past pleasures.
Abraham accompanied Felix in his second visit to England
in 1833, and he makes a remark on the difference between
London and Paris which seems worth quoting. ' Germans,
English, Chinese, and Turks can live together in Paris, and
enjoy all the delights of the town, without giving up one
fraction of their individuality or nationality; they can
imagine that Paris was made for them—that it belongs to
them. ... In England (I mean London), strangers are an
ignored ingredient; in truth there are no strangers, every
one is altogether English. The stranger must entirely re¬
nounce himself—must denationalize himself; he must belong
entirely to London and to the English in order to obtain
any kind of society, or any insight into the mode of living.'
This reminds us of a remark made on the difference between
the French and the English in the power of colonizing.
The former are bad colonists, because they sink to the level
of the race among whom they live; the English, on the
other hand, are good colonists, because they possess a sturdy
energy which bends others to itself, and which goes steadily
forward to a certain goal. It may be this strong indi¬
viduality which produced the difference between London
and Paris, thus commented upon by Abraham Mendelssohn,
or it may be that in London people work (it is a great
commercial city), while in Paris they amuse themselves (it
is the city j9a?' excellence of pleasure), and work is a greater
bond of union than amusement. In the former case the
interest is continuous and increasing; in the latter it is
decreasing, for mere pleasure palls at last.
Abraham died in 1835, just before the completion of his
son's great oratorio ' St. Paul,' in the composition of which he
had taken great interest. Felix felt his death so much, that
in one of his letters he says that he feels as if he must give
up living, or begin life anew. In 1836 this new life began by
his marriage with Cecile Jeanrenaud, whose especial charm
lay in a happy disposition and even temper, which made her
a fit wife for the more excitable Felix. His sister, Fanny
Hensel, wrote to an old friend, Klingemann, ' She is such an
amiable being, so childishly unaffected, so fresh and gay and
even-tempered, that I think Felix lucky to have found her,
for she loves him dearly, but yet does not spoil him too
much, and meets his wayward moods with an equanimity
which may, perhaps, at last free him from them.    Her pre-
l82 Tlie Ladies' Edinbiu-gh Magazine.
sence is something like fresh air, it is so light, clear, and
natural.'
The letters of Fanny Hensel, written during a stay at
Eome, give us a lively picture of artistic society there. Her
salon was the favourite resort of lovers of music, for she was
almost as accomplished a pianist as her brother; her husband,
William Hensel, was an artist, and they both thoroughly
appreciated the treasures which Eome contains, and the
delightful spring of an Italian climate.
Some years later the younger sister, Eebecca Dirichlet,
went to Italy and kept up a constant correspondence with
her sister ; Fanny, in return, gives her the news from Berlin,
and mentions, among the musical celebrities of the day, the
twelve-year-old Joachim, the violinist, who was already
making himself famous in 1843. She especially mentions
his independent ways, that he lived alone at Berlin, and was
already such a proficient on the violin, that David declared
he could teach him nothing further. She also describes the
representation of ' A Midsummer Night's Dream,' with Men¬
delssohn's music, which was a gi'eat success; and certainly
such music was well fitted for the graceful fairies and quaint
characters with which Shakspere's fancy fills the stage.
Felix had that touch of humour and playfulness which enables
the man of genius and the child to meet on the common
ground of ideal fancies lying outside the practical world of
realities; he could delight in Puck and Peas-blossom and
Mustard-seed, and throw himself heartily into the spirit of
the play. We cannot help remarking, by the Avay, that
Shakspere must have been a good playfellow with children;
for a certain amount of imagination is essential to throw
aside the grown-up self and sympathize with the world of
make-believes delighted in by childhood. One can only
regret that Mendelssohn was not inspired by Shakspere's
most poetical play, ' The Tempest,' to give us some of the
beautiful sounds which must have floated round Prospero's
enchanted island.
Four years later, in 1847, this brother and sister, so
devotedly attached to one another, died within six months.
Fanny was taken first, and Felix never recovered the blow.
There are some—and perhaps their lot is a happy one—upon
whom death comes suddenly, as night in the tropics, without
the slow warning twilight of old age.
We close the volume with regret, for we cannot but feel
that we have lost a friend; yet with regret is mingled grati¬
tude for the gifts he has left us.    Though their voices are
Notes on the Exhibitio7i of the R.S.A. 183
silent, their music lives to be our delight, as the most musical
of poets says:
* Music, when soft voices die,
Vibrates in the memory ;
Odours, when sweet violets sicken,
Live within the sense they quicken.'
When we look back to the date of Moses Mendelssohn's
birth, and compare the state of the Jews then with what it
is now in the most civilized parts of Europe, we see what a
gradual but important change has taken place, almost as
great as the emancipation of the slaves in the Southern
States of America, or of the serfs in Eussia, though, being
slower, we perceive it less. It w^as Napoleon I. who obliged
the Swiss to accord civil rights to the Jews living amongst
them; but the Swiss, with the narrow-minded views of a small
and struggling nation, look on them still with jealousy as
intruders, who trade with the produce of other men's labours,
but who do not work themselves. This tendency to look
upon the Jews only as traders, often makes us forget how
much of our literary wealth we owe to them, from the
sacred books, precious alike to the student and the peasant,
to the nursery tale of ' The House that Jack Built,' which in
its primitive form is read as an allegory on certain days in
the synagogue service. But, nevertheless, George Sand's
words already quoted are true, that the Jews, in order to
keep the position which their talents and energy have won,
must cease to be Jews in the narrow sense of the term; they
must, as Moses Mendelssohn wisely did, join the progressive
movements of the day, and, till they regain their national
territory, unite themselves heartily to the national life around
them.
i^otes on t})€ lEiIjibitton of ttje Eogal Scottis|j
acaliEmg,
A FIRST glance round the walls of the E.S.A. shows us that
there are no very marked or striking pictures to take our
admiration by storm, while a closer examination reveals
many attractive subjects on which we dwell with pleasure,
and to which we gladly return on a second visit. Almost
at once, on first entering, our attention is arrested by the
very beautiful ' Italian Boy' of Mr. Lorimer. Nothing can
be more pathetic than the earnest gaze of those dark eyes.
There is all the languor, yet passion, of the South in theii'
184 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
expression; and the thin, white fingers toying with the
accordion, tell us the same story of capacities for deep feeling
yet undeveloped. The picture is painted in cool greys,
harmonious enough, but certainly more suggestive of Scot¬
land in their tone than of Italian warmth of colouring.
The other pictures by the same artist pleased us less. There
is something painful in the ghastly complexion of 118;
and ' Farewell' (336) seems hard, and the figures somewhat
conventional.
37, ' A Straggler of the Chevalier's Army' (W. B. Hole),
is well conceived, and full of animation. Its weak point is
in the colouring, which is thin and chalky. We feel nothing
but pity for the wild-looking Celt, who clenches his fist in
hatred of the Sassenach, while yet he struggles on, footsore,
wounded, and weary. But the inhabitants of the quiet
English village return his hatred with interest, even to the
small boy behind the waggon; and now that the dreaded
army is well on its way northwards, they give vent to their
feelings in scowls and bitter words.
' A Story of the Sea' (138), A. M. Macdonald, tells its tale
very touchingly. The little lassie looks up wistfully in her
grandfather's face, as he tells perhaps of the fate of his only
son, her father; through the misty cottage window we catch
a glimpse of that treacherous sea, now blue and peaceful.
Another picture which has caught the spirit of the sea is
' A Hardy Norseman' (142), J. Campbell Noble. The face
of the weather-beaten old seaman is full of quiet power, as
he sits holding the sheet in his hand, while the green water
seethes from under the bows, and far away a passing cloud
liings a shadow over the breezy surface of the sea.
No. 20, a small picture by ' Virginia Ton tana,' if it catches
the attention, will certainly raise a smile at the oddness of
the idea. The motto is from ' My Queen.'—' She is standing
somewhere.' Somewhere! she is indeed; but apparently
she will not stand there long. She stands on the brink of a
raging torrent, with a background of very green sea. She
must inevitably be swept away the next moment; and if
her lover come not speedily, he maj'' ' wait for' her for ever
in vain !
It would be presumptuous to criticize the execution of' A
Dream of Latmos,' Sir N. Paton (255), but we cannot accept
it as an agreeable rendering of the old Grecian myth. Can
this be moonlight, even southern moonlight, this fierce
glow in which the form of the sleeper lies bathed ? There
is nothing here of that melody in a minor key to which
Notes on the Exhibition of the R.S.A. 185
moonlight has been compared; we miss the tender delicacy
which seems the especial characteristic of the story. But
Sir Noel Paton's other picture, ' Sir Galahad' (339), is the
most perfect fulfilment of Tennyson's ideal. Such subtle
conceptions can scarcely be reduced to actual, tangible form
and place, even in a picture; but here the imagination of
the painter has been, as it were, steeped in the true feeling
of the legend; and we are willing to accept this young
knight, with head bent low before the lovely vision, as a
worthy interpretation of one of the most spiritual poems in
our language. The picture should be closely examined; every
detail is carefully worked out, and it is finished with minute
and loving care. The pictures of Waller Paton have the
same charm of imaginative feeling. In looking at his sun¬
sets, such as (331)' The Entrance to Glen Etive,' one feels how
exquisitely he has caught the moment of the after-glow,
when the whole world seems transfigured, with rosy tints on
the mountains, and a vivid radiance on tree-stem and
boulder in the foreground. But is it not a pity that so true
an artist should confine himself to one aspect of Nature,
hovvever beautiful, and thereby run the risk of degenerating
■ into a mannerism unworthy of his powers ? That he is not
yet bound in such chains, witness his excellent picture of
the ' Black Pool, Killiecrankie' (28).—The clear amber
water, and warm browns of rock and heath, are admirably
rendered.
As usual, there are many pleasing landscapes, the subjects
of most of them taken from Scottish scenery, and well ex¬
pressing its character. Mr. Beattie Brown has some good
moorland views. "We much liked his ' Spate on the Conon,'
and still more 306, ' The Peat Cart, Sundown, Eoss-shire,'
with its rich, dark foreground, and low, clear sky. Kindred
subjects, very pleasing in colour and feeling, are 201 and 753,
by Duncan Cameron; but this last—' Whins on a Eoss-shire
Moor'—is spoilt by a hard, chalky sky. Indeed, a want of
distance in the atmosphere, and of tenderness in the skies,
seems to us a defect in many pictures here which are other¬
wise good. Mr. MacWhirter's 'Three Graces' (33) is not
wholly free from the same fault; but what a graceful picture
it is ! The yellowing bracken, and sweet, soft distance, form
fitting accompaniments for the silver-stemmed ladies of the
woods. 'Medmenham Church' (512), Keeley Halswelle, is
a striking representation of a view in England when ' the
floods are out.' The church and its woods form the central
point between a background of evening sky and a broad
186 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
expanse of water wherein the sunset lights are faithfully
reflected. These reflections are beautifully transparent and
true, but the sky is hard. The same painter has a ' Sketch
of Gathering Clouds' (81), which is wonderfully soft and
lovely. 500, ' November,' George Eeid. This well expresses
that moment in late autumn when the rich colouring of russet
and purple on the hillside begins to wane, and the snowy
wastes in the distance loom ominously through the mist.
526, 'A Fair Correspondent,' Miss Mary Chalmers. A
charming little picture, graceful in subject and pleasing in
execution, of a lady writing at an old-fashioned secretaire.
'Phoebe' (178), by the same artist, also deserves to be noticed.
Very clever, and full of quaint humour, is ' Stone walls do
not a prison make' (481), J. Watson Nicol. The colouring,
too, is admirably managed. 'A Wandering Minstrel' (442), E.
Herdman. This is on a larger scale than most of the other
figure subjects on the walls, and the ease and flow of the
lines, and simple folds of the drapery, are refreshing to the
eye. The colouring is quiet and harmonious, and the girl's
pensive dark eyes have something of the mute pathos of an
animal in their gaze. In spite of its antiquarian research, we
cannot like (424) ' Cardinal Beaton,' W. E. Lockhart. Such
a lurid glare of scarlet was surely enough of itself to make
the subject unmanageable. We think more might have been
made of the incident in (76) ' Goldsmith in his Study,' John
Faed. The faces are smoothed out of aU individuality.
These are two feather-brained men of fashion, without any
traces of the power and thought which must have dis¬
tinguished the features both of Goldsmith and his visitor.
And it was surely needless to introduce a modern dining-
room chair of such uncompromising ugliness, as, towards the
close of last century, chairs of a Chippendale pattern would
have been the natural furniture of the room.
Mr. Eobert Gavin's pictures transport us to Eastern
scenes. There is not in the whole Exhibition such a de¬
licious bit of colour as his ' Mosque Fountain' (320). It
quite glows with richness, in the blue tiles round the foun¬
tain, exquisite yellow of decaying marble, and warm scarlet
dress of the stooping figure. Such brilliant hues are a
positive revelation to us in our greyer northern clime.
Similar to this is (471) ' A Moorish Scribe,' the old man's
head capitally painted. In the ' Moorish Maiden's First
Love,' a gentle-eyed Arab steed, we have the same wonder¬
ful blue in the girl's dress. ' Pilgrims to Mecca' seems to be
on the borders of the Eed Sea; the water has a curious oily
Notes on the Exhibition of the R.S.A. 187
consistency unlike anything we have ever seen, but no doubt
true to nature in those distant regions.
No. 254, by J. Archer, is a noble portrait of' Herr Joachim,'
his violin in hand, brow slightly knitted in the effort to
express the music that wells up within him. 321, 522,
Millais' portraits of his daughters, are, we are inclined to
say, as like as life, only more so! Why is it that this
painter is so unequal, sometimes giving us work that will
not die, and then again in an indescribable way making us
feel that he is not doing his best ?
To be hung in the Small Octagon is almost equivalent to
being overlooked; and even when we have penetrated its
recesses, the light is so bad, it is scarcely possible really to
see the pictures. We may mention (622) ' Old Cramond
Bridge,' Eobert Eoss, a picturesque scene, enlivened by a
convoy of soldiers passing. 621, W. Banks, is the figure of
a girl in gleaming gTeen and yellow, with a peacock fan in
her hand, and all her surroundings very decidedly what is
called High Art. The motto is from ' Elaine;' but we think
Elaine was a far simpler maiden. There is much feeling
for beauty of colour in (550) ' Bulrushes,' Elizabeth Gulland,
-but knowledge of drawing is sadly wanting. The lady seems
to wear her rich brown drapery in order to conceal a total
absence of limbs!
Still it is encouraging to see a love of beauty of form and
wealth of colour thus developing itself, although at present
its manifestations are sometimes a little eccentric. Wliat
may be called the Tea-Tray style of Art—Japanese in
minuteness of details, though not Japanese in purity of taste—
is certainly becoming less frequent. We do not see so many
Boudoir Interiors, or First-class Eailway Carriages, their in¬
mates all reproducing the costume of the present day with
great accuracy. Not that it is not right and true to paint
what we see around us; but, first, it should be painted with
an ennobling intention, and, secondly, we cannot tell how
great is the boon we bestow on our artists when w^e allow
them to feast their eyes on grace of form and appropriate
decoration in daily life. Too long has the sense of beauty
been starved among us, but now it seems to be thoroughly
roused. Good taste is studied in dress, in needlework, in
household embellishment, in a way that never yet has been
the case among us. And though there is of course a waA^e
of Fashion in the matter, and probably some of our present
standards may change, we cannot help feeling it a truly
hopeful sign for the future of Art.
188 TJie Ladies' Edinburgh Magasitie.
©Ebate of iSarcfj 1880.
Debate held in March by the members of the Ladies' Edinburgh
Literary Society: ' Is the acted Drama capable of elevating the
masses ?'
ABSTRACT OF THE AFFIRMATIVE.
On the affirmative side it was argued that, historically, the drama
had done much to elevate the masses, as for instance in Greece,
■where it was the only means by which the highest efforts of literature
were presented to the people ; in the days of Shakspere and other
great dramatists, when it was one of the chief diversions of people
of all classes ; and in the case of the religious plays of the Middle
Ages (of which that at Ober-Ammergau remains almost the sole
surviving instance), which had a decidedly moral effect, till abuses
crept in, leading to their suppression. That, though the stage was
very much degraded in the 17th and 18th centuries, it was rather
the effect than the cause of a corrupted society, and only proves that
at that time it failed in fulfilling its obligations. That the objections
to acted plays, whether Puritanical, Evangelical, or Methodistical,
equally apply to other recreations, and have done great harm, ' by
preventing an amusement, which has largely added to the sum of
human happiness, and which exercises a very considerable educational
influence, from spreading anywhere except in the greatest centres of
population, and has multiplied proportionately amusements of a
far more frivolous and purely unintellectual character, and withdrawn
from the audiences in the theatre the very classes whose presence
would be the best guarantee of the habitual morality of the enter¬
tainment. ' Finally, that the character of the acted plays performed
at the present day is on the whole good ; and though in some instances
improvement is still to be desired, still many examples may be cited
of well-managed theatres, of high tone among actors and actresses ;
that the acted drama does exercise an elevating effect on the masses,
as is shown by their appreciation of high-class plays, and that it serves
as a counter attraction to the many low and disgusting performances
offered to the people.
ABSTRACT OF THE NEGATIVE.
Theoretically, the acted drama seems capable of valuable influence
on 'the masses,'but in practice its good effects are scarcely percep¬
tible. Is this not due to the fact that the drama itself rises or falls
in moral excellence with the condition of those it is supposed to
educate 1 Tracing the acted drama to its origin, we find that to be
distinctly religious and educational, both before and after the Christian
era. Noble and pure in its beginning, the drama in Greece and
Rome sank into hopeless licentiousness as manners became more
corrupt. The earliest plays of Christendom were all religious, and
for obvious reasons were only permissible as a kind of pictorial
instruction, suited to the childhood of nations, and therefore impos¬
sible in the present state of Europe. The beauty of the Ober-
Ammergau Passion-Play is no argument in the contrary direction,
fenced as its representation is within the limits of a strict religious
vow. In order to make a theatre educational, we should need
legislation of  a kind inadmissible  in  the present  day.     Without
Our L ibrary Table. 189
such legislation, the stage will follow the fashion of the day, be it
bad or good. The question before the public mind will be—not.
What will be good for the people ? but. What will people flock to
see 1 and whatever wUl draw the greatest crowd will find readiest
access to the stage. No censorship is possible save that of public
taste, so that plays and their authors, however well-intentioned, are
at the mercy of the public. As, therefore, the public taste leads the
drama, instead of following it,—as the plays do not make the people,
but the people the plays,—it seems impossible to prove that the acted
drama is capable of raising the masses.
The voting showed an overwhelming majority for the Affirmative.
©ur Hitirars Eaile.
Feom Generation to Generation.   By Lady Augusta Noel.
London: Macmillan.    1879.
It is not the first time, and probably wUl not be the last, that ' the
Howlate's' pathetic refrain—' Dowglas, Dowglas, tender and true'—has
served to writers of fiction as a kind of under-current of thought to
their story or song. Never in our recollection has the old gem received
a firettier modern setting, than in the graceful tale now before us. The
descriptions of scenery alone would entitle the author to high praise as
a writer; and to the general reader the enjoyment will not be lessened
by the placing the scene in the Highlands, albeit the heroes of ' the
Howlate's' lay won their laurels and lived out their lives on the
Southern Scottish Border, equally romantic and even more abundant
than the Highlands in tales and deeds of chivalry. For a nineteenth-
century romance, however, Highlands and Lowlands are pretty much
alike, and pur author is so evidently at home among the haunts of the
red-deer, paints with such a loving and skilful hand the cliffs, the corries,
the amber - coloured streams, that we will not grudge her Douglas
family their Highland castle and legend, though the latter may be some¬
what hackneyed. Though the story never outsteps the region of the
simple and probable, it is neither monotonous nor commonplace. Each
character is an individual man or woman, whom we come to know and
understand, blame or approve, as their merits or defects are unfolded
by the tale. Colonel Douglas, though not the ostensible hero, is by far
the most complete and beautiful portrait in the book. Noble and
chivalrous beyond all praise, he is yet, thank God, no impossible paragon,
but merely that which may and does continually result from the com¬
bination of the British soldier and the British gentleman—a man whose
Bible and sword lie ready to his hand in all the emergencies of life.
Too bravely strong to comprehend or deal with weakness, this father's
mistakes in the training of his motherless child, the boy's miserable
cowardice and its effects, are mournfully true to nature. Early in the
book, Kenneth fires a random shot, which kills Lord Douglas, his cousin.
The horror-struck child is saved from the pain of avowal by an old
servant of his father, who screens him by ascribing the shot to I-ord
Douglas' own son, Ronald. The deception lasts till the close, till cir¬
cumstances force a confession, years after, from the unhappy young
man. The effects of the lie on his own character, his utter incapacity
to see how terrible the consequences of his sin have been, his selfishness
even in the hour of his self-abasement, show a wonderful insight into
human nature.    It is an ungrateful task to criticize when so much is
I go The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
admirable, but we cannot help wishing that Margaret, Ronald's mother,
could have been held up to more decided reprobation. In her own way
she is quite as selfish and far more heartless than Kenneth, and all but
destroys her son's life and happiness under the influence of the mistake
caused by Kenneth's falsehood. The mother who could say to her own
son at such a time, ' I give you all the pity, unhappy boy, that I can
spare from myself,' strikes us as too selfish really to love anybody or
anything except herself; and as the painful history of her treatment of
Ronald goes on, we feel less and less disposed to believe in a love for
her husband which showed itself in breaking the heart of his orphan
child. Unless, however, people made harmful and silly mistakes, novels
could hardly be written, and there are many ' Margarets ' in the world.
We should have been glad of more marked disapproval of this one, as
we believe she will enlist much more sympathy than she deserves. We
cannot help feeling that there is a tone of exaggeration in dealing with
the accident itself, from which Colonel Douglas himself is not free.
Believing, as all do, that Ronald shot his father, the Colonel speaks thus
to his own son :
' God grant you may never suffer as that poor boy is suffering now,
entirely blameless as he is. . . . My boy, I think it might almost break
my heart to know there was such a load laid on you, as in God's
mysterious Providence poor Ronald is now bearing. Only one thing,
only one, could be worse to me—to know that you had ever acted
dishonourably.'
It is hardly to be wondered at that poor, weak Kenneth should have
persisted in his falsehood ! Such words were not calculated to smooth
his path. But surely so wise and good a man as the Colonel would
have done better for both boys, had he taught them to look upon the
sad event as simply God's will, just as if Lord Douglas had been thrown
from his horse ; had he insisted that no peculiar load ought to be con¬
sidered as resting on the perfectly innocent head of whoever fired the
accidental shot. Kenneth might have been nerved to tell the truth, the
innocent Ronald and his cruelly selfish mother saved from complicated
distress and wrong-doing. But while assuring the poor lad that he is
blameless, all around him act as if he were under some mysterious
curse, till the inconsistency of their speech and actions nearly drive him
distracted.
Though compelled to notice what we must consider a blemish, we
think the book a most captivating one. Marion and Diane are very
pleasing heroines, and all the minor characters are well drawn. Among
these ' minor characters,' we must be excused if we include the dogs.
Only a true dog-lover could have so individualized them, especially a
dear awkward colley-puppy. Gawky by name, whose affectionate nature
has vainly sought for some peculiar ownership or patronage, till:
' Diane's arrival roused him into a tumult of frenzied hope. Here was
some one whom no dog as yet seemed to own as his exclusive property.
Not a moment was to be lost in putting in his claim. ... He was in
waiting by day-break on her first morning; ... he followed her out
walking with as matter of course an air as he could assume, though he
knew that it imposed on none of the other dogs.'
It is pleasant to find that Diane and Gawky are soon fast friends, and
as she eventually becomes the lady of the castle, Gawky's future pro¬
spects are brilliant. We wish that a large proportion of novels by
female hands would leave us so thoroughly impressed with the goodness
as well as the talents of the writer.
Question Series. 191
Question Series.
I. History.—What was the most important event in the reign of
Queen Anne ? Give your opinion as to its results. Answer not to
exceed three hundred words.
II. Logic.—Give various definitions of Logic, and criticize them.
Answer not to exceed three hundred words.
Answers to reacli Qu. C., not later than May oth, care of Messrs.
Morrison and Gibb, 11 Queen Street, Edinburgh. Only one side
of the sheet of paper to be written upon, and it is especially requested
that nothing but the answers may be sent to Qu. C. Any other
communication must be addressed in the usual form to the Editor,
or no notice can be taken of such enclosures.
ANSWERS TO FEBRUARY QUESTIONS.
History. Of twelve answers received, we rank first that of Pink.
EcossAisE and Linda are extremely good ; Apis and Bianca follow
very closely; then Senmas Bheag and Arialpin. A Chylde has
spoilt an otherwise good paper by confusion in her opening sentences.
Abachne, Thorough, Miss Betty, and Madge Wildfire have all
exceeded their limits.
Logic. Nine answers have reached us ; the best is from Seannaig,
very clear, and carefully written ; next Irrlicht, third Eromart.
Pink sends a very good paper. Ecossaise and Arachnb good, but
both are somewhat vague in expression. Greta is hardly full
enough; Dot is too long in coming to the point. Ali Baba ought
to have taken a higher place, but unluckily she has used superfluous
words, and these have made her answer exceed the proper limits.
Give a short sketch of the war of the Spanish Succession.
The War of the Spanish Succession began in 1702. Charles II. of
Spain, having no children, bequeathed his whole dominions to Philip,
duke of Anjou, grandson of Louis XIV. of France, and second son of
the Dauphin, by a will made about a month before his death in 1700.
His nearest relatives were the French King and the Emperor Leopold
of Austria, who, by a singular coincidence, were both his cousins,
being grandsons of Philip III., and both his sons-in-law, having married
daughters of Philip IV.
Louis had solemnly renounced the right of succession for himself and
his posterity in the treaty of the Pyrenees. Leopold had in his favour
his direct descent in the male line from the Emperor Maximilian, the
long continuance of the Spanish crown in the Austrian family, and the
inveterate hatred of the Spaniards to the French. Being joined by
England and Holland, through a treaty concluded at the Hague, 1701,
he declared war against France, and Churchill, Earl of Marlborough,
who had served under Turenne, was appointed commander of the
allied army.
This distinguished general took Venlo, Ruremonde, and Liege,
compelled the French general to retreat, and won the brilliant victories
of Blenheim, Ramilies, Oudenarde, and Malplaquet.
Louis, wearied of the disastrous war, agreed to a treaty with Great
Britain, Holland, Prussia, Portugal, and Savoy, by which Philip was
acknowledged king of Spain, but renounced all future claim for himself
and his descendants to the French monarchy, while Louis made similar
192 Tlie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
renunciation of Spanish territories for the house of Bourbon, ceded
Newfoundland, Hudson's Bay, Acadia, and the island of St. Christopher,
to England, and recognised the title of the House of Hanover to its
throne. Leopold's portion was Naples, Milan, and the Spanish Nether¬
lands.    This was the treaty of Utrecht, signed 171J:. Pink.
People reason without a knowledge of Logic; why then should
Logic be studied ?
The statement that ' people reason without the help of Logic,' is
beyond all contradiction; we all, consciously or unconsciously, go
through the mental process of reasoning many times every day of our
lives, and but few of us have any knowledge of logic. But though
undeniably true, it by no means detracts from the value of that science ;
indeed, it rather enhances it, for since we must all reason, it is important
that we should reason well, and logic enables us to do so. Common
sense and our knowledge of the subject with which we are dealing,
enable us to reason pretty correctly in simple cases, though even in
them we often fall into unsuspected fallacies. But iu the case of
subjects that are more complicated, or of which our knowledge is not
deep enough to give us any certainty that the conclusions we have
drawn are in harmony with facts, we are utterly helpless, and Uable to
commit the greatest absurdities. But logic, quite apart from any
knowledge of the subject, gives us an absolute certainty as to what
conclusion follows from any given premises. A knowledge of logic
enables us to reason correctly in all cases, and at once to detect and to
refute fallacious arguments, whether advanced by others or existing iu
our own minds.
So far we have been considermg logic as an art rather than as a
science. But we must remember that, apart from its highly important
practical uses, logic is of great value as a purely intellectual study.
The contemplation and development of the laws that govern correct
reasoning form an intellectual exercise of no mean value, and tend—
like all pursuit of knowledge for its own sake—to elevate and strengthen
the mind, and to cultivate the power of clear, methodical, and consistent
thinking. Seaknaig.
Notices to Correspotttimts, etc.
Ladies are invited to contribute to this Magazine. All communi¬
cations to be addressed. Editors, Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine, Messrs.
Morrison & Gibb, 11 Queen Street, Edinburgh.
Papers intended for immediate insertion must be in the hands of
the Editors by the first of the previous month ; attention is requested
to this rule.
We must warn our correspondents that no MSS. can be returned
unless full postage be sent, that letters needing reply must contain a
stamp, and that the Editors can forward no communications left with
them unless stamped. Poems sent in letters will not be returned,
unless a stamp be sent. No anonymous communication either to
the Editors or the Ofiice-bearers of the Literary Society will be
noticed.
The meeting of the Ladies' Edinburgh Literary Society will be
held on Saturdaj', 3rd April, at 5 Chester Street, at 11 a.m.
Debate—Is the study of science hostile to a love of poetry ?
Earl of Aberdeen, Prime Minister of Great Britain.   193
E\\t ISarl of a&crtiEcn, ^rtme iHtnistcr of CSrrat
Britain.
By C. L. Johnstone.
In a conversation lield in Paris with Mr. Nassau Senior on
August 31, 1860, the French ex-Minister Guizot placed the
Earl of Aberdeen at the head of then living diplomatists.
' The great fault of the English statesmen,' he said, ' is that
they speak only with reference to their English hearers, and
act only with reference to English interests or English
opinion. Lord John Kussell favoured the expulsion of the
Italian sovereigns because they are under Austrian influence,
and Austria is unpopular in England. Peel called our con¬
duct in Otaheite an outrage to please the missionary public.
Now Aberdeen never fell into this fault. He was a citizen
of the world. He knew the interests and the feeling of
foreign nations, and consulted them. He never lost his
temper.'
George Hamilton (lordon, fourth Earl of Aberdeen, was
born to a station which gave him independence of thought
and action; and with little more to gain in dignities, and a
high moral courage, he adhered to his principles, unswayed
by popular clamour, the ambition of office, or a desire to gain
ephemeral renown. Since 1814 our wars have, to use a
hard term, in reality been aggressive wars, with the exception
of the Indian Mutiny—wars which we might have avoided,
if we had thought proper, with no derogation of dignity, but
which extended our commerce, or exacted taxation and
obedience from otherwise sulky barbarians. The long war
before 1814 was of quite another character. It was to
maintain our very existence as a great Power, and to procure
the independence of our former allies. Hanover was also
owned by the king of England, aud had been for eight years
in the possession of France, when it was restored to us by a
Kussian (!) victory. That war gave us large colonial pos¬
sessions, which secured our influence and the extension of
our commerce in all parts of the globe. It obtained for us
a prestige which made our position in reality unassailable;
for though the French in Louis Phi]iy)Yje's time anuised them¬
selves with planning invasions of England, no man in his
senses supposes that they ever seriously contemplated it.
Our military authorities knew this so well, that they raised
scares to satisfy themselves that the British public were still
Xo. 65.—May 1880. jj
194 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
capable of making the sacrifices entailed by war. We had
one hard fact to face, that we had added 300 millions on to
our national debt, and it was surely not an unreasonable
policy which advocated that we should rest on our laurels,
and in years of prosperity endeavour to pay off a portion of
it, instead of plunging into new wars, which would bring us
no further credit or honour,—for with these we were already
satiated,—but which wars were then as eagerly sought as
now by aspirants to military promotion, and by the dealers
in military supplies.
It was during the stormy period preceding 1814 that Lord
Aberdeen first entered on his political career. He was born in
1784, and succeeded to his grandfather's estates and Scottish
earldom in 1802; shortly after which he made a tour in
Greece, then forming part of Turkey, for the sake of examin¬
ing her relics of a more glorious age. Like most unprejudiced
travellers, he seems to have formed a strong opinion of the
incapacity of the Turks to govern a subject people; and
brought out, as the result of his researches, a book entitled,
Anlnqniry into the Principle of Beauty in Grecian Architccttcre,
in 1822. Much earlier he reviewed Gell's Topography of
Troy in the Edinburgh Bevicw, and received a part of Lord
Byron's angry denunciation of all connected with that
periodical in the English Bards and Scotch Beviewers, which
was published in 1809.
' First in the oat-fed phalanx shall be seen
The travelled thane, Athenian Aberdeen,'
is, however, the most severe stricture which the poet was able
to pass on the young author.
In 1813 Lord Aberdeen was sent as political agent to the
, camp of the sovereigns allied against Napoleon, who was being
slowly driven back upon Trance with a still numerous force.
One of his colleagues at the allied camp, whose sympathies
seem to have gone more with Napoleon (the hero of the
British Liberal Opposition of that day) than with the allies,
was for that reason, perhaps, prejudiced against the envoy,
who acted as the mouthpiece of the British Government; and
his letters assert that Lord Aberdeen did not know French,
and was entirely led by the Austrian Premier Metternich.
These accusations are as absurd as they are false;' for Lord
The author of the Life and Times of Alexander I. of Russia (Tinsley
Bros.) quoted this criticism in vol. 3, meaning it to be given as a
quotation merely to show the critic's warped judgment, but accident¬
ally, owing to a great curtailment of the ms. , the point of the paragraph
was omitted in the type, much to his annoyance.
Victor Eminanitel. 223
where the young Victor Emmanuel grew up, secluded from
all affairs of State, chiefly occupied with his studies. He
and his younger brother were destined by their father to
join the army, and at this time his youthful mind was
always intent on military matters. He loved, we are told, to
hear the exciting sound of warlike music, and to see the
troops, with martial aspect, shining arms, and bold step,
marching before his father.' When at the sight of this grand
spectacle he saw that father's face animated for the time,
his eyes flashing, a proud smile visible upon his pallid lips,
the question Avould suggest itself to the active mind of the
-young Duke of Savoy, a question often doubtfully discussed
among the people. For what is this army destined—against
whom are these shining lances to be directed ? and a crowd
of tumultuous thoughts would invade his breast. ' It was
• the secret of the iather that, casting forth its rays, found a
reflection in the valorous spirit of the son.'
It was thought expedient to select a wife for the hereditary
prince when he had barely attained his twenty-second year;
and as is usually the case with royal marriages, the choice of
the alliance rested with others besides himself. When we
remember that Charles Albert had long endeavoured to
alienate himself as much as possible from Austria, and that
the question constantly occupying his mind was the emanci¬
pation of the country from her despotic rule, it seems
strange and contradictory that, in spite of the dissatisfaction
which he knew it would give to the people, in the very face
of the energetic attacks which emanated from the Official
Gazette, he should have strengthened more closely the ties
which already bound him to that country, by choosing for
his daughter-in-law Maria Adelaide, daughter of the Arch-
Duke Eanieri, Viceroy of Venetian Lombardy.
The nuptials were celebrated with great splendour on the
12th of April 1842, at the Castello di Stupinigi, a country
residence of the royal family of Savoy about three miles from
Turin. Amongst the entertainments which followed, was a
magnificent tournament held in the Piazza San Carlo, in the
large amphitheatre which surrounds the monument to Duke
Emmanuel Philibert, Marochetti's masterpiece.
On the occasion of this marriage, the king extended pardon
to all political prisoners, but ' in spite of this,' says a
Piedmontese chronicler, Vittorio Bersezio, ' there was want¬
ing at the royal nuptials that best and most precious of
elements, the joy and participation of the people.' From the
' Charles Albert succeeded his uncle Charles Felix in April 1831.
196 TIic Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
ston and Mr. Gladstone were in this Cabinet, which had not
been a year in office when the complications arose that led
to the Crimean War. If Lord Aberdeen had been left to
himself, that war must have been avoided altogether, or have
been nothing but a brief struggle between the French and
Turks on one side, and the Eussians on the other; for
Napoleon III., in his subsequent career, showed that all he
wished in a campaign was to gain a battle or two over one
of the ancient adversaries of his uncle; and next to England,
Russia had done most towards completing the fall of the
First Empire. Directly after the coup cCitat he had proposed a
strict alliance with Russia; but the Emperor Nicholas rejected
it, on the score that the Treaty of Vienna in 1814 bound
Russia and the allied Powers not to acknowledge another
Eonaparte on the throne of France, so that before ackiu)\v-
ledging Napoleon III. he must communicate with England,
Austria, and Prussia. Our Foreign Secretary seems to have
forgotten this article of the Treaty, although it was intro¬
duced by our Plenipotentiary in 1814, and without going
through the form of suggesting its abolition to our allies, at
once embraced the offer of a defensive and offensive alliance
with France. Lord Palmerston at that time had profound
faith in Louis Napoleon (though he seems to have been
entirely converted Avith regard to him in 1859). Not so
Lord Aberdeen, who saw the danger of encouraging France
in the policy which had made her a European nuisance
earlier in the century, and remembered that the old
Napoleon had begun his campaign with Prussia in 180G by
intriguing in the East, and encouraging Turkey to declare
war against Russia in order to keep her employed, while
France entered on the Jena campaign against her ally ;
and Napoleon III. was certainly actuated by the same
motive when he proposed to the Sultan that French troops
should occupy Jerusalem, to secure for the Romanists
possession of all the sacred shrines.
Prince Menzikofs mission to Turkey brought the British
and French fleets to the mouth of the Dardanelles, Avhich
they were prohibited from entering by the Treaty of 1841,
although, in consequence of a panic, this stipulation had been
once broken since that time on the part of Great Britain.
Nicholas evidently expected that the allied fleets meant to
break it again, and till they had quitted the neighbourhood,
ordered a few regiments to occupy Moldavia and Wallachia.
which by the same, and by earlier treaties, were under the
protection of Russia.    Lord Palmerston pressed the Cabinet
Earl of Aberdeen, Prime Minister of Great Britain. 197
to send our fleet at once to the Bosphorus. Lord Aberdeen
answered, that the invasion of the Principalities was an
indefensible act, and one that gave to every European Power
a right of interference; still as the Emperor had made no
declaration of war, but, on the contrary, notified that he would
not make war, it became very doubtful how far it would be
justifiable for our fleet to violate the Treaty of 1841 by
passing the Dardanelles. As to Lord Palmerston's assertion
of the general approval which a bold course would receive,
he ended a letter to that ]\Iinister with the following re¬
mark :—' In a case of this kind, I dread popular support.
On some occasion when the Athenians vehemently applauded
Alcibiades, he asked if he had said anything particularly
foolish.'
The want of telegraphs and means of communication
between Asia Minor and Great Britain at that period, added
to the fact that the Turkish highwaymen prevented our
consuls from venturing beyond the towns even in times of
peace, was one cause of the profound ignorance which pre¬
vailed in this country respecting those parts. Shortly after¬
wards one of our generals sent to that neighbourhood,
described to the Foreign OfFice the horrible nature of a
Turkish invasion of Paissian Armenia, which the llussians
could only defend by reinforcements sent by sea, as the
Caucasus was still at open war with the Czar. Yet on the
entry of the Eussian troo])s into Wallachia, where they were
soon attacked by the Turkisli army which crossed the
Danube, our Government ordered the Eussian Black Sea
fleet to remain in its own parts, under pain of attack. In
answer, the battle of Sinope was fought between the
Russian and Turkish fleets, in which the latter was completely
destroyed; and as great pains had been taken by writers and
speakers in this country to create a war which had all the
charm of novelty to the existing generation, the event was
an occasion for a burst of indignation. The Emperor
Xapoleon wrote a letter on the subject to the Czar, which
is given in most histories of the war, but without the reply,
dated February 9,1854. The Czar said that his correspondent
complained of Eussia entering the Principalities, forgetting
that the allied fleet had first arrived in the neighbourhood
of the Dardanelles.
' It encouraged the Turks, and paralyzed the efforts for
peace, by showing that France and England were ready to
support them at all risks. . . . From the moment that the
Turks were allowed to attack us in Asia, even before the
198 The Ladies' EdiiiburgJt, Magazine.
term fixed on to begin hostilities, and to lay waste our part
of Armenia and besiege Akhatzik; from the moment that
it was left free to the Turkish fleet to convey troops, arms,
etc., to our coasts, could we be expected to do nothing to
forestall it ? Sinope was the forced consequence of the
attitude of the two Powers. If the cannon-shots of Sinope
sounded painfully in the hearts of all in France and England
■who entertained sentiments of national dignity, does your
Majesty suppose that the presence of the 3000 guns you speak
of, and their entry into the Black Sea, are facts without an
echo in the hearts of the nation which I have the honour to
defend. To forbid us the right of provisioning our own
coasts, is that the way to facilitate peace ? ' etc.
Her Majesty's own views seem to have been not entirely
in accordance with Lord Palmerston's; and at this period
his desire to maintain the French Empire agreed so well
with the Kadical admiration for Napoleon III. throughout
Great Britain, that he enjoyed the utmost popularity, and
courted it, and was, in short, the ruling spirit in the Cabinet.
' It appears to the Queen,' Her Majesty wrote, October 11,
1853, ' that we have taken on ourselves, in conjunction with
France, all the risks of a European war, without having
bound Turkey to any conditions with respect to provoking
it. The 120 fanatical Turks constituting the Divan at
Constantinople, are left sole judges of the line of policy to
be pursued, and made cognizant at the same time of the
fact that England and France have bound themselves to
defend the Turkish territory. This is entrusting them with
a power which Parliament has been jealous of confiding even
to the hands of the British Crown. It may be a question
whether England ought to go to war for the defence of the
so-called Turkish independence, but there can be none that
if she does so, she ought to be the sole judge of what
constitutes a breach of that independence, and have the
fullest power to prevent by negotiation the breaking out of
the war.'
Lord Palnierston was undoubtedly convinced that Napo¬
leon's ultimate object was the Ehine provinces, or even to
back out of the Eastern complications, leaving the Paissians
and Turks to fight together, while France attacked Germany.
From his correspondence ten years later concerning Schleswig-
Holstein, he appears to have underrated the power of
Germany, and to think that France had only to attack
Prussia, and her conquest of the Ehenish provinces was
secure ; while of Paissia he afterwards observes :   ' She will
Earl of Aberdeen, Prime Minister of Great Britaiti. 199
in due time become a Power almost as great as the old
Eoman Empire. She can become mistress of all Asia, except
British India, whenever she chooses to take it. Germany
ought to be strong in order to resist Eussian aggression.'
So for the sake of Germany we declared war against
Eussia in 1854. German strength and unity has cost
much blood and treasure in this generation to all the
European powers except Sweden and the Peninsula. It
is to be hoped that she will show herself worthy of it.
Lord Aberdeen was in some respects the Cassandra of his
time; for the event has shown, as well as Lord Palmerston's
own admission in 1860, that his view respecting Turkey
was more, just than the optimism with regard to her com¬
monly held in England in 1853. The Crimean War pre¬
cipitated her decay by half a century; and after 40 years
of peace in Europe, inaugurated a period of disquiet, includ¬
ing the Indian Mutiny (a direct consequence of it), which
has continued up tiU the present day. In a letter to Lord
Palmerston, who had said that a reconstruction of Turkey
would mean ' neither more nor less than its subjection to
Eussia immediately, or for a time delayed,' Lord Aberdeen
answered: ' Notwithstanding the favourable opinion enter¬
tained by many, it is difficult to believe in the improvement
of the Turks. It is true that, under the pressure of the
moment, benevolent decrees may be issued, but these, except
under the eye of some foreign Minister, are entirely neglected.
Their whole system is radically vicious and inhuman. . . .
Numerous despatches of Lord Stratford himself, and of
our consuls, describe a frightful picture of lawless oppres¬
sion and cruelty. This is so true, that if the war should
continue and the Turkish armies meet with disaster, we
may expect to see the Christian population of the Empire
rise against their oppressors, and in such a case it could
scarcely be proper to employ the British force in the Levant
to assist in compelling their return under a Mahometan
yoke.' This actually happened in Albania; and M. Thiers
rejoiced that it fell to the lot of Englishmen, not of Erench-
men, to put it down, as he said that the Albanians had as
good a right to rid themselves of a most oppressive yoke as
the Greeks had, when we assisted them in their war for
independence. But Turkey had no hereditary nobility or
landed gentry, and this fact made her especially popular
with extreme Democrats.
Our military prestige, which   had been  at  the  highest
pinnacle since the battle of Waterloo, was rudely shaken
200 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
by the disasters of our first winter in the Crimea, where the
results were so little in proportion to the sanguine expecta¬
tions of some of our politicians, and of the press, which
lightly talked of marching on Moscow and partitioning
Eussia. The Conservatives as a body were generally averse
to the war, and like the old Duke of Wellington, regarded
the Quintuple Alliance, i.e. between England, France, Eussia,
Prussia, and Austria, as the great safeguard of Europe, so
that the wrath of the public naturally fell upon the most
Conservative member of the Cabinet, who was regarded as
too lukewarm in the campaign against our old ally. A
violent attack by Mr. Layard and others, added to the
insubordination of one of the Cabinet, induced Lord Aber¬
deen to resign early in 1855, and after a day or two's
discussion, Lord Palmerston was entrusted with the forma¬
tion of a new Ministry.
In July 1854, the Prince Consort wrote to Baron Stock-
mar : ' Aberdeen is in deep distress at the probable deatli of
his eldest son, as well as the great amount of injustice, not
to say, folly, on the part of the public. "With them the
steam is fairly up as it ought to be going to war, and
Aberdeen is a standing reproach in their eyes because he
cannot share the enthusiasm, while it is his part to lead
it. Nevertheless he does his duty, and keeps the whole
thing together, and is the only guarantee that the war will
not degenerate into crack-brained, fruitless absurdities, which
are certain to turn out solely for the advantage of Eussia.'
(These, we are informed in a note in the Prince's Life, were
projects for reconstituting Poland, and depriving Eussia of
Finland and of the Crimea, etc.) The old Whig party, who
had taken the side of Napoleon I., had always borne a
grudge against Eussia as being a leading agent in their
hero's fall; and her share in suppressing the Hungarian
insurrection in 1849, and thereby reviving the almost
defunct Austrian monarchy, had excited every Eadical in
Europe against her, and the representatives of that party
spared no effort to force this country into a mortal struggle,
which should only cease when one or the other were com¬
pletely ruined. A peer of 82 delivered a speech of this
description, asserting that the Czars had doubled their
European territory within 50 years; and that Germany
was Eussia's paid slave, because the Emperor Nicholas
maintained several German princes as his pensioners. He
omitted to add that the Czar was one of many brothers and
sisters, most of ^yhonl were dead, but had married Germans,
Earl of Aberdeen, Prime Minister of Great Britain. 201
whose dowries he was obliged to continue according to the
terms of their marriage settlements, one of them being
actually an aunt both of Her Majesty and the Prince Consort,
the Grand Duchess Constantine of Russia. These brotliers-
in-law and sisters-in-law were the only Germans in Eussian
pay to whom he alluded, and they were elderly people; so
that in a short time these pensions must naturally come to
an end. The whole speech, and several more, were full of
similar distortions of fact, and Lord Aberdeen corrected
one or two of these statements in his reply. This incensed
his enemies, and Mr. Layard (now Sir Henry) gave notice
of a motion, that' the language held by the First Minister of
the Crown was calculated to raise grave doubts in the public
mind as to the objects and results of the present war, and
to lessen the prospects of an honourable and durable peace.'
Lord Aberdeen tliereupon gave notice of a motion to enable
him to remove such an impression, on which Her Majesty
wrote to him :—
' 2G/7t June 1854.
' The Queen is very glad to hear that Lord Aberdeen will
take an opportunity to-day of dispelling misapprehensions
which have arisen in the public mind, in consequence of his
last speech in the House of Lords, and the effect of which
has given the Queen very great uneasiness. She knows Lord
Aberdeen so well, that she can fully enter into his feelings,
and understand what he means; but the public, particularly
under strong excitement of patriotic feeling, is impatient
and amazed to hear at this moment the First Minister of
the Crown enter into an impartial examination of the
Emperor of Paissia's character and conduct.
'The qualities in Lord Aberdeen's character which the Queen
values most highly, his candour, and his courage in expressing
opinions even if opposed to general feelings at the moment,
are in this instance dangerous to him; and the Queen hopes
that in the vindication of his own conduct to-day, which
ought to be triumphant, as it wants, in fact, no vindication,
he will not undertake the ungrateful and injurious task of
vindicating the Emperor of Eussia from any of the exagge¬
rated charges brought against him and his policy, at a time
when there is enough in that policy to make us fight with
all our might against it.'
The sound good sense of Lord Aberdeen's answer to his
censors in the House of Lords can now be fully appreciated ;
and when it was ended. Lord Clanricarde's renewed attack
was, as Lord Aberdeen wrote the same evening to the Queen,
202 Tlie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
' very coldly received throughout, and ended without a single
cheer.' ^ A few days later the expedition to Sebastopol was
decided upon by the Cabinet, which had hitherto not been
unanimous as to the point to be attacked. A plan for
invading Eussia by means of the Crimea had, however, been
forwarded to the Duke of Wellington by Prince Metternich
as early as 1818, it having been marked out by an Austrian
field-marshal and an Austrian general in the course of that
year, during a tour they made in Eussia. The Emperor
Alexander I. had known both these officers during the
campaigns of 1813-14, and was travelling over his
southern provinces at the same time, so he invited them
to join his escort; and part of their argument as to its
feasibility was drawn from observations made to them by
the Emperor himself. These two spies, for in spite of their
rank they were nothing less, had also advised that a war with
Eussia by England and Austria should be made in union
with Turkey, as in that case the religious feelings of the
Mahometans in the Crimea might be turned against Eussia.
An effort was made in that direction during the Crimean
War, but the Crim Tartar chiefs professed to have lived
happily and contentedly under three Eussian Czars, and
not to wish for a change. Those about Eupatoria, where
the Turkish army was encamped, were, however, advised to
emigrate to Turkey, as it was said they had compromised
themselves with Eussia by their compulsory labour for the
allies; and speculative Levantine shipowners favoured the
idea for the sake of their passage money. Three hundred
thousand of the Mahometan subjects of Eussia, therefore,
eventually emigrated to Turkey, where, utterly neglected, at
least half of them perished in the neighbourhood of Varna
of pestilence and famine, while the rest settled down in the
Dobrudscha, which their industry has redeemed from a
pestilential waste.
Lord Aberdeen's views with regard to the war were
shared by most of those who had seen much of the pro¬
tracted horrors of a strugole between civilized nations.
The King of Prussia, who had been through the campaign
of 1813-14, tried hard to avert it, pointing out that if it
was merely to break down the preponderance of Eussia, he,
her neighbour, had never suffered from that preponderance.
' 'Above all,' he wrote to Her Majesty, 'does God's law
justify a war for an idea? ... I know that the Eussiau
Emperor is ardently desirous of peace.' Her Majesty
^ Life of the Prince Consort, vol. 3.
The Old and t/ic Nezv. 203
answered that she was ' aware that the Emperor of Eussia
does not wish for war. But he makes demands upon the
Porte which the united European Powers, yourself included,
have soleinnly declared to be incompatible with the indepen¬
dence of the Porte and the equilibrium of Europe,' etc. In
March 1854, the Prince Consort wrote of Lord Aberdeen:
' The war is in his eyes like a civil war, like a war between
England and Scotland. I do not like it myself; but for all
that, I cannot conjure up his feeling within myself, perhaps
because I was born in 1819, and he was serving in 1813 and
1814 in the headquarters of the allies. If Austria continues
true, this feeling will be greatly modified, but Prussia makes
it very difficult to do so.'
With his resignation of the Premiership, Lord Aberdeen's
political career practically closed. He died on December 14,
I860, aged 76.
Wcit ©In anti Wcit Ncto.
By Sidney Philips.
CHAPTEPt V.
' There is purpose in pain,
Otherwise it were devilish.    I trust in my soul
That the great Master-hand that sweeps over the whole
Of this deep harp of life, if at moments it stretch
To shrill tension some one wailing nerve, means to fetch
Its response, the truest, most stringent, most smart,
Its pathos the purest, from out the wrung heart,
Whose faculties flaccid, it may be, if less
Sharply strung, smartly smitten, had failed to express
Just the one note the great final harmony needs.'
Owen Meredith.
Though the next day but one was damp and rainy, yet
John, or, as his Scotch friends called him, Ian Leslie Barnard,
was Avalking beside the river. If he had npi lived in this
nineteenth century, we might haA^e thought that he chose that
path for some memory connected with it; but as it has often
been said that the young men of the present day are
incapable of sentiment, we are bound to believe that it was
mere accident that directed his steps thither, and that it was
owing to a similar accident that he still retained in his
buttonhole a faded Gloirc de Dijon rose that had been stuck
in front of Mabel's dress two days before.
Suddenly a tall figure in a grey ulster stood before him,
and Maggie's voice said :
204 T^fi^ Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
' I have just been to the Lodge to look for you, Mr. Leslie,
—that is, Barnard, I mean,—and I heard there that you were
going back to England to-morrow, so I just came on here to
iind you.'
He bowed, but looked surprised. Maggie's conduct was
always unconventional, but what could she want now ?
' I wished to give you this letter, which you should have
received long since,' she said, holding out Mabel's stiff little
epistle, returned through the Dead Letter Office.
' This might have changed much,' he murmured, ' but now
it is too late. I knew that she had a prejudice against me,
and had refused all overtures; so when I found who she was,
and saw that she was still ignorant of our connection, I had
not the courage to tell her. I feared lest it should break oft'
a pleasant intimacy, and I hoped that by and by, when she
knew me better— But now all that is at an end, tell her
not to think worse of me than she can help.'
' Come back yourself to the Manse and say good-bye, Mr.
Leslie. I am sure that Mabel will be pleased to see you.
It has all been a mistake from beginning to end. She does
not know that I came here,' added Maggie, careful of her
cousin's dignity, however heedless of her own.
He hesitated for a moment; but it is never difficult to
persuade people to follow their own real inclinations, so
they walked on together towards Kilinuir in silence.
Just as they came in siglit of the well-known square
house, he stopped again and said :
'No, Miss Mackenzie, I think that I will not come on
with you now. I am afraid that if I see her I shall make
a fool of myself, and her prejudices are too deeply rooted to
be entirely conquered. Some time hence, perhaps when I
have got over this i'olly, we may meet as acquaintances.'
' I don't think that you need have nuich fear of her
prejudices now, Mr. Barnard,' said Maggie, ' it's childish to
make a quarrel out of notliing.    Do come.'
So they went on both together.
It was quite spiteful of tlie sun, tliought Maggie, to burst
through the clouds just at that moment, forming a bright
rainbow over the distant lake, and gilding the western
landscape with an unearthly glow. Wliy did the world
look so very beautiful, when life was so hard to bear ?
That evening, when Mabel came up to her room before
supper, she found a white muslin dress that she had not
worn since the old Barnard days, freshly ironed and laid on
the bed.
The Old and the New. 205
' What is this for, Maggie ?' she asked.
' You must put off the black now, dear, there's nae luck
about it.'
' Oh, very well!' laughed Mabel. ' But, Maggie, why is
your hand tied up ? and what makes you look so white ?'
' Oh, it's nothing much ! I was awkward as usual, and let
the iron slip whilst I was ironing your dress just now, and
burnt my fingers.    Fortunately, it's only the left hand.'
Just as they were going down stairs, Mabel suddenly
turned back and said:
' ]\Iaggie dear, do you think that any one ever was quite
as happy before ] '
'God grant it may last, darling,' said Maggie, as she
pressed her cold lips on Mabel's Hushed cheek.
Supper was a very silent ineal that evening. Mabel and
Leslie were too much engrossed witli tlieir new - found
happiness to have much that they could say to one another
in public, and Maggie's burns must have been very painful, for
she ate nothing and scarcely spoke except once, when she
made a spasmodic effort to engage her father in a conversa¬
tion on Grimm's Law, which, however, did not succeed, for
the minister was more in the clovids than ever that evening.
He gave his waistcoat an unusually large share of kippered
salmon, and gazed, first at Leslie then at Mabel, Avith an
unwonted soft look in his eyes, thinking maybe less of De
Civitatc than of those far-off days when for him too ' all the
world was young.'
The Christmas roses were just in blossom when the old
and the new owners returned together to Barnard. The Ditch-
leigh bells rang out a merry peal, and hearty British cheers
echoed far and wide, as they drove along the approach.
' Oh, Ian '' exclaimed iNIabel, ' you have actually built out
a conservatory from the west drawing-room, where I always
wanted it to be. How did you know that it was my pet
scheme ?    I never told you so.'
' No, but Miss Dartrey did when we discussed you and
Barnard that evening at Glentyre. But look, jNIabel, what a
splendid view we've opened out now that those old trees are
down!'
' You must give me time to get accustomed to it,' said
Mabel. ' I'm afraid that you will find me a terrible conser¬
vative as far as timber is concerned; but, Ian, if I don't like
it, I shall never think that it was you who cut down those
trees. That objectionable Mr. John Barnard, who I never
would know, must bear all the blame.'
2o6 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
' How lovely the old hall is looking !' continued Mabel, as
a minute or two later they entered it together. ' How I
wish that dear Maggie could see all this !'
' Yes, by the by, have you heard whether Maggie
Mackenzie will accept your invitation for next month ? '
' No; but she is sure to come, she has always longed to
see England. I expected to find a letter from her here.
And there it is,' she added, as she went up to the marble
table where the contents of the post-bag were always placed.
' Oh, I am so sorry!' she exclaimed after a moment.
' Nothing wrong at Kilmuir, I hope ?' asked Leslie.
'No, but ]\Iaggie says that she can't come here at present.
She has joined some correspondence classes. And she
seems to be devoting herself to the poor. She's working
hard at Gaelic, and has started a Sunday-school and a sewing-
class. What a change! Oh! and then she says that old
Lochinloan's dead. He died quite suddenly; the gout went
to his heart, I suppose.'
' Then, depend upon it now. Hector Macdonald will
marry Maggie.    See if he doesn't!' exclaimed Leslie.
' I'm not so sure of that,' said his wife. ' I don't think
that Maggie would ever care for a boy like that.'
'You see she comes across so few people in the wilds,'
said Leslie,' and then, thougli she's certainly handsome, and
clever, and all that, yet she isn't the sort of girl who attracts
most people. Molyneux always used to say that he couldn't
get on with her; now I can't say I found her very difficult
to get on with. She used to come out with things in a
queer, pedantic way, but that always rather amused me.'
' Dear old Maggie,' said Mabel, ' I do hope that she'll get
a good husband.'
' Well, that young Hector has the makings of a rattling
good fellow in him, if he knocks about and gets brushed up
a bit. He couldn't be in better hands for that. Those
fellows in the —th Highlanders are a capital set, they'll
soon get him into shape. Now, Mabel darling, if you've
done reading your letters, come out and see the improvements
I've made in the garden.'
Perth station is a celebrated place for unexpected meetings.
Few places are more crowded during the shooting season,
people from all parts of Scotland pass through it, then it
is a gay and exciting scene, and a place where an hour
might be very pleasantly spent; but one can hardly say the
same of it in the month of February, when Hector Macdonald
found  himself oblic;ed to wait  there  a  considerable  time
The Old and the New. 207
between the train that brought him from his uncle's place
in Perthshire, wliere he had been staying, and the Glasgow
train he wanted to catch en route, for Ireland. He saw no
familiar faces as he paced up and down the platform,
unoccupied, save by one or two porters, who stood lazily
about not having much to do, a barefooted urchin with a
large pile of unsold Scotsmans, a keeper with a couple of
Gordon setter puppies, and an old woman in a mutch, who
seemed to be rather a wit, at least if one might judge from
the amusement of the porters to whom she was holding
forth in Gaelic. Even the bookstall was closed ; so Hector,
after he had questioned the keeper as to the owner of the
dogs, and had discussed their points, was left to his own re¬
sources and to the study of the advertisements which adorned
the walls. Suddenly he heard a voice behind him exclaim:
' Eh ! but if that isna the young laird himsel';' and turning
round, he found himself face to face with a gaunt female,
whose prominent teeth and angular features he certainly had
seen somewhere before, though, as far as he could remember,
she was not one of his own tenants.
'Do ye no mind Bell Cameron 0' the West Lodge 0'
Glentyre ? ' she continued.
' Of course I do,' exclaimed Hector, shaking hands, ' but
what brings you here ? Nothing wrong with my old friend
Jessie, I hope ?'
' Na, na, sir; but ye see Sandie Kennedy, that I was to
hae married by your leave,—ye'll mind Sandie, the carpenter's
lad,—ye see he just went to Glasgie.'
' No wonder,' thought Hector, gazing at his companion's
unprepossessing appearance.
' An' he wanted me to come till him there, but I wudna
leave Jessie. And sae noo he's deid, and his mither got the
letter last week.'    Here she paused to take breath.
'Yes, I remember Sandie,' said Hector, feeling that he
was expected to say something. ' He used to throw the
hammer uncommonly well.    I'm sorry he's gone.'
' Na, na, sir, but ye suldna say that, Lochinloan. It's the
Lord's wull, sae there maun be a rizzon in't. We suldna be
sorry for what's the Lord's wull.'
Hector could not help thinking that he was very sorry
that he had been fool enough to start the old she-dragon on
so long a story; stiU he reflected that he hadn't heard any¬
thing of Maggie for a long time, and that this woman might
perhaps in time be brought to tell him something about her,
so he asked:
2o8 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
' But what has all this to do M'ith your coming here ?'
'Well, ye see, Lochinloan,that when Sandie saw I wudna
come, he took work in foreign parts, an' he brought back a
bit wifie. Weel, she's left there all alane in Glasgie, in a
strange place, wi' twa wee bairnies. And by your leave, his
mither wad hae gane hersel' to fetch them to bide wi' her,
but she's ower auld, puir body; and the wifie hersel' being
no just that strong even noo, I said I wad gang and fetch
her hame.    Sae I just got a freen to bide wi' Jessie.'
' How is Jessie keeping now ?' asked Hector.
' Eh! by your leave, but she's ower bad the noo, wi' fretting
for the minister.'
' What!    The minister ?    Ivilmuir!    What's wrong ?'
' Eh ! but isna that strange noo ? Did ye nae hear that the
minister's deid ? An' to think that they suldna hae tauld ye
that, Lochinloan;' but the effect of her speech was greater
than she had expected, for Hector grew very white, and
exclaimed:
' How ? When ? Tell me all about it. How's Miss
Mackenzie ?'
' Weel, by 3'our leave, it wa' just three weeks last Sabbath
that he wa' taken. He'd been ailin' ever since the auld
laird's funeral. They say ane buryin's maist followed wi'
anither, and sae'—
' But Miss jVIackenzie, where is she ?' asked Hector eagerly.
' She will be back again at the Manse, even noo, I'm
thinkin'. She just cam' to Balnagoonie, when the roup wa'
goin' on in the Manse last week; but she cam' last Monday
to say good-bye to Jessie, for she's goin' awa' to Maister
Jamie in foreign parts, and she just said— Eh, but what's
wrang wi' the lad ?' for Hector had broken loose from her,
and was rushing across the station as fast as he could go.
In a few moments he had sent off a telegram asking for a
couple of days more leave, on account of important private
affairs; and whilst waiting for the colonel's answer, he paced
up and down the station in a great rage.
Now he knew the reason of those short, hurried notes
from his sisters; now he knew why his mother had said that
some of the letters, which had come for him, looked like bills
and circulars, and had therefore not been forwarded; now
he knew why she had said tliat she had told his agent not
to write to him that month, as she could explain everything
about the new fencing round the west park, and letting the
east belting for pasturage.
He could perfectly well imngine how, when he taxed her
Tlic Old and the Neiu. 209
with deceit in concealing the minister's death from him as
long as Maggie was in the country, she would shuffle out
of it, pretending that she thought that she had mentioned
it, or that somebody was sure to have told him, having
taken the greatest possible care that nobody should do so.
And all for what ? He remembered her words to him
after the Glentyre party, how she had said meaningly:
' I was glad to see that ]\Ir. Leslie Barnard confined his
attentions entirely to Miss Barnard. She is a very good sort
of girl. I was afraid at one time that he was making up to
the other cousin, and to marry an obscure minister's daughter,
like Miss Mackenzie, would have been complete social
extinction.'
Tliat his old tutor should have died without his ever
hearing of it, or having the opportunity of paying the last
tribute of respect to his memory, was hard enough; but to
think that Maggie should have been alone in her trouble
was simply maddening.
Late one winter's evening Maggie Mackenzie was sitting
alone in the parlour at the Manse. The book-shelves were
all empty, most of the furniture had been removed, and the
room was half filled with large packing-cases. A dog-cart
drove up to the door, and in another minute the young laird
of Lochinloan rushed in.
' Hector!' she exclaimed, ' why, I heard that you were
going straight back to the Curragh.'
' Yes, they never told me anytliing before. But when I
heard, as soon as I could I got leave, and came off to see if
there was anything that I could do for you ; and when I
found that the funeral and the sale were over, and that you
were to leave the place to-morrow, I came straight ofl' here
from the station to see you again.'
' That was kind, truly kind, dear Hector,' said Maggie,
really touched. ' I always have considered you one of my
best and truest friends. But take off your ulster and sit
down. I'm afraid that packing-case won't make a very
comfortable seat, but push it a wee bit nearer the fire.
How cold you look! Do let me make you some toddy.'
And as Maggie went off to the cupboard to get the whisky,
Hector felt as if the little half-furnished room was not very
unlike paradise. It was a new thing to see Maggie so
■gentle and womanly, and she looked very lovely in her long
black dress.
' Isn't there anything I can do for you, Maggie ?' asked
Hector, not knowing quite what to say.
No. 65.—May 1880. 0
2IO TJie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
' Yes, there are several things that I meant to write to
you about. Please stop your factor from insisting on
Widow Kennedy's flitting at the next term. I know that
the cottage is wanted ; but the poor old body hasn't long to
live, and it's sad that she shouldn't spend her last days in
the place where she has lived all her life. Then will you
take care of " Dandle " for me ? I shouldn't like to leave the
doggie with any one else, but you were always kind to him.
Then do try and persuade your sister Alice to look after the
sewing-class that I have started. The girls will like it
better if there is a lady at the head of it.'
' What, Maggie, have you come round to those con¬
ventional ways of spoiling the poor that you used to hold
forth against ?'
' Ah, yes, I used to be a sad prig; but I've learned now
that if Ave want to help our fellow-creatures we must just
use whatever means comes to our hand, and must not expect
perfect tools. Isn't it strange,' continued Maggie, who
never found it difficult to talk to Hector, as he always
admired whatever she said, whether he understood it or not,
—' isn't it strange that I should have lived here all these
years when I was utterly useless and longed to get away
and see the world, and just as I was beginning to try and
be of use to the people, I have to go ? But what is saddest
of all,' she added, with tears in her eyes, ' is, that just as I
was beginning to understand and appreciate my dear father,
he was taken from me. It was so hard to see a stranger in
his place last Sabbath.'
' Who have they got to take the duty ?' asked Hector.
' A probationer from St. Andrews. He's a great Gaelic
scholar. He goes in for Professor Blaclde and the Chair.
But only think, he suggested putting up a painted window
in the kirk in memory of father;' and Maggie could not help
smiling to think wliat the poor old minister's horror would
have been at such a proposal. ' He holds advanced views,
his prayers were all taken from the English service, and
were consequently beautiful, but his sermon was full of
quotations from Kant (Caird's version, of course).'
' And you yourself, Maggie, where do you mean to go ?'
asked Hector eagerly.
' I am going to join Jamie in America,' she replied. ' It
is a grand country to make one's way in. I hope that I
shall not be a burden to him. Young doctors are never rich;
besides, he may marry. I never could bear to be idle, and
in these days there are so many ways in which a woman
The Old and the New. 211
can support herself    I shaU get something by teaching, and
besides that, I mean to try authorship.'
' But if your health fails,' asked Hector anxiously, ' what
then ?'
' Oh! I'm not quite penniless,' said Maggie; ' I've the
interest of £800, or at least what will be left of it after I've
published the commentary.'
' What!' he exclaimed,' you don't mean to say that you
mean to publish that commentary, when I've so often heard
you say with reference to it, that "the old bottles of our
fathers' thoughts would never hold the new wine which
came into being this latter half of the 19th century " ?'
' Ah, yes,' said Maggie, ' but I forgot that when the new
wine grew older it would become fit for the old bottles. I
feel very old now,' she added sadly.
' Yes, indeed,' said Hector, who always echoed Maggie's
ideas ; ' it seems a long time since we used to play together
on the banks of the Muckle Burn.'
' When you and Jamie built me a little house, and I used
to cook potatoes,' added Maggie; ' but I generally burnt
them, and sometimes my frock as well.'
' And then you used to let me call you my little wifie,'
said Hector. ' Oh, Maggie !' he exclaimed, conquering the
last remnant of shyness, ' you must not go away, I could not
bear it. I have loved you so long.' Silence followed this
avowal.
' I never dared to hope till that day at Glentyre,' con¬
tinued Hector in a broken voice; ' since then, it has been
my one thought. Oh, Maggie, do say that you love me, that
you wiU be mine some day !'
Again there was silence. At length a faint voice
whispered:
' Hector, do forgive me. I never could be anything to
you but a friend.'
'Then I'll never believe in a woman again!' exclaimed
Hector frantically as he rushed out of the room.
Maggie leant against the chimney-piece and sobbed. A
that moment she would have given anything in the world
to call Hector back and to tell him that she would try and
love him. But she could not do so. He loved her too
much for her ever to be able to make him really happy
unless she gave him her whole heart, and that she felt that
she could not do. It was hard to give up the chance of a
comfortable home, harder still to part thus from the friend
she loved scarcely less than her own brother, bitterest of all
212 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
was the thought that she caused him pain; but she must be
true to herself, and that would be best in the end for both.
The door opened softly, and he reappeared.
' I just came back to say that I would remember all that
you asked me, Maggie.'
' Oh, Hector, Hector! do not let us part in anger,' she
exclaimed.
' In anger, dearest ? No, I never could be angry with
yoii. I will try and think that you are right, even though,
of course, a thingj like this smashes one up awfully. But,
Maggie, is there no hope—none at all ?'
' No, Hector dear, we should only spoil each other's lives.
Try and forget me.'
' Forget you! Do you think that a fellow can forget a
hope that's been everything to him all his life ?'
Then, taking both her hands in his, he asked solemnly :
* Maggie, dear, is there any one else whom you like better ?'
Her ' yes' was hardly audible.
There was silence for a few minutes while he gazed at
her with a look in his eyes that would haunt her for the
rest of her life.
' You will let me know where you are ?' he said at last.
' And you, too, will write to me sometimes ?'
' Write !' he exclaimed bitterly.    ' What is there about a
poor devil like me that you would care to hear ?'
' All, everything. Oh, Hector! don't look so reckless, you
frighten me.'
' Maggie!' he exclaimed, 'you might have been the making
of me. As it is. Heaven knows what will become of me ; I
shall go the way of all the rest, I suppose.'
' No, no. Hector, don't say that; there are other things to
live for besides love,—your mother, your sisters, remember
them.'
' I do remember them,' he rejoined bitterly. ' My mother,
training up those girls to be as deceitful as slie is herself,
and'—
' No, Hector, I will not hear a word of this. Eemember
she is your mother, whatever her faults may be. But,
Hector, if anything could make me happy, it would be
hearing that you were keeping straight.'
' You're not likely to hear much good of me, Maggie, I'm
afraid. Things might have been different, but now it's too
late.'
' Ah no. Hector, it's never too late, never !'
For some time neither spoke, then for an instant she was
Woman-like. 213
clasped in his arms, a moment more and he was gone, and
the grating of the wheels on the gravel outside told her that
her old playfellow had passed out of her life for ever.
Maggie sank back quite exhausted. The events of the
last few weeks had been very trying, and this last parting
had been a great strain.
' Ah !' slie thought bitterly,
' "Now if I had been a woman, such
As God made women, to save men by love,
By just my love I might have saved this man.
And made a nobler poem for the world
Than all I've failed in."
This is how my aspirations have ended. Instead of being
better than other women, I am so much worse. I used to
pride myself on being free from vanity; yet I was vain
enough to imagine that a man loved me who had never
given me a thought, and then in my bitterness, to gratify my
wounded pride, I encouraged this poor boy. My whole
past life seems one great failure. Will my new life in the
new country be the same ?'
What that new life was, we hope to show in a succeeding
chapter.
{To he continued.)
—0-
Woman-like, she tried to please him,
Just to show that she could please ;
Aired her charms to lure and teaze him,
Just as women like to teaze.
Maiden-like, she blushed to find it
Surer work than she believed ;
Broke his heart, but could not bind it;
Pirst bewitched him—then deceived.
Angel-like, she wept in sorrow
O'er the ruin she had wrought;
Found herself upon the morrow
In her own sweet meshes caught.
B. r.
214 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
Countrg Subjects anti pursuits.
XV.—DOGS.
' In life the firmest friend,
The first to welcome, foremost to defend;
Whose honest heart is still his master's own.
Who labours, fights, lives, breathes for him alone.'
Byron.
' I HUMBLY thank Divine Providence for havin^ invented
dogs, and I regard that man with wondering pity who can
lead a dogless life,' says a writer of the present day; and many
will be found to endorse his opinion, for of all animals, the
most noble, lovable, and faithful, is the dog. Horses are fine
creatui-es in their way, useful and handsome, but the money
needed for their purchase and maintenance places them
beyond the reach of many. It would be a poor person indeed
who could not afford to keep a dog; nor does the dog care
whether his master be rich or poor, so long as he is allowed
to serve and follow him. The rich man's dog has an aversion
to beggars, his tastes are those of his master, but the poor
man's dog is well content with his lot. Luath would not
change places with Caesar; but both rejoiced, as they ' shook
their lugs,' ' they werena men, but dogs.' And Burns' ' twa
dogs ' were wise of their kind. They were staunch and true,
and would rather remain as they were than be changed into
frail, vacillating human beings. How ' dog' ever came to be
used as a term of opprobrium is a wonder, for it should rather
be taken as a compliment to be likened to an animal so full
of love, amiability, fidelity, and intelligence.
Let us advise any one who has lived a dogless life, to
remedy this defect without loss of time. A dog is a necessary
adjunct to every country pursuit. His good temper makes
him ever willing to join in and add to any scheme of enjoy¬
ment. There is no out-of-door amusement in which he
cannot share. A ride loses half its pleasures if there are no
dogs trotting alongside of the horses. Shooting, of course,
their sporting members claim as their own special vocation.
They accompany you when fishing, and wait for you patiently,
and gambol home beside you, instilling into your flagging,
weary steps some of their superfluous energy. As for botany
and geology, who are so eager in the search for flowers, who
so knowing in by-paths and hedgerows as the dogs ? They
pretend, unselfish hypocrites that they are, that plants, not
vermin, are what they like to hunt for. They look wise over
geology, and approve of it, standing round with sagacious
Country Subjects and Pursnits. 215
faces intent on your rock-chipping work. Gardening is a
dull amusement for them; but their presence is a pleasure to
you, so they hide their dislike to it, and politely attend on
your bidding. The old terrier, who is too aged to face a long
walk, totters out to a sunny spot alongside of you, and basks
placidly through the morning hours, grateful for any notice
bestowed upon him. The middle-aged dogs do not like him,
enjoy gardening ; they are intensely bored, but their canine
politeness forbids them to hint at such a thing. They roll
about on the grass, snap at inoffensive flies, and loiter up to
where you are working, gravely contemplating your morn¬
ing's toil. Ask them to fetch a stick or a glove lying a little
way off, and with amiable alacrity they hurry away to per¬
form their task. One of the best traits in the estimable
character of the dog, is his eagerness to oblige, and his willing¬
ness to enter into his owner's pleasures, to be merry if he is
merry, sad if he is sad. The dog next to the old terrier who
really likes gardening, is the puppy. To it nothing comes
amiss; but while you are at work, its comrades are idle and
are ready to beguile the time with a romp or a playful worry
with the pup, chasing it to its heart's content, egging it on
in vain pursuits after butterflies or birds, and charmed to see
it puzzled and hurt over the difference between fly and bee
catching. The pup is audacious with the innocence of youth.
It calmly walks over the most prized flower-beds (the other
dogs have learned to keep to the lawn), and nestles down
in the centre of a clump of rare plants, delighted at its own
cleverness in finding such a soft seat out of doors, and comic
in its astonishment when ousted and reprimanded. It takes
punishment with a hurt, reproachful expression on its soft
face, and sits afar off, thinking over the injustice and hardness
of this world. It suddenly cheers up, regains its spirits, and
prances off, bent on a new series of misdeeds, beginning with
charging full tilt down on the sacred person of the old dog
himself, or calmly settling down to chew the heads off some
flower, while the elders watch with grave astonishment the
innocent impudence of their junior member. As regards a
walk, you would hardly care to take one if it were not for
the dogs. They are so eager to start, you become infected
with their spirit. It is pathetic when the old dog of the
band, seeing you are bent on going too far afield for his
strength, looks up wistfully in your face, and regretfully
returns to his snug corner at home. Pet the old fellow and
condole with him, for he has sympathized a hundred times
with you, and send him ' hirpling' back with his kind old
2i6 TJie Ladies Edinbnrgh Magazine.
lieart beating cheerily and his tail inclined to wag, despite
his sorrow that age holds him prisoner. You may start for
a walk with your route mapped out, but tlie tykes inveigle
you into straying along by-paths, into short cuts across
lields, and into a turn across the dunes to see if the rabbits
are out for an afternoon feed. They yearn to get off
the beaten tracks as much as possible, and you may trust
their taste as regards country walks. The old dog is always
ready to welcome you back. He who has been resting all
day shines most brightly at home. He comes forward
apologizing, in his gentle way, for not having gone. Doubly
anxious to be agreeable, he now hobbles off for your slippers,
while his comrades, worn out with the day's pleasuring, drop
down to sleep, and hunt and skirmish once more in their
dreams. Your old companion sits by you in the evening,
grateful for notice, happy in having you all to himself.
People say they do not like to keep dogs because of the loss
to be endured when they die, but they forget to weigh against
this loss the pleasure they derive from these dumb com¬
panions during their faithful term of life. They might as-
well object to have human friends, for they too die, and are
even more difficult to replace. Sir Walter Scott takes iu
every side of the case when he says : ' The misery of keeping
a dog is his dying so soon; but, to be sure, if lie lived for fifty
years and then died, what would become of me ?' Ten or
fifteen years is a goodly span, but do not shorten it, do not
put away the old dog when his strength begins to fail; keep
him as long as there is life in him, and you will find him the
most loving, gentle, and sympathetic of friends. He recalls
the days that are past, and his presence fills you with by¬
gone memories. Mr. Hamerton, in his Chapters on Animals^
tells the touching story of a veteran dog belonging to a friend
of his, who
* has an old dog that can neither hear nor see, and passes dark, silenf
days in an arm-chair, which has been given him for the coiufcirt of
his age. One sound is audible by him still, and one only—a little
shrill silver whistle that he has obeyed from puppyhood till now.
It is one of the most pathetic sights I ever witnessed, when the master
comes and sounds the piercing call. The inert thing in the arm¬
chair becomes galvanized with sudden life, tumbles down upon
the floor, crawls towards the sound, finds the beloved hand, and licks
it. They pass whole evenings together still, that gentle master and
his poor old friend. And still in that dark decrepitude beats the
heart of inextinguishable love.'
' What kind of dog should I get ?' novices ask, but the
question is one they must ansM-er for themselves.    What
Id
CoHfitly Subjects and Pursuits. 217
kind of dog do they want ? they had better find out.
Nature has been bountiful in giving a variety of species to
choose from, big and little, and all with a fair share of
brains. If by some miracle you come across one with none
of the latter, dismiss liim, but it very rarely happens. A
big dog is so solemn, so sage in looks, so substantial, be is a
desirable companion ; but then a small dog can be more with
you, trot for ever at your heels, curl itself into small compa.s&
when necessary, and accompany you where you will, while
a big dog is ponderous and difficult to move. As regards
pluck, there is no necessity for a pugnacious disposition in a
lady's pet. An objectionable specimen of the canine race is
the dog who is devoid of spirits, who even, when spoken to,
grovels in the dust at your feet. In big dogs, with their
strength, and natuially noble demeanour, pluck is never
Avanting; but if you are a lover of all animals, you will enjoy
having a cumbersome, heavy big dog, who, thougli full of sport,
cannot scatter death along his path. If he runs at the cat
basking on the wall, it is pleasant for you to know puss can
escape easily. Mr. Big Dog can only look fierce; he is not
like a lithe collie or nimble deerhound, with ability to spring^
over the barricade and overtake the escaping cat. You come
in from a ride or walk at ease in your mind. The rabbits
are safely cropping on the grass, talking of the panic that
seized them on Big Dog's appearance, and rejoicing that no
death has occurred in their family circle. The cat is peace¬
fully dozing on the wall, with all recollection of her dog
enemy bleached out of her mind by the sunshine.
A i)ug is another dog who does small harm, and yet goes
through a day in the country -with credit and sham pluck.
To an outsider he seems the boldest of animals. He runs at
everything, cats, geese, hens, and boys, but he never comes
within range of a scratch or a kick. He is full of swagger.
He believes himself to be the gamest, bravest being in exist-
ence, and is so convinced of this fact, that you are led to
believe in him too, even while knowing him to be an.
imposition. You know if that cat stops, he stops too, and
when he does turn tail, it is with a threatening growl, and the
hair on his back wiry with rage. He dodges the boys' Avell-
aimed kicks with surpassing nimbleness, he puts the hen in
a fever of fear for her brood's sake, but he keeps himself
discreetly out of range of her beak. He is thoroughly in
earnest, and he makes believe with so good a grace to be a
mass of fierceness, that you respect him for the completeness
of his shamming.
2i8 The Ladies Edinbiirgh Magazine.
How often should you feed a dog, is another question
novices ask, and you cannot reply to this query as you do
when asked how often you should wash him, by the unanswer¬
able argument, ' when he wants it.' Feed him well once a
day, and let him have a full meal of porridge seasoned
with scraps. Train him with a judicious mixture of the
rod and kindness, and spare neither. Do not nag at him.
If he transgress rules, thrash him and be done with it.
He will hate the whip; but if he be a dog with a conscience,
he will hate disgrace more. Impress upon him, ' that when
he is good, he is very, very good, and when he is bad, he is
horrid,' and he will for his own peace of mind strive to be
the former. In the teachint!- of tricks, use onlv kindness.
Tricks are foi; your amusement, and you do not want your
companions to come to the performance of them cowering
and glum. It takes a deal of practice to become a successful
teacher. The pupils are willing and anxious, but they are at
a loss to know what is wanted of them, and sit stolidly down
with puzzled faces. Once a few accomplishments are mas¬
tered, their wits brighten, and more complicated tasks are
surmounted with ease. A puppy is a most trying animal to
teach. His attention is for ever wandering, he fixes all his
energies on watcliiug the fly on the roof, and collapses into
an inert mass when told to sit up. He will not learn him¬
self, and he tries all he can to distract his comrades' attention.
Example in his case is better than precept. He loves to
copy his bigger friends, and if left to his own devices, tries
to follow their suit, gives paws, and becomes less limp when
desired to balance himself on his hind legs. Paws and
begging are the A B C of dogs' education; they are as de¬
lighted with their new accomplishments as a child when
first it learns to say ' Please.' They expect, like the child, to
get everything they ask for in this manner, and the next
thing they have to be taught is not to beg at meals. It is a
grievous fault, and a weakness to which they are sorely
tempted. You often see pictures called the ' Greedy Boy,' in
which one child is eating an apple, and another, with smiling
face, begging some. On consideration, it is difficult to say
which is the greedy one, the owner of the apple, or the
amiable being who wants a share. You are apt to feel like
the possessor of the apple, when you accuse the fawning dogs
of greed as they press round you at dinner-time. Save a few
scraps for them to be given after meals, and be stern with
them throughout; also look to your friends, see that they do not
fall victims to their good humour and your dog's insinuatingi
Comitry Subjects and Purstdts. 219
manners. They know you wUl not give them anything, so
they turn to visitors. One big dog of my acquaintance
levies black-mail on guests ; he must either have the loaf, or
he will upset theu- tea—they can take their choice.
But to continue the subject of tricks. Study your pupils.
If they are morbid and sensitive, encourage them; if too
confident, snub them. The slowest one is the surest for
public exhibition. Mr. Boastful, too eager and conceited,
muddles up the performance in a superficial, scrimmaging
way. See how their tastes lie, and let their lessons incline
that way. If their genius be for retrieving, teach them to
find lost goods, and to act as porters; if for guarding, put
things under their trust. A pug I know, will not learn
anything if I give my whole attention solely to her. Her
companion will wrinkle his brows, and think over what he
is wanted to learn solely to please his owner. The pug, with
boxed ears, sat afar off one day in the sulks, till, with her
wits sharpened by thoughts of sugar, she suddenly came to
the fore. ' Shut the door,' she said to herself, ' is that what
is wanted of Big-Dog ? How clumsily and slowly he
does it, and how he gets petted ! I'll slam it for a knot of
sugar,' and she forthwith leapt down and banged it. Hence¬
forth, when we wanted her to learn tricks, we began by
teaching Big-Dog, and my lady came and did them long
before he understood their drift.
If you are going to keep a dog, make him your friend,
have him beside you, humour him, pet him; give in to him
at times—it will not spoil him as it would a horse. He sits
and shivers beside you in a fireless room, in preference to
enjoying himself on a warm hearth where you are not. He
waits hours for you in the cold; he denies himself pleasures
for your sake; so be kind in return, and he will overwhelm
you with gratitude. Take him his favourite walk at times,
by the sea, by the warren, through the wood, whichever it
may be; he is delighted to share his enjoyment with you.
Mark this, fd him but do not s-poil him, for there is a differ¬
ence. He is your slave unless you verge into the latter
and become his. He really makes the best of servants, and
is happy and proud of his slavery, and at the same time
he is an honoured and beloved member of the household.
Take this advice of the author of liab and his Friends, you
who live a ' dogless life,' and see what an acquisition a dog
is :
' I think every family should have a dog. It is like having a per¬
petual baby; it is the plaything and crony of the whole house.    It
220 TJie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
keeps them all young. And then he tells no tales, betrays no
secrets, never sulks, asks no troublesome questions, never gets into
debt, never coming down late for breakfast or coming in by his
chubb too early to bed ; is always ready for a bit of fun, lies in wait
for it; and you may, if choleric, to your relief kick him instead of
some one else who would not take it so meekly, and moreover would
certainly not, as he does, ask your pardon for being kicked.'
Eve Simpson.
Fictor 3£mmanueL
(the soldier king.)
' Out of the Piedmont lion
Cometh the sweetness of freedom, sweetest to live and to die on.'
During a short stay in Turin last autumn, I went one day
to visit the royal palace. It is a fine residence, but its
chambers still bear traces of the gloom and desertion which
must have descended steadily upon them since the day
when, Florence being fixed upon as the new capital, the
little court was transferred thither in 1861, soon, however,
to leave the city of the Scarlet Lily and take up its abode
once and for all within the time-honoured precincts of the
Eternal City herself.
The attendant who conducted us over the Palazza Carig-
nauo made a rather significant pause in a chamber with silk
hangings and gilt cornices, where, waving his hand with
some degree of cmvprcsmmcnt, he observed: ' It was here our
great King Victor Emmanuel was born.'
This ' great kin>i:,' whose name is held in such esteem and
adoration in his native city, was the eldest child of Charles
Albert, Prince of Carignano, afterwards King of Sardinia,
and Maria Teresa Benedetta of Lorraine, sister of Leopold
II., last Grand Duke of Tuscany.
Charles Albert seems always to liave believed in the
possibility and to have longed for the accomplishment of
the ' redemption of Italy ;' but he was a weak and, in many
respects, most unfortunate prince, and seems to have lacked
both the skill to plan and the power to effect such a purpose.
Yet there were not wanting projects in his mind for benefit¬
ing his country and enlarging his kingdom. He was often
wont to repeat the motto of his house, ' J'atends vion astre!'
That star was indeed propitious to the fame and fortunes of
Ids son, that essentially soldier-hing whose valour and activity
were to give to the hitherto vague words, 'Italia redcnta'
a living significance and reality. This son was born at the
royal palace already alluded to, on the night of the 13th of
Victor Emmamiel. 221
March 1820. The birth of an heir to the tlirone was thus
announced in the Picdmontese Gazette, tlie official journal of
the kingdom, under the date of the 14th of March:
' With singular transports of pleasure, we make public an event
which has filled the hearts of their Majesties and all their loyal
subjects in the capital with joy. This morning Her Royal Highness
the Princess of Carignano happily gave birth to a prince, who at noon
was to be taken to the chapel royal,'and presented by their Majesties
the king and queen at the baptismal font, where he was to receive the
name of Victor Emmanuel Maria Albert Eugene Ferdinand Thomas.
The royal mother and child are reported to be going on well.'
Eighteen months had elapsed from the time of the birtli
of the heir wlien there was born in Florence of this august
marriage another son, Prince Ferdinand, who took the title
of Duke of Genoa; and it is his daughter, the Princess
Margherita, who, by her union with her cousin Prince
Humbert, has become the present Queen of Italy.
The princess, his mother, seems as far as was practicable
to have taken the early education of her little son Victor
into her own hands. This is how she writes of him from
Florence to one of her ladies-in-waiting, an intimate friend,
the Contessa Philippi, who had remained at Turin. She
■writes on the 2d of January 1823 :
' Victor is quite in love with his little brother ; I have told you that
my sons occupy rooms one beside the other ; he is always running
from his own chamber to look at Ferdinand and to embrace him.'
And again at the same date she observes :
' Victor, although so lively, is so intelligent that he is truly a source
of constant delight to me.'
On the 8th of May in that same year, referring to an illness,
.she says:
' Victor remains very weak, and is growing quite tall. He is learning
to read, and I wish at present to be his only instructress. He is very
docile, but one needs a little jjatience with him ; for he is so full of
life that he would prefer to be always running and jumping about,
yet when he has learned anything he remembers it easily.'
Thus the ardent, bold, and impetuous disposition of Victor
Emmanuel had already manifested itself, a nature so fitted
for exertion and endurance, and which in future years was
to stand him in such gcod stead upon the field of battle.
On the 29th of August the princess again writes :
' My two sons remain wonderfully well. Victor is amusing himself
in my room while I write, it pleases him greatly to imagine himself
a soldier; my father has made him very happy by presenting him
with a beautiful little gun, which he plays with all day long.'
In 1824 the expedition against Spain came to an end,
222 Tlie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
and Charles Albert was able to return to his family at
Florence in the spring of 1824. He used often to speak of
Turin and his royal palace there in the presence of his
little son, so that the mother writes to the Countess in May
1824, saying:
'Victor is always asking me when we are to set out for Turin,
adding, " I am longing to go to papa's house." '
The young prince's illness, which has already been men¬
tioned, jvas caused by an unfortimate accident which occurred
when he was little more than an infant. During the month
of September 1822, while the royal family were at Florence,
his nurse Theresa, wife of a young man named Victor
Zanotti, was standing beside the little prince's bed with a
lighted candle, when she accidentally set it on fire. In
spite of the horrified woman's frantic efforts to extinguish
the flames, and although aid appears to have been almost
immediately forthcoming, the prince got rather severely
burnt on his left side. The physicians on the following day
were able to allay the anxiety of the grand-ducal family
with regard to the state of the child, but were filled with
alarm and apprehension respecting the health of the mother,
who had sustained such a terrible shock while in a state of ad¬
vanced pregnancy. As for the unfortunate nurse, she died
from the effects of the serious injuries she had sustained, after
some days of protracted suffering. Charles Albert assigned
a pension to Zanotti, to be renewed every ten years; and
Victor Emmanuel afterwards confirmed it to him for life.
When the late king of Italy went to Florence after the
plebiscite in 1860, he set out one bright day in April to
visit the beautiful villa on the heights of Baroncelli, where
he had passed the earlier years of his life. He found in the
room which had been the scene of the accident the following
inscription engraved on a marble tablet:—
MDCCCXXII.
QUI
VITTORIO EMANUELK,
DI SAVOIA,
MINACCIATO NELLA VITA DA IMPROVISO INCENDIO
LA GENEROSITA BELLA NUTRICE,
CON SACRIFICIO DI SE
SERBAVA,
AI FUTURI DESTINI D'ITALIA.
The Prince and Princess of Carignano returned to Turin,
Victor Eminanitel. 223
where the young Victor Emmanuel grew up, secluded from
all affairs of State, chiefly occupied with his studies. He
and his younger brother were destined by their father to
join the army, and at this time his youthful mind was
always intent on military matters. He loved, we are told, to
hear the exciting sound of warlike music, and to see the
troops, with martial aspect, shining arms, and bold step,
marching before his father.' When at the sight of this grand
spectacle he saw that father's face animated for the time,
his eyes flashing, a proud smile visible upon his pallid lips,
the question Avould suggest itself to the active mind of the
-young Duke of Savoy, a question often doubtfully discussed
among the people. For what is this army destined—against
whom are these shining lances to be directed ? and a crowd
of tumultuous thoughts would invade his breast. ' It was
• the secret of the iather that, casting forth its rays, found a
reflection in the valorous spirit of the son.'
It was thought expedient to select a wife for the hereditary
prince when he had barely attained his twenty-second year;
and as is usually the case with royal marriages, the choice of
the alliance rested with others besides himself. When we
remember that Charles Albert had long endeavoured to
alienate himself as much as possible from Austria, and that
the question constantly occupying his mind was the emanci¬
pation of the country from her despotic rule, it seems
strange and contradictory that, in spite of the dissatisfaction
which he knew it would give to the people, in the very face
of the energetic attacks which emanated from the Official
Gazette, he should have strengthened more closely the ties
which already bound him to that country, by choosing for
his daughter-in-law Maria Adelaide, daughter of the Arch-
Duke Eanieri, Viceroy of Venetian Lombardy.
The nuptials were celebrated with great splendour on the
12th of April 1842, at the Castello di Stupinigi, a country
residence of the royal family of Savoy about three miles from
Turin. Amongst the entertainments which followed, was a
magnificent tournament held in the Piazza San Carlo, in the
large amphitheatre which surrounds the monument to Duke
Emmanuel Philibert, Marochetti's masterpiece.
On the occasion of this marriage, the king extended pardon
to all political prisoners, but ' in spite of this,' says a
Piedmontese chronicler, Vittorio Bersezio, ' there was want¬
ing at the royal nuptials that best and most precious of
elements, the joy and participation of the people.' From the
' Charles Albert succeeded his uncle Charles Felix in April 1831.
224 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
crowd, proceeds this writer, which assembled itself coldly
curious but indifferent among the streets and squares of the
city, there came not a cheer, not a shout of applause, not a
sign of good-Mill. Tlie national feelings of the Turinese
citizens were too deeply wounded by the presence among
them of the pale uniform of the Austrian soldiers, who com¬
posed the retinue of the bride; they looked on contemptuously
while they saw them associating on terms of honlwmmie and
friendship w'ith the officers of their own king—was this
alliance, alas! to be a new proof of their subjection to the
foreign foe ?
This sweet princess was not long in gaining, by the
exercise of her many virtues, tlie love and admiration of the
people; but at the moment of her marriage they were un¬
able to perceive her beauty, grace, and sweetness, while they
saw all too plainly the warriors of the hated race by her
side. Who could have foretold then that Piedmont would
one day so deeply mourn tlie early loss of this noble and
virtuous princess ?i But the captivating graces of her person,
her gentle expression and sweet smile, seem to have been
merely the index of a noble, pure, and elevated mind. She
is said to have made the family with which she had allied
herself her own, and to have taken an active and benevolent
interest in all that went on in tlie country of which she was
one day to bo the queen.
She may also be said to have filled a most difficult position
•well and worthily; and although in after years, amongst other
sad vicissitudes, she had to see husband and brothers opposed
to each other on the field of battle, she was able to fulfil her
conflicting duties of sister and wife so as to gain the respect
and admiration of those around her. This marriage was the
last time that tlie Austrian uniform appeared in friendly
guise in Turin; the citizens, always such zealous advocates of
the noble cause of National Independence, were not troubled
by the siglit of it again until they beheld it on the persons
of their prisoners of war. It is only just tliat we should
acknowledge that this ardent zeal ibr i'reedom among the
people, wliich was one of the distinguishing features of
Charles Albert's reign, owed its secret and main source to
the policy of the king, who, though often timid, and irresolute
to a degree, encouraged in every way the publication of the
■writings of such men as Gioberti, Baldo, and D'Azeglio,
whose eloquent utterances were regarded by their enthusiastic
•countrymen as the very ' Hope of Italy.'
' Ske died January 20, 1858.
Victor EmmafmcL] 225
Tlie king also favoured the cause of freedom by initiating
many important reforms in the constitution of the State. On
the 29th of October 1847, public notice was given of some
confessions he intended to make. On the 5th of February
in the following year, at the suggession of Count Santarosa,
the municipality of Turin discussed the expediency of an
appeal to the king, ' entreating him to crown the great
enterprise of reform, by conceding to his people a representa¬
tive constitution.' This Charles Albert also granted; and
on the 4th of March the statute was promulgated, accom¬
panied by many wise and prudential acts to guard its
existence and free exercise. The Jesuits were banished,
the new electoral law was proclaimed, and a full and general
pardon was granted to all subjects already condemned for
political offences. On the point of taking so serious a step,
says Bersezio, Charles Albert assembled his family around
him, and in the presence of his two sons announced, in his
peculiarly grave and reserved manner, the decision at which
he had arrived, adding, that when he was first called to fill
the position of sovereign of his people, it was to govern an
ancient monarchy; but in order to keep pace with the
advancement of' Time,' he had lately thought it expedient to
modify the form of government by the introduction of an
increase of popular suffrage. The young Duke of Savoy
listened with reverence to the words of his father and his
king. He well knew that this great and vital change was
no fallacious bait held out to allure and deceive his subjects,
no art to curry favour with the populace, no result of a
temporary fear of agitation, but a conscientious concession
on the part of a sovereign who fulfilled what he believed to
be his duty, and who took the oath which secured liberty
to his subjects, ' with the affection of a father, and the faith
of a king.'
From the very first moment that the proposal was made
to him, the stedfast, loyal heart of A^ictor Emmanuel bound
itself irrevocably to the maintenance of this solemn oath ;
and we must remember that such an affirmation is regarded
almost as an article of religion in the House of Savoy, always
eminent for keeping good faith. The subjects, now made free
citizens, assembled round the throne in a transport of affec¬
tion, such as has perhaps hardly been known in history.
There was no longer a barrier between the people and their
king; their hearts beat in unison, their interests were felt
to be one, and they looked forward together with intense
desire to a future which all felt could not be far distant, a
No. 65.—May 1880, p
226 TJie Ladies' Edinburgh Magasitie.
future which should see triumphant the glorious cause of
National Independence !
{To he continued.)
Caroline Gearcy.
One sunny afternoon in spring,
When the crisp air the spirit raised
Above each sad and grovelling thing,
I lifted up mine eyes and gazed,
Attracted first by the clear sky alone.
Whose yellow depths with gold and amber shone.
But now across that glowing sky
A black battalion came in view,
And scarce could one their forms descry
Than o'er my head the vanguard flew,—
A flight of rooks, from the day's work home flying,
Warned by the cooler air that day is dying.
And well I know that such a sight
Had stirred the soul in ancient Eome ;
For as the Augur watched the flight,
Wheeling or east or westward home.
He knew how schemes of war would prove
Favoured or not by Mercury or Jove.
' Now whither, tell me, do ye fly ?'
I asked a rook above my head.
' Home,' was his curt and quick reply,
And straight with steady wing he sped;
Xor right nor left he looked, nor spoke again.
Nor heeded trees and fields and haunts of men.
' Whither away ?' again I cried.
To some who flew with zig-zag flight.
Or with strong strokes their powers tried
Against the breeze, a dizzy height.
Or seemed to chase with glee the evening beam.
With clatter far and near of caw and scream.
And hovering nearer earth were some,
With longing glance at fresh-ploughed field.
But on they go, ' and still they come,'
Westward the course, and all must yield.
The Au^nr. 227
"£>
And aiming high, or seeking earth below.
Silent or screaming, onward still they go.
And spell-bound by the wing-waved air,
I stood till the last rook flew by ;
Once more I called,' Ye birds, 0 where.
Tell me the goal to which ye fly !'
' Home, home,' they answered, ' to the wind-tossed nest
Aloft in distant grove our wings we rest.'
Still was the air, and gone the spell;
But as my steps I homeward turned,
This flight of birds I pondered well:
' Judire not'—the lesson I had learned.
Condemn not him whose heart and aim are riglit,
Though widely diverse from thine own his flight.
One may look high, another low,
And some disport them by the way,
Or bask them in creation's glow,
And love their fellows, grave and gay,
While some pass on with meek and sad lament,
Wailin" their faults to their own detriment.
O
Some gaze on heaven, nor heed the earth.
Nursing with prayer the hidden life ;
To some it seems as from their birth
They entered on the world for strife,
For noble strife, with wrong, and sin, and ill,
And death shall find them battling bravely still.
To some is given the searching mind,
To seek with pain long-buried lore,
While others life's employment find
In searching Nature's boundless store ;
The burnished lens their guide to star or germ,
Heaping up knowledge in their life's brief term.
Thus devious though their pathways be,
Like rooks careering through the air.
If all one goal before them see.
Be but their heart and treasure there,
All shall be well; nor let one traveller say,
Quit thou thy path—mine is the better way.
228 TJie Ladies Edinburgh Ulagaziiie.
We are not made in one dull mould,
Nor for one i^attern meant to strive.
If what we seek be sterling gold,
If we be workers in the liive.
The paths we take may widely different be.
They all shall meet at last:—that is mine augury.
C. S.
Jlobjrrs anti t!)ftr Sanbititirn bursts.
By De. a. Keener.
{The Translation revised and edited by W. Ogle.)
The impulse given by Darwin's writings to the study of the
relation between insects and the vegetable world, has led
botanists to examine more minutely the forms of flowers, and
to discover the meaning of many of tlieir curious shapes, so
that the playthings of our childhood, the quaint snapdragon
and the pansy witli its smiling face, have gained new wortli
in our eyes, and give us a fresh pleasure by enabling us to
go deeper into the secrets of Nature's contrivances for her
children's welfare.
There are many who only need to have their attention
awakened in order to take an intelligent interest in the
flowers around them, and Dr. Kerner's work will direct them
to a page in the larger volume of Nature, explaining what to
thoughtless eyes needed no explanation, but which, until
recently, had puzzled the most careful observer. The theory
which throws light on so much which was obscure, is that
nothing lives which has not puslied its way upward and
onward in a constant struggle for existence, and that in this
arduous task no useless impcdiinenta are allowed ; everything
that is in the plant has a raison d'etre ; it is, or has been,
beneficial to the jdant. This theory invests each hair or
thorn, each tiny grain of pollen, with a new value; for the
shape of that grain, the position of that hair, is not deter¬
mined by chance, it is the result of causes, acting perhaps
for a long time, and producing the effect we see. It is these
causes which we seek to trace, and which the skilful botanist
points out to us from time to time as he discovers them
after long and patient investigation.
' Cut it down, why cumbereth it the ground ?' This is the
sentence which Nature passes on every useless plant; it
dies, and another takes its place, because the latter bears fruit,
whereas the former was barren. Starting from the point
that the seed is the ultimate object of the life of the plant,
Flowers and tJicir Unbidden Guests. 229
that cross-fertilization produces more and larger seeds, and
that, except in certain cases, insects are the chief bearers of
pollen from one flower to another. Dr. Kerner goes on to
show by what means the plant is preserved from the intru¬
sion of unbidden guests. By unhidden guests, he means those
insects which would visit the plant, and without conferring
the benefit of carrying the pollen from one flower to another,
would merely rob it of its nectar. The plant would thus be
deprived of that which would serve to attract a class of guests
more useful than themselves.
There are many small, wingless insects which would creep
into a flower without benefiting it, and to hinder these, there
are hairs which effectually stop the progress of soft-bodied
insects, while those with a hard case are often hindered by
little pools of water collected in leaves surrounding the stem.
(This arrangement occurs in the larger gentians, G. Lutea,
G. Punctata.) Other hindrances are a viscid secretion which
exudes from the stem and which prevents ants creeping up to
the flower, or a milky juice which flows out when the hooked
feet of insects pierce the epiderm. If these protections are
wanting, the nectar itself is often so enclosed by a network of
• hairs, or by the filaments of stamens, that it cannot be reached
by these small and useless visitors; or sometimes the petals
of the flower are twisted or swollen to prevent an easy passage
to the nectary, as may be seen in the snapdragon. In these
cases the proboscis of the humble bee is able to push through
the obstacles and reach the nectar, Avhich it pays for by the
pollen which it transfers from one flower to another. Dr.
Kerner describes a variety of ways in which flowers guard
their nectar, and then goes on to mention what he calls ' path-
pointers,' that is, hairs, swellings, or constrictions, which oblige
the insect visiting the flower to approach the nectar in the
particular way which is most favourable for the purpose of
transferring the pollen. He gives curious details about some
of the Silenai, which open in the evening and are very fragrant
during the night, when the white petals and the scent attract
insects; during the day the flowers close, and the fragrance
disappears, as the visits of insects would no longer be profit¬
able ; the flower is open for three nights, during which the two
rows of stamens and the long silky stigmas appear in succes¬
sion, and the pollen is carried from one flower to another by the
insectvisitors. Cross-fertilization is thus ensured,asthe stigmas
remain immature until the anthers have shrivelled or fallen
off. Another way of keeping off useless visitors, is to oiler
a counter attraction, and ants who find nectar developed on
230 Tlie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
the stipules of leaves do not care to climb further in search
of it; this happens with Impatiens tricornis, and the flower is
thus freed from the unwelcome ants.
Those who are familiar Avith the varieties of Soldanellas
found among the Alps, will be specially interested in the last
chapter, where the S. Montana is shown to have developed
protective hairs not needed by the S. Alpina, whose home is
on the higher Alps, close to the melting snow. This book is
indeed well fitted to be the companion either of the botanist
who wanders on the rock-strewn pastures of the Alps, or
of the dweller in towns, who will examine with fresh interest
the few flowers he can enjoy. B. L. T.
^f)C iHagtc lEorti.
' Have you ever been in love, Serel—seriously, I mean ?'
inquired Elizabeth Monroy, looking up with a smile, it is
true, from De Qwincci/s Bhetoric, which was open in her
hand.
It was a bright summer day, and the beech boughs over¬
head cast their chequered shade on the sunny lawn. Eed
and white roses, and a broad terrace walk in the full glow of
the afternoon, lay between the party on the grass and the
comfortable, old-fashioned house known as the Manor, the
property of Serel Gifford, Elizabeth's cousin.
Serel Gifford, whose age was probably midway between
thirty and forty, was lying on the grass, and leaning on his
elbow, the centre of the group. As Elizabeth spoke he
looked up, and showed a face manly and handsome enough,
with cold blue eyes and a small brown beard.
' No, I have never been in love, of course not,' he answered,
smiling. ' Is it likely I should be ? And yet I want to be
married.'
'How is it to be managed ?' inquired Eleanor Dacres, a
friend of Elizabeth's, who was one of the party, and who was
now dispensing refreshing cups of afternoon tea with the aid
of Derry Monroy, Elizabeth's sailor brother.
The two Monroys, with their widowed mother and a few
other guests, were spending the heat of the summer at the
Manor.
'That's just it,' said Serel calmly, 'it will be managed
somehow.'
' I am very glad,' put in Mrs. Monroy from her comfort¬
able garden seat, ' that you really do mean to marry.    It
The Magic Word. 231
has often been a trouble to me to think of you so lonely in
this quiet place, with no relations but ourselves, and without
the social tastes of most men. IMarriage is the very thing
for you. I only wish it might be soon ; for you are no longer
a boy, Serel, and you are certainly old enough to know your
own mind.'
' I never was a boy,' remarked Serel as comjjosedly as
before. ' And I quite agree with you there is no time to
be lost'
' Now I know what you shall do, Mr. Gifford,' exclaimed
the lively Eleanor, 'you shall tell us exactly what sort of
a person your wife must be! That will amuse us all, and
prevent Elizabeth from reading that stupid book.'
' That is very easily done,' replied the Lord of the Manor.
' I have no right to dictate ; my wife may be any sort of
person she pleases.'
Derry and his two friends. Lieutenants Ealph and Osborne,
all three of them having been at different times hopelessly
entangled as to the heart, received this unromantic answer
with roars of laughter; whilst Eleanor, laughing too, ex¬
claimed, ' Oh no! you have certainly never been in love,
Mr. Gifford.'
' Is there nobody nice in the neighbourhood whom you
care about, my dear Serel % ' inquired Mrs. Monroy.
'Everybody is very nice, thank you; but I don't know
more of one family than another.'
' I say !' cried Derry,' will you leave the matter to us, and
let us choose your wife for you ?'
' I would rather trust to chance than to you, thank you,'
replied Serel, laughing. ' You might fix on no one knows
whom, and my word once given I could not draw back.'
' I've got an idea,' exclaimed Mr. Osborne. ' Aren't there
people coming to dinner to-night ?'
Serel assented.
' Well, then, let's make an agreement. Whichever young
lady among the guests arrives first, suppose you make uj)
your mind to propose to her.'
Derry and Lieutenant Ealph applauded loudly, Mrs.
Monroy smiled, thinking it all a joke; but Elizabeth looked
grave, remembering how serious was the matter they were
thus proposing to decide so lightly; and Eleanor Dacres
shook her head, saying, 'Now, pray do nothing rash, Mr.
Gifford. I advise you not to promise anything, for I know
you well enough to understand that you always keep your
word.    Some day it will bring you into trouble, I am sure.'
232 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
' Why not out of it ?' suggested Serel. ' Do you not think
this may be an easy way out of a difficult question ?'
' But as to the first arrival,' pursued Lieutenant Ealph,
'two or three might come at once. Surely a better plan
would be to fix on some word.'
' Yes !' assented Derry,' and whoever says it first to you
shall be the one—what one may call drawing lots for the
victim.'
' I like that plan. "Wait one moment whilst I think of a
word.' And Serel GifFord shut his eyes for a minute con¬
sidering.
The others were all more than half in jest, but Serel
himself was quite in earnest, and meant to abide by his
decision.
' I have thought of a word,' said he after a minute. ' And
I promise you that the first young lady who utters it to me
after seven o'clock this evening shall be my wife, if my
earnest endeavours can win her consent.'
Soon after the party broke up, and they all went in to
dress for dinner. The clock struck seven as they assembled
in the drawing-room, and the sound of wheels was heard on
the drive outside.
'Here comes your fate,' said Derry to his cousin, and
Eleanor began imploring, ' Tell us the word, Mr. Gifford, do
tell it to us !'
' Yes, do, Serel I' added Elizabeth. But it was too late; for
at that minute the door opened and the butler announced
' Sir John and Lady Freemantle, and the Misses Freemantle.'
The evening passed off very smoothly; the Misses Free¬
mantle sang well, Miss Bodmin played charmingly. Lady
Sarah Seymour talked botany. Miss Fitzmaurice criticized
modern art, and Serel Gifford made a calm and attentive
host.
At last the party dispersed, and those left behind eagerly
inquired, ' The word! What was it ? Who said it ? Any¬
body ?'
' Yes, somebody said it, and I keep to my arrangement.
You shall know it by and by. Good night all!' And
seeing no more was to be got out of Serel, they all dispersed
to bed.
The next morning, as Elizabeth was walking alone in the
garden, her cousin joined her. At first he was silent, and
then turning to her with a smile he asked: ' Do you know
what was the magic word last night, Elizabeth, and who
said it ?'
A Fable. 233
'No,' was her quiet answer, and her cousin, taking her
hand in his, said, ' The word was—Serel, and you were the
first to utter it after the clock struck seven.'
Ehzabeth blushed and stammered. ' It was a trick,' she
said.
' Perhaps it was,' Serel acknowledged. And the end of it
was, they were married and lived in content for a consider¬
able time. A. H. Eingek.
The mermaids float on the summer sea,
They float and they sing right merrily :
' The maidens of earth have diamonds rare.
That flash and glitter from neck and hair.
' 0 Father Neptune ! to thee we pray—
Give us jewels of star-like ray.'
With dolphins sporting around his car.
The God of the Ocean appeared from far.
' 0 white-armed syrens ! the gems ye crave
Await you 'neath every breaking wave.
' Go seek and find where these treasures dwell—
They are hid from sight in a homely shell.'
They saw a nautilus sailing by,
But he said : ' No jewels, i' faith, have I.'
They met a woodcock Avith thorny spines:
' Not mine the lustre that gleams and shines.'
They asked an oyster with hoary beard:
' 0 sage, canst help us, from age revered ?'
The oyster chuckled witliin his beard,
' Little, till nbw, was my wisdom fear'd.
' Long have ye wandered from shore to shore,
While in your path lay the goodly store.
' Behold what treasures of beauty lie
In forms that ye pass unheeded by !'
234 '^^'■^ Ladies' EdinbiirgJi Magazine.
And lo ! to their enraptured eyes,
Before them shone the long-sought prize.
With a moon-like radiance clear and sheen,
Its pure light shone thro' the depths serene.
And the mermaids sport 'mid the waters bright.
And weave their chaplets with new delight.
Alma Glen.
 0 
©cbatE of Sipril 1880.
Debate" held in April by the members of the Ladies' Edinburgh
Literary Society:  ' Is the study of science hostile to a love of poetry ?'
ABSTRACT OF THE AFFIRMATIVE.
The leader on the affirmative side of this debate remarked at the
outset, that the mere fact of this question being proposed, implied
the possibility of the study of science being hostile to a love of
poetry. Attention was drawn to the words Hudy and love, as being
those of even more importance in the question than the words
science and poetry; for it was urged that it was the subjective
effect of certain studies on the mind of the student that had to be
considered, and not science in its objective results. Baron Bielfield's
definition of poetry, as being the art of expressing our thoughts by
fiction, was referred to, but was passed by as a mere dictionary
definition ; and poetry was described as a gift of the imagination
which seeks to idealize reality, to beautify everytliing that attracts
it, and to throw a golden haze over the most ordinary events of
everyday life. Science, on the contrary, was said to be not imagina¬
tion, but classified knowledge, dealing with facts, not fiction. The
scientific man, it was further stated, does not seek to beautify that
which already exists, but to understand why and how it exists,
and thoroughly to master it from its smallest beginning to its
fullest development. This wide diff'erence between science and
poetry being insisted on, it was argued that the ardent pursuit of
the one causes a love of the other to die, or at least to languish,
from want of suflicient time in human life for any one mind to
devote itself earnestly to two such subjects. It was further urged,
that the study of science carried to a great extent, does, as a rule,
have the eflfect of weakening the imaginative faculty, and that the
man who all his life is immersed in the study of facts, does not often
rise to contemplate the essence of things, which is the sphere of the
poet. To sum up :—The shortness of human life as affording no
time for the following out of two such great subjects as science and
poetry, and the well-known fact that great attention to one faculty
of the mind tends to weaken another, were urged as the chief reasons
why an intense study of science is found to be hostile to a devoted
love of poetry.
ABSTRACT OF THE NEGATIVE.
On the negative side of the question, science and poetry were
compared to two voices whose utterances greet us everywhere
throughout the universe, and some quotations were given to show
Our Library Table. 235
the nature of the difference between them. But, it was argued,
though great in contrast, there was no discord, nor aught that might
prevent the ear of man listening gladly to each of them, and that we
might expect highly cultivated natures to do so. Charles Kingsley
was cited as an example of one who could write poems and also
deliver lectures on natural science. Endeavouring to answer the
question, ' What is poetry %' by quoting some lines from Keats'
'Sleep and Poetry,' and also Emerson's aflirmation, that 'to the
■wise a fact is true poetry,' it was argued that poetry was not to be
regarded as something apart from our life, but rather 'in our whole
existence,' so that the scientific student who had not leisure to study
it, might yet meet it at every step in life, nor should we presume
that the pursuit of truth would deaden his heart to its influence.
Passing on to consider the difference between the voices with regard
to a future life (the one being negative or silent, while the other is
very confident and assured), it was stated that science could not prove
the hopes of the poet to be false, nor deny his affirmation that man
is ' a god in the germ ;' so, where her voice failed, we must listen to
the higher utterances of the seer, nor need we fear any defiance
between then. Considering the question with regard to our sex, it
was suggested that the opposition to women taking part in the science
of politics, or joining the medical profession, arose partly from the
idea that there was something hostile or irreconcilable between
science and poetry, so that the study of the former was injurious to
the ideal woman. But the truth of this sentiment was questioned,
and it was asked, why should we expect her to be less a ' ministering
angel,' or a sensitive, tender-hearted woman, because she had gained
some scientific knowledge in medicine or in politics ? Lastly, with
regard to the poetic love of nature, it was admitted that here science
might be regarded as an intruder by those who share the strong
poetic feelings (such as Emerson and Wordsworth have portrayed),
and especially they might shrink from metaphysical science, which
would define too closely those feelings aroused by nature's beauties,
and amounting to communion with the Divine Being. But it was
argued, we need not fear science, for she could not assail nor deny
that communion, which poetry also failed to explain, and of which
the only solution could be found in the words which both Voices
might unite in uttering :
' The sun, the moon, the stars, the seas, the hills, and the plains,
Are not these, O soul, the Vision of Him who reigns 1'
The voting showed a result in favour of the negative.
©ur 5Librars Cable.
Winter Havens in the Sunny South. By Rosa Baughan.
London : ' The Bazaar' Office, 170 Strand, W.C. 1880.
This pretty little handbook to the Riviera is thoroughly well worth
the attention of all whom health or pleasure-seeking may attract to
southern winter quarters. It is pleasantly and simply written, the
details given are sensible and practical, without being tediously
minute. Lady-travellers, whether singly or in pairs, are often at a
loss, in moving from place to place, or in settling themselves for a
time, for want of some such manual as this; and the rate of living,
236 TJie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
and ordinary expenses of each locality, the cost of journeys, etc. being
plainly stated, this little guide-book will be found a most useful
travelling-companion. Besides the better known and frequented
places of resort, such as Cannes, Mentone, and San Remo, there is a
f\ill description of the more recently opened Alassio; and among all
the charming descriptions in the book (enhanced as they are by
illustrations), none strike us more favourably than the chapter which
introduces us to this newly-explored 'Winter Haven.' To all who
intend visiting the Riviera, we heartily recommend this pretty and
portable little book.
Sister Dora : a Biography.    By Margaret Lonsdale.
London : C. Kegan Paul & Co.    1880.
A book which, not being a novel, runs through ten editions in a
few months, must have something remarkable about it. And perhaps
it is not too much to say that Sister Dora is a unique book of its
kind. It is a very realistic portrait of a most extraordinary woman—
' The wonderfuUest person,' as somebody said, ' that I have ever read
of in history, biography, or fiction.' In her lifetime Sister Dora's
fame was chiefly among the poor, to some of whom she was a
mysterious creature with supernatural power and goodness, while
others who were not her own patients tell one of the kind lady at
the Cottage Hospital, who in her black gown, muslin cap, and white
apron with a bib to it, was always so kind and cheerful to everybody
that came.
The outside facts of Sister Dora's heroic life may be sketched in a
few words. Her name in the world was Dorothy Pattison ; she was
the loving, self-willed, restless, observant, generous child of the
Rector of Hauxwell, in Yorkshire. She was one of the many girls
who do not find the home life enough for their energies, and after
many aspirations she struck out a line for herself by taking charge
of the village school at Little Woolston, near Bletchley. After three
years of this work she joined the Sisterhood of the Good Samaritan
at Coatham, thus entering on a life which had long been her ideal.
It was in connection with this sisterhood that she was first sent to
take charge of the Cottage Hospital at Walsall, where her name will
live in the hearts of the people for many generations. Her influence
among that rough, Black-country population is curiously brought out
by the story of the small-pox hospital, which Miss Lonsdale gives very
fully in the sixth chapter of her book. In February 1875, there was
a serious outbreak of small-pox at Walsall, and the town authorities
were naturally most anxious to persuade the people to send their sick
to the Epidemic Hospital outside the town—a dismal place in the
middle of dust-heaps, the description of which makes one feel it not
incomprehensible that the poor W'alsall people were unwilling to
send their wives and husbands and children to this gloomy house of
refuge, or that the sick themselves begged to be allowed to die at
home. Perhaps few of them were educated enough to understand
what public spirit means, or why it was their duty for the sake of
others to send their sufferers away. Anyhow they would not do it;
the epidemic went on spreading; the mayor and corporation were in
despair. Then in this terrible emergency Sister Dora came forward
and offered to leave her own special work for a time, and to take charge
of the small-pox hospital. She knew, and so did the authorities,
that no name but hers would break down the people's prejudices.
Question Series. 237
and the work she had to do soon proved her to be right. She had
reached this place in the reverence of the people by years of such
self-sacrifice and devotion as very few women or men are capable of,
and it seems to us that her coming forward at this time was an act
of purer heroism than her biographer is quite willing to allow. For,
as we are told, ' to this place, on a February afternoon, Sister Dora
was escorted by her friend, the surgeon of the Cottage Hospital. . . .
As she stood on the doorstep she shivered, for the first and only time
in her life, with an irrepressible dread of the lonely struggle with
disease which she was going to encounter. Her courage failed lier
for the moment, and she exclaimed, "Oh, take me back! I cannot
endure this dreadful place! I had no idea what it would be like
when I said I would come here." The surgeon knew her well, and
took the right method of dealing with her. He only said, "Come
in.'"
In tills hospital there were twenty-eight beds ' soon filled with
patients in every stage of the disease.' Sister Dora's only helpers
were the porter, who often went off at night, leaving her alone, and
two old women who came in from the workhouse to help her in
washing. And this work lasted till the middle of August. If there
was any mixture of vainglory in the motives that led Sister Dora to
undertake it, one can only say that never was a fault more splendid.
But though those six lonely months were perhaps the most heroic
of her life, it is at the Cottage Hospital that one learns to know her
best, among her strange variety of patients. Those must have been
few who did not leave the hospital with their minds and souls, as
well as their bodies, the better for being there. Her ' fulness of
joyous life,' her sympathy, her patience, her power over the roughest
spirits, her fresh straightforward activity — it was impossible that
such a woman should not become the head and heart of any house
she ruled over, and one cannot imagine that her best helpers ever
wished her ascendancy less. And the secret of Sister Dora's own
life may be read in her own words : ' Tell her this is not an ordinary
house, or even hospital. I want her to understand that all who serve
here, in whatever capacity, ought to have one rule, love for God, and
then I need not say love for their work. I wish we could use, and
really mean, the word Maison-Ditu.'
The end of this beautiful life came after long suffering from a
painful disease. Sister Dora entered into rest on Christmas Eve
1878, leaving behind her a memory that will not soon fade.
Ifobody can wish that her life had not been written ; her memoiy,
as Miss Londsdale says, 'is not private property,' and the Walsall
people will surely not be less proud of their heroine because all
England has so readily agreed to place her on the list of honourable
names.
(J^uestion Series.
I. Ewjlish Literature.—Give a short sketch of the character of
King Lear taken from the early part of the play. Answer not to
exceed three hundred words.
II. Geolo(iy.—Describe the characteristics of the Upper Silurian
rocks and their distribution in Great Britain. Answer not to
exceed tliree hundred words.
238 The Ladies Edinhirgh Magazine.
Answers to reach Qu. C., not later than June 5th, care of Messrs.
Morrison and Gibb, 11 Queen Street, Edinburgh. Only one side
of the sheet of paper to be written upon, and it is especially requested
that nothing but the answers may be sent to Qu. C. Any other
communication must be addressed in the usual form to the Editor,
or no notice can be taken of such enclosures.
ANSWERS TO MARCH QUESTIONS.
English Literature.—Not one among the ten answers received is quite
satisfactory in point of finish and correct exj)ression. Akialfin is
best, although she is not perfectly accurate in stating that Addison
' brought out' the Spectator. Steele was the originator, Addison the
* animating spirit' among the contributors of this short-lived but
popular magazine. Wolfra, Bianca, Arachne, Eromaet, Linda,
all good ; the latter has given no clue as to where the quotations
given are to be found. Thorough has also omitted this, and her
paper, usually so like her name, bears marks of hurry. Nagol has
given no quotations at all. Greta has arranged the subject clearly,
and the quotations are well chosen, but the style is sadly abrupt and
the writing untidy. Pink excellent, but disqualified, from having
exceeded the required limits. Would competitors kindly cojiy the
Question verbatim at the head of each answer.
The Editor Qu. C. begs to apologize for having omitted Linda's
name among the Logic answers in February number.
Geology.—The Geology papers, seven in number, are all good and
accvirate as far as they go, but several important points have been
left untouched. Linda and Wolfra, equal. The answer of the
former is printed, because better expressed; the latter, however,
gives somewhat fuller information. Pink excellent, especially in her
remarks on the migration of land animals. Arachne, jBianca,
Eromart, and Beetwalda, all rank very slightly behind the first
papers.
Give a short account of Addison and his influence on our language,
with specimens of his style.
Joseph Addison, born 1C72,—whose father afterwards became Dean
of Lichfield,—was first known as a poet, and selected as such to cele¬
brate the battle of Blenheim. In 1709, when secretary to the Lord-
Lieutenant of Ireland, he assisted Steele with The Tatler; in 1711
brought out The Spectator, published daily. ' These were the first
attempts,' says Dr. Johnson,' to teach inferior duties of life, to regulate
daily conversation,' to correct and remove hourly vexations, 'rather
ridiculous than criminal.' In 1713 Addison produced the tragedy
of Cato, and reached the height of his fame, but his chief glory is now
that of one of our greatest writers of prose. Here his lively fancy,
his most original and exquisite sense of humour, is unsurpassed, and
made him the founder of a new school of popular writing, easy and
familiar without coarseness, polished but flexible, well adapted to the
transmission of both amusement and instruction.
After holding various oflSces, Addison was, in 1717, made a secretary
of state, but resigned on a pension, and died June 1719, aged 47. His
character of Sir Roger de Coverley in the Spectator is well known.
The following remarks on Chevy Chase were singular at that date :
' The thoughts of this poem, which naturally arise from the subject,
Stray Notes. 239
are always simple and sometimes exquisitely noble. ... If this song
had been written in the Gothic manner, wliich is the delight of all
our little wits, whether writers or readers, it would not have hit the
taste of so many ages, and have pleased the readers of all ranks and
conditions.'
In a paper on English language, Addison writes: ' It shows the
genius and natural temper of the English, which is modest, thoughtful,
and sincere, and which perhaps may recommend the people, though it
has spoiled the tongue.' Arialpin.
'Give proofs that the present distribution of land and sea were
different in past geological ages to what they are now.'
At first geologists thought that the changes which have taken place
in the distribution of land and sea since the creation, were owing to
a general lowering of the water, but later Anvestigations have proved
this theory to be false, and they have been compelled to embrace the
doctrine, that the solid land has been repeatedly moved upwards
or downwards, so as to have changed its position with regard to the
ocean. Proofs are not wanting to show that the distribution of land
and sea was different in past geological periods to what they are
at present. The marine shells, which have been found so far inland,
and on the tops of high mountains, are sufficient proof that the sea
must once have been there. Again, Dr. Pingle, a Danish naturalist,
has proved by researches, that along the west coast of Greenland, for
the length of more than COO miles, a gradual sinking of the land has
been going on during the last four centuries ; while Mr. Darwin has
inferred that in those parts of the Pacific and Indian Oceans where
the coral islands abound, there is a slow but continued sinking
movement of the submarine mountains upon which the masses of
coral are based, while in other places in the South Sea, coral has been
raised far above the sea level.
We need not therefore be surprised, when we learn from geology,
that the continents and oceans were not always placed where they
now are. But from what we know of the extreme slowness of the
upward and downward movement, we may infer that it would take
a long succession of geological periods to cause the submarine and
supramarine areas to change places, even if the ascending and
descending movements were continuously carried on in one direction.
Linda.
Strag i^otfs.
Ladies' Clubs.—In answer to inquiries which have reached us
since our article on this subject appeared in April last, we beg to
state that the Russell will in future be known as the Lotos Club,
having changed hands ; and henceforth it will be specially intended
to suit the requirements of those interested in the Drama, Music,
and the Fine Arts generally.
Ladies' Swimming Club.—We are glad to hear that there is a
prospect of such a club being formed this summer in Edinburgh,
though we must warn our readers that some previous knowledge of
swimming will be necessary before applying for admission, as the
proposed meeting-place is the Chain-pier, Trinity. Should this pro¬
posal be carried out, the proprietor of the pier will make arrange¬
ments for reserving the pier for ladies' use at certain hours.    Ladies
240 TJie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
are invited to apply to Miss Simpson, 5 Randolph Cliff, Edinburgh,
for further details.
Drawing by Correspondence.—This somewhat unusual method of
teaching drawing is already found very successful by the Committee
of the S. George's Hall Classes in Edinburgh. The Lending Library
in connection with the class offers a great advantage, by placing
within the students' reach many books upon Art subjects, which
would otherwise be unattainable by them.
A Lady Graduate.—It is said that at Cambridge, when the
Mathematical Tripos List was being read out, before the reader
could utter the eighth name upon that list, some among the crowd of
listening undergraduates raised ?v shout of 'Scott, Scott.' Another
name, as we all know, was read, but the shouting undergraduates were
generously proclaiming the honour gained, not by one of their own
number, but by one of their girl-rivals at Girton. Charlotte Angus
Scott, who having been ' informally examined ' at the same time and
under the same conditions as the male candidates for Mathematical
Honours, was declared by the examiners to have taken a position
equal to that of eighth wrangler—a much higher place than has
been taken by any woman before. Miss Scott is the daughter of the
Principal of the Lancashire Independent College. She is not yet
twenty-two, and untQ she entered Girton her education was carried
on almost entirely in her own home. After having distinguished
herself in the Junior Local Examinations both of Cambridge and
Oxford, in 1875 she passed first of all the girls in the Cambridge
Senior Local Examination. ' In consequence of this position, scholar¬
ships at Newnham Hall and Bedford College were offered her; but
she elected to compete for an Entrance Scholarship at Girton
(preferring that college because its conditions for its students pre¬
cisely correspond with those imposed by the university on candidates
for degrees), and obtained the Goldsmiths' Company's Scholarship.'
When Miss Scott came up for her Degree Certificate at Girtou,
she received also a present of books, voted to her by the College
' in recognition of her distinguished place in the Tripos.'
Notices to (iTorrcspoittrrnts, etc.
Ladies are invited to contribute to this Magazine. All communi¬
cations to be addressed, Editors, Ladies' Edinhurgh Magazine, Messrs.
Morrison & Gibb, 11 Queen Street, Edinburgh.
Papers intended for immediate insertion must be in the hands of
the Editors by the first of the previous month ; attention is requested
to this rule.
We must warn our correspondents that no MSS. can be returned
unless/mW postage be sent, that letters needing reply must contain a
stamp, and that the Editors can forward no communications left with
them unless stamped. Poems sent in letters will not be returned,
unless a stamp be sent. No anonymous communication either to
tlie Editors or the Ofiice-bearers of the Literary Society will be
noticed.
The meeting of the Ladies' Edinburgh Literary Society will be
held on Saturday, 1st May, at 5 Chester Street, at 11 a.m.
Debate—Are small societies for self-improvement or pleasure de¬
sirable ?
Victor Emmanuel. 241
Uictor EmmanueL
(the soldier king.)
' Will, therefore, to be strong, thou Italy !
Will to be noble !'—E. B. Browning.
II.
There are few probably who enter for the first time the
beautiful capital of the plains of Lombardy, without calling
to mind the stirring incidents of the war of National
Independence in Italy, particularly, those of the memorable
Cinque Giornaie. When the unprecedented events of those
' Five Days' had taken place, and the Austrians were driven
out of Milan, some of the more important of the citizens
formed themselves into a deputation, and hastened to Turin
to entreat the aid and intervention of the Piedmontese
King.
Among the Ministers who composed the first constitutional
Cabinet were many friends to the cause of national freedom,
especially Cesar Balbo, the great historian, who was Presi¬
dent of the Council; Ceneral Franzini, Minister of War; and
Vincenzo Eicci, Minister of the Interior. These with their
colleagues soon put an end, by their counsel and persuasion,
to any delay which the king might have been disposed to
make before acceding to the request of the Milanese; and
on the 23d of March 1848, he was induced to issue a pro¬
clamation, addressed to the people of Lombardy, in which
he promised such aid in the glorious scheme of liberating
that province from the galling yoke of Austria,' as brother
might expect from brother, or friend from friend.'
Almost as soon as the king's decision was made known,
the Sardinian army entered Milan, bearing the standard
of the Italian tricolour, in conjunction with the shield
of Savoy. The Milanese, intoxicated by the succession of
triumphs which had marked the exciting events of the
'Five Days,' now flattered themselves that they had suc¬
ceeded in expelling the Austrians for ever, and scarcely
received the king's address and assistance with the en¬
thusiasm which his patriotism, in so readily responding to
their appeal, had merited.
On the 8th of April the Sardinian army, after a brisk
engagement, succeeded in forcing the pass of the Ponte di
Goito, a rather important position which had been held by the
Austrians. But the Piedmontese, though victorious, suffered
many privations  during the  first days of the  campaign.
No. 66.—June 1880. q
242 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
These were chiefly caused by a want of foresight on the
part of their leaders in making due provision for their wants.
This occasioned considerable murmuring, and dissatisfaction
spreading in the camp put an end for the time to all disci¬
pline. But their king was hastening to the scene of action,
and his presence among them soon had the desirable effect
of restoring both to soldiers and officers their pristine hope
and enthusiasm. Tlie appearance presented by Charles
Albert at this juncture during the first anxious days of
preparation, has been commented upon by more than one
of his biograpliers; he has been compared to a ghost-like
apparition of the fancy, to a supernatural vision which
nothing, even death itself, could touch. As he passed slowly
between their ranks, with that far-away, wearied look on his
face as if strength were almost spent, the soldiers cried
loudly with one voice,' Viva il Re, viva il Re !' while the pale
king responded with a mournful smile. A complete contrast
to his father, Victor Emmanuel stands forth full of vitality,
lively, impetuous, courageous, longing to take an active
part in the sublime and terrible drama of war. The proxi¬
mity of danger exercised upon his bold and ardent nature
a fascination almost amounting to delight. Erom the
moment of his first engagement, it was manifest to every
one that there beat in his breast the heart of a true warrior.
The Sardinian army now commenced operations. One
division laid siege to Peschiera, but in vain. They had
been led by false spies to believe it indifferently fortified,
and incapable of defence. Meanwhile the rest of the troops
gained their first victory on Lombardian territory at Past-
rengo on the 30th of April; but this success Avas speedily
followed by a most disastrous defeat at Santa Lucia on the
6th of May, when the Piedmontese army was put to flight
with grave losses. Again, on the 29th, the Sardinians were
successful in a severe engagement. This famous battle was
fought on the heights of Goito, and here Victor Emmanuel
greatly distinguished himself Bersezio, Avhom we have
already quoted, gives a vividly-coloured description of the
exploits of the Prince on this memorable occasion:
* Towards the end of May the commander-in-chief of the Austrians
made an attempt to retrieve the fortunes of his army. He concen¬
trated the strength of liis troops at Mantua, issued from that city over
the Mincio, and pursued his way towards Goito, intending to put to
flight the Piedmontese army, part of which was engaged in the siege
of Peschiera, while the rest was stationed before Verona.'
Charles Albert, becoming aware of this strategical move¬
ment of the Austrians, hastily quitted his headquarters at
Victor Emmanuel. 243
Valeggio,  and made for the  heights  of Goito.    To  give
Bersezio's own words:
' The troops were fatigued with their long day's march, and needed
food. They explored the ground, but in no part of it could they see
traces of the vicinity of the enemy ; orders were therefore given
to the soldiers to lay aside their arms and prepare their rations.
A young general rides by each line of troops, examining the position
occupied by our army, pushing on towards the last outpost, and
looking anxiously into the distance, as if he desired intensely to behold
the front of the enemy ; at last, having assured himself that there is
no probability of an engagement for the present, he turns his horse's
head, retiring slowly and reluctantly. This young general, so vigilant
and alert, and with so courageous an aspect, is the Duke of Savoy.'
The troops liad laid aside their arms, and stretched them¬
selves upon the ground to snatch a few hours' rest, when
suddenly a sound of firing broke the stillness of the air, and
with a cry of alarm the dismayed soldiers started vTp and
seized their arms. Tire enemy was advancing steadily upon
them, and the shock and surprise combined struck a panic
to the hearts of the proverbially brave Piedmontese. The
troops became so disordered, that to dispose them in order of
battle seemed a hopeless task to their officers. Emboldened
by their evident confusion and dismay, the Austrians pressed
on impetuously. One Sardinian regiment was put to flight,
and the battle bid fair to be lost almost without resistance.
But the Duke of Savoy, Avhose quick ear had caught the
first sound of the cannon, rode speedily to the rescue of his
army. One regiment had indeed been routed; but the young
general, pursuing the fugitives, had, with a few kind words of
encouragement, infused fresh spirit into their failing hearts.
Placing himself at their head, the broken battalions arranged
themselves, and following their brave young leader, prepared
for the conflict. The Prince pressed on before all; wherever
the fight waxes most furious, he might be distinguished, even
in a cloud of dust and smoke, by the flashing of the sword
which he brandished everywhere. Though wounded in the-
thigh by a shell, he neither paused nor alighted from his
saddle; for he saw that liis object was accomplished, and
that the enemy were effectually held at bay. Still the
struggle was protracted, the odds being against the Sar¬
dinians. A moment had now arrived which seemed to call for
one valorous act on their part to decide the day in their
favour. The vigilant eye of the Duke of Savoy had
discerned a point where the attack was most vigorous, and
he turned boldly towards the conquest of that position. To
accomplish  his  purpose, he  invited  the  aid  of a  strong
244 "^^^^ Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
battalion commanded by an officer who was destined later on
to distinguish himself in the Crimean war. The duke
placed himself at the head of this regiment; they gladly fol¬
lowed their prince, and with the cry,' Viva il Bh !' galloped
impetuously forward to the conflict. At length the Austrians
were compelled to yield and retreat in disorder, leaving the
victory with the Piedmontese, who owed this success solely
to the personal bravery of the heir-apparent to their throne.
Evening came on. The king had been presentthrough the
whole of the engagement, displaying the calmness and courage
that seemed habitual to him; the enemy were in full re¬
treat on every side, the cavalry pursuing the fugitive troops,
when a special courier arrived from Valeggio, bringing a
despatch for the king from Prince Ferdinand, Avho com¬
manded the troops that besieged Peschiera. The king read
the document attentively; then turning to those around him,
he displayed it with a look of mingled pride and satisfaction,
exclaiming: ' Gentlemen, Peschiera is ours; my sou the Duke
of Genoa sends me the announcement of the surrender !' A
few minutes later the Duke of Savoy rode up at full gallop,
his clothes blood-stained and covered with dust, fatigued
indeed in body, but with a countenance beaming with intense
delight. Eeining in his foaming steed immediately before
the king,' Your Majesty,' said he, ' the battle fought this day
may be recorded in the annals of our Piedmontese army as
the Victory of Goito.'
It must have been a proud and happy moment for Charles
Albert when he thus marked the success which had attended
the brave efforts of his sons—one of those moments of
compensation which occasionally cheer the most clouded
existence, and reanimate the most discouraged heart. He
probably felt that though he might never live to see his
dreams realized, nor hope witli his own arm to win for
Italy the freedom which had so long abandoned her beautiful
and fertile plains, yet that the energy and bravery of his
sons might one day win the applause of the Italian nation—
grateful and exultant because no longer oppressed.
On the 7th of June 1848, the Duke of Savoy was pre¬
sented with the gold medal of the order of' Military Valoux','
for distinguished conduct and honourable wounds received
at the battle of Goito on the 29th of the preceding month.
The king now concentrated his forces at Goito, while he
endeavoured to obtain an armistice, hoping by that means to
obtain the time necessary to rest and reinforce his troops;
but the Austrian general offered only such terms as the
Victor Emmanuel. 245
dignity of the sovereign would not permit him to accept. A
retreat was therefore commenced; but on reviewing the
situation, the kind and generous heart of Charles Albert
recoiled from the idea of abandoning the unfortunate Lom-
bardian province to the fury of the enemy. Their capital
Milan had struck the first blow for freedom; and if he
deserted the noble city, not only would her hope be shattered,
but she would be left exposed to the full vengeance of the
conquerors. Eeasoning thus, the king decided to defend the
Lombardian capital Avith the residue of his army. If this
decision was an error of judgment, strategical and political,
it was surely the error of a humane and generous ally.
Having resolved to stand by the inhabitants of Lombardy,
the king of course exposed himself to the chance of an attack
from the Austrian army at any moment, and unfortunately
it was not long in coming. On the 25th of July 1848,
General Eadetzky, with an army of 50,000 men, marched to
Custozza, where the Piedmontese forces were stationed. It
was a terrible blow, although it could scarcely have been
unexpected. Both armies felt that the time had now arrived
which might decide the chances of the campaign. To the
Sardinians, more especially as being the weaker party, it was
a moment of intense anxiety. Well might their hearts fail
them at sight of the advancing enemy, packed in so dense a
mass, that to part them would require an effort almost of
superhuman strength. The indomitable courage of the l)uke
of Savoy appears, however, to have been equal to the occasion;
and he determined that, even if victory must rest with the
Austrians, it should not be without a struggle. He himself is
described as fairly ' rushing upon the enemy like a lion,'
constantly renewing the attacks; so that even with the odds
so fearfully against them, the Sardinian army was enabled
to maintain its defence for nine hours, hoping and expecting
every moment to be joined by De Sonnaz from Valeggio,
This general was prevented from succouring them by a body
of Austrians who guarded the fords on the right bank of the
Mincio, which he was consequently unable to cross. At the
close of that disastrous day, reduced to extremity by the
forces of Eadetzky, the royal troops were compelled to
surrender the ground, and to retreat in good order towards
Villafranca.
The following month saw the unequal contest renewed
beneath the walls of Milan. Here once more the Austrians
were victorious, compelling the Piedmontese to take refuge
within the ramparts of the city.   Charles Albert now listened
246 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
to the counsels of his generals, who were unanimously agreed
in considering it impossible to defend Milan, whose old and
ineiJicient walls would not bear a siege. The king, now
compelled to capitulate, made proposals to Eadetzky, on
the part of the Piedmontese army, to evacuate LomJjardy
and surrender Milan, provided that the lives and possessions
of the citizens might be guaranteed. Eadetzky assented
readily to these terms, stating only that he could not on his
own responsibility give any guarantee for the conduct of the
emperor with regard to Milan, but promising to concede a
period of twelve hours to allow ample time for those who
preferred to do so to quit the city.
When the terms of the capitulation were made known in
Milan, the whole city Avas in confusion and uproar; the
people were utterly beside themselves with grief and rage; the
mob cried loudly that the king was a traitor, and ought at
any cost to defend the city. A handful of these malcontents,
speedily followed by many others, assembled themselves
before the royal residence, screaming, cursing, and menacing.
Then Charles Albert, stung almost to exasperation by such a
display of folly and ingratitude, placed himself at one of the
windows of the palace, and addressed the infuriated mob as
follows : ' The energetic manner in Avhich the entire popula¬
tion has declared itself against any idea of treaty with the
enemy, has determined me to continue the contest, although
circumstances seem so adverse; I therefore inteud to remain
among you with my sons.' This speech took effect, and the
mob had begun to calm down a little, when news was
brought that a deputation had arrived, bringing from Marshal
Eadetzky a ratification of the proposed treaty of surrender.
The infuriated population now cried more loudly than ever
that the kincj was a traitor, and as a last token of their
drunken madness, attacked with irresistible fury the royal
palace ; and it is not unlikely Italian history might have had
some horrible deed of bloodshed to record, if a battalion of
the guards and a company of the faithful Bersaglicri had not
hastened to protect the life and person of their sovereign.
Charles Albert now retired to Vigevano, a town about 16
miles from Milan. From this place, on the 10th of August
1848, he issued a notification to the people of Italy, part of
which ran as follows : ' The cause of the " Independence of
Italy" incited me to the war against our common enemy.
Supported by the valour of my soldiers, victory at first smiled
upon oiir arms. Neither I nor my sons have shunned
danger; the sanctity of the cause redoubled our ardour.    The
Victor Emmanuel. 247
smile of victory was brief; the enemy increased in numbers.
My army was wdlling to fight, but lack of provisions con¬
strained us to abandon the position we had conquered, the
land already freed by our arms. I retreated with my army
to Milan, but the city cannot sustain a siege. We lack money
and a sufficiency of arms and provisions. ... A truce of six
weeks has been arranged with the enemy; we have honour¬
able conditions of peace in the interval. We shall return one
day to the contest. I recall the shouts of applause with
which you once saluted my name; they resounded still in my
ears during the tumult of the battle. Confide calmly in your
king: the cause of Italian independence is not yet lost.'
While Charles Albert was penning this document, bearing
the impress of sincerity and good faith, a woman, lonely
and disconsolate, knelt, weeping and praying, within the walls
of the royal palace at Turin.
It was the young Princess Maria Adelaide. Those nearest
and dearest to her were engaged in the struggle; there
fought in the Italian camp her husband and father-in-law,
while that of the Austrians contained among its officers
her own father and brothers. Sometimes her ladies-in-
waiting would endeavour to cheer her by directing her
thoughts to the future,—to the day when her brow might
be encircled by the crown of Italy, when the fortunes of
the family of Savoy should have triumphed, — but the
unfortunate princess, almost distracted with grief, would
quickly silence those who spoke, saying, ' This is no subject
for such sorrowful times, ladies; let us pray more earnestly
to our God, who alone can help us.' ' For whom would your
Eoyal Highness have us pray V asked the ladies. The answer
was gently but sadly given,' I would have you pray for all.'
A few short months from this time, the Princess Maria
Adelaide became Queen of Sardinia; but the crown of Italy
was not destined to adorn the brow of this fair and amiable
woman. She died on the 20th of January 1855, struck down
in the flower of her age, very soon after the birth of her third
son and fifth child. Indeed, death appears to have been rife
in the royal family of Sardinia during this year ; for Maria
Theresa, the queen dowager, died on the 12th of January
1855, and the following month of the same year the king
was called to mourn the loss of his only brother the Duke
of Genoa, who died at the early age of thirty-three. The
old church of the Ccrasolcda at Turin may not architecturally
be worthy of a visit, but in one of the side aisles may be seen
two very beautiful statues, which cannot fail to excite admira-
248 TJie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
tion and interest; they are the two queens who died within
a few days of each other, represented kneeling side by side,
their hands clasped in an attitude of deep devotion.
(jTo he continued) C. G.
Nursing for ti)e ^oor.
No. 23 Bloomsbury Square.
In these days, when general interest is excited on the subject
of women's work in its various branches, a few details given
by one engaged in nursing may be acceptable to some
readers. Leaving for the present the wider field of hospital
work, let vis restrict ourselves to an equally interesting
branch, namely, the nursing of the sick poor in their own
houses.
When we consider the early life of the National and
Metropolitan Association for providing Trained Nurses for the
Sick Poor, we are inclined to recall the saying of a great
bishop, that no undertaking that was finally prosperous
owned a grander origin than an attic or a cellar.
The Association was begun in a lodging-house in that
depressing region Rloomsbury, having for workers one nurse
and the Superintendent, Miss Florence Lees.
This lady brought to the work immense experience.
Having been almost the first of the Nightingale probationers
in St. Thomas' Hospital, she had subsequently been through
most of the French hospitals, under the excellent teaching of
the Sisters; she had distinguished herself by her energy
and marked ability in managing the Crown Princess'
Ambulance in the Franco-Prussian war; and on her return
home from this duty, she had been appointed to examine
into the state of sick-nursing in London. Being compelled
to report unfavourably on its efficiency, she was placed at the
head of the new svstem, the workincc of which I am about
to describe.
The Association was formed under the personal patronage
of Miss Nightingale, with a large committee to aid her. One
of the first rules they laid down was, that the nurses should
be all ladies. Miss Lees had great experience of district
nursing, especially in the East End of London, and had found
that the women employed were very often married, with
houses of their own, and that they belonged to the same class
Nursing for the Poor. 249
as most of their patients. Though often clever and well-
meaning women, they were unable to balance between the
duties they owed to their own families and those to their
charges. At times, when duties clashed, these poor women
were scarcely well enough trained to decide between the
relative importance of family and professional claims. If
the sick poor are to be successfully dealt with in their own
homes, the exertion must never flag. No day must the bed
go unmade, the window unopened; for the friends are only
too ready to take advantage of this negligence. No wonder
that the committee of the new Association felt the para¬
mount necessity of having as workers those who would
render thoroughly conscientious service, and this was more
to be looked for from women of education, upon whose
lives many higher influences must have been brought to
bear, than from women who have taken up nursing as they
might have done dressmaking or factory work, merely for
the sake of a living.
Taken as a whole, no work requires higher motives or
more undivided purpose than nursing, and no branch of it
so much as district nursing. This new opening for ladies
had also its advantages. Unlike other nursing, it was to be
well paid, and the ' Home' was to be made as pleasant as
possible ; ' for,' wrote Miss Nightingale,' these ladies are the
servants, and the very liard-worked servants, of the poor.'
While actually on duty, tlieir occupation was most laborious,
so that it was thought right during their leisure time to
bring as much of brightness and prettiness into their lives as
possible. On this wise principle, so unlike that upon which
was modelled the dreary life of the ordinary hospital worker,
the Association started in a spot well suited for its early
efforts, including as it did the neighbourhood of Gray's Inn
Eoad, Holborn, and St. Giles. In describing the practical
working of the system, I had better confine myself to my
own experience. A year's training in a general hospital
where there was plenty to be seen in the way of casualties,
had shown me the nature of the work, and had enabled me
to compare to a certain extent the advantages and dis¬
advantages of district and ward practice. Little, however,
can be realized of the special difficulties of any work before
entering upon it.
In the long afternoons of quiet ward routine, how often I
had thought that any excuse for going into the outside sun¬
shine and air would be welcome; but then I had not taken
into account the tired feet and weary limbs, the wet days
250 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
that seem to come so much ofteuer when one's duty obliges
one to face them. Besides this, in a hospital the work must
always be kept up to a certain standard; and what with the
doctors, the sisters, the matron, there is every stimulus to
perfect order and cleanliness, whereas, in district work,
everything retards the nurse's efforts. Her worst enemies
are always the patient's friends; to them warmth and dirt
are often synonymous terms; air and change of any sort are
cruel interferences. If a medicine or dressing does not pro¬
duce immediate effects, they abandon it; and instead of the
cleansing lotion and firmly applied bandage, the nurse will
often find a strange brown mixture, which perhaps turns out
to be soap and sugar, put on with a loose rag, and doubtful
masses of flannel, because ' poor Tim never could bear any¬
thing tight on his leg, and the mixture was too cold!' In
our Association the hours of work were arranged as follows :
At half-past six we were called; breakfast was served an hour
later. This over, we set out, often before it was quite light, at
the same time as the milkman and postman make their first
rounds, namely, half-past eight. I began work in January,
certainly not an easy month in which to test a system by
whose rules one is required to go out in all weather. I have
a depressing remembrance of thick fogs, the trees dripping
in the square, and the mud lying so deep in the road that
it required a severe mental effort even to leave the door-step
and bravely ' face out.'
The ' Home' had been in workin" order for about six
months before I joined it, four ladies and one probationer
forming the staff. According to the general rule, I, the
latest arrived, was sent to all the fresh cases. Miss Lees
always accompanies the nurse on the first visit, to see that
it is a proper nursing case, her wonderful power of resource
and large experience being often of the greatest help.
Trom half-past eight till one, the nurse goes from case to
case. Some are quickly got through, requiring only a wound
dressed and no ' tidying' to be done ; but others there may
be requiring two hours' hard work before we can leave them
comfortable and with clean surroundings. The nurse's first
duty in going to any case is, after treating the patient, to
put the room in proper ' nursing order,' the friends in some
cases being shamed into helping. Still the patient must
often be left alone all day, the bread-winners having to be
out early; and to these cases the nurse tries to go first on
her rounds, so as to make things comfortable for the day.
Fancy the amount of work that must be done before a room
Nursitig for the Poor. 251
unaired, unswept, and fireless can be made really clean and
wholesome ! From these cases it is impossible to hurry; the
work would be worthless if half done; l)ut it is one of the
trials of a nurse that the ' worst cases' in hospital phrase,
namely, the most hopeless, such as paralyzed or consumptive
patients, can have so little extra time spared to them. No
wonder that such loud laments rise from the nurse who is
told off to a burnt case; for its proper treatment would need
much more time than she can spare, and the doctor attending
will be little interested in it. The number of cases given to
each nurse varies from eight to twelve ; and as they are in
very scattered districts, the amount of walking is one of the
greatest trials.
As a rule, each case is seen daily, sometimes, in fever and
and other cases, twice a day; and this, when one may be in
a court of Marylebone and the other in Seven Dials, requires
plenty of strength. At one the nurses come back to the
Home for dinner. No one can appreciate the nice sur¬
roundings more thoroughly than a hospital nurse after a
long morning spent among ugly sights, evil smells, dirt, and
suffering; and as a rule, no people are less considered in this
matter. During their working hours, the shop-girl and dress¬
maker have pretty things to handle and look at; the nurse has
many repulsive sights and a constant strain on her nerves
and spirits, and when the Avorking hours are over, the
simplicity of the ward adornments are exchanged for the
bareness of the 'Common-room,' where the only things on
which she can fix her eyes while at meals or resting are a
few cheerless anatomical diagrams.
In the Home in Bloomsbury Square there Avere at all times
sweet fresh flowers on the table, and pretty china. On
some minds the articulated skeleton at one end of the room
might have had a depressing effect, but it reminded the
nurses of the theoretical and more advanced side of their
work, in the practice of which they had been almost over¬
whelmed during tlie morning.
After dinner there was always a short rest in the sitting-
room, where were easy-chairs, laooks, the weekly papers, and
a grand piano, after which work was resumed at half-past
one. We came back to tea at five, and our dresses were
changed for the evening, when we could amuse ourselves.
We had lectures on three evenings in the week: on Physi¬
ology, by Dr. Haywood Smith ; on Anatomy, by Mr. Crofts ;
and on Hygiene, by Dr. Cheadle. These lectures, coming at
the end of a long day of hard work, meant a great deal
252 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
of exertion; but to the mentally and physically strong
nothing can be more delightful than this union of theory
and practice.
No night work is required except in unusually bad cases.
In all times and places the uniform is a complete protec¬
tion; it is distinctive, without being like that of a Sister
of Mercy, consisting of a short holland dress prettily made,
and having a large apron and sleeves—to be worn while
actually at work; a plain cloak and bonnet complete the
costume.
Every nurse carries with her a bag filled with the things
she is likely to need—bandages, cotton-wool, plaster, linseed-
meal, syringe, and thermometer. They are allowed in no case
to give help, except by their work; and if they see poverty
they must report the case at once to the superintendent,
who will do her best to procure relief through some public
charity. In many cases this is done; but the London poor
are so extravagant, and particularly in the regions of St. Giles
so afflicted with the ' curse of hopelessness,' that it is
impossible, without close inquiry and experience, to accept
their statements. Those most to be pitied are not the
utterly debased population whose self-respect is gone, but
rather those saddest of all cases who have seen better days.
Take, for example, that old maiden lady in her one poor
room, whose latter life has been a long, valiant struggle
against debt and want, still surrounded with a few touching
remnants of gentility. She is too proud to explain or refer
to the past. The mingling of refinement and gaunt poverty
seen in her poor house, combined with her intense loneliness,
appeal piteously to one's heart. To such as her, and to the
desolate teacher of foreign languages, with his polite manners
and his threadbare attire, no city missionary or district visitor
can penetrate; because they seem respectable, they cannot be
' free-breakfasted' or taken down the river on Bank holiday.
But to the nurse they are well known. Even as I write,
many such cases of the sadness of the shabby-genteel arise
before my mind, when suffering as well as poverty come upon
them as ' strong men armed.'
There are now in London three Homes,—the central one in
Bloomsbury Square; the second, the JsTorthern Home, at 413
Holloway Koad; the third, tlie Paddington or Marylebone
Home, at 510 Edgeware Koad. Besides these, there is a dis¬
trict in the East End managed by the Association.
The salaries of nurses on the staff begins at £35 for the
first year, increasing yearly, till in the sixth year the maxi-
Nursing for tJic Poor. 253
mum of £50 is attained. Space forbids our enumerating the
rules for probationers and candidates ; but the report will be
gladly sent by the secretary, 23 Bloomsbury Square, to any
one interested in the subject.
The work is very hard; no amount of enthusiastic ardour
will be sufticient to carry any one through even a few weeks,
without an almost unusual amount of strength. The following
extract from a report of the Northern District Home will
give some idea of the nature of the work:
' Yesterday Miss W. and I found a good morning's work in a mews
off Highgate Road. I had such a shaking of carpets ! And I scrubbed
a table white to my great satisfaction, while Miss W. scrubbed two
dirty children. The place has been a rag store, and is in a horrible
state, at hearing which the landlord who sent the case is so horritied
that he is going to have the whole place properly purified.'
In this extract only the cleaning is spoken of; but when it
is remembered that there is nursing besides, it will be seen
to what an extent strength and energy must often be taxed.
Let me give a few instances from my own journal:
' E. M., toy-maker in James Street, Holborn. Typhoid fever.
Nursing treatment. Daily comb and arrange hair, twice daily sponge
with hot water and vinegar, change linen, take pulse respiration and
temperature as directed, and notes for doctor.
'L. F., child of three. Red Lion Court. Pleurisy. Mother out
all day. Daily wash, poultice twice daily. At first visit altered
position of bed, removed old clothes, swept and thoroughly cleaned
room.
'M. L., servant, Ormond Mews. Acute rheumatism. Sponge.
Pack in cotton wool.    Make bed without moving.    Notes for doctor.'
One is often obliged to manage with hopelessly bad appli¬
ances. I have been given a small clothes-brush with which to
sweep a large and very dirty floor, and in another case the
only thing in the place in which I could wash a baby was a
tea-cup or a tiny vegetable dish. Often I have had to carry
the ashes of weeks down from a room four storeys high in a
newspaper ! If there are friends, however, they can generally
be persuaded after one or two visits to do part of the clean¬
ing ; only the example must be set by the nurse.
It is satisfactory to know that their efforts are much
approved of by the doctors in the districts where they work.
The notes of scientifically trained nurses are of great value to
hard-worked medical men; and they speak highly of the
thoroiigh spirit that runs through all the actual nursing, and
also the sanitary reforms accomplished by the nurses.
The Association is supported by voluntary contributions,
and just now funds are much required to carry on and
extend its work. J. "VY.
254 Tlie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
i^aillxiag Speculations,
' What can a " Ladies " Magazine have to do with railway
speculations ?' I think I hear some of our readers exclaim;
but they need not fear tliat they are about to be overwhelmed
with arguments for or against any of the numerous com¬
panies which profess to ' open up the country,' and to do
so entirely 'in the interests of the public,'—-the country
'opened' up too often proving merely the mouths of the
promoters' pockets, and they themselves the only portion of
the public whose interests are furthered,—nor am I going to
give any accounts of the ' bulls ' and ' bears' who play with
shares and debentures to their own amusement and satis¬
faction, if to no one else's.
The 'speculations' anent which I am about to scribble
never were made public before, and were entirely confined
to my own brain; they concerned human beings, and had
nought to do with the fluctuations of the Share market.
It was the first week of August, and a very hot Aveek too,
when, on a Wednesday morning, I found myself in a first
class compartment of the Great Northern Day Express, on
my way to Yorkshire. I had had the measles rather severely
in spring, and the hot summer in London had not aided the
return of my strength. My father, though the incumbent
of a large West-end parish, could not have afforded to give
me the comj)lete change of air recommended by the doctors,
had not my aunt, a younger sister of my mother's and the
wife of a rich Yorkshire baronet, invited me to spend some
weeks with her, and offered to defray the expenses of my
journey. I was just eighteen, so it may be imagined with
what delight I welcomed the invitation to a large country
house sure to be full of guests at that time of year. But
at first there were obstacles in the way of my going, which
somewhat damped my anticipations. Anxious as my parents
were that I should have the change, neither of them were
inclined to allow me to make so long a journey alone ; and
even had we possessed a lady's-maid, they could not afford
to send one with me. Then, too, my wardrobe was not such
as would be required at my aunt's, and my father could
only give me two pounds extra to my usual allowance with
which to replenish it. However, another letter from my aunt
enclosed a ten-pound note, saying she had no doubt I should
want some little things; and my mother having explained
the difficulty as to the journey, after a week or two her sister
Raihvay Speculations. 255
wrote to say that an old lady of her acquaintance, Avho was
to be a guest in a neighbouring house, would be very happy
to chaperone me.    Accordingly that warm August morning
we met on the King's Cross platform; and after seeing me
safe imder Mrs. Courtenay's wang, my mother hurried home.
My aunt had written about my chaperone as quite an old
lady, and I had pictured to myself a fat, infirm dowager, so
was much surprised to find her an active, brisk, and most
fashionably dressed dt'gante—old certainly, but with rem¬
nants of beauty, and everything about her bearing the cachet
of the latest mode.    Her hair was quite white but abundant,
and slightly powdered, which gave an air of peculiarity to her
appearance.    "We got into a compartment which contained
only one lady in the centre seat.     My chaperone took her
place next the window with her back to the engine, and I
chose the one opposite to her and beside the other lady.   The
other three seats  Avere soon filled by a tall, dignified old
gentleman, and a young man with a lady, who got in just as
the guard was slamming the doors.    Not feeling inclined to
begin the book I had in my bag, after we were fairly off, I
at first looked out of the window, but my eyes soon tired of
the rapid whirl of objects which I could scarcely see at the
pace  we  were  steaming  along.     Now  my  ' speculations'
began.    I amused myself by trying to guess who and what
were my fellow-travellers, and found much entertainment in
imagining their histories and destinations.    The lady sitting
next me, who was in the carriage when we got in, was
young, and apparently slight, but her figure  was   almost
entirely  concealed  by  a  grey  alpaca  dust-cloak, beneath
which peeped out a dress of some soft grey material.    Her
fair hair appeared in a thick coil beneath a plain hat of
grey felt, from which a black veil fell over her face.    I saw
that the book she was reading was in German, and came to
the conclusion she was a young governess, though evidently
not a foreigner; and yet simple as her toilette was, there Avas
a 'je ne sals quoi' about it and the wearer that made me a
little doubtful, especially when she drew out an enamelled
watch, the chain of which, I could see, was a thick- gold one
with coral ornaments.    ' Ah!' thought T, ' poor thing, she is of
good family, and perhaps the loss of her parents obliges her
to go out as governess, and her grey dress is half-mourning
for them.'    I speculated a little longer as to the treatment
she would receive in her new home, and Avas picturing to
myself the  arrival  of the tenderly  nurtured  girl among
strangers, when our train slackened speed, and in a few
256 Tlie Ladies' Edinburgli Magazine.
minutes we ran into a good-sized station. A tall, powdered
footman jumped out of the second class compartment next
ours, deposited a large travelling-bag on the platform, and
helped out a smart lady's-maid with a dressing-case, just as
another footman in the same livery hurried up from the
ticket office. I was watching with interest for their master
or mistress, when ' I beg your pardon, I get out here!'
uttered in a remarkably sweet voice, made me turn my head.
The young lady in grey was standing up prepared to leave
the carriage; at the same moment one of the footmen opened
the door, and as my supposed governess jumped out, she
bowed civilly with a winning smile, and I heard the servant
say, ' The pony carriage is here, your Grace !' So my first
imagination was far wrong. My chaperone, Mrs. Courtenay,
bent forward and informed me that our late fellow-traveller
was the young Duchess of C , noted for her good taste
in dress and for her charming manner.
I next turned my eyes and thoughts on the old gentleman
who was sitting in the opposite seat to the one just vacated
by the young duchess.   He was a tall, spare man with snow-
white hair, whiskers, and moustache, and I came to the con¬
clusion he must be a general from the cut of the aforesaid
appendages; and I began picturing to myself the battles and
campaigns in which he had probably distinguished himself,
and the various stirring scenes in which he had borne a part,
when my dreams were dispelled by his drawing oft' one of
his gloves, and revealing a hand adorned with one of those
heavy rings set with a single diamond, which are seldom
seen in Great Britain save on the fingers of Jew money¬
lenders or others, who would be dubbed by gentlemen,' cads.'
This changed all my ideas respecting the white-haired wearer,
and I now set him down as most likely some great speculator
who had risen rapidly to opulence by sharp practice on
'Change.    As I could not weave any romance about such a
character, I turned my attention to the couple at the far end
of the compartment.    There was not much doubt as to who
and what the young man was: everything, from the sit of
his clothes, the style of his moustache and close-cut fair hair,
betokened the guardsman; while the bundle of fishing-rods
in the netting and the gun-case peeping from under the seat,
afforded good reason for supposing he was on his way to
spend his leave in Scotland.    The lady was more puzzling ;
she was evidently some years his senior, yet not old enough
to be his mother, and so unlike him that I could not imagine
them to be brother and sister.    She was tall and dark, with
Railway Speculations. 257
an olive complexion, and decidedly foreign-looking; equally-
certain was it that she was handsome, though in a rather
massive style. For some time I could not determine where
or when I had seen some picture or statue of which she
reminded me, till all at once, as I caught her profile sharply
defined against the window, a late visit to the Crystal I'alace
came to my recollection, and it flashed across me that our
fellow-passenger bore a strong resemblance to the human
faces of the ' Nineveh bulls.' She had the same large, full
dark eyes with their peculiarly cut lids, the same shaped
nose—in fact, every feature was similar, though in miniature.
I had just eome to the conclusion that she must be step¬
mother to her companion, when I heard him address her by
name; I could not quite catch v:liat the name was, but it
was evidently a Christian name. I then settled she must be
his sister-in-law.
The white-haired man in the middle seat got out at Milford
Junction; and the guardsman and his companion we saw no
more of after reaching York, a few stations beyond which we
arrived at our destination. A carriage was in waiting for Mrs.
Courtenay, belonging to the house to which she was bound,
and my aunt herself was on the platform to receive me ; and
I was soon seated beside her in a small omnibus, which
iu less than half an hour conveyed us to her comfortable and
handsome home, where I was warmly welcomed by my
cousins.
About three days after my arrival, in the middle of break¬
fast, my uncle, who was reading the Times, exclaimed,'Hullo!
I see they've caught that scoundrel Tomkins; and by George,
Minnie,' addressing me,' you must have been in the same train
with him, I think !' Asking for an explanation, I found the
said Tomkins was a notorious swindler and promoter of
bubble companies, who had at last been obliged to fly. It
appeared the police had been on the watch at the Euston
Square Station, as it was supposed he would start thence for
America, but he had baffled them for a time by going from
King's Cross in disguise. As my uncle read the account, I
at once recognised my white-haired ' general;' and great was
the amusement of my relations at finding we had actually
been fellow-passengers, and still more were they entertained
on my telling them of my ' speculations' regarding the dis¬
honest speculator.
A great many guests were expected to arrive that after¬
noon, and I found that among them were a bride and bride¬
groom. Lord and Lady H , respecting whom, especially
No. 66.—June 1880. li
258 TJie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
the bride, there was much curiosity among my cousins. Lord
H was a young man, the eldest son, they said, of a neigh¬
bouring proprietor, and had married abroad, much to the
annoyance of his family; and there seemed to be some doubt
as to the nationality of his wife; nothing could be discovered
against her, but her country and parentage no two people
agreed upon.    My cousins told me that they had heard from
Lord H 's sisters that their new relation was handsome,
quiet, and pleasing; could speak English very fluently, and
with only the slightest foreign accent, while she seemed
equally at home in French, German, Italian, and Spanish.
Their brother had met her in the Holy Land when making
a tour there, and when his father first heard of his attachment
to her they were already married. If questioned as to her
country, she always laughed, saying,' I am of no country, for
my father was of one, my mother of another, I was born in a
third and brought up in a fourth, and since I grew up have
travelled constantly, so am thoroughly cosmopolitaine.'
Her name told nothing, as, having lost both her parents
when quite young, she had been adopted by the childless
widow of a German Graf, who had bestowed upon her her
own surname.
We were in the midst of five o'clock tea when Lord and
Lady H arrived, and my astonishment was great when I
beheld my fellow-travellers, the fair young guardsman and
his companion.
Lady H  proved a most agreeable guest, unfailing in
good-nature, and full of talent. She sang splendidly, and
had an immense repertoire of curious foreign songs in almost
every European language; and her peculiar style of beauty
grew on every one's admiration the longer they saw her, and
had a strange fascination for most of the party.
Having so signally failed in my first attempt at ' specula¬
tion ' did not in any way deter me from another venture in
the same line on my homeward journey at the end of a most
happy two months; but as I never knew whether my later
efforts were more successful than those I have just related,
or the reverse, I shall not enter into them.
I only hope my readers may be as much diverted as were
my many Yorkshire cousins when I told them the story of
my journey, and of my first attempt at raihvay speculation.
Helama.
Country Subjects atid Pursuits. 259
Countrg Subjects ant« pursuits.
XVI.—' A PEEP INTO AN APIAEY.'
' The study of the natural history of the bee is within the
reach of every one, and he who is engaged in it is presented
at every step in his progress with something capable of
awakening pleasing emotions.' So writes George Jesse, a
loving observer of nature and her mysteries. I feel confident
that any of my readers who already take an interest in bees,
or may be induced to do so, will fully agree with him.
What country pursuit can be more adapted to ladies ? for
though the manual labour requisite is nil, yet the mani¬
pulation of all necessary operations demands great delicacy
of touch, while the ever-changing, busy scenes in the hive
offer a constant source of interest, and the sweet harvest
stored up by the inhabitants produces an agreeable increase
to our income. A hive is essentially under petticoat govern¬
ment, the monarch and all her industrious workers being of
the female sex, whilst the males consist of the idle, worthless
drones.
The observation and culture of bees is no new theory of
modern days. From the very earliest times we find honey
considered as a chief article of food in the Bible, whilst among
the ancient Greeks Aristaeus, the son of Apollo, was re¬
nowned as the protector of bees. The manner in which he
recovered his lost bees is fully related by the matchless pen
of Virgil in the Fourth Georgic. On the pyramids of Egypt the
history of bees is found written in hieroglyphics. Columella,
in his work on natural history, relates that tradition
points to Cecrops as having brought bees from Egypt and
established them on Mount Hymettus, where to this day
honey of superior flavour can be procured:
'And still his honeyed store Hymettus yields ;
There the blythe bee his fragrant fortress builds,
The free-born wanderer of the mountain air.'
Pliny mentions that bee-barges, laden with hives, were
accustomed to travel by night, stopping during the day-time
where there was good pasturage, and that it was known by
the depth to which the boats sank in the water when the
hives were sufficiently full. Now-a-days the same practice
is carried on down the Nile. The Druids are known to have
encouraged bee-keeping ; and in the early Anglo-Saxon period
various laws were made for regulating the numbers of hives
to be kept on a certain amount of land.    A law of the reign
26o TJie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
of Alfred the Great desired a bell to be rung at the time of
swarming to warn the neighbours, which may perhaps be the
origin of the tin-can music customary in some rural districts.
On such an occasion mead or megthelin, a drink compounded
from honey, was a popular beverage in royal households; in
that of an early Welsh king the mead-maker ranked next
to the royal physician. Butler, in his exhaustive work The
Feminine Monarchie (1634), relates how that 'Queen Elizabeth
of happy memory did so well like honey, that every year she
would have a vessel of it.'
Many fabulists both ancient and modern have taken the bee
for a model, from the Greek Theocritus down to La Fontaine.
A curious Eastern legend relates the regard of Solomon for
the sagacious instinct of the bee. The .Queen of Sheba having
vainly tried to puzzle King Solomon by various cunning tests,
at length produced two bouquets, one of real the other of
artificial flowers, and standing at a distance with one in each
hand, she asked the king to distinguish God's work from
man's art. Vainly the king and his Avise men puzzled them¬
selves ; at last Solomon commanded the windows of his Cedar
Palace to be thrown open, and his bees admitted, who at
once solved the question by attacking the real flowers. ' The
work of God,' said the king, ' hath both food and sweetness
in it, therefore is man's work left alone whilst it is attacked.'
But while we are pondering over ' ancient lore' in bees,
no doubt you are thinking that you might learn something
more practical if you are ever to take a hive under your own
especial charge ; and as I hope to persuade you to do so, come
with me into the garden. We can see a good deal of the
mysteries of the bee-hive in the apiary—apis, a bee. ' What!
you are afraid of being stung;' well, I will provide you with
a long black muslin veil over your hat, and as you have thick
gloves on, there will be no danger of your being hurt. It is
a rare thing, unless you irritate them excessively, to get stung,
because a bee when frightened always runs and fills itself
with honey, and when its honey-bag is full is unable to use
its sting.
Besieles honey and wax, the bees collect two other com¬
modities, pollen or bee-bread, and propolis or bee-gum. A
bee, after lapping up sufflcient honey with her long tongue,
passes it down her mouth into her honey-bag; she then,
before returning home, rolls herself in the dust of the stamens
of a flower. You might suppose that it would all be blown oft'
her body, and so it would, only nature has provided two
hollow-like baskets in each of her legs, into which the dust
Country Subjects and Pursuits. 261
is collected. On arriving at the hive, the honey is poured
out of its mouth into cells, and the pollen stored up as food
for the young.
Wax is apparently nothing but well-digested honey; for
after a good meal, or when taking possession of a new hive,
the bees will hang in clusters, thus generating heat, till the
wax oozes out of the small openings called wax-pockets. It
is then carried by the legs to the mouth and masticated till
it forms the material with which the comb is built. As
soon as this is ready, the set of bees told off as labourers
collect it and carry it to the bees acting as comb-builders, who
mould it into the form of cells. These have six sides, and are
placed back to back. When they are very busy building,
the bees do not waste any time to fetch themselves food, but
honey is brought to them and poured down their trunks by
their companions; for, as you will soon perceive, the bees are
told off in detachments to perform certain duties in their
little city. Some are employed to keep the hive cool; these
hook their wings together and flap them up and down to raise
a wind; others nurse the young, or fetch honey and other
necessary stores; whilst around the queen is always found a
body-guard of faithful adherents. Ancient writers describe
the sovereign of the hive as ' the king,' and even Sliakspere
fell into the same error, for in Henry V. he says, 'They have
a king;' but since then she has been fully proved to be a
queen, and differs considerably in shape and size from her
subjects. She is unable to gather either pollen or honey, and
possesses a blunt sting; her only duty seems to consist of
laying eggs in the cells prepared by her workers; and she
must be very well occupied, as she is estimated to lay from
1000 to 2000 per day. These are hatched out in a day or two ;
and as the little worms require feeding, you can fancy how
busily the nurses rush about from one cell to another attend¬
ing to these helpless mites. They are fed on bee-bread
softened into a jelly till about ten days old, when the door of
the cell is fastened up, and the grub spins around itself a
cocoon of silk, from which it bursts forth in twenty-one days.
As soon as one emerges, the cell is inspected by a worker-bee,
to see that all is clean and proper to receive the egg which
the queen comes round to deposit. If by chance the queen
were to meet with an accident and be lost, her loving subjects
would die of grief; they therefore take the precaution to
provide a successor. The queen-grubs are reared from common
eggs in a cell three times the size of an ordinary one, and are
fed on ' royal jelly.'  It i.s an undoubted fact that so nourished
262 TJie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
they grow four times as large as a common grub, and are
fully developed in sixteen days instead of twenty-one.
The population of a prosperous hive soon increases to an
enormous amount; and as there is no room for them all in the
old home, some must seek a new one, and are accompanied
by the mother-queen, who seems to have had her indignation
excited by the nurturing of the young princesses, and has
for some days been in a terrible state of emotion, rushing to
and fro, and would, if permitted by her attendants, tear open
the royal cells and destroy the inmates. Before their
departure, the ever-provident bees fill their honey-bags. As
they do so, they cluster about the mouth of the hive waiting
till their companions are ready; for the cells being chiefly
full of young bees and bee-bread, there are very few honey
cells for so many bees to help themselves from. At last they
are ready, and great is the noise they make to induce their
friends to join them. With a sudden impulse they rise up
into the air, and when about half are out the queen sallies
forth. Being very unwieldy, and not accustomed to fly abroad
often, she generally alights on some bough or ledge near at
hand, where all her followers cluster round, forming a compact
mass. So intent are they on watching over the safety of their
queen, that they may be easily shaken into a hive and placed
on a board; unless this is done promptly, the whole swarm
will take flight again, establishing themselves in a hole, in
some tree or roof, when it will be foimd impossible to dislodge
them.
Our swarm placed in a new hive, all the crevices will be
carefully examined by the bees, and stopped up with propolis
or bee-gum, an adhesive substance gathered from the buds of
poplar, willow, or horse-chestnut, with which they also fasten
their hive to the stand and varnish their cells. A supper of
honey having been carried with them, and there being no place
to store it in their new home, the bees hang in clusters till
sufficient wax is formed to begin building comb, in which
the queen lays eggs, and in a few weeks in line weather there
is often thrown oft a ' virgin swarm.' This should be prevented
as much as possible, as it weakens the hive for the winter.
Meantime in the old hive a princess has succeeded to her
mother's throne, and laying eggs again increases the popula¬
tion of the hive, and preparations are made in about nine
days for the exit of a second swarm headed by the queen.
Experienced bee-keepers can tell the day before the second
swarm departs by listening to the shrill cry of the imprisoned
princess appealing to the queen to be allowed to leave her
Country Subjects and Pursuits. 263
cell, who answers back with the same piping noise. If more
than one princess is left in a hive after swarming has ceased,
they both attack their royal sisters yet uuemerged, biting
away the wax and stabbing the occupant to death, when the
worker bees hurry to throw away the corpse. Tliis having
been despatched, the rivals for the throne are surrounded
by a circle of bees, and a desperate battle ensues between
them, till at last, one being stung to death, the victor reigns
supreme.
Having told you something about the internal economy of
the hive, I will now mention some of the points to which
you must attend if you wish to ensure a successful honey
harvest. We will conclude that it is autumn. We are still
suffering from the same cold, damp weather we have had all
the summer. Our hive has exhausted itself by throwing oft'
two or three swarms, leaving but few workers to keep up
warmth and to store up honey for the winter, and unless there
is a sufficient supply well sealed up, there will be but small
chance of the hive wintering; so let us remember times are
bad everywhere, and lend them a helping hand, by feeding
them with a steady supply of barley-sugar. They will not
hesitate long to avail themselves of your charity, and will
rapidly increase in weight. Some people feed with syrup
from a wide-mouthed bottle reversed, the top tightly covered
witli some material such as zinc or vulcanite, pierced with
small holes; but with this plan the hives are often swamped
with liquid, which pours in so fast that the bees are unable
to carry it off quick enough, and becoming sour, it leads to
dysentery and foul-brood, the scourges of the hive. The
bottle should be covered with a fl.ower-pot, or robber-bees
will attack it.
If you have two or three hives which you believe to be
weak, it will be far better to unite them to the one containing
the most new comb. Feed them liberally, and one strong stock
in the spring will be the result, instead of losing two or three
weak ones from cold and starvation during the winter. If
you suspect anything wrong, or are doubtful about the con¬
dition of your hives, be sure to examine them before the
winter comes on. Don't be afraid of doing so. PufF a little
smoke into the first hive you wish to operate upon; and whilst
the bees are wondering what has happened, turn the hive up¬
side down on a pail, and throw a little syrup among the combs,
which the bees will stop to clean up: they cannot bear un¬
tidiness of any sort. Scrape the floor-board they were standing
on, place an empty hive on it to allure any bees who may be
264 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
out foraging, and examine your hive ; clean round its rim with
a brush, to oust any dust or moths that may be lying there,
and then replace it on its clean board. By so doing, you
will soon find out which are your weak or old swarms, and
can act accordingly. If you unite any hives, it is a good plan
to sprinkle the bees with syrup, as in cleaning it up they
Avill lick one another and fraternize. After you have fed the
bees up to a good weight, and they do not care to take any
more, or that the frost has set in, see that they are well
tucked up for the long cold months with an old carpet or
sacking thrown over; jjut remember that ventilation is most
important. Milk pans so commonly iised as covers, are very
good protection, but don't place them on the top without
some haj^ or wood-shavings between the sacking and the
pan, or the moisture will condense and run down the side of
the hive, doing incalculable damage. This leads up to the
question as to what is the best sort of hive. So many new
varieties have been invented of late years that it would be
diflBcult to decide ; but all the modern bar-frame wooden
hives are alike in the respect of inviting constant easy inspec¬
tion into the interior, and complete supervision, without
approaching the inmates, through the glass windows at the
back, and certainly there must be very little pleasure in
the mere knowledge that the bees are inside a hive without
being able to watch their wonderful manners and customs.
Weak stocks are always liable to be preyed upon by wasps
and robber bees. The former hardly ever attack a hive unless
it has been previously injured. If you see wasps persistently
going in and out, be sure something is very wrong. The
great activity caused by the robber bees at the entrance may
lead the owner to fancy a great ingathering of honey is
taking place, but when all has been carried off the mistake
will be apparent, a few poor starving bees only being left.
If there is one stock much stronger than its neighbours, it
will make a practice of robbing them. I have seen a string of
bees flying to and fro from one side of the garden to another,
fetching and carrying their spoil. In such a case it is as
well to turn round the hive attacked, the entrance being
altered disconcerting the marauders. Crippled bees are not
allowed to live, but are at once despatched and cast out by
their more fortunate friends. The entrance to the hive in
winter is as well reduced, so as only to allow of the passage
of two bees at a time, for many are the enemies always ready
to molest the bees besides those of their own species—wasps,
ants, earwigs are always trying to creep in at any unprotected
Country Subjects and Pursuits. 265
crevice. Tomtits snap up unwary bees with surprising activity;
last winter I knew a hive on which many were caught in
snares on the search for a stray bee during the severe weather,
and they have been known to bite their way through straw-
hives to get at their prey. The wax-moth is a most inveterate
disturber of the bee's peace, and should always be carefully
sought for before winter. Queen wasps are to be found
hiding at this period in the coverings of the hives, and one
destroyed then prevents a wasp's nest in the next summer.
Towards the end of February or beginning of March, when
the crocuses are beginning to bloom, and the first signs are
appearing of nature throwing off the stern, cold aspect she
has borne so many months, the bees begin to awake, and we
mvist then renew our feeding, and try to stimulate our little
friends into collecting pollen to prepare for early breeding,
and consequent early swarming. It has been proved of
late years, that besides supplying them with artificial honey
in the shape of syrup or barley-sugar, they can also be induced
to make use of artificial pollen, viz., pease-meal placed near
to their hives in a saucer, with some shavings or bits of wood
placed among it to prevent their sinking in too deep. Some
people take the trouble of making artificial paper flowers,
and placing the pollen in them, but this is not necessary; the
saucer does just as well.
Spring is the time for sowing seeds which may tend to
.shorten the bees' journeys. Amongst the flowers and plants
they are most partial to, borage, phaeelia, mignonette,
poppies, Canterbury bells, lavender, clover, balm, and rose¬
mary are especial favourites ; and if planted near the hives,
help to keep the bees near home. Amongst trees, the lime,
horse-chestnut, and willow are much sought after when in
blossom, and a long lime avenue near my home is thick
with bees from all the country-side in spring-time. They will
come several miles in quest of their favourite food. Be sure
to continue the supply of food till the cold weather is well
past, when the fruit blossoms will appear, and the bees can
obtain their own livelihood; but even then beware of leaving
off too suddenly, as during cold winds very little honey is
to be found in the flowers. Your attention and care will be
repaid a hundred-fold in a few months. When the bees are
really collecting honey in good earnest, supers may be placed
above their hives, or nadirs below; these are simply boxes
added to the bee's house, so as, in giving them more room to
build in, they may be induced to store their honey for our
benefit; and as they rarely breed in them, the honey will be
266 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
of the finest quality. Having expended so much trouble to
keep our bees strong to the spring, we look for an early
swarm, remembering the old adage :
' A swarm in May is worth a load of hay,
A swarm in June is worth a silver spoon,
A swarm in July is not worth a fly.'
Having housed it and fed it for the first few days to hasten
the comb-building, in nine days a second swarm comes ofl',
which we can either keep separate or return to the parent
hive if it chance to be very small.
The summer creeps on, and by July we have a beautiful
super of pure honey to reward us, and we begin to realize
the delights of bee-keeping, and to understand its mysteries.
We must discourage any more swarming, as it will be too
late for a new colony to store up sufficient provender to carry
them through the winter, for wax-making consumes all their
honey. It has been calculated that every pound of wax takes
20 lbs. of digested honey to make. Wise bee-masters have
invented a machine by which honey can be extracted with¬
out injuring the comb, and then replaced in the hive to be
filled up again. Don't throw away any bit of clean comb;
if you can fix it in a hive, it always serves as a beginning for
a swarm. In many parts, after the first honey has been
taken, tiie bees are sent up to any moors that may chance to
be within reach, and a second crop, much darker in colour,
is obtained. The heather is in full bloom in August, whilst
the flower harvest is over. The drones are all massacred
early in autumn, the workers not choosing to keep them
through the winter, as they only devour the food which they
do not help to collect; they have no sting, and are somewhat
larger than the labouring bee. Old writers thought they
were useful in sitting upon the eggs to hatch them, but this
fallacy has long since been exploded. We owe the authentica¬
tion of most of the curious facts of bee-life to Francis Huber.
This intelligent and persevering genius became blind at an
early age from over-study ; but by the aid of his family and
a faithful servant who watched unceasingly, he was enabled
to discover much hitherto unsuspected of his favourites' move¬
ments. The barbarous practice of suffocating the bees to obtain
their honey, is now almost extinct, the method of driving them
being so very simple and free from any danger. A puff of tobacco
smoke in the entrance will cause such consternation among the
bees that on inverting their hive, and placing another on the
top, a very slight drumming on their home will cause them
to leave it precipitately, and rush into the one provided for
Country Subjects and Pursuits. 267
them, when they can be replaced on their old stand. Bees
are said to be susceptible of affection for their owners, and
undoubtedly they know a stranger; for, when accustomed to
the daily visit of their owner, they will rarely disturb them¬
selves. An old legend relates that a disciple of St. David,
Bishop of Menevia, in Wales, used to keep bees ; he was,
however, nominated to a benefice in Ireland, and before
sailing, sold his bees, and went on board the vessel awaiting
him, but soon perceived that the bees were following him;
le returned on shore and restored them to the purchaser;
)ut a second and a third time this happened, till at length
.le decided to let them accompany him, and accordingly they
were transferred to Ireland, where they have flourished ever
since. The life of the bee is not of long duration, and depends
upon the amount of labour it performs. In summer, when
hard work is the rule, it lives only about six weeks ; but
in winter, when in a torpid condition, they live very much
longer.
The Ligurian bee has been introduced of late years into this
country from Switzerland. They are a larger species than the
common bee, differing also in colour, and are said by their
admirers to be more industrious honey-collectors, while their
opponents complain that they are not hardy. In all parts
of Europe bee-culture is now encouraged, and exhibitions
have been held in France, Denmark, Germany, Italy, Austria,
etc. In Great Britain and Ireland exhibitions are annually
held of honey, hives, and various inventions, in most of the
leading towns. At the Crystal and Alexandra Palaces
immense bee-shows have been most successful, when the
different operations of driving, artificial swarming, intro¬
ducing new queens, and honey-extracting are all publicly
demonstrated. The stimulus of keeping these interesting and
profitable insects has spread rapidly, and practical knowledge
of the minutest details of the hive has been acquired by
many. There are published several excellent works to aid
the novice; I may mention one by Mr. J. Cheshire, with
which all difficulties may be surmounted and doubts dis¬
pelled. But with careful feeding and husbanding through
the winter, no one need fear embarking in a few bee-hives,
and I sincerely wish them success and enjo^^ment.
N. Payne Gallwey.
268 7"//!? Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
STije ©lu anti tlie Neb).
By Sidney Philips.
CHAPTER VI.
' Knowest thou yesterday, its aim and reason ;
Workest thou well to-day, for worthier things.
Calmly wait to-morrow's hidden season,
Need'st not fear what hap soe'er it brings.'
Goethe, translated by Carlyle.
Three years have passed since the events recorded in our last
chapter. The whirligig of time has brought many changes,
and by a series of unexpected turns has once more landed
Maggie INIackenzie on the shores of the old country she had
thought never to see again. Once more she is sitting in the
well-known parlour at Balnagoonie, in the bow-window, by
Aunt Jean's chair; once more she sees that familiar face,
unchanged save that the three last years have traced a few
more lines on those worn features, and brought out a yet
softer light in those gentle eyes.
' Yes, Aunt Jean,' said Maggie, gazing dreamily at the red
sunset burning itself away behind the fir-trees; ' yes, auntie,
who would ever have thought that I should have been back
so soon ? But everything I've tried has failed. Perhaps
it's just my own fault; but somehow I often think that my
whole life seems like a skein of wool that's been begun at
the wrong end.'
' And the teaching, lassie, why couldn't ye stick to that ?
I mind ye were just ower fond o' learning. What for could
ye no teach ?'
' Well, Aunt Jean, it was not that easy to find pupils; and
when Jamie married and I didn't want to be a burden to
him, it was long before I could find a situation as governess.
Some people wanted a more thorough knowledge of modern
languages, others required a better musician, then again some
objected to my Scotch accent. I tried authorship, but that
did no better; some editors merely declined my contributions
with thanks, while others openly told me that perhaps I
might write some day, but that at present my style was
stilted and pedantic, and my grammar faulty, so I gave that
up. At last I heard of a situation near Toronto, with an
officer's wife, Mrs. Whiteman. The children were mostly
boys, and I had to begin Latin with them. There were five
children in the schoolroom, and it was very hard work, but
T didn't mind that. I suppose, though, that it was partly
being overworked that made me so wretched.    So far from
The Old and the New. 269
home, never hearing of or seeing any one I had ever known
before, all amongst strangers, I felt so desolate and friend¬
less, and a sort of despair came over me, I longed to die.'
' But, lassie, there was one Friend near you all the while;
where was your faith ?'
' Ah, where indeed! Oh, Aunt Jean, that was worst of all!
It all seemed to have vanished. I couldn't believe anything,
or realize anything. I seemed utterly forsaken by God. I
was so wretched that I can't bear to think of it even now.
And then Major Whiteman was very sceptical, and he used
to lend me books, and now and then I used to hear him and
some of his friends talk, and the feeling came over me that
there was no good in anything, and no truth anywhere. I
used to go on, though, teaching the children just mechanically.
And one Sunday little Arthur, who was a very intelligent
child, was learning his Bible-lesson, and he looked up and
said, " Miss Mackenzie, do you really believe all this ? I
know that my papa doesn't, for he always laughs at good
things.'"
' I couldn't look in the child's eyes and tell a lie, so I said
, ernly: " Go on with your lessons," and I got up and went
into the next room, where Mrs. Whiteman was lying on the
sofa, and I gave up the situation there and then; for I felt
that I was quite unfit to have the forming of children's minds
whilst my own was so unsettled. Then I again tried writ¬
ing, but all power or pleasure in writing seemed gone. I
did write a book, though, and I sent it to a publisher in
London, to whom I had a letter of recommendation; but I
never heard anything more of it, so I suppose that it failed
like all the rest; then at last I came to the conclusion that
whatever might be doubtful, suffering was a fact that no one
could deny, and I thought that by helping to relieve other
people's pain I might perhaps become less unhappy. So I
went into an hospital to learn nursing. It was a hard life,
and one for which I do not think that I'm suited either
physically or morally, yet I shall never regret the six months
that I spent there; for through all the misery and agony
around, I seemed to see but one hope, but one strength,
which supported the sufferers, and the doubts and difficulties
passed away, never, please God, to return, and now I know
whom I have believed, and I am sure that though there are
many things in this life that are hard to understand, yet that
its meaning is good and not evil, and though we live in a world
of sorrow, yet I am fully persuaded that its Maker's name
is Love.'
2/0 TJie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
Aunt Jean did not speak for a few minutes, then looking
at Maggie's worn face, which alone was proof enough that
she had lived, not dreamed, through the last three years, she
said:
'And now, lassie, ye'll just rest a wee bit; I'm thinking
it's rest ye'll want.'
' No, Aunt Jean, I have wasted too much time already
trying to do things my own way; I must try and make up
for lost time.'
' But, lassie, remember you are here for rest. That
hospital work was too hard; the doctors said sae when they
ordered ye change.'
' Yes, auntie, I was very ill, but now I'm quite strong. I
had all the voyage to pick up my strength in. Was it not
fortunate that I just heard of those nieces of Mrs. Whiteman
coming back to school in England and wanting an escort,
and so got my journey paid for nothing ?'
' Then will ye no bide here ?' asked Aunt Jean in a dis¬
appointed tone.
Maggie shook her head. ' Not long,' she said,' I must not
be idle too long; remember I have my bread to win. I
promised Mabel that if ever I came home I would no longer
refuse her invitations, so I shall go there for a week or two,
and then settle in Edinburgh, work up for the Local Examina¬
tions and get my certificate, and then I shall again try
teaching; for I no longer dread the responsibility, now that
I can lean on a Higher Strength than my own,' she added
gravely.
' And so ye will be leaving us again,' said the old lady,
looking at her fondly ; ' weel, dinna lose heart, or think that
life's failed because it isna just as ye would have had it. It's
no' the amount of success, but just the amount o' work that's
in it, that makes a life worth the living, I'm thinking.'
'No, auntie, I don't seem to wish for success now, or
indeed for anything except just to keep my head above water,
and not to be a burden to my friends. I used to have so
many plans and schemes for the future, but I don't make
any now. It seems as if nothing could ever give me either
pleasure or pain again. I seem to have passed beyond the
storms into a great calm which notliing can break.'
' Hoots toots, lassie !' exclaimed Aunt Jean, ' wha's tauld
ye that ? The worst storms, ay, and the best sunshine, may
be still to come for what ye know. Nae mair storms indeed !
Why, just to hear the way these bairns talk, one wad
a'maist think the deil himsel' wa' deid.    But there's ower
&
The Old and the New. 271
much life in him still, I'm thinkin', though aiblins he's
departed from ye for a season. Ye'll have mony a sair
tussel wi' him yet or I'm much mista'en, ay, and mony a
bonnie bit sunshine too, and that when ye least expect it,
for'—
' Mercy, mercy! what are ye about there sitting in the
dark and letting oot the fire ? Why, it's past five o'clock, and
Balnagoonie no back from the market yet; the bairns are just
that impatient, we canna wait dinner for father ony longer.
Yes, yes, Alick! leave the pussy's tail alane, there's a good
lad. What for have ye nae laid the cloth, Peggy, yet ? eh,
but the lassie's clean demented. She hasna had ony head
to speak of on her shoulders since I let her gang to the daft
games at the Hallowe'en last week ;' and a stream of children
and a strong smell of dinner which accompanied Mrs.
Macintosh's tumultuous entry, broke strangely in on their
quiet talk.
'Call that a fire!' exclaimed Balnagoonie as he entered,
contemptuously looking at the dying embers in which Maggie
was penitently trying to reawaken a little life; ' and wasn't
it just freezing hard as I crossed the moor. Weel, it hasna
been a bad market, though Balbogie's beasts didna fetch sae
lang a price as I was expecting. But I heard a piece of
news that will interest ye,' he added, rubbing his hands.
' Ladies always like a match, and there'll be such na wedding
in the county before long as we hanna seen the like 0' for
mony a long year. Maggie, my lass, ye maun make haste
and get back the colour i' your cheeks, for ye'll just hae to
tak' the floor i' the reels.'
' Well, and who are the parties ?' asked Mrs. Macintosh
eagerly.
' Wha wad ye think noo ? It wadna surprise me an it
were to be the laird himsel'.'
' What, Lochinloan ? Hector ? You don't mean it. And
wha will he get then ?'
' Wha suld he get but our ain bonnie leddie, the Leddy
Susan fra the Castle. But noo ye maunna gang talking
about it, for the leddie being ower young it's no to be spoken
aboot just yet, and what comes through us wad be thocht to
hae authority,' he added proudly. ' But it's just certain for
a' that, and she's biding noo wi' his mither in France, and
Lochinloan himsel's going to join them there,—'deed they say
he's gane a'ready.'
' Well, this is news; who wad ha' thocht it!' exclaimed
Mrs. Macintosh.    ' But ye needna fear, I'll no breathe a
2/2 TJie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
word o't to a living soul, and Maggie was aye discreet,' she
added, wondering if her great friend the new minister's wife
at Kilmuir had heard anything of this, and remembering
that it was some time since she'd called at the Manse, and
that Maggie would probably wish to see her old home again.
' And to think that lad Hector should-have turned out sae
well,' continued Balnagoonie. ' It's just wonderfu' what he's
done for the place in such na short time, since the auld laird
was taken. And he's bringing the property round too since
he left the army, what with letting the house and just livin'
himsel' in a small way at the Lodge. Weel, he'll just need
every penny he can get noo. If things were as they used
to be lang syne, we might hae gied a pretty bit fortune to
Leddy Susan, but ye see what wi' the master's racing debts
—and there's a deal mair o' his paper oot than his lordship
knows—and the forest on our hands the year, it's no much
that we can be doing for younger children; that lawyer fellow
riinthead just tauld his lordship sae, when he was asking
about it the ither day. Still, we'll manage sometliing for
Leddy Susan yet. I'm no averse to the match mysel'; nae
doubt her ladyship miglit ha' done better, but I was aye
partial to the lad, notwithstanding his folly auent the crofters
on Clachanbeag.'
' What was that ?' asked Ma"ii-ie.
' Weel, ye see, the auld laird's father had given feus o' the
moorland to small crofters to bring it under cultivation, and
the most o' the feus fell in last year. Weel, the sensible
thing to ha' done wad ha' been to ha' let the cottages fall
doon,—they're in a poor way maist o' them,—tlien the people
maun ha' flitted and emigrated, and there he wad ha' had a
bonnie big farm to ha' worked with the latest improvements.
It's just what we've done oursel's at Glenty^re over and over
again, and I just tauld Lochinloan sae; but I might as weel
ha' spared my breath to cool my porridge, deil a bit wad he
listen. The crofters maun bide, said he. And he's just
rebuilding their cottages, such na folly, wi' an estate that
canna bring in mair nor £3000 a year.'
'But surely, Sandie, your plan would depopulate the country
very soon. What will you do for labour, if all these people
emigrate ?' asked IMau-'jie.
' Labour, bless you! why, it's nae muckle labour we're
needing noo wi' the steam and the new inventions. And if
the worst came to the worst, we could just import coolies
cheap,' he continued.
' Then it seems to me that your plan is just to save a little
The Old and the Neiv. 273
expense and trouble at first, and then to end by substituting
an alien population for the people who've been born and
bred on the soil, who've made it what it is by their labour,
and who love their country as no strangers could,' said Maggie.
' All clap-trap and sentimental trash. Love their country
indeed! That's tlie sort 0' nonsense that takes with you
women. 'Deed, I'm thinkin' Lochinloan maun just ha' learnt
it from ye lang syne. Ye were aye freen's then. And if
ye'd played your cards properly, ye might just ha' married
wi' him yoursel', but ye frighted him off wi' larnin' and sic
like nonsense.'
It was indeed lucky for Maggie that the long-expected
dinner arrived just then, and the commotion consequent on
its appearance saved her from the necessity of a reply to
this last thrust.
A few days later and IMaggie was once more walking along
the well-known path by the river near Kilmuir.    She could
not bear to re-enter the Manse and see strangers in it, so she
had left Mary Macintosh to pay her visit alone, and had
turned down her favourite walk.    It seemed like a dream to
be back there again.    There was the old river winding on
amongst the leafless trees, just the same as it had done long
ago in those happy days, whose full brightness she had never
realized till the dark shadows had fallen and shut her off
from them for ever.    Tiiere was the big stone off which she
had slipped into the water the day that Jamie caught the
large  trout in his hands;  there was the pool into which
Hector once dropped his new clasp knife; and there, too, was
the roclc down which he had scrambled to get her some
rowan berries.    It was just at that point over there that she
had first seen Mr. Leslie, and just about here that she met
him the day that he proposed to Mabel.    It was strange
how much less she thought of those days than she had ex¬
pected.   She had thought that returning to these parts would
recall everything; but someliow it was the earlier life with
Hector and Jamie that rose the most vividly before lier in the
old familiar scenes.   How she missed Hector's friendship out
of her life !   She had thought it wiser not to write to him; and
yet, after all, perhaps she had been foolish in that as in inucli
else.    Might she not have continued to have him as a friend
after all ?    She need not have worried about him, his life had
completed itself without her.    She was not needed by him
now any more than by any one else.    Yet it was satisfactory
to hear him praised by every one, to find traces of his thought¬
ful, unselfish care for others on all sides, and to hear people
No. 66.—June 1880. g
2/4 TJie Ladies' Edinbtirgh Magazine.
wonder that anybody of whom so little w^as expected should
have turned out so well. It was a comfort to know that she
bad not spoilt his life. If only Lady Susan was worthy of
him, Avhat a blessing they might be to the country ! It was
lucky that he was away. Maggie was just as glad to have
been spared meeting him again, till she could see him settled
down comfortably as the husband of another. Yes, she was
very glad that dear old Hector was going to be happy. She
wondered if he ever thought of her now. Somehow his life
, seemed to her to have succeeded, while her own had failed.
With all her grand schemes, with all her aspirations, what
bad she done ?    Nothing.    Where did the mistake lie ?
Suddenly there was a rustle in the withered bracken, and
a rabbit rushed across her path, followed by a shaggy terrier,
how like—why, was it possible,'_her very own old Dan die! and
in another moment, with whines of delight, he was springing
up at her and overpowering her with demonstrative canine
affection.
' Ah !' thought Maggie, ' he's evidently left beliind while
bis master is away; perhaps Lady Susan doesn't like dogs, old
things must make way for new.    Dandie dear, you and I'—
' Maggie!'
' What, Hector !' Was it really Hector who stood before
her ? That fine-looking man with a long beard was surely
not the uncouth lad so often present in her waking dreams.
Luckily, Dandie's antics still continued, and bridged over the
awkwardness of the first meeting, and in a few moments they
were talking quite comfortably together; and Maggie felt
almost as if she had never been away, it Avas so natural to
have Hector walking beside her and talking in the old eager
way. There was so much to be discussed : Jamie, and how
he was getting on in his profession; Maggie's various efforts
at supporting herself, and her future plans; the changes in
the county, and Hector's farm. Both felt that a pause would
be fatal, by enabling them to realize the awkwardness of
their situation. They were approaching the Manse before
Maggie woke to the fact that she ought to congratulate
Hector on his en^afrement, so at some casual mention of
Lord Glentyre's name, she began:
' Where is Lady Susan ?'
' With my mother at Nice,' he replied. ' The girls enjoy
having her very much. I didn't know that you knew Lady
Susan,' he added, Avith some interest in his voice.
' I remember her years ago, before I went away ; she once
came with her governess to tea at Balnagoonie.     She seemed
The Old and the New. 275
very—very—very amiable,' added poor Maggie, racking her
brain to find any adjective that should be complimentary
enough to satisfy a lover, and yet that she could with some
degree of truth apply to the fair-haired, pale-faced school¬
girl of whom she had but a very faint recollection.
' Oh! she's a capital girl,' said Hector warmly. But
Maggie could not help wishing all the same that Lady
Susan's future husband would not look at her with that
fixed fierce stare, that made her feel alternately hot and cold.
Was it indeed true that friendship was impossible for those
between whom there was the ghost of a dead past ? Surely
not. There must be no more nonsense, it would be better
when she had spoken to him about his future.
' Hector,' she began, * I hope you won't mind, but I wish
to tell you that I am so very pleased at—at—all I hear
about you.'
' That's all right, Maggie, but what '—
* Eh, Lochinloan, you here ? We thought that you were in
France. Well, if it isn't just like old times to see you two
together again. But come awa', Maggie; Balnagoonie says he
canna j ust be waitin' for us any longer, and we shall be that
late for dinner'—
' Not one bit, Mrs. Macintosh, I won't hear a word of this
within half a mile of my own door. You're just coming back
to dine with me at the Lodge. I won't answer for what
you'll get, but old Elsie '11 manage something for us; and I
want to show Balnagoonie some beasts I bought last month,
and have a talk with him about the curlincj. If this frost
lasts, we shall soon be able to begin.'
'And, Lochinloan, then ye'll just come to Balnagoonie
when the curling begins; it's ower far here from ony good
pond.'
' Yes, that I shall if you'll have me, Mrs. Macintosh. I
remember too well the excellent sheep's-head broth you gave
us there last year; I never got Elsie to make anything at all
Hke it.'
Always pleased at any compliment to her housekeeping,
Mrs. Macintosh was easUy persuaded to return to the Lodge
with Hector, and Maggie followed a little behind in silence,
much amused at Mrs. Macintosh's continued efforts to
introduce the names of different members of the Glentyre
family, longing to hear Hector himself confirm the report of
his engagement, and yet not quite venturing to talk openly
of it to him.
When Balnagoonie joined them, Maggie was much struck
2/6 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
by the practical good sense and keen interest in all agri¬
cultural subjects which Hector displayed in his conversation
with her brother-in-law.
' Suppose, whilst we're waiting for dinner, you just come
over with me to the Square and see the new byres, Balna-
goonie,' suggested Hector. ' Maggie, won't you come too ?
You used to like shorthorns,' he added, addressing her for
the first time since the others had joined them. ' Come and
give your opinion of my new purchases.'
'No, Hector, I think not just now; I'm rather tired, and
my opinion wouldn't be of any use, for I know nothing about
fat cattle.'
' Why, I thought you might have brought us back some
ideas from America,' said Hector good-humouredly, but with
a little disappointment in his voice. ' That's where every¬
thing comes from now-a-days. What do you think, Balna-
goonie? will these Americans succeed in swamping our market
Avith their cattle ?'
'No, no, Lochinloan, they'll no succeed in swamping us
yet; ye see they have no^byres or sheds for fattening them
there to compare wi' ours, sae the meat the beasts is putting
on in the summer they just lose it again in the winter, and'—
Thank goodness they were gone, and Maggie could breathe
freely again. Though Hector had avoided talking to her,
3^et she had felt that his eyes were upon lier the whole time,
following every one of her movements, and no doubt he was
drawing mental comparisons between her and Lady Susan,
and congratulating himself on the escape he had had.
' Well, to be sure, as Mistress Mackay was saying to me at
the Manse even noo, Lochinloan does want a wife sadly; did
you ever in your born days see a house in such a mess ?
As Mistress Slackay says, when Lady Susan comes'—
' Why, I thought that Sandie said that we weren't to
mention Hector's engagement to any one. You surely
haven't been talking of it to Mrs. Mackay ?'
' No indeed, Maggie. It isn't I that w^ould be sae indis¬
creet. But we were just talking a bit aboot the laird, and
I said that nae doot he wad be getting a wife soon, for I
thought I wad just find out if she'd heard anything. And
I just tauld her that Leddy Susan was wi' his mither at
Nice; and I was saying how that our Lady Susan was a
likely lassie, and that I didn't think it wad be sae very long
either till we'd hae a bonnie wedding at the Castle, and so
she just put two and two together.'
' That was very intelligent of her,' said Maggie with a smile.
The Old and the New. 277
' To be sure it was,' continued her sister, utterly uncon¬
scious of the irony of Maggie's words, ' but I always said that
she was a clever woman. Well, I must say that this wadna
be a cheerful house for a bride. Nae doot, as I was saying
to auld Elsie even noo, they will be moving to the big house
fast enough when Lady Susan comes.'
' You don't mean to say that you've been gossiping about
Lochinloan to his own servants ?' exclaimed Maggie indig¬
nantly. ^
' Well, and if I did drop a hint o't to the puir auld body
even noo, when I was going to see the kitchen, where's the
harm ? And anyways, it's no for you to be tellin' me what
I suld and suldna do—you that I've held in my arms as a
baby, and me the mither 0' a family. I shall hae my ain
bairns teaching me my duty next! In my days the young
wa' taught to respect their elders; but nae doot that's done
awa noo, what wi' travelling and book-nonsense and all the
rest o't. But you dinna seem to be getting a husband a bit
the faster for a' that,' she added.
' Sandie,' said Maggie next morning at breakfast,' I think
I must leave you next week.'
A chorus of remonstrance and disappointment followed
this speech. Why, she had only just arrived, she hadn't
half rested yet, it was nonsense to think of leaving them.
Mrs. Macintosh, who had quite forgotten her ebullition of
temper the day before, burst into tears, and lamented
volubly that her dear sister, her only sister, should care so
little about her, and should only think of being off to her
grand friends.
' Xo,' said Maggie firmly, ' I must not stay. Mabel
Barnard will be at her London house next week for a fort¬
night ; it will be a good opportunity for me to combine my
visit to her with seeing a little of London, and then I have
been idle long enough, and must set to work again. You
see I'm doing nothing here.'
' Well, I'm an old woman noo,' said Aunt Jean thought¬
fully, ' and maybe my old brain is too slow for the times,
but I canna understand why folks maun aye be doing
something. It's aye I must go here and go there, and do
what the Lord would have me to do. Noo, that's good,
nae doot, stiU. whiles I'm thinking it might be better to
say, I'll just bide where I am and he, what the Lord would
have me to he. But I'm no blaming you, lassie. It's just
the age. But whether the end of all this going here and
there will na just be to make folks mair like /wm who goes
2/8 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
to and fro in the earth and walks tip and doon in it, is just
what I'm no prepared to say.'
' Ah! if Aunt Jean only knew everything,' thought Maggie,
' she wouldn't blame me. No, I'm quite decided. No ghost
of a dead past shall vex dear old Hector any more, or throw
a gloom over his new happiness. I will just get through this
visit that's been hanging over me for so long; and when I've
schooled myself to watch Mabel's happiness with no other
feeling but thankfulness, then I will settle down to real
hard work. What a blessing it is to be obliged to work!
There is nothing like work.
" Whoever is useful cannot be unhappy, this creed
Fills the void of existence."
Eest, rest, what is the good of resting the body when
the mind will work ? How could people talk of rest, if they
had ever realized how short this life is, how much there is
to be done in the world, and how little time in which to do
it, while there is a whole eternity in which to rest ? No
doubt it is dreary to go drudging on day after day; but how
can those who rest now ever hope fully to enjoy that "rest
that remaineth for the people of God " ?'
{To be continued.)
IN THE FEAEI CHURCH, VENICE.
In Frari Church, by Venice shore,
He rests beneath the chancel floor.
The Knight whose name is known no more.
His tomb is high upon the wall;
The deep niche shadows on it fall,
Not to be lightly seen by all—
Stranger and citizen and friar.
Who pass about the glorious choir.
So dim the chapel walls retire.
All armed he lies, in perfect grace;
His hound beside his feet has j)lace,
And looks alertly in his face:
That face we cannot see below;
'Tis slightly turned away, as though
In sleep he moved a little so.
E. Marlitt and her Works. . 3^9
One spot the sculptor knew—'tis here.
Where the Knight's countenance is clear,
And all the hidden thoughts appear;
Even as the dog's glad vision stays
Upon his lord, he seems to raise
His eyes above Avith rapturous gaze,—
A fair, worn face, with toil and grief.
Just brightening into glad belief.
Turned to the inner bas-relief,—
Where, sweetest hope that ever smiled—
Hope that the great Cathedral piled,
Is carved the Mother and the Child.
Ah ! not for fame the sculptor sought:
Few see the monument he wrought,
' For this man'—so 'tis like, he thought—
' Carve Ave a sign of perfect peace.
Let not his last loved vision cease,
Turn to the wall the masterpiece.'
So shall the Knight and hound remain
All patient in the glorious fane.
And trusting good shall come again ;
Each yearning to a higher state,
With knowledge small, with reverence great,
Content to love and trust and wait.
E. J. O.
!£. fHarlitt anti ijer Moriks.^
In a former article written for the iMclies 'Edinhurgh Maga¬
zine, the present writer gave a brief sketch of E. Werner's
works, and spoke of the kindly reception they met with in
England. E. Marlitt, with whom we have now to do, enjoys
a popularity at least equally great with English readers.
Hard indeed would it be were this otherwise, for the
appearance   of her Old Ifaid's Secret (Das Geheimniss der
■ See Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine for December 1878.
28o The Ladies EdhibiirgJi Magazine.
alten Mamsell) some ten years ago, gave a fresh impetus to
the perusal of German novels in England, also in many
other countries. Translations in French, Dutch, Portuguese,
Italian, indeed in almost every modern language, followed
each other in rapid succession. Nor was the interest which
these works called forth, confined to Europe only, but showed
itself in the United States, both amongst Americans them¬
selves and the Germans resident there; the arrival of
every fresh number of tlie Gartenlaube, in Avliich these
stories first appeared, being anxiously looked for, and each
page eagerly perused. Indeed, many people named their new¬
born infants after the heroes and heroines of this favourite
writer.
It does not seem too much to say that Marlitt's writings
mark the beginning of a new epoch in German fiction, and
that she does much towards giving it a healthier tone. ]\Iorbid
sentimentality, writing for effect, sensationalism, a false
propriety instead of real purity,—these were wholly foreign
to her. Things lovely, honest, pure, and of good report, are
what she teaches and upholds. Xor does she lack followers,
who with more or less talent and power seek to carry out
the same line of thought.
Like E. Werner, she shows no mercy to any form of religious
hypocrisy or bigotry, whether shown in the Ultramontanism
which denies ixll hope of salvation outside the pale of what
it calls tlie ' True Church,' or displayed in a pietism which
seeks to hide its avarice under the garb of unworldliness,
and deems the pence dropped into a missionary bo.x ample
atonement for the sins of harshness towards debtors, and of
turning a deaf ear to the cries of the needy.
She condemns the pride that apes humility, feigning
religion, yet ignoring that inferiors or dependants have
sorrows, feelings, wants as keen as those of earth's children
who boast the longest and most faultless pedigrees. She
has done much towards a^\'akening and cementing good
feelings between masters and servants, employers and
employed; pointing out tliat if hearty service is the duty of
those who toil, sympathy and kindliness, and not bare justice
only, are none the less demanded of those who make use of
their labour. To take one example from her writings on
this subject, she brings this out strongly in Countess Giselar
(Eeichs-grdjin Gisela), which is intended especially to show
up the haughtiness of the nobility. There even the generous-
hearted heroine, to a degree scarcely credible to English
readers, is ignorant of the griefs and wants of those who had
E. Marlitt and her Works. 281
been long years in her service.    Yet in the case in point the
picture is by no means exaggerated.
The Second Wife {die Zweite Fran) is a great favourite
with Germans of both sexes. It shows how a wife uniting
firmness and decision Avith true womanliness, and readiness
to be guided by him to whom she has pledged her obedience,
meets intrigue by uprightness, imputations by the fearlessness
of an unstained conscience, and finally wins the deep,
devoted love of the husband who married her, believing she
sought nothing more than a ' mariarjc de convenance.'
There are points (as has been hinted) in E. Marlitt's
writings which to us may savour of exaggeration, and this
not only regarding the relative position of superiors and
inferiors, but of the vices of a counterfeit religion. Y"et
these are faithful sketches.
In the notice of Werner's writings, reference was made
to the sad state of irreligion in Germany. In addition to
Socialism and Ultramontanism, another evil, which has done
mucli towards fostering unbelief, is a pirofession of i)iety,
rich in words but lacking in practice, which has shown
itself from time to time in certain parts of the country. In
the Old Maid's Secret, the disciples of this movement, 'having
the form of godliness, yet lacking the power thereof,' are
shown in their true light.
But to turn to pleasanter subjects. Few existing writers
can compete with Marlitt in descriptive power. She is
equally happy in leading her readers into the palaces of the
wealthy, wliere magnificence abounds and the eye is satiated
with beholding costly furniture, rare exotics, and luxuries with¬
out end, or in showing them the stiff punctilious orderliness
of a well-to-do burgher's house ; or again in making them at
home in a dwelling, however humble, where every small
detail is the work of loving hands, and all breathes an atmo¬
sphere of peaceful contentment. Her descriptions of nature
are no less pleasant to read. In the Princess of the Moor¬
land {Haideprinzesschen) one quite revels in the heather-
scented breezes amongst which the madcap heroine grows
up ; and in Goldelse {Elsie of the Golden Locks) one feels
in truth transported to the stately oak and beech forests,
which the author so vividly delineates. Her beautiful
Thuringian home has giveu Marlitt ample opportunities of
studying woodland scenery in its perfection. She is fond of
describing what has come under her personal observation;
a safe line wliich young authors would do well to follow
more often.    The abode of the principal actors in the Old
282 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine. *
Maid's Secret is the exact counterpart of a curious old house
in her native place.
And now, although E. Marlitt talks of perhaps some day
publishing her autobiography, a few lines concerning herself
may not be unacceptable. Like Werner, she makes use of a
oiom de plwnu, being really called Eugenie John. Her motives
for concealing her true name Avere partly diffidence, a strong
prejudice prevailing in Germany against women's writings.
This feeling the noble results of her pen have done much to
dissipate. Although she still signs herself MarUtt, few
Germans are unaware that this is an assumed name; indeed,
with the enthusiasm which is one of their strong characteristics,
numbers of her fellow-countrymen as well as others have
written to express to her their hearty appreciation of her
talent. These letters she values greatly, and takes pleasure
in showing the album containing them to her visitors. Many
and touching indeed are the proofs of gratitude which have
reached her, gladdening a life which, owing to ill-health, has
for years been one of much suffering. Eare Alpine and other
beautiful flowers, cases of wine from distant parts of
America, besides many tasteful specinjens of feminine work,
have been sent from time to time to cheer the gifted woman,
who from her invalid room has given pleasure and instruction
by her writings to thousands of fellow-creatures scattered
here and there throu"hout the globe.
Friiulein John was born on the 5th of December 1825 at
Arnstadt, in Thuringia, where she now lives with her
brother. Possessing a magnificent voice, she was destined
in early life for the stage; but a defect in her hearing
showing itself while she was still quite young, she was forced
to give up the scheme, and became lady-in-waiting to the
Princess of Schwarzburg-Sondershausen. This led to her
travelling a great deal, and enabled her to enrich her mind
with a widespread and varied knowledge of people and
places.
Now for a brief sketch of Eriiulein John as seen in her
own home. She has dark, curly hair, which is cut short;
blue eyes, beaming with an amount of animation unusual with
deaf people; a bright, amused expression about the mouth.
Altogether, her appearance is most prepossessing. She is a
very agreeable conversationalist, talks pleasantly about art
and literature, and is very well informed on general subjects.
To these qualities she adds a very humble estimate of her
own achievements. Her sufferings cannot conquer her
cheerfulness; and the fine traits of character with which
E. Marlitt and her Works. 283
she endows her heroines are but the noble conceptions
engendered of noble living.
Fraulein John says she can write best when all without
is dreary, and snow or rain clouds fill the sky. Such days
seem to her best fitted for hard work, and help her to carry
on a train of thought undisturbed. She is in the habit of
working out her plot mentally, even to the most trifling
details, and then only commits the story to paper. She
does not speak of her unfinished work to those around her,
nor does she let any one read the manuscript while in course
of preparation; but when a fresh story is completed, the day
before sending it to the press she reads it aloud to her
family circle. Such seasons are hailed as great events by
her relations.
For a long time ill health almost entirely prevented this
charming writer from continuing her literary labours; after
a considerable interval of silence, she was able to publish
Im Hause des Comiiurzienraths {In the Counsellor's House) ;
and again, after repeatedly being compelled to put off her
publishers with indefinite promises, she has brought out a new
novel, entitled Im ScMlli7igs-hof, in the Gartenlaiibcioi 1879.
The first of these two productions vigorously contrasts the
modest, unaffected womanliness of the heroine with the
would-be superiority of Flora Mangold, who, vastly over¬
rating her own abilities, mistakes eccentricity for genius, and
whilst believing herself a powerful advocate for the rights of
her sex, can find no publisher willing to accept her essays,
which abound in commonplaces and plagiarisms. Ini Hause
des Commerzienraths, though well conceived, is scarcely plea¬
sant reading; the characters are almost all calculated to
inspire antipathy; even the hero, though his singleness of
purpose calls forth one's admiration, is not without a touch
of pedantry and unlovely stiffness. Yet in this work also
Marlitt has had a noble aim in view, and in the hatred with
which Flora's haughtiness inspired the factory hands, through
whose labour the wealth of the family is acquired, again
pleads for justice and kindliness from the rich towards those
who toil.
In Im ScJiillings-liof it may also be said, however, that
although in the delineation of the different characters the
novelist shows her usual versatility, the chief actors in it
do not enlist our sympathies in the same degree as did some
of the heroes and heroines of her earlier works. Her de¬
scription of the various scenery may likewise in all sincerity
be described as word-painting. M. M, C.
284 TJie Ladies' EdinburgJi Magazine.
©cbatc of iHag 1880.
Debate held in May by the members of the Ladies' Edinburgh
Literaiy Society : ' Are small societies for self - improvement or
pleasure desirable ?'
ABSTRACT OF AFFIRMATIVE.
' Small societies for self-improvement or pleasure,' it has been said,
' are the props of weak moral natures.' But this would only show
that they are most desirable, for nothing can be better tlian to prop
a weak nature. It has been objected that the rules of such societies,
as ' early-rising' and reading clubs, interfere too much with the
personal liberty of their members ; but then being a member is a
matter of free choice. It was further urged, that the affirmative
might be supported without arguing that every kind of small society
is desirable. Perhaps the best are those in which the members go on
with some work or study together—as in drawing clubs, essay societies,
etc. Again, it has been said, the wish to carry on our pursuits in
company is a weakness. Matthew Arnold holds up the stars for our
example : ' These demand not that the things without them yield
them love, amusement, sympathy.' But the craving for love, amuse¬
ment, sympathy, is ineradicably a part of human nature. Human
nature requires the stimulus of companionship' in its pursuits ; even
those who can, if necessary, dispense with it, are nevertheless greatly
the better of it. It was argued that small societies give this stimulus
pleasantly and informally, and do not fetter individuality of mind.
Many members of sucli associations are deeply interested in the work
of their clubs. Even if these societies are only an amusement, they
are desirable, vinless some objection specially attaches to this form of
amusement. There was a suggestion from another point of view, that
these societies are safety-valves for letting off superfluous energy.
To avoid anything personal, it was agreed to exclude large societies
from the discussion ; but as there is no difference of principle
between large and small, it was thought only fair to exclude debating
clubs. They are set on foot for the very purpose of encouraging
individuality of thought, and therefore there can scarcely be any
question as to their excellence. G. C. Wood.
ABSTRACT OF THE NEGATIVE.
Small societies are only to be tolerated as the infancy of large
societies. Guilds, etc., are good only so long as they remain large
in numbers as well as ideas. The standard of work done in small
societies is low. Constant comparison with each other narrows the
judgment of the members. As 'props for the weak,' consolation
may be derived from them, though it is scarcely improving to be
' Le honjne, roi cliez les aveugles.' Self-absorption, conceit, and self-
righteousness are excited. The members have no time for the duties
of life, they are so busy improving themselves. Everything must
give way to the society. The reading may not be interrupted, the
practising hours must be got through, regardless of the feelings of
others, books and music being 'd discretion.^ Early-rising will
not be attained by paying fines; proper regard for health should
make one walk without joining a society.    Sketching clubs interfere
Otir Library Table. 285
with study and waste time, the advantage being doubtful of sending
drawings on a little journey to have foolish remarks scrawled on
their backs. Is it more improving to learn verses of the Bible, etc.,
in a society than outside ? To conscientious members, the routine of
rules is often a real slavery. The littlenesses of life are much developed
in small societies—envy, malice, and all uncharitableness. Exclusive-
ness is another fault which is inherent. The society is often a narrow
clique for mutual admiration; nothing beyond its bounds can be
listened to. Then how absurd the whole thing is ! A few girla
(unknown to each other by name perhaps) agree to do some obvious
duty under pain of fines—the well-conducted receiving prizes. There
are early-rising societies (is there one for tubbing or liair-brushing ?),
practising, reading, sewing, gardening, walking, sketching, choral
and essay societies ; lawn-tennis, archery, rowing, swimming, and
croquet clubs, besides hosts of others, from handwriting to harmony.
Small societies may have kept one or two idle hands out of mischief;
but is that much of a plea for them ? They take the place of con¬
science to their members, and all the good they aim at would be done
much better without them. E. C.
The voting showed a large majority for the Affirmative.
©ur iLibrarg ZnUt.
Donna Quixote.    By Justin Macarthy.
London: Chatto & Windus, Piccadilly.    1879.
We feel ourselves almost out of date in noticing this, one of the
cleverest and most amusing novels of the past year. It is true, that
even of those who have read, a number do not seem to aj^preciate it.
Speaking for ourselves, we feel that the vein of humour, the under¬
current of quiet satire, would carry us to the end of a much less
amusing story. The satire is directed against quixotic methods of
benevolence ; the principal character of course, as is denoted by the
title, being a young and fascinating woman, who, widowed on the
day after her marriage, is left with ample means and opportunities,
and with an insatiable appetite for doing good. Her inexperience
and utter ignorance of the harder realities of life, land her in a series
of difficulties, partly real, partly from the fanciful ' giants' to whom
she offers battle. Yet it is no small praise to a novel-writer of the
present day to confess, that in all Gabrielle's vicissitudes and
adventures she is never put into questionable situations, that her
pleasant youthfulness and freshness remain unimpaired, and that
there is not throughout the book a single line or phrase that could
offend the most critical taste. The secondary characters are all
cleverly introduced and worked out. Many of us have known a
Major Leven, kind, fussy, self-important, a universal redresser of
grievances, but—' When any grievance was brought under his notice
he had no difficulty in recalling some experience of his own which
supplied him with reason for assuming that the wrong had been
done. "When he was at the Cape, just the same sort of treachery
had been shown to one of the native chiefs; when he was at Rawal
Pindee, he had had to interfere himself in exactly such a case of
cruelty to a servant; he knew of his own knowledge in the Mauritius
that a fellow had been promoted to a most important office for no
T
286 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
other reason in the world than because he had married the favourite
maid of the Governor's wife; and so on through various other
instances.'—Vol. i. p. 26.
Lady Honeybell, Miss Lemuel, Miss Elvin, are all inimitable,
and the first introduction of the last-named lady to Gabrielle's
patronage is one of the best scenes in the book. A young would-be
public singer, unable to get the London world to be as sensible of
her attractions as she is herself. Miss Elvin is thus described to us :
' She was a sallow girl, who looked as if she had stepped out of a
medifBval jjainting, her chin was so pointed, her mouth so large, her
lips were so thin, her eyes were so long and mournful, her drapery
was so darksome in its green.' We are prepared by the lady's
appearance for her singing. In vain does the fair Quixote, herself
no judge of music, undertake the introduction of this unpleasing, not
to say odious personage. At her debut at Lady Honeybell's concert,
' that girl with the strong voice' is the highest encomium poor
Gabrielle can obtain for \\.&x i^roik/ee. Perhaps nothing iu the book
is more striking than the episode of the Charltons, a young couple
whom Gabrielle patronizes in her mistaken benevolence, till she
turns a weak, conceited brain to utter madness, and makes two lives
wretched till one ends in suicide. It is a common mistake of
benevolent women, that they can make p)eople happy by feeding
them with unwholesome food ; but although we feel that Nature was
beforehand with Gabrielle in the spoiling of Robert Charlton's life,
it would be well if many who profess themselves interested in ' the
elevation of the masses,' would seriously consider the chances of
fatal mischief in all efforts which tend to create dissatisfaction with
things as they are, and engender hopeless cravings for things that
cannot be. In spite of her mistakes, Gabrielle is so great a favourite
of ours, that we are glad when her second marriage places her in
safe and good hands.
A Golden Chain.    London: Printed at the Ladies' Printing Press
(for the Tuition and Employment of Necessitous Gentlewomen),
48 Hunter Street, Brunswick Square, W.C.
This little publication is a succession of incidents, a true golden
chain made up of many links, the history of one good and kindly
word or deed leading on to the next, a certain thread of continuity
being always preserved.    It  is  chiefly interesting  to  us  as  being
printed under the auspices of a society for the employment of ladies,
by whom it has been issued in a neat and clear type.
(I^ucstion Series,
I. History.—Give a short outline of the career of Marlborough.
Answer not to exceed three hundred words.
II. Logic.—State some of the causes of ambiguity of terms, and
illustrate.    Answer not to exceed three hundred words.
Answers to reach Qu. C., not later than July 5th, care of Messrs.
Morrison and Gibb, 11 Queen Street, Edinburgh. Only one side
of the sheet of paper to be written upon, and it is especially requested
that nothing but the answers may be sent to Qu. C. Any other
communication must be addressed in the usual form to the Editor,
or no notice can be taken of such enclosures.
Question Series. 287
ANSWERS TO APRIL QUESTIONS.
History.—Ten answers received. First, Thorocgh ; second,
Arialpin'. ^Apis and Wolfra equal, and very interesting, read from
a Scotch and English point of view respectively. Next Linda,
Greta, Arachne, Pink, Miss Betsy. Eromart is in a minority of
one in her opinion of the most important event in the reign of Queen
Anne.
Logic. —Five answers received. Linda and "Wolfra equal. The
sentence near the end of Linda's paper beginning, 'It is not a science
of invention,' is, however, open to question. See Mr. .John Stuart
Mill's definition of Logic. Next Gketa, much imjiroved in every
respect. Had Irrlicht taken more care in the writing out of her
paper, she would have been in the front rank. Pink good in parts,
but has fallen into error in the latter part.
What was the most important event in the reign of Queen Anne ?
Give your opinion as to its results.
The most important event of Queen Anne's reign was the Union
between England and Scotland, which was finally accomplished on
the 1st of May 1707. The attempt had repeatedly failed, and much
opposition had even now to be overcome. The Scotch feared for the
safety of their Church, and made it a fundamental condition that
the treaty should only be for temporal politics. The Union was
based on three principles. 1. There was to be one kingdom, with a
new name. 2. There was to be one parliament. 3. The new crown
was to be subject to the Act of Succession. It was agreed that
Scotland should preserve her local institutions, her courts of justice,
and her law, while taxation and trade were to be equal throughout
the kingdom.
There can be no doubt that the result of the Union was beneficial
to both countries, more paljiably perhaps in Scotland, but not really
more so than in England. Scotland acquired an equal share in the
colonies and trade of the country, new branches of industry were
opened up, wealth came into the country, and towns—especially
Glasgow — rapidly grew in importance. Agriculture improved
enormously, and the state of the Highlands was gradually changed
from semi-barbarism to what it now is. England, on the other hand,
was delivered from the jealousy of the Scotch Parliament, and
benefited by the valour of the Scotch in war, and by their sagacity
and enterprise in commerce, science, and literature during peace.
The immediate results of the Union were not so favourable, much
irritation being caused by the manner in which the English forced
unwelcome innovations on their fellow-countrymen. This result was
perhaps unavoidable, especially as the benefits were, of course, not
apparent for many years. Now, however, these benefits would hardly
be questioned by any one. Thorough.
Give various definitions of Logic, and criticise them.
There is great diversity among authors as to the correct way of
defining Logic, each logician having his own ideas regarding it.
Perhaps the simplest definition and the most easily understood is to
define it as the ' science or art of reasoning,' meaning by the former
term the analysis of the mental process which takes place whenever
we reason, and by the latter, the rules grounded on that analj'^sis for
conducting the process properly. Another definition, and perhaps
the  most commonly used, is to call it the ' science of the laws of
288 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
thought.' When we speak of a law of thought, we mean a certain
uniformity or agreement which must exist in the modes in which
people think and reason, and Logic is the science which is engaged
in detecting and describing tliese natural laws.
Another eminent logician defines Logic as the ' science of sciences'
and 'art of arts,' and another definition is : i 'Logic is the art of
directing the reason aright in acquiring the knowledge of things, for
the instruction both of ourselves and others.'
If we compare all these definitions, we shall find there is really
very little difference between them. They all show us that Logic is
the science wliich teaches us to arrange our thoughts in order, and
to reason and argue correctly. It is not a science of invention but
of conviction ; for it does not find out new things, but teaches us
how to prove old facts. It is the common judge and arbiter of all
investigations, and it is in this sense that we may consider it as the
' science of sciences :' for its aim is to prove the truth of all other
sciences, and to enable us to give right conclusions to any arguments
which may arise from our study of them. Linda.
Association for the Promotion of Food Production by Women.
—By this somewhat puzzling name, a new association of some
interest is made known to the public. Its chief aim is to help and
encourage ladies who have a taste for Country Pursuits to turn to
profitable account their bee-keeping, poultry and pig rearing, garden
and dairy work, etc. It is further proposed to open a school, soon,
it is hoped, to become self-supporting, in which ladies may receive
the necessary training in these br.anches of industry. Already we
hear of several ladies having expressed a wish to become students,
and this scheme gives promise of opening a wide field for the employ¬
ment of women, which, if properly supported, might in a few years
lessen the expense of many articles of food now imported from
distant colonies.
Notices to Correspontirnts, Etc.
Ladies are invited to contribute to this Magazine. All communi¬
cations to be addressed, Editors, Ladies' Edinhunjli Magazine, Messrs.
Morrison & Gibb, 11 Queen Street, Edinburgh.
Papers intended for immediate insertion must be in the hands of
the Editors by the first of the x^revioiis month ; attention is requested
to this rule.
We must warn our correspondents that no MSS. can be returned
unless/«ZZ postage be sent, that letters needing reply must contain a
stamp, and that the Editors can forward no communications left with
them unless stamped. Poems sent in letters will not be returned,
unless a stamp be sent. No anonymous communication either to
the Editors or the Office-bearers of the Literary Society will be
noticed.
The meeting of the Ladies' Edinburgh Literary Society will be
held on Saturday, yth June, at 5 Chester Street, at 11 a.m.
Debate—' Is silliness a moral and curable defect ? '
The Late Empress of Russia. 289
STfje ILatc impress of Bussia.
The grand-ducal castle of Darmstadt is an old-fashioned
fortress-like building, standing in a small town, which was
remarkably dull and stagnant till the marriage of the late
Princess Alice with the heir of the duchy attracted many
English settlers, who have been increasing every subsequent
year. The railway now brings it into easy communication
with all Germany ; and a manufacturing suburb has grown
up, more than doubling the wealth of the principality since
the Austrian and Prussian war of 1866. But in 1824, it
was very poor, and comparatively little visited. It was
certainly independent, as far as so weak a state could stand
on its own footing, and it is now virtually an integral part
of Prussia. The Grand Duke was then as despotic in his
own dominions as the Shah of Persia, though not much
liked by the other German sovereigns ; for he and his father
had served on the side of Napoleon against the Fatherland,
and till, in fact, the French retreat across the Eliine com¬
pelled them to yield to the Allies. The court of Darmstadt
was therefore isolated, and reported to possess many of the
characteristics of the German baronial mansion of ancient
times, where there was much beer consumed, and much
boisterous mirth. In 1848, the Duke's debts were paid by
a national subscription, and from the time of his daughter's
marriage he obtained occasional pecuniary assistance from
St. Petersburg.
Louis II., Grand Duke of Hesse Darmstadt, was born in
1777, and had married in 1804, Wilhelmina Louisa, the
daughter of a Crown Prince of Baden. This lady had
several sisters, besides one brother, who was married to tlie
Princess Stephanie Beauharnais, and was father to the
Duchess-dowager of Hamilton. Of her sisters, one married
Alexander I., Emperor of Russia; another, Gustavus IV.,
King of Sweden, who was expelled from his throne in 1809 ;
a third, the Duke of Brunswick, who was killed at Waterloo;
and a fourth, who married King Maximilian of Bavaria, had
two sets of twin daughters, all of whom made brilliant
alliances, one of them having been mother to the i)resent
Emperor of Austria; two were successively Queens of
Saxony, and another, the wife of Frederick William IV. of
Prussia. Therefore, although themselves brought up with little
state or ostentation, the children of Louis II. had illustrious
connections. The two eldest, Louis and Charles, were born
in 1806 and 1809, and after a space of fourteen years, a third
No. 67.—July 1880. T
290 Tlie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
son Alexander, now the sole survivor. He was followed in
1824 by the only daughter, Maximiliana Wilhelmina Augusta
Sophia Mary, who was eleven years old when their mother
died; and shortly afterwards their father formed a morganatic
marriage. The court of Darmstadt had imbibed philo¬
sophical opinions during its long connection with France,
and a German girl as a rule learns very little of theology
till she is prepared for her confirmation, when a year is often
devoted to religious instruction. This ceremony and instruc¬
tion was usually delayed with German princesses, in case
the prospect of a Romanist or Greek Catholic suitor should
appear, as it would make the change of faith less difficult
if the mind in that respect was a blank; and consequently,
when the Princess Mary of Darmstadt went to St. Peters¬
burg six months before her marriage to be instructed ia the
faith of the Eusso-Greek Church, preparatory to her re-
baptism (which is required in the case of a Lutheran), she
embraced it with all the ardour of a young and serious
character who had no preconceived opinions to be opposed.
In 1838 the Crown Prince of Eussia, afterwards Alexander
II., was sent abroad for the benefit of his health and spirits,
which had suffered from the very rigorous mode of life and
severe studies that his father had imposed upon him, and
in which a minimum of time was allowed for rest and
refreshment. The Marquis de Custine, who met him at
Ems, calls him ' one of the finest models of a prince that I
have ever met with. The habitual expression of his face
is gentleness and benevolence; but between the youthful
smile of the eyes and the constant contraction of the mouth,
there is nevertheless a discordance wliich perhaps indicates
some inward suffering. One can observe that he is under the
influence of some cause of grief; his eyelids are cast down
with a sadness that betrays the cares of a riper age. His
carriage is graceful, imposing, and altogether princely, and
his manner modest without being timid.' The Prince was
then nineteen ; and two years later, the Czar being anxious
that he should marry, sent him to pay a visit to the court
of Baden, where the present Duchess of Saxe-Coburg was the
eldest unmarried princess, and being about twenty, was re¬
garded by the Czar as very suitable for the future Empress.
But at Frankfort, where he was first to rest for two or three
days, the Prince received an invitation to visit the castle of
Darmstadt, and there saw the Princess Mary, who was his
mother's second cousin, and only sixteen years old. Many
romantic  stories  are  told about their engagement, which
The Late Empress of Russia. 291
took place shortly afterwards with the full permission of the
Emperor.    They were married on the 28th of April 1841.
As the heir to the throne of Russia at that period lived
under his father's roof, and could certainly hardly call himself
his own master, the position of his wife was not always very
comfortable among her brothers-in-law and sisters-in-law;
but she is believed to have acted with the greatest discretion
amidst family differences, and to have obtained a high place
in the estimation of the Emperor Nicolas.    Her eldest child
was  a  daughter, Alexandra,  who  died  at  seven,  and   is
described as a beautiful little girl by an English visitor at
Kissingen, where the Grand Duchess went to drink the
waters, and to meet her own family in 1847.    At the birth
of her eldest sou Nicolas, in 1843, the Emperor made his
second son Constantine take an oath to respect the rights of
his elder brother and this child, as the Grand Duke Con-
stantine's determined and ambitious temperament had given
rise to some fears on the subject; and the oath was repeated,
at his command, by the Emperor's  death-bed.     On  that
occasion the Grand Duchess brought her eldest boy, who
was then eleven, into the room, that, as she said, he might
see how an emperor ought to die, little thinking that her
favourite child would never live to become an emperor.    At
this time it was commonly said in St. Petersburg that she
was fitted for another Catherine II., a rather doubtful compli¬
ment ; and it was remembered that at some tahleaux vivanU,
in 1849, she and her husband had taken the parts of Peter
III. and his ambitious wife.    But no period could have
been more depressing, or more fitted to damp ambition, than
the day on which they ascended the throne, March 3, 1855.
Their predecessor had died of a broken heart, if he had not,
as was rumoured in the Eussian capital, voluntarily shortened
his own life.    Four hostile nations had encamped their armies
in his empire, and every day it was fully expected that
Austria and Prussia would also declare war.    Great efforts
were being made to induce Sweden to join against Eussia,
whose ports were all blockaded in Asia and Europe, so that
the greatest difficulty was experienced in the transport of
ammunition and reinforcements.    The change of sovereign
brought no modification in the terms of peace offered by the
AUies ; so the war continued another year, and one day the
young Empress's carriage was pursued in the streets of St.
Petersburg by a mob demanding vengeance on their enemies
(the news having just arrived of the death of two distin¬
guished Eussian officers before Sevastopol), because it was
292 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
popularly supposed that she was favourable to a peace. In
September 1855, the Emperor and his family visited Moscow,
and there they received the intelligence of the fall of Sevas¬
topol. The Emperor at once proceeded to Nicolaieff and
Odessa, from whence he first informed his wife and his
ministers that it was his intention to visit the northern forts
of Sevastopol, and his army in the Crimea. The telegraph
and railway at that time did not extend farther south than
Moscow, and the Empress passed many an anxious hour
while her husband was penetrating into the fever-stricken
hospitals at Batchi - Serai, Simpheropol, and other towns
adjacent to the seat of war, and was laid up for a fortnight
with illness at Nicolaieff. It was said to have been due to
the scenes he had witnessed in this journey, and to the
urgent representations of the Empress, that he consented to
the terms of the Treaty of Paris, which were known to have
been most bitterly felt by them both; and their depressed,
almost saddened demeanour at their coronation in September
1856, was generally noticed by the foreign visitors. At that
time they had four sons and a daughter, now Duchess of
Edinburgh; but a fifth son was born the following year,
and baptized Sergius in memory of a pilgrimage his parents
had made to the tomb of St. Sergius in the Troitza monastery
shortly before his birth.
In 1858 the Empress and her children paid their first
visit to the Crimea. Accompanied by the Emperor, she took
a melancholy drive round the valley of Inkerman, the ruins
of Sevastopol, and the harbour and battle-field of Balaklava.
The broken sides of the famous docks, once the most
commodious in the world, and the remains of the aqueduct
seven miles long, all of which had been rather barbarously
blown up by the allied engineers with great difficulty, and
some loss of life, during the armistice which preceded the
treaty of peace, then presented the same desolate scene of
destruction as when the foreign armies had only just quitted
Eussia. A beautiful little chapel had been erected on the
ground where many thousands of Eussian soldiers were
interred, and here the imperial travellers assisted at a
Eequiem for the dead. The previous autumn they had
visited Germany, and while the Emperor went to see his
aunts, the Queen of Holland and the Duchess of Saxe-
Weimar, the Empress stayed in her old home at Darmstadt.
Since the Peace of Paris, Napoleon III. had been endeavour¬
ing to form an alliance with liussia, and for this purpose had
invited the Czar to visit Paris.    Though the invitation was
The Late Empress of Russia. 293
refused, he made other efforts to have a meeting with the
Eussian monarch; and on hearing that Alexander II. was
going to Stuttgart to visit his sister, who was Crown Princess
of Wurtemburg, he obtained the desired interview by offer¬
ing at the same time to be the guest of the aged king.    It is
amusing to look back upon that period, and to read how
jealously our newspapers watched if all due honours and
respect were paid by the Eussian sovereigns to our French
allies, and how, because the two Empresses did not accom¬
pany their husbands, it was at once assumed that the Czarina
was too proud to meet the Empress Eugenie on equal terms;
and the supposed insult to the imperial lady, who had been
a daughter of the people, was severely commented upon.
The story was supposed to receive confirmation when the
Empress of Eussia, the day after her husband had arrived
at Stuttgart, telegraphed to say she should join him, and
accordingly came the same evening, when he met her at the
station, so that many concluded it was pre-arranged.    But
the difference shown in the reception of the two sovereigns
ought to have satisfied the pro-Gallic critics.    The Czar, who
was nephew to the King of Wurtemburg, was at his own
request received as a near relation without ceremony, while
all the guards and state that Stuttgart could muster were
bestowed on Napoleon III.    An English correspondent at
Stuttgart, who saw the Czar arrive, described him as looking
' out of humour, out of spirits, and out of health,' and as
having in appearance aged rapidly since he came to the
throne.    It was surmised that perhaps his strong-minded
wife was afraid lest he should concede something to Napoleon
III. without her support, and she was believed to be very
anti-French in politics.    At any rate, after she came, she
always accompanied her husband ; and it was reported that
Alexander II. accounted for his own taciturnity by telling
Napoleon that the fact of his father having caused a war by
a conversation with the British ambassador had taught him
to keep his lips closed on public affairs.    About a year after¬
wards, the Empress of Eussia went to Schwalbach, and then,
for the first time, met the Empress Eugenie, who paid her a
two days' visit.
In October 1860, the Grand Duke Paul, the Empress's
youngest son, was born, and she now began to suffer from
an internal malady, which distressed her for many years.
The Emperor lost his mother before this child was a month
old; so the younger Empress gained a step in rank, for
according to Eussian etiquette the Empress-dowager takes
294 The Ladies' Edinburgh Alagazine.
precedence cf the reigning Empress. But from that period
her health obliged her to avoid all state receptions or
fatiguing ceremonies as much as possible; and, in addition
to her other complaint, she had symptoms of disease of the
lungs, which required her to pass several winters in a
warmer climate. The disquietude which also followed the
emancipation of the serfs in 1861; the outbreaks of the
Nihilists, through whose machinations a third of St. Peters¬
burg was burned down, besides several provincial towns;
the attempts on her husband's life; and the Polish insurrec¬
tion, which at one time seemed likely to bring about a war
with all Europe, made the position of the Empress a most
unenviable one, particularly as she was ambitious, and very
jealous of the dignity of her adopted country. All these
misfortunes culminated in the death of her eldest son
Nicolas, a most promising young man, twenty-one years of
age, and betrothed to the Princess Dagmar of Denmark.
The melancholy event took place April 24, 1865, at Nice,
where the Empress and her children had been staying
during the previous winter, and was the result of spinal
disease brought on by an accident some time before, when
engaged in a wrestling match with his cousin the Duke of
Leuchtenberg, but of which the early symptoms had been
mistaken for rheumatism. His father and next brother
arrived from St. Petersburg a few days before he died, as
well as his betrothed and her mother, the Queen of
Denmark; and at his special desire, the Princess Dagmar
afterwards became the wife of the Grand Duke Alexander,
his successor in the dignity of heir to the throne, and they
were married Nov. 9, 1866. For a long time afterwards, the
Empress was quite inconsolable, and from that period gave
herself up to religion, and to increase the influence of the
Eusso-Greek Church. To all the splendid religious edifices
which have been fast springing up throughout Eussia during
the last fifteen years, she has liberally contributed, and from
time to time has disposed of some of her diamonds and
other jewels for the purpose. The missions among the
Caucasians, the Eussian progress in Central Asia, and the
endeavour to supplant the Lutheran creed in the Baltic
provinces, and Eomanism in Poland, by the Eusso-Greek,
have been objects dear to her heart; and those who of late
years have chiefly surrounded her have been persons of
similar views. It has generally been stated that she finally
induced the Emperor to consent to a declaration of war
against Turkey in 1877, to which he is known to have been
TJic Late Euipi-css cf Russia. 295
long very averse, and, as Lord Salisbury expressed it, ' tor-
mentingly anxious for peace;' and, so far as her weak
health permitted, she took an active part in the work of the
Eed Cross Society at St. Petersburg, where poor women,
generally soldiers' wives, were given employment in making
clothing for the sick and wounded, which was regularly
forwarded, with bandages and lint, to the many receptacles
for the sufferers from the seat of war dispersed throughout
Eussia. The Turkish prisoners were also cared for through
the same channel, and means afforded for instructing them
in Christianity. When the war was over, many of these
prisoners asked to remain in Eussia; some of them, includ¬
ing one Pasha, had turned Christian and married Eussian
wives, and those who have returned to Turkey speak most
favourably of their treatment in captivity. The Empress
also contributed thousands of pounds to the relief of the
Bosnians, Servians, Bulgarians, and Herzegovinians, rescuing
many from starvation; and she exhibited the utmost anxiety
that the Treaty of San Stefano should be maintained, and
the whole of Bulgaria be united and independent, as well
as the proposed additions made to Greece, Servia, and
Montenegro, which would as near as possible restore their old
frontiers of three hundred years ago. The harrowing suspense
which followed the signature of that treaty, when there
seemed to be every prospect of a war between Eussia and
Great Britain, and when adventurers from all parts of
Europe were organizing the Turkish irregulars to maintain
a fierce resistance to the Eussian occupation of Bulgaria,
causing immense and unnecessary bloodshed, most severely
tried her; and when the Emperor, contrary, it was believed,
to her wishes, consented to allow the Treaty to be revised
by the Congress of Berlin, she feared lest all the advantages
gained at the price of so much blood and treasure would be
nullified by the stipulations which authorized a Turkish
garrison to occupy the Balkans, and restored Eoumelia
partially to Turkey, and her mental distress brought on a
serious attack of illness. Her life was at this time despaired
of; but she rallied, and spent part of the winter of 1878-79
in the Crimea with the Emperor. It has been stated that a
faithful sentinel at the park gate of their palace at Livadia
was found to have been assassinated by the Nihilists, and
that this circumstance, joined to information which was
conveyed to her anonymously that a plan was on foot to
destroy the imperial train in one of its long journeys,
alarmed her so much that she would not again visit the
2g6 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
Crimea. Last August, she therefore went to Darmstadt,
where she hoped to find quiet and safety, at the same time
that the Emperor made a short sojourn at Warsaw, and
afterwards repaired for his usual autumn visit to Livadia.
The German doctors whom she consulted at Darmstadt
declared that she had lost one lung, and that the other was
affected, and advised her to spend the winter at Cannes.
It was hardly surprising that she should eagerly read the
French newspapers, so that no bad news could be long
concealed from her; but the annoyance and alarm oc¬
casioned by the reports—often untrue—about herself, and
her reasons for quitting Eussia, with the real intelli¬
gence of the Nihilist outrages, and the attempt to blow up
her husband's train last December on its way to Moscow,
prevented all chance of improvement in her condition, which
became so much worse that her recovery was no longer
considered possible. She was only able to breathe an arti¬
ficial atmosphere, chemically produced; and at her urgent
desire, and accompanied by the Duchess of Edinburgh, she
was removed to the Winter Palace at St. Petersburg, where
on the 3d of June she died.
The Empress was a rigid observer of the numerous fasts
and festivals of her Church, and it was characteristic that she
should have expressed a wish to be buried by the priests
when they were wearing their Easter vestments; as it was,
her interment took place on the last day of the Greek Easter,
and the eve of the Kussian Ascension day. Some years ago,
when staying at Salerno, the Italians, who are by no means
strict in those matters, were astonished to find that nothing
but bread and fruit was provided for the Empress, her
children, and their suite, during Holy Week. Wherever she
went, the poor found a generous friend; and, unlike her
mother-in-law, who was proud of the beauty and splendid
costumes of the court ladies, the late Empress set her face
against undue extravagance in dress, and was remarkable for
the plainness of her own. While the Empress Eugenie was
still setting the fashion of costly and ever-varying costumes,
a Erench newspaper made this significant remark concern¬
ing the Empress of Kussia when she passed through France
on her way to Nice: ' The Empress was attired in a dress
which a citizen's wife would have despised; but when a lady
is the wife of the sovereign of all the liussias, such simplicity
is only an additional charm.' The Empress Eugenie was
supposed to have been impressed with this hint, and to have
acted upon it.
Vale of Rest. 297
The Empress Mary never visited Paris till subsequent to
the fall of the second empire, when she was on her way to
Nice, after staying in Buckingham Palace, at the time of the
birth of the Duchess of Edinburgh's first child. Her short
residence in England was not fortunate, as the weather was
wet and foggy, and most unfavourable for an invalid; and
after one or two drives, she was laid up with bronchitis for
the rest of her visit. Two of her sons escorted her as far as
Paris, where she was joined by her younger children, who
accompanied her to Nice ; and she showed herself a careful
mother by making the two elder princes promise that, after
her departure, they would not remain more than a night in
Erance. That occasion was her last and first visit to this
country, although it is believed to have been her daughter's
great wish to entertain her at Eastwell Park, where rooms
had been purposely arranged for her, and never occupied by
any one else. The marriage of the Duchess of Edinburgh
had naturally given the Empress a great interest in this
country: she understood the language, and kept herself
acquainted with its literature; and in later years her greatest
enjoyment was probably derived from the visits of her
daughter and grandchildren to Pussia. Like most German
princesses, she was an accomplished needlewoman, and in
the travelling saloon in which she undertook her long rail¬
way journeys, a work-table was a conspicuous object. The
Empresses of Russia have always been patronesses of several
educational and charitable institutions in St. Petersburg,
but with her this was no sinecure, for she was personally
acquainted with every school-girl and governess in the
establishments nominally under her care.
C. L. JOHNSTONE.
Uale of lacst.
TRANSLATION FROM UHLAND.
When in the sunset clouds arise.
And, glowing in the ruddy beam,
Like distant hills and valleys seem,
I ask, with tear-o'erfiowing eyes.
If 'mid those mountains in the West
Doth lie my yearned-for Vale of Eest ?
Helama.
298 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
St. ^ntfions's Bao.
FROM THE ITALIAN OF ROSENTHAL-BONIN.
I.
Petronella Titano was seated in a small back room of her
father's house, which stood on the high-road leading through
the northern suburb of Pisa. Said suburb might almost
have been called a separate village. It was a long distance
from the town, and consisted of two rows of small, smoky,
tumble-down houses. Each dwelling possessed a balcony,
supported by stone pillars, and an arched portico. Large
heaps of dust stood in front of every house; at the back
were good-sized kitchen gardens. The children, poultry, and
little reddish-brown pigs belonging to the village, disported
themselves in happy confusion amidst the dust and dirt of
the road. The older people employed themselves in working
in their gardens, for they gained their livelihood both by
breeding pigs and cultivating artichokes, sweet potatoes, and
cauliflowers, which they sent by train to Leghorn, as the
people of Pisa seemed to have remarkably small appetites.
Petronella's little room overlooked straight rows of prickly-
leaved artichokes; behind these stood three large fig-trees;
and beneath them, at the time my story begins, Agosto
Titano, Petronella's father, was engaged in hoeing potatoes.
His garden was enclosed by a high stone wall, grown grey
with age, and above which a surging mass of Indian corn
was visible.
Petronella gazed dreamily out upon this greenish-yellow
sea, and from time to time her very white little teeth closed
petulantly over her cherry lips.
' Why do you sit up-stairs idling in the daytime V Agosto
called out to his daughter. ' We are not nobile, and must
work.'
Petronella closed the window, and went into the garden
to help her father.
' Girl, all is not right with you,' said Agosto as she began
hoeing beside him, adding as he drew a straw—the common
remedy against thirst—from his mouth, and thrust it into
his curly locks: ' You often look as red as a turkey-cock,
run to chapel ninety times a day, and don't care a bit about
the housekeeping : I have never had a decent bit of dinner
since that afi'air with Antonio. If I were you, I should be
ashamed of myself.'
St. Anthony s Day. 299
Petronella made no answer, but went on hoeing, her face
growing rather red, showing that the ' turkey-cock' insinua¬
tion was not without foundation.
' Yes, I should be ashamed of myself,' continued Agosto,
bent on expressing his feelings. ' Do you think I would run
after a man who did not want me ?'
' Who runs after whom ?' asked Petronella, hoeing vigor¬
ously.
' Well, listen. If a man has shown a girl plainly enough
that he does not care a bit about her, and the girl worries
herself day and night in conseciuence, and stands behind
every garden fence and tree to look after him, go where he
may, I think that is running after a fellow.'
' Have you not said yourself tliat Antonio would suit you
for a son-in-law, father ?' asked Petronella at lengtli, pausing
in her work and looking as if her sharp eyes, surmounted by
dark, strongly-marked eyebrows, could pierce through the
old grey wall.
' Oh yes, he would suit me. In spite of his wicked old
mother, the lad is well behaved and has money. But if he
does not choose, I cannot drive him into your arms at the
bayonet's point; nor is your face, like a turkey-cock's, likely
to tempt him to church.'
' What does my red face matter ?' inquired Petronella in
a tone of vexation, pushing the hair off her brow, and passing
her hand over her cheeks as if she hoped to drive the colour
out by these means.    ' You see my face happens to be red'—
' Yes, unfortunately; and it has a very obstinate look about
it. I only wish it were good for something either in or out
of the house. But you let the dinner get burnt, and never
sell anything when you go to town or market. All Pisa
knows by this time that you are in love with Antonio, and
he won't marry you; and that explains why you don't know
wliat people pay you.'
' I don't care a bit about Antonio, and that the whole
town may know,' said Petronella, twitching nervously at her
garden apron.    ' He is too weak to suit me.'
' Come, come; don't get cross,' answered Agosto, fearing
he had said more than the occasion warranted. ' You are
still young and not bad-looking; nor are you penniless. We
have our cottage and as large a garden as our neighbours.
Let the fellow be, I say. There are plenty more lads in the
village to be had, without peeping over the hedge for them.
It is generally best not to get the first one has set one's
heart on.'
300 Tlie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
' I have not set my heart on any one, father,' replied
Petronella. ' I shall not marry at all; then I can be my
own mistress, and shall have no one to slave for. As to
wanting any of the lads here, above all old Benigna's son, I
shall tell her I don't; so she may stop nagging. It is she
who is at the bottom of it all. You never used to speak to
me like this, father.'
' So I am at the bottom of it all, am I ?' a shrill voice
was suddenly heard to exclaim behind the fence dividing
Agosto's garden from his neighbour's; and soon the yellowish-
brown, parchment-like face of a keen-eyed old woman became
visible from the other side of the paling. ' Well, see if I
don't manage to get the better of you and those evil schemes
of yours, which you don't dare to give out in broad daylight,
though you keep brooding over them in secret.'
Agosto had at first been alarmed at sight of the well-
known, though by no means welcome face; but now he
quietly put an end to this fine burst of eloquence by saying,
' Dear neighbour, you talk of plans which may not see day¬
light, and here we are speaking in the garden at midday,
talking so loud that every one can hear us; you heard us
yourself. Will you be good enough to tell me what plan
we are making ?'
' Tell you what plan you are making ?' repeated the old
woman in a mocking tone, brushing a stray lock of grey
hair away from her forehead. ' Do you think I have been
fed on nothing but green meat all my life ? Are you not
plotting about my boy ? don't you want to set a trap, in
which your daughter may catch him ? Hasn't the good-for-
nothing girl tried all sorts of tricks to entice the lad ? and
you, Agosto, are you not doing your best yourself to catch
a rich son-in-law ?    Ay, you are fine neighbours !'
' No, I don't want her boy,' said Petronella; ' he is too
much under his mother's thumb. I would never take a
husband who wanted leading-strings.'
' Yet you would have liked well enough to lead him your¬
self,' cried the old hag scornfully.
' Come, Mistress Benigna,' said Agosto, ' I think we have
been bickering long enough. Your lad used to play with
my daughter when both were children; then he was sweet
on her for a while, so that she began to fancy he meant
something by it. Upon this he took to his heels as hard as
he could, and behaved just as if he had tumbled straight
down from the moon. Well, it was no crime; all the lads
do it.    Ouly it was stupid of my girl to think the bit of
o
Sf. Anthotiys Day. 301
love-making meant more than it did.    So now you know
all our plans, neighbour, do you see ?'
' Yes,' added Petronella, seconding her father, at the same
time wiping her forehead with her coarse blue linen apron,
which happened to be covered with earth. Her face, we
have said, was naturally of a brownish red, like a ripe pome¬
granate ; and now the mass of earthy streaks remaining
after the application of the apron caused it to resemble the
tattooed visage of an Indian chief in full w'ar-paint. ' Now
we will talk about your plans,' she added. ' AVe have not
been fed all our lives on green meat either. Once Antonio
was fond of me ; then you came between us. I was not good
enough for you, and so you made mischief, and the lad
never looked at me again. Those were your plans, and very
cowardly, treacherous ones too. We are plain people, and
I tell every one straight out about my wishes and doings.'
'If abuse is honesty, then you are honest as the day,'
retorted old Benigna wrathfully.
'That is true, Petronella,' chimed in a fresh voice from
behind the fence; and the rustic Paris who caused this
second Trojan war, drew near to the spot where the battle of
words was waging. ' You are too hasty of speech; I found
it out, and that was the reason I left you.'
The slight, good-looking young man, with gentle beardless
face and kindly blue eyes, who now spoke, remained stand¬
ing at some distance from the fence separating the contending
parties; thus Petronella and her father could only see his
reddish-yellow hair. Petronella's quick woman's wit at
once detected the reason of his holding back.
' Ah!' she exclaimed, turning to the new combatant, 'you do
not even dare to look at me; yet only a few weeks ago, a cer¬
tain person could hardly be persuaded to leave our kitchen.'
' No, I am not afraid of you, Petronella,' replied the young
man, coming close up to the fence, and looking quietly across
at the strangely-tattooed girl, who was now additionally red
from increased vexation. ' You are far too uncertain-tempered
to make a wife for me.'
It was now Petronella's turn to cast down her eyes beneath
the calm, quiet gaze of her faithless lover, for her heart beat
wildly with sorrow and vexation on hearing Antonio say
this. It required all her self-possession to keep from burst¬
ing into tears, and thus betraying more than she cared to.
Widow Benigna must have thought this interchange of
glances might prove dangerous to her son, for she suddenly
took hira by the hand and  dragged him away from the
302 TJie Ladies Edinburgh Magazi7ie.
perilous spot, only stopping to fire a parting volley into the
enemy's camp.
' Ball! you over there might be doing something better
than quarrel. That will not bring you in money ; yet you
need it. You had better work, so as not to go to bed hungry.
Only those who have something to live on can afford to stand
idle. Come away, Antonio, or they may even say we lessen
their earnings.' Thus speaking, she dragged her long-limbed
son away from the fence with unnecessary haste, and marched
off witli him into the house at a pace strongly resembling a
rajiid flight.
Agosto laughed and said, loudly enough to be heard in
any part of the adjoining garden, ' There they go, running
away together as if they had been stealing plums.'
After tliis, he and Petronella resumed their work, hunting
amongst the artichokes for caterpillars, and treading upon
them with as much eagerness as if each stamp dealt a blow
to their unfriendly neighbours.
Days, weeks, months, had passed since this battle. Winter
had come—winter such as it is in northern Italy. Eain had
fallen in torrents, and rivers overflowed their banks. The
vines were bereft of leaves ; and instead of green fields of
rice and Indian corn, nought but wide pools of muddy water
were to be seen. The olive trees looked far greyer than in
summer time; the foliage of both orange and lemon trees
had turned to dark green, and shrivelled like old leather;
and the giant cypresses stood out in gloomy stiffness against
the leaden sky. The sadness of external nature presented
an apt picture of Petronella's state of mind.
Every flower had faded from her heart. The waters of
sorrow had gone over her soul, and storms of passion
raged within her. The sun of all her hopes was hid behind
heavy clouds: nought remained to her but memories
mournful as the dark shades of cypress groves. Now and
then in the outside world the sun's rays pierced through the
cold dreary atmosphere, and shed an almost spring-like
warmth around; then flowers of all kinds and sizes sprung
quickly up on the grateful Italian soil. But to Petronella's
heart no gleam of sunshine came. Her full lips were tightly
compressed; her dark eyes had lost their brilliancy; there
was less colour in her pomegranate cheeks; and her bushy
eyebrows met frowningly above her finely-chiselled Grecian
nose. Thus the poor forsaken girl sat day after day at the
market, close by the world-famed Leaning Tower, selling
fruit and vegetables from beneath a huge umbrella which
St. Anthony s Day. 303
was fastened into the pavement. Many a fashionable young
man cast very friendly glances at the rustic beauty, but
Petronella saw them not. Petruchio the saddler, a fascinat¬
ing bachelor, who owned a nice little shop nearly opposite
her stall, and drove a thriving trade, often let his shop
door stand wide open,'iu spite of the cold, for the sake of
seeing Petronella. Having a fine voice, he never ceased
singing the most beautiful airs in a very touching manner,
sometimes putting one hand to the side of his mouth to
guide the sound across to Petronella. Yet the unapproach¬
able beauty seemed even untouched by a valse of Arditi's:
she continued stiff and immoveable as a statue, and Petruchio's
songs grew gradually sad and sentimental. At length he
tied a handkerchief over his head, closed the shop door, and
entirely left off singing. Even this did not touch Petronella.
She did not cease to stare blankly before her, never hailing
a customer, and consequently selling very little, though she
had been formerly so active at her business. This all
tended to provoke her father, making him very cross and
prone to give her angry lectures.
As Titano's handsome daughter liad refused several lads,
it gradually became noised abroad that she did not want to
marry.
Antonio likewise seemed disinclined to marry. He was
now twenty-four years of age. His mother had already
recommended a dozen rich girls from neighbouring villages
for his consideration; she and he had even more than once
gone so far as to take holiday trips to Leghorn with some
of the families round about. On these occasions the respec¬
tive daughters were of the party, dressed in their best, with
large silver combs in their black tresses, huge rings of the
same metal in tlieir ears, and gay handkerchiefs adorning their
shoulders ; nor did they fail to carry on a brisk, merry conver¬
sation. Visits to the harbour and shipping were followed
by hearty repasts of fried fish at the trattoria ; yet all these
excellent opportunities seemed lost on Antonio, who was only
friendly, civil, and quiet as before, but never singled out any
girl. After one of these fruitless expeditions, which had cost
his stingy old mother a great deal of money, Benigna be¬
came furious, and heaped the bittei-est reproaches on Antonio.
* Why should I marry if I don't want to ?' Antonio had
replied in answer to the old woman's arguments. She had
tried hard to impress on him that he required a good house¬
keeper, who would respect, obey, and help lur, as well as
make life agreeable to him.
304 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
' I do not want a wife, mother, however much you try to
prove the contrary to me,' Antonio had added emphatically.
' I really believe you are still thinking of that spitfire
Petronella,' cried old Benigna, at length thoroughly enraged,
and casting a penetrating glance out of her malicious eyes
at her unfortunate son.
' No,' Antonio hereupon answered quietly; ' some day she
will make a very good mother of a family—that is certain,
whatever you may say. But as regards myself, I do not
care to make any woman my wife who is hasty-tempered.'
'Well, I hope you don't,' replied old Benigna. Eager to
strike while the iron was hot, she added cautiously, ' You
lads take the devil himself for an angel when you are in love.
Petronella is worse than Beelzebub.'
' Don't speak ill of the girl, mother,' said Antonio with
great decision. * I cannot bear to hear such things. I won't
have any girl abused behind her back. You hate Petronella
needlessly, for I do not wish to marry her.'
Benigna felt anxious, and cast a rapid side glance at her
son, who was looking down thoughtfully on the ground.
But she knew that he was often hard to manage, and capable
of holding his own in a quiet way, and also remembered that
more than once an ill-timed remark had effected the reverse
of what she wished. Acting on former experiences, like a
wise woman, she let matters take their course. Then mother
and son returned to their village, without Antonio being any
nearer matrimony than before. M. M. C.
{To he continued.)
©urs Still
We have not lost them,—those whose happy laughter
Chimed through the joys of yore;
They wait us in the homes of the Hereafter,
Where we shall part no more.
They have passed onward through the land of shadows,
Up to the realms of God ;
And we may follow o'er Time's sodden meadows
Where their pale feet have trod.
On to the close, with tend'rest love and pity,
Over our path they shed
The inner light from God's celestial city,
Those whom we call ' our dead.' E. P.
Victor Emmanuel. 305
Uictor ISmmanuel.
(the soldier king.)
' Meanwhile, let all the far ends of the world
Breathe back the deep breath of their old delight,
To swell the Italian banner just unfurled.'—E. B. Browning.
III.
Charles Albert returned to his capital fully bent on renew¬
ing hostilities as soon as the stipulated truce should have
come to an end, and a pretext should be found for declaring
war.    All Piedmont was burning to avenge the shame and
disgrace of their late defeat, and to measure anew their
strength with the enemy.    On the 13th of March 1849 the
country issued a proclamation of war, accusing the Austrians
of having violated some of the stipulations of the treaty—■
(1) by refusing to restore part of the artillery taken at the
siege of Peschiera, (2) by their occupation of the dukedoms
of Parma and Modena, and (3) by the blockade of Venice.
A few days after war had been declared, the king performed
an act of solemn abnegation, by resigning the supreme com¬
mand of the army to General Albert Chzarnowski, saying
as he did so, ' Chzarnowski cannot be called a stranger to
Italy, although he is a Pole, for Poland and Italy are the
two sister nations who can unite in the conquest of their
own independence.'    While resigning the command, Charles
Albert chose nevertheless to accompany his army to the
field of battle, though with little hope of success, knowing
how inferior in numbers were his forces to those of the
enemy.    Cibrario, who seems to have possessed much of his
confidence, says plainly, ' The king did not hope to conquer;
he hoped to die.'
The 23d of March was for many years a day of heartfelt
mourning for Piedmont and throughout Italy, for on it was
fought the terrible battle of Xovara, the loss of which was
so fatal to the national cause. After that signal defeat, the
hope of freedom for the country from the hated yoke of
Austria seemed more distant and visionary than ever. We
are told by eye-witnesses that the very heavens themselves
seemed hung with black on this most ominous occasion :
' Throughout the day the sky remained dull and gloomy, the clouds
•were low, and towards evening it rained immoderately.'
The scene was one of confusion and desolation.    Groups of
disbanded Piedmontese troops were surrendering on every
side ; cries of the wounded and groans of the dying mingled
No. 07.—July 1880. U
3o6 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
with the noise of cannon and the cracking of musketry
through the dense and turbid air. The kin" and his sons
fought to the last as valiantly as they had always done,
defying danger with supreme indifference and calm temerity.
The Duke of Savoy rode fearlessly under fire from the
enemy's guns, urging on his soldiers to the utmost. The
Duke of Genoa, after having two horses shot under him,
conducted his division for the third time to the attack,
running on foot at the head of his troops. The king, pale,
worn, and bowed down with grief, remained immoveable at
the most perilous point of the battle, exposed to the shots
of the enemy. The soldiers at last forced him to retire into
the city, where the greater part of the routed army had
taken refuge; but even then he mounted the walls, and stood
with his arms crossed upon his breast, looking fixedly towards
the artillery of the enemy, bearing already the semblance of
a corpse, and longing for the bullet which might transport
his wearied spirit to the shades of the dead; for the conquered
king invoked death, and would gladly have met it gloriously
upon the field of battle. Cibrario, in a small work entitled
Ricordo d'una Missione in Portogallo al re Carlo Alberto, has
related minutely this closing episode in the first war of
Italian Independence, and from his pages we will quote a
few of those details which concern more particularly the
life of Victor Emmanuel:
' At half-past eight on the evening of the 23fl, General Cossato
retnrned, bringing from the eommander-in-chief of the enemy's camp
conditions for the conclusion of an armistice. The king ordered
Cadorna to beg the two princes, the commander-in-chief, and the
other three generals commanding divisions, to join him at nine
o'clock. In the meantime he consulted with his Ministers, Cadorna
and Durando. When all those he had named were assembled to¬
gether, the king turned to them, saying, " Here is the reply made by
the enemy to my proposal for an armistice,"—and he read as follows :
" General Hess, in the name of Radetzky, consents to an armistice,
but demands all the country lying between the Sesia and the Ticino,
the possession of the citadel of Alessandria, and the expulsion from
Piedmont of the Italian refugees from Venetian Lombardy." The
document also contained an insinuation to the effect that, as the
marshal no longer trusted the word of the king, he would wish to
receive as hostage the heir-presumptive to the crown. Having read
the despatch, the king spoke, saying, "You see, gentlemen, that it
is impossible to assent to such terms." Then turning to the com-
mander-in-chief, "Do you think," he asked, "that we can renew
hostilities with any possibility of effectually opposing the enemy?"
On receiving a response in the negative from this general, the king
turned to each of the bystanders in succession, putting the same ques¬
tion, and receiving from all a similar reply. Having thus ascertained
the general opinion, the king resumed: "I, on my part, have con-
Victor Emmanuel. 3Q7
tinually made every possible effort for the welfare of my people during
the last eighteen years. It is the greatest grief to me to see my hopes
shattered, not so much for myself as for my country. I have not
been able to meet death upon the battle-field, as I could have wished ;
now perhaps my existence is the sole obstacle in the way of obtaining
more moderate terms from the enemy ; and as for a time we cannot
continue the contest, from this moment I abdicate my crown in favour
of my son, Victor Emmanuel, in the hope that in proposing a treaty
with Radetzky, the new king may obtain better terms, and procure
for the country an advantageous peace. Here is now your king! "
he concluded, indicating the Duke of Savoy ; then embracing in turn
the few bystanders, he took leave of them, and remained alone with
his sons.'
Having accomplished this supreme sacrifice, Charles Albert
assumed the name of Count di Barge, and set out at once
lor Portugal, the country of his exile, stopping only at Tolosa
on his way, wliere, on the 3d of April, he confirmed by a
public deed his verbal abdication. On the 19th of April
he reached Oporto, where he lived, or more correctly speaking
languished, for a few months in the most complete retirement.
A lingering disease, from which he had long suffered, com¬
bined with grief at the fatal catastrophe of Novara, and the
fatigue of his hasty flight, seem to have thoroughly under¬
mined the constitution of the unfortunate king. Charles
Albert was not called to remain long in the country of his
exile, for on the 28th of July 1849 his worn and wearied spirit
was released by death. He requested, when dying, that his
heart should be carried back to the beloved land of his
birth, and on the 12th of October in the same year all Turin
assembled to render the last honours to the remains of their
late king. On the 14th his remains were laid in the vaults
of the Superga.
' There a king may fitly lie,
Who breaking that heroic heart of his
At lost Novara, that he could not die
(Though thrice into the cannon's eyes for this
He plunged his shuddering steed, and felt the sky
Reel back between the fire-shocks), stripped away
His ancestral ermine ere the smoke had cleared,
And naked to the soul, that none might say
His kingship covered what was base and bleared
With treason, went out straight an exile,—yea,
An exiled patriot.    Let him be revered !
Yea, verily, Charles Albert has died well;
And if he lived not all so, as one spoke.
The sin passed softly with the passing bell.
For he was shriven, I think, in cannon smoke ;
And taking off his crown, made visible
A hero's forehead.    Shaking Austria's yoke,
He shattered his own hand and heart.'
308 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
As a last testimony of their affection for him who had
thus surrendered his throne, and doomed himself to die in
exile, the senate united in honouring Charles Albert's memory
with the surname of the ' Magnanimous.'
To return to the fortunes of the young king.    To him was
left the fulfilment of an act almost more cruel than the
defeat which gave occasion for it.    On learning that Pied¬
mont had another sovereign, Eadetzky requested an interview
with him for the purpose of arranging conditions of peace.
Commencing his reign with sacrifice, Victor Emmanuel set
out on the 26th of March from Casale, a place which had
made a most heroic resistance against the Austrians, and
arrived, not without incurring some peril, at Novara, which
the Imperial troops had already occupied, and where he found
Eadetzky awaiting him.    It was a memorable scene.     To
the young king's demand for an armistice, the marshal replied
that the sole conditions on which he could consent to arrest
his troops were as follows:—The abolition of the Sardinian
statute, the suppression of the Italian national flag, a return
pure and simple to the government of Charles Felix, and
an intimate alliance with Austria.    Should tliese terms be
acceded to, the marshal on his part agreed to withdraw his
troops at once to Milan; to demand no indemnity for the
war; he even offered to secure the good offices of his govern¬
ment for the new power so soon to be inaugurated at Turin.
The security of Austria, her establishment in Italy, required
that the provisions of the  treaty should  immediately be
carried into force.    He had  received  orders  to  prescribe
them, and to see that they took effect, though in so doing
he "should annihilate Piedmont and her dynasty.
Victor Emmanuel listened in silence to the words of
Eadetzky, though hardly able to restrain his indignation;
'Marshal,' he exclaimed when the latter liad ceased, 'sooner
than accede to such terms I would lose fifty crowns ! You
wish a war to the death, so be it! I will call the nation to
me, and you shall see what Piedmont can effect. If I must
succumb, I will at least do so without shame. Our race
may know the path of exile, it shall never tread that of
dishonour!'
He was in the act of retiring, but his firm and patriotic
words had made an impression on the rugged Austrian, who
began to modify his demands, promising to insist on nothing
that should injure the political independence of the kingdom.
He now changed his tactics, by proposing an indemnity to
be paid to the Austrian government towards defraying the
Victor Emmanuel. 309
expenses of the war, the disbandment of the foreign troops,
and the occupation by the Austrians of certain parts of the
Sardinian territory as a further guarantee of peace.
Victor Emmanuel used always to declare in after years
that he owed his success in obtaining such modified terms
more especially to the accidental absence of General Hess,
a man who was a hundred times more obstinate and intract¬
able to deal with than the marshal himself. When the
news of the arrival of the prince and his conference with
Eadetzky was made known to the general, he hastened to
return to headquarters; but by the time he arrived the
conditions of peace were already definitely arranged, and
Radetzky's discomfited colleague could scarce control his
vexation at having returned too late. Piedmont paid a
heavy indemnity towards the expenses of the war, but
preserved its parliamentary independence and its national
tiag, which never ceased to be the soul-stirring symbol of
Italian unity, the earnest to more than twenty millions of
souls of the hope and promise of the future.
The young king may be said, without hyperbole, to have
saved his country from the depths of despair by his firm
and heroic conduct; and having thus accomplished his first
act of sovereignty, he returned on the 27th of March to Turin,
whence two days later he addressed a proclamation to his
people, and took the oath before tlie assembled Chamber of
Deputies. ' No one can imagine what courage, firmness, and
loyalty were necessary in the young sovereign. . . . The
country at his succession was desolated by two successive
and most unhappy wars; its finances were exhausted, its
army destroyed, its trade languishing, its credit diminished.'
Many, indeed, were the difficulties with which the king had
to contend; but spite of all obstacles, he was ready and eager
to struggle against what seemed to be the fate of his dynasty,
and to make every effort for the welfare of his country. As
the son of Charles Albert, as a Piedmontese soldier, as an
Italian patriot, he imposed on himself the triple task of
avenging his father's exile, of redeeming the honour of his
army, and, above all, of procuring the freedom of Italy. He
began his reign by collecting round his throne all true lovers
of their country and of liberty. He endeavoured to arouse
Piedmont to fresh ardour. He prepared the forces of the
country for a new and greater effort on some happier occasion,
when all Italy, inspired by a love of justice, should unite to
strike another blow for freedom. Such was the aim and
object of Victor Emmanuel's government, and though, as
338 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
—music, as we understand the term, lay slumbering. When
St. Owen, and Amiens, and York Minster were rearing their
exquisite arches and spires,—most like an embodied symphony,
—music was still groping her way upward, making trial of
her powers. Only now, when the freshness and vigour of
an earlier day seem to be passing away, when no external
symbolism will content men, and they require something
which shall appeal to their innermost heart rather than their
senses, does music step forward to assert her heaven-born
claims. We are reminded of the old legend of the monk,
who, wandering one day in the forest, fell to musing on the
joys of Paradise, till the thought occurred to him. What if
man could weary of eternal bliss' Straightway there
sounded through the w'oodlands the note of a bird, so sweet,
so soul-entrancing, his heart was stu-red within him, and he
Avandered on and on, ibrgetting time and distance in the
ecstasy of that song. When at length he roused himself to
return to the monastery, still unconscious that anything strange
had happened, all was changed,—a new face at the porter's
gate, unknown brethren in the cloisters, the refectory.
Years had gone by, and his supposed fate was remembered
only as some far-off tale of the past. It was plain to the
good father that the angelic strain which had made these
long years seem like a few hours, had been sent in answer
to his doubts ; and he doubted no longer '
So, as the web of life grew ever more tangled and com¬
plicated, and men began to ask each other what was the
meaning of all they saw, and if there was indeed any clue
which should guide us safely through the labyrinth, came
Music like a revelation to assure us that all we had ever
dreamt or imagined was true ; that life was no riddle without
an answer, ' no pastime saddening into age,' but that man is
formed to respond to infinite possibilities of bliss ; that there
are heights and depths of ' pinnacled glory' yet undeveloped,
and in this life never to be fully develoj)ed, sufficient to
appease every yearning, to still all the deepest aspirations of
our nature:
'For earth had attained to heaven, there was no more near or far.'
' What never had been, was now ; what was, as it sliall be anon ;
And what is,—shall I say, matched both ? for I was made perfect
too.'
The highest music is indeed a sort of religion,—' A fair
gift of God,' says Luther, 'and near allied to divinity.'
"While painting and architecture represent, as it were, man's
Victor Einniaiiiiel. 311
on the splendid proof of valour given by his troops in the
Eastern campaign.
Towards the close of this year (1855), Victor Emmanuel,
accompanied by Count Cavour, visited Paris and London,
where he was received with cheers and acclamations by the
people in both capitals; he was also cordially welcomed by
tlie Emperor and our own Queen, at the Tuileries and at
Windsor. Sir Theodore Martin, in his Life, of the Prince
Consort,^ gives some account of this visit:
' On the 30th of November the King of Sardinia arrived in London
on a visit to the Queen. He was met by the Prince at the railway
station, and in passing through London on his way to Windsor
Castle, was received with a cordiality which, if not so demonstrative
as that with which the Emperor and Empress of the French had
been greeted, was sufficient to show how warmly the English people
appreciated the gallant spirit in which he had thrown himself into
the struggle against Russia. . . . On the 4th of December the king
went to London, and after receiving the corps diplomatique at Buck¬
ingham Palace, proceeded in state to the city, where about 20(X>
guests were assembled at the Guildhall to witness the ceremonial of
presenting an address by the corporation. The king had been
welcomed by great numbers on his way to the city, although the day
was cold, dark, and wet; but the scene as he entered the hall—
and the crowds assembled there rose in a body, and received him
with prolonged cheers—was especially gratifying and impressive.
It was one which was to be witnessed, only in England, among a
people sure of its own liberties, and predisposed in favour of a
sovereign who had proved himself true to the principles of constitu¬
tional monarchy. Cotint Cavour was in attendance upon the king,
and the reply to the address was such as might have been expected
from the pen of a statesman so liberal, so far-seeing, and so accom¬
plished. Both address and reply were useful at the time, from the
resolute tone with which they declared that the allies would not lay
down their arms until an honourable and durable peace had been
secured.'
The results of the alliance of Piedmont with the Western
Powers were soon apparent in the increased importance of
the country and its prestige among the states of Europe. On
the 11th of January 1856 a council of war assembled in
Paris, the Emperor himself being president. General la
Marmora was invited to take part in it; and on the 25th of
February, also in Paris, a conference was held for deciding
on terms of peace, under the presidency of Count Walewski.
And here again Piedmont was represented by Count Cavour
and the Marquis of Villamarina, the Sardinian Minister in
France. The astute Cavour was not slow in availing himself
of the opportunity of benefiting his country, by association
in intimate and familiar converse with the first diplomatists
1 Vol. iii. page 403.
312 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
of France and England. A distinct proof of this was given
by his presenting, at the conference on the 8th of April, a
memorandum (of which previous notice had been given to
Count Walewski and Lord Clarendon) in which he begged
to call attention to the necessity for the re-constitution of a
Liberal government at Eome, the separation of the political
from the ecclesiastical power, and in which he entreated the
intervention of the allies to enforce upon the King of Naples
a more reasonable line of conduct than that in which he was
then persisting. On retiring from the conference, the Count
communicated to the Chamber of Deputies the result of his
mission; and the Senate, on signifying its approval of the
conduct of this Sardinian plenipotentiary at the Congress,
trusted that the Ministers would steadily pursue a similar
policy.
On the 10th of October Count Walewski directed the
French ambassador at Naples to make known the dis¬
pleasure of France at the repulse received by the com¬
bined powers in answer to their well-meant remonstrances
with the Neapolitan Government, on the many abuses of
their administrative system; adding, that to secure, at all
events, an effectual protection to French and English sub¬
jects resident in the Two Sicilies, a French squadron would
be stationed at Tolone and an English one at the port of
Malta. So events pressed on; for, seeing their counsels
were rejected, and that too in a spirit of complete defiance,
the French and English Governments, towards the end of
October, closed their diplomatic relations with Naples by
withdrawing their several legations from that city.
On opening Parliament in the January of 1857, the king
declared that he wished to add to the many eulogiums
already bestowed upon the valour of their soldiers in the
East his own tribute of praise; and speaking of the con¬
ference at Paris, he declared that the part Sardinia had
taken in it had won for her a reputation both for political
prudence and for civil courage.
During the February of this year, Austria, seeking some
cause of quarrel with Sardinia, made complaints of the
Piedmontese press, peremptorily demanding a guarantee
against its excesses. Count Cavour hastened to reply that
Sardinia could not be dictated to, but must be left free to
fulfil the obligations imposed by a sense of duty to her
subjects. At the same 1 time, the Chamber of Deputies
passed an Act devoting five millions of lire towards the
fortifications of Alessandria, a response no less significant
Country Subjects and Pursuits. 313
than the words of the Count. Austria quite understood to
what she was pledged, and took occasion, during the course
of this year, to put an end to all diplomatic relations with
Piedmont.
At the commencement of the year 1859, the friendly rela¬
tions already existing between France and Sardinia were
further strengthened by the marriage of Prince Napoleon,
cousin of the French Emperor, with the Princess Clotilde,
elder daughter of Victor Emmanuel. The political import¬
ance of this event was proved by the words with which the
king responded to the congratulations of the nation when
the auspicious alliance was announced. 'Yes,' he exclaimed,
' such a union will be favourable to the dynasty, to the
country, to all Italy ! The new year begins happily, and it
will end more brightly stilL' . . .
These almost prophetic words were pronounced on the
23d of January 1859. By the close of another year, those
princes who had held their possessions under Austria were
scattered far and wide over the Peninsula, and the dukedoms
of Lombardy, Parma, Modena, Tuscany, and Umbria had
determined, by annexing themselves to Piedmont, to become
consolidated under one name, so that henceforth Italy ceased
to be merely a geographical expression; and no longer merit¬
ing the mournful title of the ' Niobe of Nations,' took that
place which she may hope henceforth to keep amongst the
kingdoms of Europe—of the world.
Caroline Gearey.
i^To he continued.)
Countrg Subjects anH pursuits.
XVII—PPtOFITABLE PETS—DONKEYS AND
GOATS.
I SHALL in this paper endeavour to excite some interest in
favour of the above-mentioned quadrupeds, which, even if
not actually despised, I hold to be generally undervalued,
although surely worthy of notice, from their especial useful¬
ness to the poor and to many persons of moderate means.
So much has been written of the natural history of the
donkey, it is scarcely necessary for me to dilate upon him
further than to point out—first, how very useful he may be;
and second, how greatly he may be made to increase the
pleasure of many persons unable to keep a pony. The latter
is an expensive luxury.    Friend Neddy, compared to this.
314 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
besides being more easily kept and housed, can be obtained
for a comparatively trilling sum.
I lately met a young lady who took me to see a donkey
she had bought for herself, and on her way to the stable she
described how she had saved her pocket-money for the
purpose, having collected enough at the end of the year to
enable her, with some little assistance from her sisters, to
purchase the wished-for steed from his former master, a
tinker. A happy exchange it must have been for the poor
animal, to leave the service of a hard master for that of a
kind mistress. Think of him, a miserable, half-starved
wretch, turned out after a long day's work, with his poor
back and sides aching from blows, and chafed raw from the
ill-fitting harness, to seek a scanty feed on the bleak, cold
common; and now suddenly to find himself installed in a
comfortable loose box at the end of his hour or two of work,
well fed and well kept, being clipped, clothed, and groomed,
and fully appreciating the caresses and even kisses of his
young mistress, whose care and kindness he requites by
trotting along untiringly with her pretty light trap, or carry¬
ing her on his back on many long and pleasant rides without
the need of whip or spur, ' Get on, Jack' being sufiicient to
make him break into his funny up-and-down gallop.
When he was shown to me, I could scarcely believe he
belonged to the common tribe of asses so commonly to be
seen about gipsy encampments and in costermongers' carts.
There he stood, the very picture of donkey beauty,—and,
let me assure my readers, donkey beauty is worthy of all
respect,—thorough-bred of his kind, his large ears pricked,
his eye full and soft, as he turned to us with his intelligent
expression and a whinny of welcome as we entered. His
coat, thanks to constant grooming, shone brightly, and his
skin felt soft and velvety. His young mistress told me that
the day before she had ridden him to a meet of the hounds;
they had a short, rather ringing run, at the end of which she
found herself in at the death of the fox, and had the brush
awarded to her by the master.
As a beast of burden, the donkey can carry or draw a
heavy weight for a greater length of time and with more
endurance than any pony of his size. Being of so gentle a
disposition naturally, he is well fitted to be entrusted to the
management of a nurse, when, with panniers or Spanish
saddle on his back, he can take children for their daily ride
without fear of accident.
And at this point we may fitly introduce another ' pet,'—
Country Subjects and Pursuits. 315
viz., the Goat. Goats are frequently used in drawing
children's carriages, but I myself think it a pity to use them
for this purpose, the she-goats being so valuable for dairy
purposes.
Some years ago, when first setting up house, we kept two
cows. They did very well so long as the grass lasted; but
when the cold weather set in, and they had to be housed,
then came the difficulty of feeding them, as we had neither
turnips nor straw, nor were tliese attainable by purchase,
farm tenants being bound by lease not to sell their straw.
There was therefore nothing for the poor beasts but the good
rye-grass hay that had been provided for the hunters, and
on which, although the cows gradually became fat, the milk
supply entirely disappeared. Suddenly, being at my wits'
end where to get milk, it entered my head that for the small
quantity we required, goats might be sufficient; and having,
during one of my rides, seen a large brown Nanny tethered
at a cottage door, that I was informed should shortly have
kids, I spent a sovereign on her and had her brought home.
A few days after, a white one somewhat of the same descrip¬
tion was brought to me for approval, and I bought her for
fourteen shillings ; and these two goats, after their kids were
born, kept us supplied with milk in abundance during the
whole winter, being fed on cabbage leaves, potato peelings,
and meadow hay cut into chaff and mixed with a handful of
oats and bran night and morning, with an occasional turnip
or carrot.
From these goats we got five kids, lovely little creatures ;
they had such intelligent countenances, I was never tired of
admiring them and their graceful antics at play. They were
very tame, and would always eat out of my hand, or drink
their allowance of milk out of a basin held to them; and
such was their anxiety to obtain each more than its share,
that I had the greatest difficulty in preventing the basin
being upset and the contents spilt.
At the end of six weeks I sold these pretty little pets for
seven and sixpence each, which repaid me the sum spent in
buying their mothers. During my researches after goats, I
discovered that many of the poor people were well aware of
their value, in supplying a family with milk, and it struck
me that a goat show might be of service in improving and
encouraging the breed, and also might be the means of
bringing them more before the public.
A poultry show was to be held in the village, and we
succeeded in getting the committee to allow our goat show
3i6 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazijie.
to take i)lace at the same time, we offering prizes for the
different classes and securing a building adjacent to the school¬
room where the poultry show was to be held, for our part of
tlie exhibition. In this we were most ably assisted and
encouraged by some friends staying with us, one of whom
contributed a sum sufficient for the purchase of an atmo¬
spheric churn; while the other volunteered his services as
judge, having kept goats himself with much success, and
being well up in their good points.
It was during the severe weatlier of January 1875 that
our goat show took place. Heavy snow had fallen, and had
been blown into deep drifts, so that we had grave doubts as
to the possibility of carrying out the exhibition; but trusting
to its novelty and the tempting prizes offered, we hoped
that goat-owners would come, notwithstanding the dreadful
state of the roads and difficulty of bringing the animals to
the place. We were the more agreeably surprised to find
on arrival at the village with our own pets, that a considerable
number had been assembled at the show-yard, which was a
smithy, hired for the occasion.
The distance from our house to the village was only a
mile; but many difficulties liad to be surmounted even in
so short a journey, the roads being for some part of the way
completely blocked up with snow to the height of the walls
on either side; indeed, we had to lead our goats walking on
the top of the walls. Some had been brought from consider¬
able distances. One exhibitor in particular attracted my
attention—a venerable old man with a flowing white beard,
who walked gravely up the street, followed in patriarchal style
by a little ffock of six goats, quite a family party. Farther
on was a small boy, the connecting link between a very
perverse pair: how he had brought them so far we could not
guess, till we saw the artful way in which he played the
one against the other. So far and wide had the news been
spread of the exhibition, that one of the entries was from
Wick, although, owing to the severe weather, this particular
goat did not arrive at the show. Of those who did come,
many were from a considerable distance; and after it had
taken place, goat-fanciers from different parts of England,
and even from France, wrote to me on the subject. The prizes
were shown and awarded in the schoolhouse, the winners
being much pleased with them; and every one seemed satisfied
with the judging, which is not always the case at a show.
I may add that the entrance fee for spectators to our show
was Id., at which price 12s.  were collected.    Since  that
Coimtry Subjects and Pursuits. 317
show, we have always kept goats ourselves, and consider
their milk most valuable for use in the nursery, from its
being so light and nourishing. Often have the village
doctors begged the loan of a goat from me for some poor
sick child or consumptive invalid, too ill to digest the
heavier cow's milk.
In the Highlands, we have a little flock of about a dozen,
and most useful they are to us. The kids being born very
early in the year, get fat sooner than lambs, and are most
delicious eating. Many of our English friends have declared
they thought them almost superior to lamb, and I have heard
a great Epicure say that goats were worth keeping, if only
for the sake of their milk for tea and coffee. A neighbour
of ours, who lives in a rocky but very beautiful part of the
island, has a flock of about tifty; but they are now almost
wild. They are kept among rocks near the sea, and graze
upon the short, sweet grass that grows in places almost
inaccessible to sheep; indeed, the goats will not allow in¬
truders upon their ground, and have even been known to
butt an unfortunate sheep over the cliffs into the sea.
Some years ago, when care was taken of these goats,—and
at that time the herd numbered hundreds,—the she-goats
used to be gathered once a day into a large cave to be
milked ; from the milk cheeses were made, which were sold
in the south at a high price, and numbers of the wedders
were sent in the autumn to the Glasgow market, where they
realized almost as much as sheep. The skins of the wdiite
rams even now are worth a great deal of money, being usually
made into sporrans, while the other skins make handsome
hearth and carriage rugs. The greater part of this flock was
sold a short time ago to the Duke of Hamilton, to be turned
out in the island of Arran.
Being anxious to procure some of this pure breed, and
hearing that there was to be a gathering on a certain day,
I started early one summer morning, driving my Mull pony
in the little trap through the lovely wild Glen More, reach¬
ing my destination not too late for breakfast, after which
repast, escorted by the laird, we walked to where the gather¬
ing of the goats was taking place ; they were collected in the
sheep-fauld, a walled enclosure with wire upon the top to
j) re vent their escaping, and it* was most interesting to see
this herd of beautiful wild creatures, nearly all pure white,
with their shapely forms and deer-like heads, and long, soft,
silky hair, many of them with handsome horns. They tried
hard to escape from their imprisonment, and when occa-
2,18 Tlie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
sionally one did so, he was quickly driven back by the
watchful collie dogs, who seemed on the watch to circumvent
any such endeavour.
My generous host told me to select any tliree I pleased ;
my choice fell upon a grand old ram, a beautiful thorough¬
bred-looking Nanny, and her wliite kid, which, after much
difficulty, were secured, and with their legs tied, were put
into the pony-carriage. As to my homeward drive with
these captives, it baffles description. The poor ram, think¬
ing his time was come, made a most hideous noise, quite a
succession of roaring bellows; but the others were compara¬
tively quiet and patient, considering the discomfort under
which they travelled.
These creatures at first were almost mad with terror, and
for days refused their food; but by dint of constant kind
attention, and the example and companionship of tame goats,
they gradually became domesticated, the ram, who was the
wildest, taking longer to tame, but eventually becoming the
quietest of the three. In fact, he had at last to be destroyed,
as it was impossible to keep him out of the garden, over the
wall and wire fence of which he scrambled with perfect ease.
Since turning my attention to goats, I find that the general
public have taken up these useful animals. Shortly after
our show, another was held in Devonshire, and now there is
an-annual one at the Crystal Palace ; while a book, with all
information as to the management of these creatures, has
been written by Mr. Stephen Holmes, and can be had from
any bookseller.
I hope I have not trespassed at too great a length on my
readers' patience, in my desire of interesting otliers in this,
to me, most interesting subject. I trust that some of them
may find in goat-keeping a useful and agreeable country
]nirsuit, and, moreover, will agree with me in thinking that
donkeys and goats are ' profitable pets.' M. M. C.
erte ©Iti anti tl)c Keto.
By Sidney Philips.
CHAPTEE VII.
' Time teaches iis that oft One higher,
Unasked, a happier lot bestows,
Than if each blighted dream-desire
Had blossomed as the rose.'—Sir F. Doyle.
It is half-past ten on a gloomy December morning.     A
The Old and tJie Niw. 319
dismal yellow fog hangs over London, and penetrates even
into the interior of the house. Yet in the bright dining-room
of No. — Eaton Square, there is but little trace of gloom.
A couple of shaded reading-lamps light up the breakfast
table with their soft pink light, and the ruddy glow of a
blazing fire enlivens even the old carved cabinets and olive-
tinted walls.
At one end of the room, Ian Leslie Barnard, having
finished his breakfast, has pushed back his chair nearer the
fire, and is reading the Times. Maggie, also an early riser,
still sits near the breakfast table, but is knitting a stocking;
while Mabel, who has only just appeared, looking very pretty
in a dark velvet gown, with lace ruffles, is alternately sipping
her chocolate and reading some letters that were waiting for
her on the table.
' Such a good account of the dear children,' she said.
' Only think, Ian; nurse writes that baby has got another
tooth through already. It will be so nice to show you tlie
children, Maggie, when we get back to Barnard. It seems
such a long time since last I saw them; nearly two months.
But then, as Ian says, travelling about is very bad for young
children ; they are much happier and better left quietly in a
country place. Besides, our nurse is very careful; I can
quite trust her. I showed you Tottie's photograph, didn't I,
Maggie dear ? aren't her curls sweet ?'
' Only think,' she continued with some surprise as she
opened the next note, 'here's actually an invitation to a
party at this time of year. That odd Lady Amelia Sitruth
wants us to dine with her next week, and she asks you too,
Maggie. I thought that you would get on well with her;
that was why I asked her to luncheon the other day. I
wonder who she will get to meet us, for there's really no one
in town now; but then her parties always are the oddest
mixture. One sees people there whom one never meets any¬
where else—queer, clever sort of people, who frighten me;
but Ian rather likes the sort of thing, so I suppose that we
shall go. And you must come too, Maggie; there are sure
to be one or two literary lions, who will just suit you.
Besides, Lady Amelia is Scotch, so you may meet people
whom you know all about.'
' But, Mabel dear, I've no clothes fit to wear. You
wouldn't like to be seen chaperoning a dowdy figure amongst
all your smart friends.'
' Nonsense, dear; at this time of year no one attempts to
be smart.    Besides, you've no idea what a dowdy set Lady
320 TJie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
Amelia always gets together. I can't think where she picks
them up. I never saw a well-dressed woman in her rooms
yet. The old black dress you wear every evening will do
perfectly, only I will lend you some old lace flounces for the
skirt, and then, with a fichu and some real flowers, you will
look as nice as possible. But you must have your hair
properly done. Louise shall do it for you. Any news in
the papers, Ian ?'
' No; nothing much. That teapot yesterday at Christie's
sold for three hundred. I was sure that it was genuine,
whatever Maxse might say. He always fancies that he
knows better than any one else. I wish now that I'd
bought it last year, when Daniel offered it me at eighty-five.
If the fog clears off a little, you'd better come to Christie's
this morning. Maggie won't get another chance of seeing
such a collection. Old Sir John Bennington travelled about
and picked up china fifty years ago, when good things were
still to be had. There are several pieces of Chelsea that are
quite unique, and some of the finest Worcester I ever saw.
By the bye, I hear that Dick Bennington, the son, means to
stand for Ditchleigh at the next election.'
' Why, I always understood that you intended to stand
yourself when next there was a vacancy. You always used
to talk so much about getting into Parliament, in Scotland,
years ago,' said Maggie.
* Ah, yes; I used to be fool enough to imagine that I
should like to spend the best years of my life grinding away
day and night all for nothing.'
'Surely you cannot call helping your fellow-creatures
nothinf:t ?' exclaimed Mairfrie.
' Well, you see,' resumed Leslie, ' the human race has got
on somehow without my valuable help for the last six
thousand years at least, and probably a good deal longer, so
I don't see why it shouldn't go on doing without me. Sup¬
posing I did get a seat, what real good should I do to any
one ? Whichever party is in power, there will always be a
few good and a few bad measures, a great deal of talk and
humbug, and very little result. Is it worth giving up all
the peace of one's life for that ?'
' I'm sure I'm very glad that you haven't any idea of going
into Parliament,' said Mabel. ' It would be too horrid for
you always to be away on committees and other tiresome
things of the kind. Besides, with these Irish members, the
House sits so very late now. Julia Molyneux,—you re¬
member Julia Dartrey, Maggie,—well, she married Captain
IJic Old and the New. 321
Molyneux, whom you must also remember, and he's an M.P.
AVell, Julia told me that Harry Molyneux was often not back
till three or four in the morning last session, and off again
ijuite early for committees. And then it ties one down so,
having to be in London for several months every year.'
' I can understand its boring you,' said Maggie; ' but I
should have thought that your husband would have liked
the interest of having some occupation.'
' Ah, you see, dear, you always thought so much of w^ork,
you never could be made to take life easily like other
people. Now, I can't think what on earth you want to be
off to Edinburgh now for. What's the good of attending
tiresome classes, as if you didn't know quite enough already ?'
' But then, you see, Mabel dear, I must keep pace with the
times. Everything is changed since I went to school. Even
English grammar's quite different now; the articles are
altogether abolished, and'—
' Oh, dear me, only think of that. How everything
changes, to be sure! Why, people are beginning to say now
that Henry the Eighth was a patriot, and that Eichard the
Third was handsome; and somehow in several countries
geography is all different, and now they can't even leave the
poor articles alone. One will soon not know what to think
or believe about anything.'
' Never mind, dear,' said her husband, looking up from his
newspaper, to which he had returned when the Parliamentary
discussion was finished; ' never mind, dear. Whatever articles
they may have abolished, you've still got your thirty-nine
left, though, as Maggie will perhaps tell you, they're all
indefinite.'
Maggie laughed and said that she would not find them so
if she had to sign them; but Mabel looked puzzled, and not
feeling quite sure that it was reverent to laugh at a joke
that was in any way connected with the Church and tlie
Prayer-Book, she remarked that as the fog was clearing off, if
they meant to go to Christie's that morning, they had better
get ready at once.
As they walked along, Maggie could not help wondering
whether some years ago she would have believed it possible
that the brain she thought capable of everything that was
great, would have expended its energies in haggling with
Jews about Sevres teapots and Dresden shepherdesses.
Maggie really was enjoying her visit to London. The
meeting she so much dreaded had passed off easily; all
painful thoughts connected with the past had disappeared.
No. 67.—July 1880. X
322 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
She was no longer a raw girl, dazzled by the first specimen
of higher culture that had come in her way.    Though she
really liked Ian Leslie, finding him an agreeable companion,
a good-natured and considerate host, and seeing that he was
a very devoted husband ; yet there was something incomplete
in his life: blameless as it seemed, it gave her a sense of
wasted energy and unemployed powers.
Mabel's nature, on the other hand, appeared to have found
its completion, and to centre itself entirely on her husband
and children.    When love touched the chords of her being,
it did indeed seem as if it
' Smote the chord of self that trembling passed in music out of
sight.'
But neither culture and artistic tastes, nor love and home
interests, seemed to Maggie as if they constituted a sufficient
aim and object to absorb every part of the more complicated
machinery of a man's nature, and she could not help thinking
that the riches that render work unnecessary may often be
rather a curse than a blessing. What a contrast Leslie's
artificial existence was to Hector's simple, practical life, that
seemed so satisfactory in every way!
That man walking down St. James' Street in front of her,
really was not unlike Hector; he was about the same height,
and swung his stick just in the same way. Was it possible
tliat Hector could be in town ? He might be passing through
London to join his mother and Lady Susan in France, and
for a moment Maggie's pulses beat quicker. But no ! The
man turning round at this instant, revealed a face as unlike
Hector's as face could be, and Maggie could only laugh at
her own folly.
She would much rather have visited some of the great
sights of the modern Babylon than have gone, day after day,
to inspect collections of china, or to listen to classical music.
But neither Mabel nor Leslie could in the least realize the
feelings of any one seeing London for the first time. They
expected her to enter into all their interests, and with any¬
thing beyond that circle they had but little sympathy.
On her return from Christie's, Maggie found, to her
surprise, a letter awaiting her in her sister's handwriting.
Mary Mackintosh was famed in her family for a dishke of
letter-writing.    What could she want ?
' Oh, Mabel, how dreadful! I don't know wliat to do.
Tiiere has been such a terrible accident at Balnagoonie.
Poor Hector slipped on the ice at the curling match last week,
and he has injured himself internally.    He is laid up there.
The Old and the New. 323
and is dangerously ill. They say that, at any rate, it will
be some time before he can be moved. Poor Mary writes
that she is so put about for the nursing. Besides, Aunt
Jean is ill too ; she has been in bed some days with one of
her bad attacks. How I wish that I had not started so
soon!    I really think that I ought to go back at once.'
' Oh no, Maggie ; you mustn't hurry away from us. That
would be too bad. No doubt Mary Mackintosh exaggerates
everything. She always was so fussy if there was anything
the matter. Depend upon it, Aunt Jean would be all right
again by the time you could get there. Her attacks never
last long. And as to the man, why can't his own people look
after him ?'
' You see, his mother, Lady Lucy Macdonald, is abroad
now, and he has no near relations.'
' Macdonald ! Oh yes, to be sure ; I remember. Why,
it's the red-haired boy about whom we always used to laugh
at you. How very romantic! If you go back and nurse
him, you'll have to marry him, you know. Mind you ask
me to the wedding.'
'Hector Macdonald is engaged to Lady Susan Gordon,
Lord Glentyre's daughter,' said Maggie stifHy, ' and she is
travelling with his mother now.'
' Of course! Macdonald; that was the name. I heard
something about it last season. No doubt, if he's really
dangerously ill, she's posting back as fast as trains can carry
her. No, no, Maggie; don't you be Quixotic, and go racing
off after people who probably don't want you. Besides, if
you do go and save his life, he'll think himself obliged to
throw over Lady Susan and marry you. What an awkward
predicament for the poor man! You'd much better come
([uietly down to Barnard with us. If they want you, they
can always send for you. I shall take you to the Court
Theatre to see the Ladies Battle. That will show you what
to expect if you go.'
Why has no philosopher yet written a treatise on the
potential power of chaff? Tew things exercise a deeper
intluence over human destiny, yet'how utterly unconscious
people seem of the responsibility they may sometimes incur
by a few random words spoken in jest. Chaff always has
seemed to me one of the greatest of the uncalculated forces
at work in the world. Maggie would have overcome any diffi¬
culty and faced any danger to return to the Highlands ; but
strong-minded as the reader may think her,she allowed herself
to be dissuaded from her purpose by Mabel's unintentional
324 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
remarks. So she contented herself by writing to her sister,
that ' if Aunt Jean were really dangerously ill, and required
trained nursing, she would endeavour to return to them, and
she hoped that they would soon let her know how both the
invalids were.'
But day after day went slowly and drearily by, and there
was still no letter from Scotland. At length the day of
Lady Amelia Sitruth's party arrived, and Maggie found
herself, for the first time in her life, introduced into London
society. She had pleasant neighbours at dinner. On one
side of her was a learned divine, on the other a rising young
artist; but Maggie was sore at heart, and unable to throw
herself thoroughly into any conversation, however agreeable.
She was wondering wearily all the time why she had not
heard from Scotland again, how Hector and Aunt Jean were,
whether any one was helping Mary to nurse them, and if
they missed her at Balnagoonie. Too preoccupied with these
thoughts for real conversation, and not suificiently well
acquainted with the circles in which her companions moved
to keep up a mechanical flow of surface talk, she continually
relapsed into silence, and Mabel, watching her from the other
side of the table, could not help wondering why Maggie,
who was so clever herself, did not get on better with clever
people.
After dinner, Maggie was surprised to find how rapidly
the room filled; in spite of Mabel's assurance that London
was empty, nearly two hundred people shortly assembled
in Lady Amelia's drawing-room. Mrs. Leslie Barnard soon
discovered one or two stray acquaintances, who, like herself,
were rather surprised to find themselves in such company,
and did their best to atone for their presence by sitting in a
little group, whispering disparaging remarks about the extra¬
ordinary appearance of the rest of the people, and wondering
who they could all be. Occasionally joining this group, and
trying hard to look as if they belonged to it, were some of
those professional toadies who linger on the outskirts of
society, and find it easier to extort an occasional scrap of
civility from Mrs. Grundy when most of her real votaries
are out of town. Meanwhile, Mr. Leslie and a lady, who
was dressed according to the most advanced rules of high
art, were deep in a discussion about bric-a-brac. In the
inner room beyond, a well-known composer was playing a
"weird interlude of his own composition, but the noise of
tongues was unhushed except in the immediate neighbour¬
hood of the piano.    Few things are more depressing than to
The Old ajid the New. 325
find oneself, when sad, in the midst of a number of unknown
people who seem to be enjoying themselves. The clatter of
voices,
' The delight of happy laughter,
The delight of low replies,'
which rose round Maggie seemed almost to stun her. Were
these people really happy, or had they only learnt the secret
of concealing their true feelings ? and if the masks of custom
and conventionality were stripped off, would one find aching
hearts and troubled minds on all sides ? The stream of un¬
familiar faces passed on round lier, and Maggie felt really
thankful to be spared the infliction of being obliged to talk
to any one. All of a sudden she started. Amongst the
unknown crowd she had at length discerned a familiar
object. ' Either in this life or in some former state of
existence,' thought Maggie,' I have undoubtedly known the
owner of that rusty brown wig.' He turned suddenly. Was
it possible ? It was old Willoughby Snarles, a well-known
literary character, whom she had met continually when she
was living with her brother in New York, and who had
afterwards been a frequent visitor at the Whitemans' when
she was governess there. He recognised her at once, was at
her side in a moment, and they were soon deep in a discus¬
sion about mutual friends on the other side of the Atlantic.
' And is this really your first glimpse of London life. Miss
Mackenzie ? How I envy you ! Few people now-a-days,
except foreigners, ever have the chance of telling us what
our life really seems like to outsiders, for nearly every one
has some impressions which date from a time before they
were old enough to think. But, by the way, I must point
you out some of the celebrities here. Now, you wouldn't
think that that benign-looking old gentleman over there has
made some of the boldest thinkers of the day shake in their
shoes; yet so it is. He's Mr. Kennet, the great publisher, a
most formidable person to have anything to do with, though
he looks mild enough now ; but then he's in the clutches of
Miss Dalilah Dobson at this moment, and that's enough to
awe the bravest man in Christendom.'
' I was just going to ask you who that remarkable woman
with the short hair and hard face was ; but you don't mean
to say that that's Dalilah Dobson, who writes those very
mild, washy stories that a girl of fifteen might read. I
always imagined tliat she must be a gentle, sympathetic
person.'
' Whatever gentleness or sympathy may have been in her
326 TJie Ladies^ EdiiiburgJi Magazine.
composition has all gone into those books, and left her
entirely devoid of both, I should fancy. Look at her now,
holding forth to that unfortunate Kennet. I really must
release him, and gain the eternal gratitude of a certain
enthusiastic little devotee who's been dodging Miss Dobson's
footsteps for the last hour, and who is just behind her now,
gazing at her with a rapt look in her face that would rejoice
old Carlyle's heart. Oh, Miss Mackenzie, what wouldn't
you give to be seventeen again, and still able to believe in
something and somebody ! Perliaps, though, you are young
enough to have some enthusiasms left. Lucky woman ; not
like the greater number of us, who've long ago discovered that
much of our enthusiasm was like that of Heine's drunken
students, who thought that they were admiring the beauties
of the star-lit heaven, when they were really gazing intently
at the cheese-parings in their own fusty cupboard. But
she's handsome eyes, that little hero-worshipper. If I were
twenty years younger, I really wouldn't mind writing bad
poetry for the sake of having those eyes fixed on me like
that (always provided, of course, that I could pitch into my
own verse in the Saturday afterwards). Poor child, she
thinks that she's caught a real live lion, who will soon
begin to roar. Long may it be before she discovers tliat it's
only a lion's skin ; in other words, a muff!'
Maggie laughed. 'You are very hard upon poor Misa
Dobson,' she said. ' I always heard that she was a very
good woman.'
' Excellent, no doubt. But a very slight flavour of good¬
ness is enough for me, especially when it's strongly impreg¬
nated Math concentrated essence of self. I always fight shy
of people who've the reputation of being good. Have you
ever thought seriously how much mischief so-called good
people do in the world ? It's good critics who abuse one's
best writings; good preachers who keep one from going to
church; good business men who advise one to invest one's
little all in shaky concerns; good fellows who make one
back their bills; good wives whose liusbands prefer the
clubs; and when one finds that a young fellow has gone
utterly to the dogs, it's as often as not a "good little woman "
with " no harm in her whatever " wdio's at the bottom of it.'
' Come, now, I really do think that you go too far. No
fear of my including you amongst the good people you dislike
so much. Eemember how hard Miss Dobson worked in the
ambulance at the time of the Franco-Prussian War, and
don't shake all my illusions and make me doubt every one.'
The Old and the New. 327
'Ah, but you know, Ich bin der geist der steis verneint, as
you once civilly told me at New York. Well, the world
would never get on without a little of that spirit of opposi¬
tion ; every one would go to sleep. But as far as Miss Dobson
is concerned, I daresay she wouldn't be so overbearing if it
weren't for the admiration of such geese as our little friend
over there. Take an old man's advice, Miss Mackenzie, and
if ever you publish a book,—for write I'm sure you will, and
I hope you will,—after your book has once appeared, avoid for
the future the society of your own sex. Clever women are
always spoilt by associating much with other women. 1
always tremble for the effect of a literary career on a woman's
character, unless she's what you unfortunately are not, the
least little bit of a flirt, as the French say, tant soit peii
coquette. That brings its own danger; but occasionally
having a man in love with her, doesn't spoil a woman nearly
as much as the unlimited homage of every silly girl who
comes in her way. But now I really will interrupt Ken net's
interview with the authoress, and I hope that in gratitude
he will give me larger royalties on my next book.'
And the little man bustled off, leaving Maggie to her own
refiectious. She was really glad to have met Willoughby
Snarles again, for she had always liked him in spite of his
oddity, feeling sure that there was a great deal of real
kindliness hidden under a cynical exterior; and she often
had thought that after all the ' man doth fear God, howsoever
it seem not in him, on account of some large jests he will
make.'
But when he laughed at hero-worship, she could indeed
feel for the young girl in front of her. She, too, knew what
it was to mistake a Will-o'-the-wisp for a guiding star, and
to have to acknowledge at length, from the deptlas of some
Slough of Despond, that it was an earthborn exhalation
instead of a heavenly light. Perhaps after all it was best
to live without enthusiasms, like Hector, taking life as it
came, and trying to get as much as possible out of it.
A young singer, who was expected to be one of the stars
of the following season, was exhibiting her voice for tlie
first time in the adjoining room. It was difficult to hear
much of the singing, but a luU at that moment enabled
Maggie to make out the words:
^C)0
' How could I tell I should love thee to-day,
Whom that day I held not dear 1
How could I know I should love thee away,
When I did not love thee anear ?'
328 TJie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
Was it a lying trick of her senses that at that moment
gave some other word pronounced near her the sound of the
name uppermost in her heart ? or did some one standing
there indeed say 'Lochinloan'? She looked up. ' How sad !'
exclaimed a young girl.    ' Is there really no hope ?'
'None whatever,' replied the man to whom she was
speaking. ' I only came south yesterday, and precious cold
it was on the Highland line, I can tell you. Old Dr. Mac-
fuddle travelled with me from Grantown to Kingussie, and
he said that there wasn't the least hope for that poor young
Lochinloan. I believe that he suffers terribly ; one can only
trust that it won't last long.'
' Dear me, I really am sorry,' said the lady. ' He seemed
so bright and cheery. He was introduced to me at the last
Northern Meeting, and we danced the schoUische together,
poor fellow. I remember'— But at that moment the con¬
versation was interrupted, for a general hush spread through
both rooms as tlie full volume of the singer's thrilling voice
burst forth in the passionate wail of despairing anguish :
' And now tlion wilt hear me no more, no more,
Till the sea gives up her dead.'
' Bravo! bravo! Not half bad that for so young a girl.
I saw that you were listening to the singing, Miss Mackenzie :
it would have been a shame to interrupt that last bit; but
here's Kennet dying for an introduction to you, to apologise
for some stupid mistake or other.'
Maggie turned a bewildered face towards jVIr. Snarles.
Was it a dream, or was Mr. Kennet really explaining to her
the reasons that had prevented her manuscript from reach¬
ing his hands till a few days ago ? Was he indeed praising
her work, prophesying a brilliant future for her, offering to
publish not only that, but anything else she might write,
and assuring her that, in spite of a little roughness in the
style, and certain slight technical errors, her book was full
of promise and originality; while Willoughby Snarles stood
chuckling by, rubbing his fat hands and puckering up his little
crumpled face in great excitement, exclaiming, ' I told you
so ! I told you so, Miss Mackenzie ! I knew that you had
it in you. Now, what will you give me to say it's improper
when I review it ? and then everybody will want to read it,
and your reputation will be made.'
How she answered, Maggie never quite knew. She was
dimly conscious that some one helped her on with her shawl,
that some one else handed her into the carriage, that Mabel
and her husband discussed the party, and that when, after
The Old and the New. 329
polcing her fire, her cousin left her room, it was with the
words: ' You are more absent than ever to-night, Maggie.
I asked you a question three times, and you never vouchsafed
me any answer. I really do believe that you are more than
half asleep already, and no wonder, for a more stupid enter¬
tainment it never was my misfortune to attend. Good-night,
you sleepy old thing. Mind you tell me all your impressions
of society when you wake up to-morrow.'
Could it be really true, then ? No hope whatever! Hector,
with his bright face, so full of life and strength, Hector
dying! What did it signify to her at that time that she
had attained the summit of her ambition, that her wildest
hopes had been more than realized, that the career for which
she had longed was opened to her ? ' Books succeed, but
lives fail.' And her life was a series of failures. Hector
dying! How impossible it was to realize! It had been
quite different when her father died ; he had always seemed
to belong more to the other world than to this, and for him
there was nothing terrible in the removal of the barrier of
flesh that hid from his eager gaze the mystery of mysteries
that he had spent his whole life in vainly seeking to unravel.
But there was nothing spiritual about Hector; honest, good,
and true, he was yet essentially human, and seemed to belong
entirely to this world. How different everything might have
been if she had only known her own heart sooner! She
might even now have been beside him, watching him, nurs¬
ing him, perhaps even cheering and encouraging his spirit
for the dark journey which lay before it. But now perhaps
she would see him ' no more, no more, till the sea gave up
her dead.' Perhaps at that very moment his untrained,
thouglitless spirit was passing away, maybe — agonizing
thought!—unprepared to meet his God. Maggie fell on her
knees, but she could not frame any actual words of petition.
She could only gaze dumbly up to that loving Father who
has never yet failed them that sought Him in their hour of
need. Her mind was too confused by the shock she had
sustained for it to be capable of any definite act of conscious¬
ness, but her whole soul was absorbed in the
' Still communion that transcends
The imperfect offices of praise and prayer.'
As she rose from her knees her eyes rested on a picture
hanging overhead; it was an old print of one of Kaphael's
cartoons, representing the Saviour giving the command,
' Feed My sheep,' and as she gazed absently at it, the words
that immediately followed came into her mind, ' Lord, what
330 TJie Ladies Edinbtirgli Magazine.
shall this man do ?' And then the Divine answer fell on her
troubled heart, like Virgil's soothing touch on poor bewildered
Dante ^ at the dreadful gate,' What is that to thee ? Follow
thou Me.'
Yes; ' follow Him.' Work for others, live for others,
suffer for others, agonize for the sin of others, die, if need be,
for others, even as He did, but trust that He who died, not
for thee alone, but for all, is willing to do more than thou
canst either ask or think for those whom He called into
being for His pleasure, for whose sake He endured this
flesh-hood, and for whom He died.
Meanwhile, ' Follow Me.' How ? What is the first step
in that path ? Is it not to spend and be spent for others,
seeking no reward ? Is it not to ' lose our barren unit lives
to find again a thousand lives in those for whom we die ?'
Is it not to go where the need of our presence is the greatest,
not considering the possible consequences to ourselves, or
heeding the opinion of others when it clashes with the voice
of conscience within us ?
Mingled with these higher thoughts came a lower im¬
pulse, a more selfish yearning, to see once more those familiar
features, to hear again that well-known voice, though it were
but in delirious ravings. Another might perhaps have the
right to be nearer him now; ' but even then,' thought Maggie,
' let me only see him once again, and then,
" Let come what come may,
What matter if I go mad,
I shall have had my day." '
So, when the housemaid called Miss Mackenzie the next
morning, she M'as surprised to find Maggie up and dressed,
and still more astonished when she was asked to help her to
cord her box and to fetch a cab; and, before Mabel came
down to find the note in which her cousin explained her
sudden departure, Maggie was rattling over the stones on her
way to Euston Square.
IMaxtnts anD Spfjorisms.
FROM  THE WEITINGS  OF  GOETHE.
' As in water face answereth to face, so the heart of man to man.''
Sculpture is effective only in its highest grade.   All inferior
work   may for  some  cause or other impress us;  but all
' ' 'E poiche la siia mano alia mia pose,
Con lieto volte, ond' io mi confortai.'—Inferno, Canto III.
Maxims and Aphorisms. 3 31
inferior works of art of this kind are more disturbing than
gratifying. The art of sculpture must therefore choose
worthy subjects; and it finds them in the representation of
great men. But here also it must reach a high standard, if
it is to unite merit and truth.
Painting is the most unrestricted and convenient of all
arts. The most unrestricted, because, even where it is more
mechanical than artistic, we allow and even enjoy it for the
sake of the material and the object; partly also because an
accurate though spiritless production awakens the astonish¬
ment of the uncultivated as well as of the cultivated; so
that it needs only in some measure to rise to a higher level
of art to be still more welcome. Truth in colour, and super¬
ficial likeness to visible objects, is agreeable; and as the
eye is already accustomed to see all kinds of things, so a
deformity, and in the same way a distorted likeness, does
not jar upon the eye as much as a discord on the ear. One
allows a bad representation to pass because one is accustomed
to see worse realities. Therefore the painter needs to be an
artist only in some degree, in order to gain a larger public
than a musician of the same degree ; the inferior painter can
at any rate work by himself, while the inferior musician
must associate with others in order to produce any effect.
' Painting is the intermediate somewhat between a thought and a
thing.'—Coleridge.
The question whether, in looking at works of art, one
should make comparisons or not, we may answer thus: the
cultivated connoisseur should compare, because he has an
ideal before his eyes, and understands what can and should
be done. The amateur who is seeking culture helps himself
most, not by comparing, but by examining the merits of eacli
separate work of art; in this way his taste and intellect are
gradually trained to grasp general principles. An ignorant
man compares for his own convenience, to spare himself the
trouble of judging.
' So I took the Italian masters upon trust, rather than presume to
have an insight into them. What I could not contemplate as nature,
or put in the place of nature, compared with a known object, was
without effect upon me. It is the material impression which makes the
beginning of even every more elevated connoisseurship.'—Goethe's Auto-
hiography.
Love of truth shows itself by the endeavour to find and
value good wherever it may be found.
A historical feeling for humanity is that which, while
332 Tlie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
valuing contemporary merits and deserts, includes the past
in the valuation.
The chief merit of history is the enthusiasm which it
excites.
' Christianity is an enthusiasm or it is nothing ; and if there sometimes
appear in the history of the Church instances of a tone which is pure
and liigh without being enthusiastic,—of a mood of Christian feeling
which is calmly favourable to virtue without being victorious against
vice,—it will probably be found that all that is respectable in such a
mood is but the slowly-subsiding movement of an earlier enthusiasm.'
—EccE Homo.
Beatrix L. Tollemache.
©ebate of 3une \Q^0.
Debate held in June by the members of the Ladies' Edinburgh
Literary Society :  ' la silliness a moral and curable defect ? '
ABSTEACT OF THE AFFIRMATIVE.
Silliness, it was remarked at the outset of the debate, is arraigned
in a more serious manner than that to which we have been accustomed;
it is no longer to be regarded as a harmless idiosyncrasy, a provoking
if loveable folly, but 'a moral and curable defect.' A moral defect
was then defined as * a want or imperfection in the conduct of men
towards each other.' Man's nature may be regarded in three aspects—
physical, intellectual, and moral. Silliness, deiined as weakness, was
shown to be either bodily, mental, or moral; and the last form of
weakness was more particularly considered as the subject of this
debate. It was argued that, besides bodily weakness (the ' silliness' of
our homely Scotch tongue) and mental weakness (the ' silliness ' which
under its other name of imbecility is provided for in our idiot
asylums), there is a distinct form of weakness which, flowing from
vanity, inconsiderateness, flippancj', or some other moral defect, is
quite unconnected with mental deficiency, and results in ' silly '
conduct in the ordinary meaning of the word. The frequent
occurrence of this ' silliness' among the young, and the many
instances we have all known of flightiness and folly eventually
changing into sobriety and sense, were argued in favour of the at
least curableness of partial or moral, as well as physical and mental
weakness. M. T. B.
ABSTRACT OF THE NEGATIVE.
For the Negative, it was contended that there are three principal
forms of silliness, viz:—
1. The weakness of mind that amounts to imbecility, which is not
curable.
2. The weakness of mind which, though inherent, still permits
people to conduct themselves with ordinary propriety, and may be
educated to some extent, but is certainly not curable.
3. The silliness which is the result of allowing the weeds of
aflFectation, false pride, conceit, and self-consciousness to overpower
the original and perhaps hereditary good sense and strength of mind.
The first form, imbecility, was shown to be only a moral defect in the
Our Library Table. 333
sense of a want, not a fault. A moral fault is a fault in conduct
towards God or our fellow-men ; and consequently imbecility cannot
be regarded as moral, inasmuch as it is a defect of development over
which the agent has no control. From the same cause it will be
incurable.
For the second form of silliness, viz. weakness of mind, it was
urged that the defect was constitutional, not moral, and therefore,
though subject to discipline, still not curable.
The third or acquired form of silliness was shown to be a moral
fault, not a defect, because a defect implies something wanting ;
whereas this is something added to or put on, and knowingly
persevered in. The worst form of silliness is that of conceit and
self-consciousness, and is emphatically a moral fault, not a defect.
The most highly intellectual men may be silly from these causes.
Lord Brougham circulated the report of his own death to see what
the newspapers would say about his life. Oliver Goldsmith's conceit
was as great as his intellect, and as laughable as his humour ; and had
he not been a genius, he would have been universally despised as a
silly man. Though certainly curable, we yet rarely find that this form
of silliness is cured. The self-conscious man or woman remains self-
conscious, the vain man remains vain, the haughty and overbearing
man continues so to the end of the chapter ; the woman conceited of
her looks, her position, or her accomplishments, will rest in her
conceit. There may be and no doubt are many endeavours put forth
to conquer these faults, but the tendency is there, and is seldom
eradicated, unless by a long experience of sorrow and misfortune.
K. F.
The voting was in favour of the Affirmative.
©ur 3LiI)rarg Cable.
Greene Ferne Farm.    By Richard Jeffries, Author of ' The Game¬
keeper at Home.'    London: Smith, Elder, & Co.    1880.
This novel, in one volume, is very pleasant reading for those who
care for the sights and sounds of English country life. Its scene is
laid in a quiet nook among pastures and downs; and the idyll com¬
mences just when May is causing the meadows to shimmer with yellow
buttercups, when apple-blossom is in its glory, lambs dot the pastures,
and thrush and blackbird fill the air with their mellow notes. The
tale bears us on to the heat and the haymaking of full summer-time,
and ends in September, when the woods turn russet and the fields
golden, and the ' caer-whit' of the partridge resounds. The prettiness
of these descriptions forms the chief attraction of the book. We confess
that, to ourselves at least, the human figures are not so interesting.
The two suitors for Margaret's hand are so much alike, it is difficult
to feel sufficiently anxious as to which will win her. The old miser,
May's grandfather, is a strange, weird character, rexjulsive in his grim
rejoicing that there is not a house in the parish at which he has not
seen a hearse standing. His lone dwelling-place is graphically de¬
scribed, far up among the chalk downs, away from the church and
smiling village in the meadows ; and no less graphically depicted is
the scene of his death, as he sits lonely in his window, and is bowed to
for the last time by the ' wearyful woman ' as she passes in the twilight.
Though the actors in these quiet scenes may not in themselves be
334 TJie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
sufficient to constitute an interesting story, yet these pictures of
country life are so wonderfully true to that life, that the mere readinjj
these descriptions leaves one longing for summer and ' the country.'
<Q,ucstion ScrtES.
I. Engliah Literature.—Give the course of the argument employed
by Bishop Butler in his Analoi/y of Religion. Answer not to exceed
three hundred words.
II. Geology.—Give some account of coral formations and their
distribution.    Answer not to exceed three hundred words.
Answers to reach Qu. C, not later than August 5th, care of Messrs.
Morrison and Gibb, 11 Queen Street, Edinburgh. Only one side
of the sheet of paper to be written upon, and it is especially requested
that nothing but the answers may be sent to Qu. C. Any other
communication must be addressed in the usual form to the Editor,
or no notice can be taken of such enclosures.
ANSWERS TO MAY QUESTIONS.
English Literature. — Nine answers received. Thorough first;
Apis second, with a very pleasantly written paper. The others,
Pink, Wealdmoor, Arialpin, Linda, Irrlicht, Greta, and Wolfka,
have all sent papers of considerable merit.
Geology.—Four answers received. Pink best, but fails to mention
the distribution in Scotland. Next Wealdmoor, but does not
confine herself to Upper Silurian, and mistakes in saying the Silurian
are the earliest fossiliferous rocks, as the Harlech group of Cambrians
contains fossils. Then Linda and Wolfra equal. The former is
the only one that mentions the distribution in Scotland, but fails in
description of fossils; mentions Ireland, which was not asked. The
latter is confused, and does not separate Lower from LTpper Silurian.
All the papers fail to mention the unconformability between Upper
and Lower Silurian rocks when found together, and also the presence
of volcanic rocks in the system.
Give a short sketch of the character of King Lear, from the earlier
parts of the play.
When first presented to us, the character of Lear is self-willed,
irritable, despotic, unnatural, rash in temper, and weak in judgment.
His cruel selfishness is most apjjarent. We must remember that Lear
is a heathen king, and the wilfulness of ofl'ence at an innocent child,
and his agonized imprecations on his wicked daughters, befit a
heathen's lips. He is eighty years old, and has been so long a
despot that even the resignation of his power is carried out in a
despotic manner. The failure of his miserable device of forcing an
expression of love from his daughters is more than his pride can
brook, and with the petulance of a lifelong undisputed sway he yields
to passion, and will not listen to judgment or advice. Beneath all
this there is a something which makes us feel the nobleness of Lear's
real nature—just a touch here and there. The respect of his courtiers,
the faithfulness of a_^ few, the love he bore Cordelia up till now, is
given, enough to make us pity rather than despise. Still, already
there are notes of warning struck, dark indications that a passion so
overwheltuing will overreach itself  and bring its own punishment,
Stray Notes. 335
as in the later part of the tragedy is so fearfully fulfilled. Lear
oversteps human limits in his arrangements when he abdicates his
power and says :
' While we
Unburthen'd crawl towards death.'
He seems to be calling down upon himself the terrible burdens he
was forced to bear, by which his moral nature was chastened and
purified. This purification was accomplished by means of his suffer¬
ings and Cordelia's mediation ; and though the crowning agony of the
death of his restored child cannot be spared him, he dies in con¬
templating her he never really ceased to love. Thorough.
Describe the characteristics of the Upper Silurian rocks and their
distribution in Great Britain.
The Upper Silurian rocks consist principally of deposits that were
originally marine mud, accumulated bed upon bed, and intermixed
here and there with strata of limestone, since hardened into rock,
the whole being many thousands of feet in thickness. The term
Silurian is taken from the Silures, a tribe of ancient Britons who
inhabited South Wales, and the rocks are mainly exposed in the
east of that district, as well as in Shropshire, Herefordsliire,
Worcestershire, Gainberland, and Westmoreland. They are divided
into the Wenlock group, containing Wenlock limestone, Wenlock
shale, Woolhope limestone, and Tarannon shale ; and the Lndlow
group, consisting of Tilestones, Upper Ludlow, Agmesty limestone,
and Lower Ludlow. The Upper Silurian rocks abound with fossils
belonging to many difterent classes, from fishes downwards ; and with
the exception of remains of some cryptogamic plants discovered in
the Upper Ludlow beds (which indicate that a uniformly warm
temperature then prevailed over the globe), they are all marine
forms. Graptolites or penstones, which are characteristic of this
range, but disappear before its close, are scanty; but corals,
Brachiopoda, Lamellibranchiata or ordinary bivalves. Gasteropoda,
Pteropoda, Cephalopoda, Echinodermata, and Crustacea abound. In
the last-named genus trilobites are numerous, some of which appear
to have had the power of rolling themselves into a ball. The
Calymene has been often found in this state. Fragments of fish
bones are common in a stratum at the top of the Upper Ludlow,
■which is called the Bone bed. The oldest known vertebrates are
small and very curious fishes of extinct genera, but high organization,
which have been found in the Lower Ludlow beds. Pink.
Edinburgh University Local Examinations.—These examina¬
tions were held simultaneously in many parts of Scotland, as well as
in some parts of England and Ireland, on the 15th, 16th, and 17th
of June. The large number of candidates in Edinburgh made it
necessary to have two halls for their accommodation ; accordingly,
the Library of the University and the Oddfellows' Hall were fitted
up for the occasion. At tlie former of these places. Professor
Calderwood presided over a large and earnest party of students,
while at the latter, Professor Laurie conducted affairs. Of the 829
candidates, we hear that 163 had prepared for examination in the
S. George's Hall Classes, either as oral or corresponding students.
33^ ^''^^ Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
Nearly 50 of these corresponding students came to Edinburgh to be
examined, while the rest found it more convenient to attend at the
following centres :—London, Belfast, Inverness, Cromarty, Broughty-
Ferry, Perth, Dunblane, Glasgow, Helensburgh, Forfar, Dumfries,
Aberdeen, Arbroath, and Cupar-Fife. We congratulate the com¬
mittee of the S., George's Hall Classes on having raised so great an
interest in these Local Examinations by means of their system of
teaching by correspondence.
Annual Conversazione. — The usual friendly meeting of the
Local Examination Candidates who had been prepared by the S.
George's Hall Classes, with the committee, tutors, and other friends,
took place on Thursday, 17th June, in the new Lecture Rooms of the
Association for the University Education of Women, 15 Shandwick
Place, Edinburgh. These ' halls of good learning ' were charmingly
decorated for the occasion with a profusion of flowers, and great was
the satisfaction of all parties at this pleasant and interesting meeting
in such commodious quarters.
As usual, the chief interest of the entertainment was the bringing
the corresponding students into actual contact with their kind
friends, the tutors and secretaries, to whose exertions they will feel
mainly indebted for their success in their various studies. After tea,
coffee, and ices, a few interesting addresses were made from the
platform of the large Lecture Hall, on the subject of the work done
in S. George's Hall, especially with a view to its being preparatory
to the higher work of the Association for the University Education
of Women. The pretty rooms, especially the Library, being thrown
open, were much admired by the visitors. The party broke up a
little earlier than might otherwise have been the case, by the
necessity of the candidates in Music, Logic, and Geology returning
to the University to complete their examination in these subjects ;
but the good spirits and general liveliness that prevailed were a sure
indication that none had found the work of the past session too
severe a strain.
]^fotic0S to Corrcsponticnts, etc.
Ladies are invited to contribute to this Magazine. All communi¬
cations to be addressed, Editors, Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine, Messrs.
Morrison & Gibb, 11 Queen Street, Edinburgh.
Papers intended for immediate insertion must be in the hands of
the Editors by the first of the previous month ; attention is requested
to this rule.
We must warn our correspondents that no MSS. can be returned
wvXid&s full postage be sent, that letters needing reply must contain a
stamp, and that the Editors can forward no communications left with
them unless stamped. Poems sent in letters will not be returned,
unless a stamp be sent. No anonymous communication either to
the Editors or the Office-bearers of the Literary Society will be
noticed.
The meeting of the Ladies' Edinburgh Literary Society will be
held on Saturdaj', 3d July, at 5 Chester Street, at 11 a.m.
The usual Debate will give place to a general discussion on the
comparative merits of a late or early hour for the principal meal of
the day.
Of Music, Past and Ficttire. ^$y
Of iEusic, IPast anO Juturc.
What is, or will be, the ' music of the future' ? We feel
inclined, on hearing these ominous words, to exclaim : ' May
it only be worthy of the music of the past!' What concep¬
tion have most of us formed of that new and much-vaunted
music which is to be the delight of future generations ?
Does it not seem, to judge by the teaching of some who consider
themselves most competent to guide us in this imknown
land, that music will then have become so abstruse as to be only
appreciated by a select few ? Nothing in the shape of pure
melody will be admitted. The tired man of business, who
looks to his daughters for the relaxation of a ' little music'
when the toils of the day are over, will be expected to enjoy
a ' Poeme Symphonique.' Foremost among the ranks of the
initiated will be found the {esthetic young man in Punch,
who stigmatizes INIozart as ' too tuny' for him. Accord¬
ing to this view, music will then become something between
a transcendental philosophy and a restless cry, beautiful, but
vague—a struggle to give coherent expression to feelings
and desires whicli ever elude her grasp. It is an alarming
prospect to people who find Schumann difficult, and are apt
to lose their way in a Fugue, but who yet cherish an honest
wish to understand the art language of their age !
But in spite of Liszt and Wagner, and the great discoveries
so pertinaciously announced by their disciples, we think it
may fairly be held that there is another side to the question,
and that those are mistaken who expect a wonderful
development of musical genius, or new and undreamt-of
modes of musical expression. In this, as in so many
branches of art, we are disposed to think the climax has
been reached, the highest note has been struck. The world
is waxing old apace; her creative power, always the rarest
and most emphatically God-given of all the gifts vouchsafed
to men, is fast becoming exhausted. We know that Eaphael
or Michael Angelo cannot come again; Homer is a myth ;:
Shakespeare belongs to the days of England's youth. Goethe
alone, of the great world geniuses, touches our own time.
It is nearly 200 years since Bach and Handel were born;
and we might as soon expect another Dante to come and
tell us the secrets of the invisible world, as to see the laurel
wrested from the brow of Beethoven. Music, indeed, is the
latest-born of the arts. Through all the mystic fervour of
the Hebrews—through all the Greek sense of beauty of form
No. 68.—August 1880. Y
338 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
—music, as we understand the term, lay slumbering. When
St. Owen, and Amiens, and York Minster were rearing their
exquisite arches and spires,—most like an embodied symphony,
—music was still groping her way upward, making trial of
her powers. Only now, when the freshness and vigour of
an earlier day seem to be passing away, when no external
symbolism will content men, and they require something
which shall appeal to their innermost heart rather than their
senses, does music step forward to assert her heaven-born
claims. We are reminded of the old legend of the monk,
who, wandering one day in the forest, fell to musing on the
joys of Paradise, till the thought occurred to him. What if
man could weary of eternal bliss' Straightway there
sounded through the w'oodlands the note of a bird, so sweet,
so soul-entrancing, his heart was stu-red within him, and he
Avandered on and on, ibrgetting time and distance in the
ecstasy of that song. When at length he roused himself to
return to the monastery, still unconscious that anything strange
had happened, all was changed,—a new face at the porter's
gate, unknown brethren in the cloisters, the refectory.
Years had gone by, and his supposed fate was remembered
only as some far-off tale of the past. It was plain to the
good father that the angelic strain which had made these
long years seem like a few hours, had been sent in answer
to his doubts ; and he doubted no longer '
So, as the web of life grew ever more tangled and com¬
plicated, and men began to ask each other what was the
meaning of all they saw, and if there was indeed any clue
which should guide us safely through the labyrinth, came
Music like a revelation to assure us that all we had ever
dreamt or imagined was true ; that life was no riddle without
an answer, ' no pastime saddening into age,' but that man is
formed to respond to infinite possibilities of bliss ; that there
are heights and depths of ' pinnacled glory' yet undeveloped,
and in this life never to be fully develoj)ed, sufficient to
appease every yearning, to still all the deepest aspirations of
our nature:
'For earth had attained to heaven, there was no more near or far.'
' What never had been, was now ; what was, as it sliall be anon ;
And what is,—shall I say, matched both ? for I was made perfect
too.'
The highest music is indeed a sort of religion,—' A fair
gift of God,' says Luther, 'and near allied to divinity.'
"While painting and architecture represent, as it were, man's
Of Music, Past and Future. 3 39
struggle to embody his conceptions in definite form, so that
material things should become capable of expressing the
divine idea, jNIusic, iu every legend of her origin, has been
felt to be heaven descended, ' a flash of the will that can,
existent behind all laws.' All that remains for man to do is
to find a medium sufficiently pure and perfect for the sacred
flame to shine through, as a lamp in an altar of alabaster.
These musical notes ' have escaped from some higher sphere;
they are the outpourings of eternal harmony in the medium
of created sound; they are echoes from our home ; they are
the voice of angels, or the magnificat of saints, or the living
laws of divine governance, or the divine attributes; some¬
thing are they besides themselves, which we cannot compass,
we cannot utter.'
In all arts there is a supreme moment when the pressure
of imperfect means and methods seems suddenly to cease;
the difficulties which hampered the artist's power of speech
are surmounted, and noble thoughts find fitting utterance
through perfect technical skill. It is but for a moment!
Too soon the glimpse of opening heaven is clouded again.
The delight of the workman in his own gifts overpowers all
else; he thinks less of the ideal meaning, and more of the
manner of expressing himself; and then sets in an age of
decadence. Such an age, however, of poverty of artistic
imagination, is quite compatible with a very Avidespread
appreciation of art. Perhaps it may be held generally true,
that the great masterpieces of the world speak rather to
future generations, and that the lessons they are empowered
to teach are only fully understood when time has given us a
sort of familiarity with them.
Thus, if indeed the greatest period in music, as in some
other arts, is past, we must look to find her influence in the
future exerted rather in deepening and widening her hold
on men's minds than in any extraordinary exercise of
creative power. The very richness and variety of the means
at her disposal in the present day, seem to interfere with
the freedom and directness of her aims. Grace and colour,
lavish ornament, and a tender pathos we may expect; but
underneath all this we seek in vain for that symmetry of
form, that firm foundation of original thoughts, which
would make a chorus of Handel or an air of Mozart beauti¬
ful even if stripped to the level of a child's exercise.'
The working of the same influences may be traced in the
ISee an Essay on 'Music,' by Lady Eastlake. Reprinted from
the Quarterly Review.
340 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazitic.
poetry of the day. Indeed, it is easy to see the same
tendencies and dispositions of men's minds expressing
themselves now in poetry or painting, now in music. The
various types which genius has assumed in its different
manifestations, are ail represented in this latter. A com¬
parison between poets ancl musicians brings out many points
of contact, which may help to prove that, though the form
of expression may vary, the same asj)irations find vent
through all. This may seem somewhat fanciful, and yet
not so; for ' as every lovely line is light,' so every artistic
gift does but represent a different side of that love of
beauty, that straining after perfection, which, broken and
shattered though it be, still subsists to remind us that man
was made in the image of his Creator.
The name of Handel seems to suggest that of Milton by
a natural affinity. Their themes are kindred, the mightiest
and most sublime that imagination can conceive; and in the
stately rhythm of the poet and the massive grandeur of the
composer, we trace the same elements of breadth of con¬
ception and unity of design. Who may be mentioned
beside Beethoven ? Only one great name suggests itself as
really offering any parallel—that of Dante. To Beethoven
too was this world a wilderness, a rugged forest in which he
vainly sought for rest. He too has opened the gates of
Paradise to us in many a soul-inspiring strain; he too can
hold us in suspense while the mystery and the trouble
deepens and darkens till our hearts die down within us, and
we grope vainly towards the light. But in spite of all its
sadness, there lies on Dante's ' visionary brow' ' a touch of
infinite calm,' whereas Beethoven is ever wrestling with
those great thoughts which crowd into his mind, and his
features seem to quiver with the intensity of the struggle
to give them fitting utterance.
Let us come to Mozart, with all his impassioned sweet¬
ness, his charm of melody. ISTot quite up to the heights
where Spenser breathed and sang, yet reminding us of him
by his pensive grace and earnestness, he has much in
common with a poet well known by name, yet less read
than his rich and flowing measure deserves—Torquato
Tasso. Again, is not Mendelssohn most truly a musical
Tennyson ? And Wagner, the dramatist who has expressed
himself in music, has already in these pages been compared
with Browning, the philosopher who has expressed himself
in poetry.
Not  less marked  than the  style  of individuals, is the
Of Music, Past and Future. 341
national character imprinted on the music of various races.
This indeed is a trite observation. The fact has given rise
to more than one proverb, as, for example, the saying that
' Music was born in Italy, educated in Germany, languished
in England, and died in France.' Without venturing to
enlarge on so wide a topic as the above, we may pause to
consider how great is the diversity of feeling and expression
in the music of our islands alone. For even if it be true
that it has somewhat languished among us, it must be added
that a healthy and flourishing shoot had been planted, which
for a time showed every sign of growth and vigour. As
diverse as are the races of which our nationality is made up,
so various are the modes of its musical speech. We have
the melancholy and imperfect songs of the Gael, gloomy as
the ghosts of Ossian, wild as the wind that moans through
pine forests, or clouds sweeping over the mountains. In
Ireland the same elements, perhaps through the influence of
her early culture, have become mellow and plaintive, full
of passion and sweetness; while the rollicking Irish fun
has inspired many a quaint dance-tune, gay with spirit and
emphasis. A greater contrast to the above can scarcely be
imagined than is afforded by our early English melodies.
Here (excepting in a few instances, often north-country
airs, such as ' The Oak and the Ash, and the Uonny Birch
Tree') we have no pathetic minors, no wistful complaints;
all is bright, cheerful, decided. Those were the days when
Merrie England deserved her name: ' England, full of
sports; a free people, delighting in jokes.' (i\.lfred of
Beverley, D. 1136, quoted by Camden.) 'Angli jubilant,'
says the proverb, supposed to be of French origin. Her
melodies have caught all the sunshine of an English land¬
scape ; and with true Saxon directness, they take us into
the very heart of the life of the people. ' Summer is
yeomen in ; loud sings cuckoo,' such is the rejoicing strain of
one ditty, of which words and music are 600 years old. Or
it is—' Joan, to tlie Maypole away ;' or ' The Gathering of
the Peascods,' a lovely air; or ' 0 for a husband \' (This
latter, we will hope, did not receive its name from the fair
sex, but is rather an instance of that caricature of their
views and opinions in which men delight.)'
As we approach the mountains of Wales, we find again all
the Celtic fire and poetry.    The Welsh airs are extremely
fine, full of martial ardour, worthy to be the voice of a free
and noble people.    It would be difficult  to find a  more
' See Chappell's Popular Music of the Olden Time.
342 TJie Ladies' Edinbui'gh Magazine.
inspiring air than the 'Eising of the Lark;' only to our
fancy it rather speaks of the conquering march of an army
through a deep defile. As they emerge upon the open country^
and face the full glory of the sunshine, troop after troop
takes up the jubilant strain; the light flashes back from
spear to helmet, and the triumphant chorus swells up, a
greeting to the God of Day!
Scotland has a rich heritage of musical treasures, and she
is especially fortunate in that her melodies have been
wedded to a ballad poetry unequalled for lyrical poM^er
and variety. Their associations meet us on the braes of
Lochaber, and haunt the ' bonny birks' of Yarrow; the
history of the nation is embalmed in her songs, from the
Battle of Flodden to the Eising of the ' Forty-Five.' With
verse and song the rustic lover woos his lass, or the fisher¬
man makes ready for sea; and the wit of the country-side
finds utterance in ballads which are full of the dry humour
peculiar to Scotchmen. There is also in the instinctive
taste of the people, a healthy power of selecting and assimi¬
lating the best from what is brought before them. The
process by which both airs and words have become what
we now find them, is often exceedingly curious. Many of
our airs are to be found, under a somewhat diflerent form,
in England or Ireland. Some cannot on any plea be
accepted as indigenous, as, for instance, the air to ' Auld
Eobin Clray,' which was composed by an English clergyman,
the Eev. William Lewis. It seems a pity that so many of
these fine old tunes are practically neglected, and that we
confine ourselves mostly to a few, and those not always of
the first merit. We should like to put in a plea for some
of the less common airs, such as ' 0 waly, waly, up yon
bank,' in its heart-broken sadness, not unworthy of the
exquisite poem that is associated with it; or' Carlisle Yetts,'
a grand despairing Jacobite lament; or ' What ails this
heart o' mine ?' one of the most tender of love-songs.
With all this, it is mortifying to find that Dr. HuUah
considers the Scotch to have the worst ear for music of all
the inhabitants of the United Kingdom. It will be an evil
day for us when we lose the traditions and the love of that
music Avhich has doubtless done much to make Scotland
what she is. It would be a scarcely less evil day were we
to sit down content in the belief that our musical knoAvledge
and taste are complete through the study of our native melodies
only. It would be much as if, because ' Sir Patrick Spens '
is a noble ballad, we should decline to read the ' Idylls of the
Of Music, Past and Future. 343
King.' The men who composed the old airs were indeed
gifted with true genius, but they wrote with imperfect
materials in an age of imperfect culture, and they would
have been the first to Avelcome a higher development.'
It is a remarkable circumstance that we have no great
female composer. Women have taken a high place in the
world of letters ; science has unlocked her gates to them; in
painting and sculpture they are worthy of honourable
mention. But it seems as if the heights of musical inspira¬
tion were too lofty for them to scale. Fanny Mendelssohn,
the gifted sister of Felix, is probal^ly the nearest approach
to a true musician that can be cited. In our own time we
have known ladies endowed with much natviral talent, who
have composed graceful and pleasing songs ; but they cannot
be said to have risen beyond the most elementary skill iu
composition. It must not, however, be forgotten that in one
way music differs from all the sister arts, in that she is
speechless without an interpreter; and here we may all find
plenty of scope; for the receptive nature and susceptible
organization of women renders them peculiarly fitted to give
the needful expression to the thoughts of the great composers.
Tlae master is the shrine of inspiration ; the singer is the
priestess who interprets.
Something of the poverty of musical tlioughts among our
countrywomen may be due also to the fact that though so
many are performers, scarcely any are in the true sense
musicians. How many of us can sing an easy passage at
sight, without notes ? How many of us could supply a bass
correctly to a written air ? The study of harmony is perhaps
becoming a little less rare than it was; but it ought to be
an essential part of the teaching wherever a genuine ear
for music exists ; and we think it would be found that an
insight into the immutable laws of musical grammar would
have something of the same power of training and strength¬
ening the faculties which is obtained through mathematics
or the Latin grammar.
Even under the liighest cultivation, it seems probable that
there will always remain two distinct kinds of musical taste
—through the ear, and through the intellect. A delicate
ear, that is really pained by a false note,—a sympathetic
voice that thrills to the heart of the listener,—may exist along
with a total indifference to grand orchestral harmonies.
Many great singers may be found in this category; and it
' See, for an excellent resume of the relative position of Scottish
music, the Ladles' Edinburgh Magazine, May 187^.
344 T^he Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
is impossible not to be struck with the very mediocre
character of the music which such singers seem to take
pleasure in performing. On the other hand, we do occasion¬
ally meet with people who are fired to enthusiasm by a
symphony or an oratorio, but who are not quick to recognise
a melody, and are in no way troubled because the tenor is
singing flat! Such listeners are not greatly concerned with
the technical side of music. Time and tune affect them but
feebly; the composer touches them as with an enchanter's
wand, and their imagination forthwith wakes up to feel aU
that he seeks to inspire, though they could hardly tell us
what it is that has so stirred them. Where the two kinds
of appreciation co-exist, we have a heaven-born musician.
Increased knowledge and taste will no doubt do much to
supply the deficiencies on each side; but the difference will
still be found to exist, as it seems to spring from varieties
of character and temperament Avhich are inherent in our
nature.
Apparently it is to this intellectual ear that the music of
Wagner more directly appeals. His followers number many
clever and thoughtful minds; but they are people with a
theory, or they have a poetical fancy which is strongly
impressed by the romance of his operas. His music has
undoiibtedly a powerful effect on the imagination. When
it is played in London, the performers find it so highly
stimulating to the nerves, that a sleepless night afterwards
is the result. The key to his brilliant but erratic career,
may perhaps be found by looking at him as a man of genius,
—a poet—a dramatic author of a high order, but not—
above and before all things—a musician. It seems by a sort
of accident—a perversity of fate—that he has been brought
before the world principally as a composer. This view would
account for the fact that while he exercises such a fascination
over many cultivated minds, genuine musicians hold aloof,
and give cogent reasons why his compositions may not be
ranked with the great works which are for all time.
In order rightly to estimate Wagner as a dramatic writer,
we must first ask. With whom shall we compare him ?
' Ce qui ne vaut pas la peine d'etre dit, on le chante,' said
Beaumarchais, and the accusation has held good pretty
generally to our own days. The opera that Mendelssohn
dreamt of, remained unwritten because he never could find
a subject to his mind. We must all have felt how much the
lovely music of the ' Zauberflote' or ' Oberon' loses through
the strange and fantastic medley  to which it is attached;
Of Mitsic, Past and Future. 345
and certainly nothing can be more vapid than the libretto of
the ordinary ' Italian Opera.' Wagner has had the good
fortune to belong to an age of better taste, and the wit to
take advantage of it. The noble and beautiful legends of
his own land have suggested themes which he has used with
consummate skill. Such stories as Tannhaiiser and Lohengrin
are replete with ideas of truth and honour, and the best
qualities of tlie Teutonic mind ; and Wagner has well caught
their chivalrous character. His versions of these time-olden
myths are true poems, full of genuine feeling; nor can it be
denied that the music appeals powerfully to our sympathies.
It is generally admitted that Wagner is a master of that rich
and complex organization, the modern orchestra. True, he
sometimes tortures his instruments; but there is much that
is striking'and characteristic in his treatment, as, for example,
his use of the trumpets, which never fails to transport us to
the knightly days of yore. Lovely are the strains which
herald the appearance of the Swan in Lohengrin; their
' linked sweetness long drawn out' lingers on our memory
with an indescribable charm. This whole opera will surely
live as his finest work: the story is exquisitely told, and it
deals with passions which make it true for all time, while
the gorgeous and highly-wrought music seems to blend
naturally with the scenes as they pass before our eyes, and
to form one harmonious whole which is not easily forgotten.
Even in the Tetralogie, though on the whole that must be
left to his more uncompromising partisans, there are not
wanting passages which all can admire. The WalJcdre, too,
is a wonderful piece of tone painting; the music works us
up to the highest pitch of excitement; we seem to see how
the mountain-side breaks into liakes of fire, and the little
flames twinkle and glitter as the glowing ring is formed that
gradually encompasses the warrior maiden Brynhild in her
magic slumber.
So much has been written and said of Warner's famous
theory, that the perfection of true art—the ideal after which
we are all striving—is to be realized in the combination of
music, poetry, and painting, as found in dramatic represen¬
tation, that it seems presumptuous to add to the stock of
criticism on the subject. The question may safely be
left to be decided on its own merits. But if we dare to be
true to our own unbiassed judgment, shall we not confess
that it carries its refutation on its face ? The highest music
and the noblest poetry will not mingle ; each reigns a queen
in a sphere apart.    Can we imagine ' Hamlet' set to music ?
34^ The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
Or would a poetical commentary add to our enjoyment of the
Pastoral Symphony ? The day will surely come when this
great discovery will be remembered only to raise a smile at
the eccentric theory of a clever man! The very children
playing in our midst bear witness that the most perfect
imitation does not satisfy. It is not the smart new doll,
with her pink cheeks and flaxen ringlets, or the horse whose
mane and taU, saddle and bridle, are all intact, that is the
cherished friends of our childhood. How much dearer the old
rag doll, or the horse with the broken leg, which has
been the beloved companion of many a day-dream, and which
to our partial eyes is endowed with every possible perfection L
Why is it that there is often a suggestiveness, a visionary
charm, about the first sketch of the artist, which the finished
picture cannot attain to ? Why but because imagination is
after all the true enchanter who must touch our ears and
eyes if we Avould indeed understand; but he must be left
unfettered if he is to take us by the hand and bear us with
him into the glorious land over which he reigns. All this
completeness of arrangement, this dramatic correctness of
detail, which aims at imitating nature rather than idealizing
her, does but set weights on the freedom of our fancy, and
retard her flight.
Poor music ! Something of the sadness which is insepar¬
able from all advancing life, seems to have fallen upon her of
late. When that heavenly maid was young, she sang for us
divine and heart-stirring melodies. At lier approach every
brow cleared, every head began wagging ; not an inch of our
bodies was free from delight. Now, in the maturity of her
charms, we meet her, a splendid and imperial dame indeed,
glittering with jewels, adorned with costly broideries and
cloth of gold. But the sweet unconsciousness of youth is
gone. Her brow is knit with thought, deeply pondering;.
she is musing over some problem, struggling to give fitting
utterance to the feelings that overpower her. And some¬
thing of the same change is to be found among her votaries.
No longer content to sit idly listening to her simple pipings,
they share her restless longing after the unattainable, and
are fain to follow where she would lead them. Such is tlie
price we pay for all high cultivation. Like children, that
which pleased us once speaks to us no longer; still we seek
something better, something higher. Yet, be our music
simple or complex, let us hold her fast; for here, if by any
uninspired agency, may the dreams of modern optimists be
fulfilled, and the world be flooded with sweetness and light.
St AntJmtys Day. 347
Let us all do our utmost to spread her influence and enlarge
her borders; let us discourage everything ignoble and unworthy
of true art, so winning men more and more to appreciate her
at her true value. Eare and precious things has she to offer
tis now, and her gifts will be multiplied a thousandfold in the
great Hereafter,
' When Eternity affirms the conception of an hour.'
Aljia Glex.
^t. Sntiiony's Sag.
II-
Spring came; the clouds disappeared; the sky was once
more blue; the rice sprouted; the Indian corn sprung up
rapidly; olive trees regained their silvery tints; pome¬
granates sent forth bright red buds, and orange blossoms
shed their sweet fragrance upon the reviving landscape.
The wintry darkness in Petronella's heart grew likewise
less. It was not spring which caused this change; the
beauties of nature made little impression on the country-
bred girl. It made no difference to her whether the blossoms
filled the air with pleasant odours, and sunshine enhanced
the charms of nature's many-coloured garb; or whether she
lived surrounded by a mournful wilderness of bare, colour¬
less rocks. Neither had any alteration for the better taken
place regarding her intercourse wath Benigna and Antonio.
No, the gleam of light in Petronella's heart was caused by
the fact of St. Anthony's day being at hand. Why this
was the case I am about to explain.
In the whole of northern Italy, especially amongst the
peasantry, St. Anthony of Padua is held in high estimation
as a matchmaker, and looked up to with the most reveren¬
tial faith by all old men, youths, and maidens who wish still
to get married during the year. All those, also, who take
any kind of interest in a marriage, entrust their wishes to
the saint, feeling confident of their fulfilment.
Thus Petronella, too, looked to St. Anthony as a last
refuge in her grief. A Bergamese shepherd had told her of
a way by which girls in the lake country knew how to
force the saint to fulfil their wishes. The charm they used
was the following: Having written the name of the lad
they had set their affections on, three times, in the form of a
cross, on a sheet of paper that had been blessed, they placed
348 TJie Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
this beneath a plaster image of the saint, and besought him
night and morning not to forget their wishes. It scarcely
ever happened (so the shepherd declared) that the girl who
did this failed to get her lover, even though till then he had
appeared totally disinclined to marry. Further, if the chosen
lover chanced to be named Anthony, the girl was perfectly
sure to have her heart's desire granted. A maiden who
asked for an Anthony had never been disappointed, but was
sure to get the longed-for husband within the year.
It was this news which gladdened Petronella's heart even
as the sunshine of spring shed brightness on the outer world.
The shepherd's story had not tended at first greatly to raise
her hopes, but soon she began to say to herself: ' It may be
true; the saints have done far greater wonders than that,
when people have prayed earnestly to them. Why should
not Saint Anthony, who is known to be ever kind and ready
to help, do something for a poor unhappy girl like me ?'
Has the reader guessed the cause of her unhappiness; or
is it necessary for me to say that, though she would not hav^e
owned it to any one, she still loved Antonio truly and
passionately ? Certain it is that our heroine's cogitations
resulted in her investing in a plaster-of-Paris image of Saint
Anthony, and placing it above her bed next to one of the
Madonna. The more Petronella gazed on the newly-pur¬
chased bust, the more her confidence in its assistance and
faith in the shepherd's story increased. At length she
decided positively to try what Saint Anthony could do for
her.
But now an unthought-of difficulty arose. She could not
write, and the shepherd had particularly said that a girl
must write the name out herself. Fortunately Petronella
was always energetic and ready-witted when occasion re¬
quired, and so was not long in finding a way of getting over
this obstacle. Slie went to the public notary, who had
established himself at a little table close to the Cafe Gari¬
baldi at Pisa, and carried on his business in the open air,
protected by a huge umbrella. She gave him two 'soldi,'
and for this he wTote out the name of Antonio in large
letters on a thick strip of paper. The girl ran quickly home
with this treasure, locked lierself into her room, and set to
work to trace out the name of her beloved in pencil. She
was obliged to sit up late for many a night before the letters
on the tracing-paper looked at all like those written by the
notary. Indeed it cost her many tears, angry exclamations,
and earnest appeals to the Madonna for aid, before her copy
St. Aiithoiifs Day. 349
perfectly resembled the original. Then at length she felt
satisfied, and went over the pencilled letters with her pen;
for only that which was written in ink seemed real writing
to her. Finally, when Antonio was written out in the shape
of a cross, just as the shepherd had said it should be,
Petronella with a trembling heart placed the precious talis¬
man beneath the plaster image.
This done, she felt as if suddenly a great burden had been
lifted from her heart. For a whole year she had never been
known to sing, but now her voice quite resounded through
the house as she burst forth into an impassioned love-song.
Hearing this, Titano, who was in the kitchen peeling potatoes
for supper, nearly fell off the tub on which he was seated,
and devoutly crossing himself, exclaimed :
' Good heavens, she is gone quite mad !' Then he rushed
off into his daughter's room as if lashed by furies.
Petronella met him, singing to the full extent of her
lungs.
' My child! my child!' cried Agosto with tears in his
eyes.
' What has happened to you, father ?' asked Petronella,
whose turn it now was to be frightened.
' To me, to me ?' sobbed Agosto.
' Yes, to you, father. I think you must be in love, for you
seem quite crazy.'
' Child, are you in your senses ?' inquired Agosto breath¬
lessly.
' Well, at least as much as you are, father. Just look at
me; do I look as if I had gone mad ?'
' But what has happened to you ?' asked Agosto, still
gazing with astonishment at his daughter, who had suddenly
become as bright and gay-looking as a May morning.
' Happened to me ?' repeated Petronella. ' What should
have happened to me ? Did you expect me never to be
merry again ? I think I have been in low spirits long
enough ;' saying which she again burst forth into a gay
melody, all about amore and core siicranza, tella hella, and I
cannot tell how many more ellas and anzas.
Agosto went back to the potatoes, shaking his head and
sorely puzzled; but Petronella ran swiftly after him, and
seating herself on the tub, finished her father's work, sing¬
ing all the while as gaily as a lark. Such a thing had not
happened for months.
Father Titano did not know what to make of this miracu¬
lous change, and vainly cudgelled his brains for an explana-
3so The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
tion thereof, whilst he poured some oil into a pan and placed
it oil the fire, preparatory to frying the potatoes. He was
not any nearer a solution of the mystery by the time supper
was ready, though; whilst turning over the thin slices in the
pan, he had never ceased mentally revolving the causes
which might possibly have produced this strange transforma¬
tion in his daughter.
Still Petronella continued singing as gaily, and even more
gaily, than before.
The foregoing happened in the beginning of April. By
the middle of May the Indian corn stood high in the fields,
the vines were laden with an abundance of leaves, oranges
became golden red, and lemons attained a fresh yellow tint.
The powerful rays of the sun, lighting up fields and groves,
soon caused the fruit to become ripe and juicy, and a wealth
of beautiful, deep-coloured flowers to spring forth from the
earth's sheltering bosom.
Petronella's gaiety and hopefulness had, however, not in¬
creased. Antonio showed no inclination whatever to return
to her. He went by the house as if he did not remember
her existence, and when by chance they met, always looked
hard in the opposite direction. Meanwhile St. Anthony's
day was coming nearer and nearer, leaving little time for a
miracle to take place.
Petronella did not cease to pray daily fervently to the
saint, and always rose from her knees with hope and courage
renewed. She no longer heeded the flight of time, firmly
believing that a miracle would be performed for her.
The month of May passed without rousing any feelings of
alarm in her. It was only when the first of June had come
that she began to feel a little anxious, but still she trusted
im]5licitly in Saint Anthony. Strange to say, the nearer the
ominous day (the thirteenth) approached, the stronger her
hope became of a miracle being wrought.
On the tenth of June, the plaster image looked immoveable
as ever, and Antonio went on with his usual work apparently
as placid and unchanged as the figure of the saint on
Petronella's shelf. The eleventh arrived; still the image
never moved from its place, and Antonio was engaged in
tying up vine branches. The twelfth had come; the saint
was motionless as before; Antonio was calmly gathering
figs.
The morning of the thirteenth of June dawned, and with
the first signs of returning light Petronella rose and went to
kneel before St. Anthony's effigy.
Si. Anthonys Day. 351
The sun had risen high in the heavens, and Petronella
prayed on, though at the same time anxiously listeniug for
the sound of well-known footsteps. Yet all was still. Hark!
what was that ? Only Titano rising to go to his daily labour.
The sun was now pouring in at the window; Petronella
remained kneeling, and watching with bated breath for a
sound from outside.
All remained as before, terribly still. Petronella listened
once more. She only heard the voices of children at play,
and the grunting of a pig which they were chasing from its
favourite resting-place. Then from the left-hand neighbour's
house the scolding utterances of an indignant woman sounded
on I'etronella's ear. It was the policeman's wife scolding
her husband, who had again lost all Iiis money playing at
' mora.' ^
Noon came and went. The afternoon also passed away;
the sinking sun bathed Titano's cottage in a flood of golden
light, which penetrated into Petronella's little room, and
illumined the figure of the saint, but no footfall outside was
to be heard; I'etronella w^ould have known Antonio's step
from amongst a thousand others.
Stars twinkled in the sky; Petronella continued to gaze
immoveably at the image. Nine struck at the town clock,
then ten, then eleven, at last—twelve. All was silent as
death in the house. Nothing moved in the street. With
the first stroke of twelve the thirteenth of June was past and
gone. Petronella uttered a hoarse cry of rage and scorn,
then seized the image and threw it with all her might out
into the street, in the direction of a manure heap which lay
between two nei^hbourin" houses. Thrown with such
force, the image flew rapidly out of sight into the dark¬
ness.
Listen ! what was that ? A loud cry from a human being;
a heavy fall; then deep, alarming stillness.
Petronella felt terrified, her head swam, and, as if in a
dream, she heard first the screeching tones of her old enemy
Benigna calling loudly for help; then lights were brought,
and with them came the sound of several more voices. Some
whispered, others shrieked or (j^uarrelled, and amid all the
hubbub Benigna was plainly to be heard exclaiming in tones
of deepest distress:
' 0 my son, my j)oor son! They have killed, murdered
him ! 0 my poor boy ! Help me, neighbours ; run to town
for the doctor.    Oh help me, help me 1'
* A popular game of cards.
352 Tlie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
After this Petronella heard no more, for with a piercing
shriek, which rang out far into the street, she fainted away.
The following day strange rumours were afloat. Antonio
had been rather seriously wounded, and next to him a figure
representing St. Anthony was found, to wdiich a paper bearing
the name of ' Antonio' was fastened. This image seemed to
have been the weapon with which the young man was
attacked ; for there were traces of plaster of Paris in the
wound on his head. It was further declared to be certain
that tlie effigy of the saint had been thrown out of Petronella
Titano's window, and that she had perpetrated the shocking-
deed out of hatred to her faithless lover. This was considered
sufficiently proved, first by the fact of a light being then seen
in her room, and by her having been heard to scream loudly,
and afterwards found completely dressed, lying insensible on
the floor. The girl must have watched for Antonio, pur¬
posing to kill him.
Happily the young man did not die, although the wound
was considerable. The Italian police, particularly in the
country, are not fond of interfering where it is only the case
of a broken head, all the more so when caused by an amorous
maiden. Thus the affair might have blown over but for
Mistress Benigna, who left her son no peace till he went
to the magistrate and accused Petronella of attempting to
murder him.
Antonio did not like doing this at all. He would willingly
have forgiven the wild girl; but his old mother managed to
convince him that if he took no steps in the matter, he would
only be lavighed at bv everybody and thought a weak-minded
fool.
' She has marked you for life,' said the widow, ' and will
boast of it and say, " He does not dare to say a single word
against me ; he has a bad conscience."'
' I shouldn't care what she said,' replied her son. ' I don't
mind the stuff girls talk; but though she is nothing to me, I
should not like her to be imprisoned.'
'You are always good-natured and ready to be made a
laughing-stock of by the girls,' sneered his mother.
' No, mother,' answered Antonio ; ' if a man had treated me
so, he should soon learn whom he had to deal with. But one
ought not to have a girl put in prison for such rubbish as
that.'
But Antonio's opinions were no use once the public
prosecutor had the matter in hand, and the latter looked
upon the affair as premeditated murder.    Consequently a
St. A n tJiony's Day. 353
few days after the above-related conversation took place, two
gens-d'arnws came to take Petronella off to the Pisa prison;
and they would not accept any bail, although Agosto wept
and offered all he possessed as surety.
Petronella let herself be led away with the utmost indiffer¬
ence, and went quietly off to the town between two soldiers,
accompanied as far as the outskirts of the village by a
crowd of gaping children.
The preliminary examination did not last long, as the case
was perfectly clear. About a fortnight after the girl had
been arrested, Antonio, Benigna, and Agosto Titano, together
with two or three other neighbours, were summoned to town
to be present at the trial.
■ ••••••
The court of justice was a bare, empty room, devoid of all
ornamentation excepting a large bust of Victor Emmanuel,
which stood in a niche above the horse-shoe-shaped table,
covered with green baize, at which the judges were. On one
side sat Antonio and Benigna as accusers; on the other were
Agosto and several neighbours as witnesses. On a small
table hung with black lay the broken image of St. Anthony,
and next to this terrible, murderous instrument stood a
sentinel with loaded musket to guard it as the law required.
The place set apart for spectators was crowded with people,
and the hum of voices might have been likened to a swarm
of bees. All at once, deep silence fell on the multitude.
The judge had made a sign ; a small door with iron fastenings
was opened, and in came first a carabiniero with drawn
sword, then Petronella; after this another carahiniero behind
her.
"Whilst Petronella took her place at the bar, her two guards
ranged themselves on either side of her.
On beholding his daughter, Agosto began to sob aloud,
which caused a sympathetic murmur amongst the spec¬
tators.
Petronella never looked up, but sat there perfectly immove-
able and apathetic. Her brown cheeks had grown pale and
sunken.
' Do you know of what you are accused ?' inquired the
judge, turning to the prisoner when the first formalities had
been gone through.
Petronella remained silent, and still did not raise her eyes.
' Petronella Titano, I request you to look at me and pay
attention to my questions. Do you know of what crime
you are accused ?' repeated the judge.
No. 68.—August 1880. z
354 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
Petronella looked in astonishment at the speaker.
' No, I don't,' she answered indifferently.
'You are accused of having attempted, in the night of
the thirteenth to the fourteenth of June, to murder your
neighbour Signor Antonio Lacca by throwing a plaster
image at his head, which wounded him severely. After due
examination, this heavy image has been found to be quite
sufficient to destroy life with. Do you confess yourself
guilty?'
' iSTo,' cried Petronella loudly and decidedly.
* Did you not throw the image ?'
' Yes, I threw it out of the window; but I didn't want to
hit any one with it.'
' You did this in the middle of the night,' said the public
prosecutor; 'a strange proceeding. Your usual hour for
going to bed is ten o'clock ; why did you stay up so late that
night ?'
' I was praying and waiting for something.'
' What were you waiting for ?'
Petronella hesitated in replying.
The public prosecutor repeated the question impressively,
and also warned Petronella to speak nothing but the truth,
without being ashamed, as it would only be to her advantage.
He wound up by saying:
' Therefore I ask you again, Whom or what were you wait¬
ing for ?'
' For Antonio.'
' For which Antonio ?'
' For Antonio who is sitting over there.'
Great astonishment and much murmuring took place at
this speech of Petronella's. Antonio rose and wanted to
speak, but the judge signed to him to sit down and keep
quiet.
' Did he promise you to come ?' asked the public prose¬
cutor once more.
'No.'
'Were you not even on unfriendly terms with your
neighbour ?'
'Yes.'
' Then why did you expect the young man ?'
' Because it was St. Anthony's day, and I quite believed
he would come.'
' For what purpose ?'
' To be betrothed to me.'
Great commotion amongst the crowd followed this speech.
S(. Anthony's Day. 355
Benigna and Antonio had risen excitedly from their seats.
The old woman shrieked, and Antonio looked at Petronella
in dismay.
The public prosecutor then addressed Antonio : ' Had you
any intention whatever of going to be betrothed to the girl,
or in any way made her believe it ?'
' No,' said Antonio readily. ' I was not thinking of her at
all; I was going to set a trap for a rabbit.'
' Prisoner at the bar, why did you throw the image out of
the window ?'
' Because the saint had forsaken me.'
' Because who had forsaken you ?' asked the astonished
judge.
' St. Anthony; he had not got Antonio for me. I did
everything I could; prayed to him tiU I nearly wore myself
to a shred ; learnt how to write his name; dedicated a golden
heart to him at the church,' continued Petronella passionately,
' did everything—everything, in short, but the saint did
nothing. So I grew angry, and threw the image out of the
window.'
This confession called forth a perfect tunmlt of the most
varied exclamations, cries of astonishment, admiration, assent,
and pity.    Wild shouts of laughter were also heard.
When at length order was restored, and the prisoner had
been repeatedly called upon by the judge to tell the whole
story from beginning to end, without keeping back anything,
she related word for word what we already know.
Both judges and spectators listened in breathless silence
to the story of this impassioned, almost madly vehement,
love. Agosto, who was seated amongst the witnesses, rubbed
his curly head with astonishment; and Antonio moved about
uneasily on the bench set apart for the plaintiff, turning first
red, then white, and staring at Petronella, who spoke in a
low tone with her eyes fixed on the ground. Try what he
would, Antonio could not take his eyes oflf the girl. Mean¬
while his mother kept looking anxiously and gloomily first
at the judge, then at the prisoner, then again at the judge.
Petronella had done speaking, and the public prosecutor
was about to address the jury, when Antonio rose.
' Mr. Judge,' he began, stammering a little at first, but his
voice became gradually distinct and clear, ' the girl did all
out of love for me. I never believed there could be such
love. My mother talked me out of taking Petronella; so I
hesitated for a time and saw how hasty she grew, giving up
work, and not caring for the housekeeping.    She used to
356 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
look at me so strangely that I got quite frightened, and
thought there was quite a diabolical gleam in her eyes. I
drew back more and more, not caring to have such an ill-
tempered girl for my wife; and it seemed to me as if she
became daily more wicked and unbearable. In short, I gave
up all thoughts of marrying her. But now, sir, I know that
she did all from unconquerable love for me, and was only
showing her sorrow and grief. I shall never again find a
woman who will love me so dearly; therefore, I beg
Petronella's pardon, and if after all the ill that I did her in
my blindness, she will still have me for her husband, you
perhaps, Mr. Judge, will kindly make out the necessary
papers at once.' At this, Mistress Benigna rushed from her
seat like a fury; but Antonio pushed her back witli an
unmistakeable gesture, and the widow resumed her seat with
a groan.
That which you ask of me, Signor Antonio,' said the
public prosecutor, ' is not in my province, and the trial must
now go on. The evidence has all been heard; I therefore
consider it necessary to sum up and request the gentlemen
of the jury to withdraw and consider their verdict.'
The jury retired.
Petronella, overcome by the sudden change of circum¬
stances, had sunk upon the bench, crying and sobbing with
true Italian vehemence, assisted therein by some of the Pisa
market-women who happened to be amongst the spectators.
In a few minutes the jury reappeared, and gave their
verdict of ' not guilty.' Upon this, the court, amidst general
acclamations, pronounced Petronella to be free to go when
and where she chose, further declaring officially that she
left with unstained character, and, in short, once more
reinstating her in all the rights of an Italian citizeness.
Then Antonio went up to Petronella, and held out his
hand. She rose quickly, and threw her arms round his neck.
The spectators shouted and applauded; the judges smiled
and shook hands with Agosto, whose face, which till then
had looked so careworn, was now radiant as the noonday
sun in July. Altogether every one left the fane of retri¬
butive justice in a state of extreme contentment, excepting
old Benigna, who rushed hurriedly out of the court without
deigning to look at her son.
On going out, PetroneUa picked up the fragments of the
plaster image, and hid them in her apron.
' Why do you take them with you ?' asked Antonio,
surprised.
Victor Emmanuel. 357
'I did the saint terrible injustice,' said Petronella gravely.
' He helped me after all; in future I shall greatly honour
him.    And you will too, Antonio, won't you ?'
Antonio rubbed the red scar on his forehead.
'Well, he need not have made things so serious,' he
growled, drawing Petronella's arm through his, and walking
off triumphantly, followed by those of his neighbours who
had come to see the triaL
The news of all the marvellous things which had hap¬
pened reached the village before them. All were eager to
see the betrothed, and came joyfully out to meet them;
nor were the pigs and poultry wanting at this triumphal
progress, for they always followed wherever they saw the
villagers gatliered together.
Two months later Petronella and Antonio were happily
united, and Saint Anthony's image, which had been glued
together, again resumed its old place above Petronella's bed.
M. Montgomery-Campbell.
{Concluded)
Fictor ^mmanueL
(the soldier king.)
' Happy are all free peoples, too strong to be dispossessed ;
But blessed are those among nations who dare to be strong for the rest.'
E. Barrett Browning.
IV.
It w-as in March of the year 1859 that Count Cavour took
occasion to address a memorandum to the English Govern¬
ment, calling their attention to the provocations received by
Sardinia from Austria, and at the same time he gave orders
for the whole of the contingent to be put under arms. AU
Europe, though more especially France, interested itself in
the Italian question. Eussia initiated the idea of deciding
the j)oints at issue by a congress of the Powers; Austria,
however, objected to a general council in which Piedmont
should be represented; and the proposition was ultimately
negatived by the Pontifical States.
On the 19th of April the Austrian Government drew up
an ultimatum, in whicli she called on Piedmont to reduce
her army and disarm the volunteers, who were literally
pouring in from every province of Italy.    England, Prussia,
358 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
and Kussia contented themselves with merely j)rotesting
against the arbitrary demands of Austria. The Emperor of
the French, however, came boldly to the rescue; on the
25th of the same month a detachment of his troops crossed
the frontier at Culoz, and France made known to the
Austrian Government that she was prepared to consider the
entering of Piedmontese territory by the Imperial troops as
a declaration of war against herself.
One of the first results of this warlike policy on the part
of Napoleon III. was the abandonment of Tuscany on the
27th of April by the Grand Duke Leopold, who, feeling
apprehensive as to what his ultimate fate might be, set out
at the first alarm of war, leaving his former subjects to their
own devices. The Florentine people are reported as having
smilingly Avished his Serene Highness a pleasant journey,,
while they waved before the eyes of the august fugitive
the tricoloured banner under whicli they intended to enrol
themselves. Upon Victor Emmanuel was conferred the
title of dictator of Tuscany during the war. His first act of
dictatorship was to issue a short proclamation to the army,
in which he announced that the war was provoked by
Austria; and made mention of the generous aid extended
by France in sending so numerous and so brave an army to
assist in the just and holy enterprise of asserting the inde¬
pendence of Italy.
Austria certainly appears to have been blind to her fate
at this crisis. She had herself called not only Sardinia, but
all Italy to the struggle which was to end so disastrously
for the Imperial power. Her declaration of war was received
with universal rejoicing throughout Piedmont; the people
applauded their king and his ministers; the soldiers set out
for the field of battle full of hope for their country and of
confidence in their cause; the king hastened to place him¬
self at the head of his army,' drawing his sword and casting
away the sheath,' exhorting his soldiers in few but eloquent
words to avenge the shame and defeat of Novara inflicted
upon them by the same enemy, and once more declaring
that he had no higher ambition than to fight for the freedom
and the independence of Italy.
The commencement of the war must have been a period
of grave anxiety even to the bold and valorous spirit of the
soldier-king. Bersezio, with his usual eloquence, describes
how the invading enemy spread like an overflowing stream
on the plain between the Sesia and the Po, while the unfor¬
tunate provinces that were watered by these rivers became:
Victor Emmanuel. 359
a prey to the barbaric insolence and cruel injuries of the
irritated foe. It was indeed a formidable array of troops
that was led by Marshal Gyulai; but before that commander
was able to commence an attack, the allied army, prompt in
its movements, was on the scene of action, led by the Emperor
Napoleon, who had crossed the Alps in order to assume the
command himself. Gyulai, already thrown upon the defen¬
sive, was in doubt whether the attack would commence on
the right or left bank of the Po, and the first attempt to
ascertain the intentions of the French resulted in the
Austrians being taken by surprise at ]\Iontebello, where they
were defeated. A few days afterwards the king, with the
greater part of his army, assailed Palestro, which was strongly
fortified, and here the Piedmontese troops enjoyed a success
peculiarly their own ; their valour was excited to the utmost
by the presence, example, and courage of their king, who led
them to the assault. After a short but sharp contest the
Piedmontese conquered the position, the fortress was theirs;
and the Cross of Savoy had once more put to flight the
Eagle of the Hapsburgs.
The Austrians were at the same time hard pressed by the
advance of Garibaldi, that heroic leader and distinguished
patriot, who passed along the foot of the Alps, arming the
population as he went. On the 22d of May lie crossetl the
Ticino at the village of Sesto Calende with a corps of volun¬
teers amounting to about 3500 men; by the evening of that
day he had reached Varese; on the 26th he made a bold
attack on the Austrians, driving them back to Camerlata;
and on the 29th he entered Como.
The Sardinian army followed up the success obtained at
Palestro by assailing the fortifications of Casalino and
Vinzaglio, both of which places were abandoned by the
Austrians after an obstinate resistance. They retired to
Bobbia; and, indeed, the Imperial army had sustained so
many and such grave losses that it had now become expe¬
dient to withdraw from Piedmont, which they did, pur¬
sued by the Franco-Italian troops. In vain the Emperor
of Austria set out from Vienna for the field of battle, hoping
that his presence might infuse fresh zeal and courage into
his failing soldiers. Put to flight by the bayonets of the
French, he saw them beaten at Magenta on the 4th of June ;
again they failed to achieve success at Melegnano on the 8th ;
and were finally repulsed and forced to retreat beyond the
Mincio, where they took refuge in the foi;r great fortresses
of the famous Quadrangle.
360 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
The whole of Lombardy was thus speedily delivered from
the foe, and the Emperor of the French, with the King of
Italy, made their triumphal entry into Milan. The king
now issued a short proclamation to the people of Lombardy,
part of which ran as follows :
'The victory of the confederate armies has brought me to your
city. The sub-Alpine population has made and is still making great
sacrifices for our common country. The Emperor of the French, our
generous ally, worthy of the name and race of Napoleon, has expressed
a wish to liberate Italy from the Alps to the Adriatic. By making
sacrifices in such a struggle, you will show yourselves worthy of the
destiny to which Italy is called after centuries of grief.'
This entry into Milan took place amidst the tumultuous
rejoicings of the exultant citizens; the streets and houses
were everywhere adorned with the Italian colours, the
colours of the victorious army, and crowded by a delighted,
admixing, and grateful population, who rent the air with
their applause. Together the royal warriors went to that
' marble miracle,' the beautiful Duomo, to return thanks for
the success of their arms, where, among clouds of incense,
arose to the solemn sound of the organ the glorious
Te Deum, in joyful thanksgiving to God. Perhaps, says
Bersezio, in those solemn and impressive moments, when
his heart must have beaten with such noble pulsations, there
might have appeared to the mental vision of Victor
Emmanuel the spirit of the father who had died in exile,
saying to him : ' Thou hast discharged the debt of citizen
and of son, thou hast fulfilled the vow of thy dying parent,
thou hast avenged me and thy country. Blessed mayst
thou be, last King of Sardinia and first King of Italy!'
Towards the close of Jime the Austrians repassed the
Mineio, and strengthened their position on the heights of
Solferino. The Franco-Italian army, which at once marched
in that direction, encountered the Imperial troops on the
24th of that month. More than a hundred thousand men
were engaged in the terrible battle of Solferino, which lasted
from daybreak to nightfall. At this momentous contest the
French and Piedmontese armies seem to have vied with each
other in the performance of deeds of valour. The king con¬
ducted the attack witli his usual courage, and the allied
armies once more vanquished their opponents. The Austrians,
disordered and put to flight, were compelled to retreat and
take refuge within the fortress.
It seems probable that had the allied armies at this time
followed up the advantage they had so rapidly gained, they
Victor Emmanuel. 361
might, indeed, have succeeded in setting Italy free, as the
Emperor Xapoleon had said, from the Alps to the Adriatic.
But to the utter astonishment, not only of Italy, but of all
Europe, the victorious armies suddenly brought their oj)era-
tions to a close while the task they had set themselves was
but half accomplished. To the wondering and indignant
Italians, the deliverance of Lombardy seemed a very poor
achievement for those who had called for the liberation of
Italy from the Alps to the sea. Yet so it was. The king,
with all his enthusiasm for the cause, felt himself unable to
carry on the war alone; and the Emperor of the Trench
(hardly influenced by the generous motives for which the
country had given him credit) seemed suddenly to have
arrived at the conclusion that enough had been ' accomplished
for glory' in a war which he had perhaps undertaken with
no other very definite object. It was suddenly announced
that the two emperors had agreed first on an armistice; and
immediately afterwards conditions of peace were arranged.
Yet the fetters of Austria were still riveted upon unhappy
Venice; while the noble provinces of central Italy seemed
condemned to accept the restoration of the tyrants they
abhorred, who would return eager for reprisals, prompt to
take vengeance for the insults they had received. The
peace of Villafranca, signed on the 11th of July 1859, fell
as a thunderbolt upon all Italy, and was regarded by the
outraged inhabitants of the unhappy country as a calamity
more terrible and humiliating than any defeat.
One true-hearted Englishwoman, a poetess resident for
many years in Italy, identified herself nobly with the cause
of 'jSTational Independence.' In her 'First News from
Villafranca,' one of a series entitled Lad Poems, Mrs.
Browning has given to the world a thrilling picture of the
hoiTor and emotion testified throughout the country when
the tidings of the proposed treaty reached the ears of the
indignant aud suffering population. We can only quote a
few verses:
' Peace, peace, peace, do you say 1
What!—with the enemy's guns in our ears ?
With the country's wrongs not rendered back ?
What!—while Austria stands at bay
In Mantua, and our Venice bears
The cursed flag of the yellow and black 1
' Peace, peace, is still your word.
We say you lie, then ! that is plain.
There is no peace, and shall be none.
362 The Ladies' Edijibiirgh Magazine.
Our very Dead would cry "Absurd ! "
And clamour that they died in vain,
And whine to come back to the sun.
' Hush! more reverence for the Dead!
They've, done the most for Italy,
Evermore since the world was fair.
Now would that ice had died instead,
Still dreaming peace meant liberty.
And did not, could not, mean despair!'
By the treaty of Villafranca, Lombardy was ceded to
Trance, and then transferred to Piedmont; while it was
settled that the fugitive princes of central Italy (most of
them Austrians or dependants on Austria) were to be restored
to their thrones. But here a new difliculty arose. The Italian
States, with Tuscany at their head, utterly refused to accept
the terms of the treaty; and feeling it to be a favourable
opportunity for taking matters into their own hands, they
united in declaring that they declined to submit to the
humiliating proposal of restoration. They then announced,
and steadily maintained, the resolution of annexing them¬
selves to Piedmont. A plebiscite of the people was taken,
which confirmed the decision, and Victor Emmanuel entered
Florence as sovereign of Italy, under a continuous shower
of bouquets, greeted by the ringing cheers, the shouts of
applause, and ' Viva il Re' of the enthusiastic Florentines.
The unfortunate Venetians were still held in bondage by the
Austrians; but many of them were present at the rejoicings,
and it is related of the king that he bared his head before
the crape-veiled flags which they bore in their hands. He
was crowned as their sovereign by the universal consent of
the Italians in the magnificent Duomo, of which the name
St. Maria del Fiore is so truly appropriate to a temple in the
' City of Lilies.'
Victor Emmanuel, after accepting the allegiance which
the States of central Italy had so eagerly tendered to him,
was compelled to pay some indemnification for the aid
received from his Imperial ally, who demanded Savoy and
Nice as the heavy price of his confederacy. Count Cavour
struggled long and vainly against the necessity of ceding
these fertile provinces to France (the latter was unfortu¬
nately the birthplace of the great patriot Garibaldi, who is
said never to liave pardoned that minister the act), but the
Emperor would not abate his terms; Savoy, it was urged, was
•geographically French, and in a military point of view
useless  to   Italy.'    After  much discussion, it   was  at last
Victor Evimamiel. 363
determined by the Government at Turin, that the question
of the cession of this territory to France should be decided
by the vote of the people, as had been arranged in the
annexation of Tuscany and the other States. This appeal to
universal suffrage was thought by many to be merely a
farce; it was said that French agents were employed in the
provinces to organize demonstrations in favour of the
Imperial Government. Be that as it may, the cession was
ultimately confirmed by a popular vote; and whether the
appeal to the people was a farce or not, it seems probable
that had there been any very powerful feeling against
annexation amongst the inhabitants of the provinces, some
national demonstration would have taken place. France, it
was felt, would at any rate hold Savoy and Nice as a material
guarantee for the maintenance of the Italian kingdom.
While these questions of plebiscite and annexation were
being discussed at Turin, an extraordinary impulse was
given to the progress of Italian unity by General Garibaldi,
who, with a heroism perhaps ' rarely paralleled,' had charged
himself with the deliverance of Sicily and Naples from the
tyranny of the rulers they detested. This he subsequently
accomplished; and though for a time the liberating General
chose to assume the title and functions of dictator, he
subsequently made arrangements for the annexation of the
Two Sicilies to the kingdom of Victor Emmanuel with the
usual formality of a popular vote, while he himself retired
to Caprera.
Finally, on the 18th of February 1861 the first national
Parliament assembling at Turin proclaimed Victor Emmanuel
king of Italy. It consisted of 443 deputies, and they came
from every province of the country. The illustrious Count
Cavour was Prime Minister, assuming also the office of
Minister of Foreign Affairs and the control of the Marine
department. This great diplomatist, one of the chief agents
in the regeneration of his country, lived to see his task all
but accomplished. In the early part of the summer of this
same year, a life which was one long struggle of disinterested
patriotism was brought to a close. Count Cavour died after
a short illness, leaving to posterity the well-earned reputa¬
tion of the first Italian statesman of his time.
During one of the earliest deljates of the new Parliament,
in which Cavour, Audinot, Chiaves, and many other well-
known statesmen took part, the possession of the ancient
capital of Eome was declared to be indispensable to the
perfect unity and independence of the kingdom.
364 TJie Ladies^ Ediubuygh Alagazinc.
Things seemed, however, to be hardly ready for the
supreme effort; but as a preliminary the king formed a
determination, to which, in spite of all obstacles, he steadily
adhered, namely, transporting the seat of government j)ro2;i-
sionally to Florence, with the threefold design of approach¬
ing Eome, of hastening the departure of the French troops
quartered in the Tuscan city, and of conducting the ad¬
ministration of the country from a more central point, and
one more adapted to the fulfilment of the project which
he had in hand. Great was the tumult which took place
in Turin when the king's determination became known.
This disturbance was, however, partly owing to the very
brusque and uncompromising manner adopted by the
ministry in announcing the contemplated change to the
people. The fears of all classes interested were naturally
excited; they almost dreaded the ruin of their fine and
imposing city, thus suddenly reduced from being the seat
of the court and government to a secondary position in the
Idngdom.
As to Florence, ' Queen of Arno's lovely vale,' she is said
to have been neither depressed nor delighted when she saw
herself elevated to the rank of capital, though her muni¬
cipal rulers surpassed themselves in the prodigality with
which they expended their finances in the welcome and
reception of their new guests; yet they are reported to
have regarded the event with calm and sublime indifference
when, six years later, it was settled (this time definitely)
that Eome, the ' Eternal City,' should become the headquarters
of the court, the seat of the government, and capital of the
kingdom.
During these six years many important events took place,
which indirectly concurred in realizing more completely
that dream of ages, the unification of Italy. Of these events
we can only briefly notice two.
The first was the war between Austria and Prussia, in
which Italy took an active part as an ally of the last-named
country, France remaining neutral. There were many
features in this campaign which concurred in rendering it
unfavourable to the Italian arms; yet the king, his two
eldest sons, and the army at large gave striking proofs of
valour, particularly at the battle of Custozza, fought June
24th 1866, where Prince Amadeus, Duke of Aosta, was
wounded. The loss of this battle was a severe disappoint¬
ment to the Italians; and later on ' the national mortifica¬
tion was largely increased by the defeat of Admiral Persano
Victor Eunnamtel. 365
by Admiral Tegethoff in a naval engagement off the island
of Lissa.' On the whole, Italy could not pride herself on the
success of her arms during this campaign, yet the result of
the war was favourable to the national interests. Venice
was gained to the cause of Italy by Prussian troops on the
plains of Bohemia; yet, as was justly remarked at the time,
that brilliant victory might never have been Avon, 'if the
flower of the Austrian army had not been detained to
oppose the Italian forces on the Mincio and the Po.' The
contest between Prussia and Austria came to an end after a
few weeks' campaign, and one great and decisive battle,
fought at Sadowa, in which the Prussians were victorious.
A few days after this battle the Austrian Government made
an awkward overture of peace, by suddenly offering to
surrender Venetia to the French. It was ultimately trans¬
ferred by them to the Italians, the Emperor Napoleon
insisting on an appeal to the popular vote; the inhabitants
unanimously agreed to annex their province to the kingdom
of Victor Emmanuel; and the Pearl of the Adriatic, with
her ' glorious city in the sea,' was once more united to her
Italian sister.
We have already alluded to another event which occurred
while Florence was still the provisional capital, and which
added considerably to the power of the dynasty, and to the
joy and satisfaction of the country. This was the marriage,
which took place on the 22d of April 1868, of Prince
Humbert of Savoy, the eldest son of Victor Emmanuel, with
his cousin, the Princess Margaret of Piedmont, daughter of
the Duke of Genoa, the brother whose early loss the king had
so deeply mourned. By this alliance Italy secured as its
future queen, in the event of the accession of the hereditary
prince to the throne, this amiable and beautiful princess,
whose presence has given to the Italian court a brilliancy
and attractiveness far greater than had ever distinguished it
before.
AVe pass on to two years later, when all Europe was startled
by events so astonishing that they seemed for the time to
reduce to insignificance all previous changes and transactions.
The result of the Franco-Prussian war, and overthrow of the
Empire in France, stimulated an immense agitation in Italy;
and it was thought by the king and his chief counsellor at
that juncture. Signer Lanza, likely to prove a favourable
opportunity for maturing a scheme which they had long
had at heart,—the acquisition of the city of Eome. At
the beginning of September in the year 1870, the Italian
366 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
' Government announced the determination they had arrived
at—viz., of compassing, if possible, the occupation of the
Eoman States. A few days later a considerable number of
Italian troops were despatched for that purpose; and by the
20tli they had made their way to the very gates of the city,
of which they were allowed to take peaceable possession by
the Pope. After the usual ceremony of a popular vote, the
Eoman States were publicly declared to be a part of the
kingdom of Italy. Henceforth the soul-stirring words, Roma,
capitale d'Italia, need no more be regarded as merely ' the
faint echo of a mighty past, but were the expression of a
living present.'
The court and parliament were transferred to Eome; and
on the 28th of November 1871, the king, at the first session
held in that city, thus announced the success of an enterprise
which must always be associated with his name: ' The
work to which we consecrated; our life is accomplished.
After long and bitter expiation, Italy is restored to herself
and to Eome, where for the first time after the dispersion of
many ages, our nation finds itself assembled with its king
and its parliament. Here everything speaks of greatness,
but at the same time everything puts us in remembrance
of our duties. The joy of these days must not cause us to
overlook them.'
From that memorable day the king devoted his time and
energies to affairs of State, showing himself prudent, vigilant,
and bold, able to keep his ministers in check, yet making
them the interpreters of his policy. While engaged in such
work as this, death overtook him. All the world knows the
rest,—it is yet in all our memories,—how, on the 9th of
January 1878, the bold, brave spirit of this liberator of his
country returned to the God who gave it. He died in Eome,
where all Avho were resident at the time can testify that the
grief of the citizens was uncontrollable. He was laid to rest
in the midst of the many illustrious dead in the Pantheon.
Let us hope that his tomb may prove to his countrymen a
continual incitement to a patriotism as far-sighted and un¬
selfish as his own.
Cakoline Geaeey.
(Concluded.)
The Old and the New. 367
Wc^z ©10 antj tfje Neb3,
By Sidney Philips.
CHAPTER VIII.
' C'est dans le coeur que Dieu a place le genie d'une femme.'
Lamartinb.
The long wet day was drawing to a close, and as the train
went dashing on past soaking fields and smoky towns,
through the black coal country, where tall chimneys reared
their uncouth heads in dreary ugliness, Maggie, leaning
back in a corner of a second-class carriage, felt exhausted
and faint from want of food. She had started too hurriedly
to think of breakfast, and on arriving at the station found
that, after feeing the servants and paying the cab, she had
only just enough money left for her second-class ticket.
Her fellow-passengers, a party of gentlemen's servants, were
joking and laughing amongst themselves in a way that
tended to depress rather than to enliven the poor girl.
Still those words rang in her ears:
' No more, no more,
Till the sea gives up her dead.'
Would she be too late after all ? If only she had started
sooner! Why did she not obey the first impulse of her
heart ? Why w^as she so weak as to yield on account of a
thoughtless jest ? And now she would be punished, perhaps,
by coming too late. If she could oirly hear that the end
was peaceful and cheered by hope, even that would not be
so hard to bear, for then she could almost feel as if Hector
might be nearer her in death than in life. After all, how
short is the passage that separates any of us from the other
world! A pointsman might forget to turn the lines right,
a signal might be mistaken, and she too might at any
moment find herself launched into the grand peut-etre.
Besides, even while here below^, might she not ' in heart and
mind thither ascend,' and 'continually dwell' with those
whom, having loved, she had lost, in the presence of Him
' whom, having not seen,' she ' loved' ? Meanwhile, could
she not trust for Hector, even though it might please God
to try her faith by never letting her hear a word of hope or
consolation? Though all might seem darkness, were they
not both equally in the hands of One to whom the darkness
and the light are both alike ?
^68 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
Soothed by these vague thoughts, poor exhausted Maggie
at length sank into a troubled, exhausted sleep, waking at
intervals with a horrible feeling of undefined dread, and yet
with a dim sense of the rest that reaches beyond the
tumultuous waves that agitate the surface of this troubled
life, to those calm depths where all is peace; for though ' it
needs a faith loug trained in hourly life' to realize this calm
while the storm is still raging, yet 'underneath are the
everlasting arms.'
' 0 Lord, give me strength for what Thou requirest, and
then require of me what Thou pleasest,' Avas the cry of
Maggie's inmost heart as she came in sight of the old house
at I3alnagoonie. "What awaited her there ? She had heard
at the station that Hector was still alive the day before, but
hardly expected to last through the night. In her impatience
she could not wait till a dog-cart was procured, but accepted
a lift in a farmer's cart; and, worn and exhausted as she
was, walked or rather ran for the last few miles. Footsore
and weary, she at length stood at the garden gate. The
blinds were mostly down, but then there was old Dr.
Macphuddle's carriage at the door, and that looked hopeful;
the doctor would scarcely be still there if all were over.
' Eh, but it's Miss Maggie, and ye're looking just awfu'
cauld !' was the greeting she received.
Her tongue could scarcely frame the word ' Lochinloan.'
' Eh, puir lad !' and a burst of tears was the only answer.
' Eh, puir lad, and to think that I should mind on him no
but a bit bairnie, whateffer! Och, mo throighe! mis an
duigh. But come awa' ben, mo grath. Eh, but it's just the
Lord's Avull, whateffer!'
Maggie struggled to speak, but the words would not come.
She could not ask if he were still alive.
* Eh, but I'm thinkin' he's no lang for the world, whateffer.*
' Then it's not all over. ... In time after all.'
A fortnight later INIaggie was standing on the staircase
talking to that well-known Edinburgh physician. Dr. X.,
who had been called in owing to her urgent remonstrances.
• Yes, Miss Mackenzie, he really is out of the wood now
entirely, thanks to your skilful nursing and to your seeing
what quite escaped poor old Macphuddle. Lochinloan owes
his life to your presence of mind. I must be off now, or I
shan't catch the train. Don't let him exert himself too
soon, and avoid excitement as much as possible.    I shall
The Old and the New. 369
send a telegram from the station to Lady Lucy IMacdonald,
to say that her son is entirely out of danger. Now, good¬
bye ; when I want a good nurse for a difficult case, when you
are in Edinburgh, 1 shall know to whom to apply. INIean-
while, don't overdo yourself; you are looking very pale.'
' Now, if women ever do succeed in becoming doctors,
which Heaven forbid they ever should, that's the sort of
stuff they should be made of,' murmured that great man,
Dr. X., to himself, as he wTapped the railway rug round his
knees, and settled himself down for the journey back to
Edinburgh. ' Eemarkably intelhgent girl. No nerves or
hysterical nonsense there. I'd warrant her as cool as a
cucumber under every emergency.'
But even great men are not always right. What would
Dr. X. have said if he could at that moment have seen into
Maggie's room, where she had flung herself down in a
passionate flood of tears ?
' Saved, saved by me, but for another!'
The last few days had been almost unbearable. To be
continually with Hector, to hear his voice filled with tender¬
ness whenever he addressed her, to feel his eyes resting on
her, following her every movement, and yet to know that
between them for ever rose that phantom. Lady Susan.
Could that woman really care for him—she who had not
returned even when the danger was the greatest ? Lady
Lucy, it was true, was detained in Eome by the illness of
one of her daughters, who had taken a fever there; but
daily bulletins were sent to Hector's mother, and the letters
were sometimes answered by Lady 'Susan herself; but what
cold, stiff notes the girl wrote. What sort of a woman could
she be ! Maggie had often studied her face in the album
down-stairs when she was dusting the best drawing-room.
It was a handsome face, without much expression.
' '•' Faultily faultless, icily regular, splendidly null," like
her letters,' thought Maggie. Would Hector be really happy
with such a woman ? Why did he never speak of her or
inquire after her ? He had seemed pleased and excited,
though, when one of the little grey envelopes with a silver
S arrived, addressed to him in the fine pointed hand that
Maggie knew so well, and which always seemed to her as if
a fly had been running over the paper. He read that letter
himself instead of asking to have it read to him, and even
made an effort to write an answer himself that day, but had
to give it up on account of weakness. But as far as Maggie
knew, that was the only letter that he had ever received from
No. 68.—August 1880. 2 A
370 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
his future bride. What could the woman be made of? She
must be as cold as a stone. "Well, perhaps it was better to
be cold and dignified, and not always yielding to foolish
fancies, and yet Maggie could not help feeling that, however
much she might regret the girlish sentiment that had blinded
her long ago, she never could be really sorry for the deep
love that now stirred every fibre of her being, for her life
would not have been complete without such an affection.
Love is the crown of life, and though to some lives it may
have only thorns and no flowers to offer, yet even then it is
a crown, and perhaps a more glorious one; for in love, as in
everything else, it surely is ' more blessed to give than to
receive.'
The first snowdrops were just appearing in the most sheltered
corner of the Balnagoonie garden, when one damp Saturday
afternoon towards the end of February, the Macintosh
children had all gathered round Aunt Maggie, who was tell¬
ing stories in the Balnagoouie parlour. The listeners were
not easily pleased. Alick petitioned for something in which
there was a great deal of fighting; while Bella, who was
sentimental, wanted it to be all about beautiful ladies; and
matter-of-fact Jock begged for something that had to do
with history. So Maggie chose some of the quaint Ossianic
legends, and the little faces grew eager and excited listening
to these old tales that tell of the days before the world itself
had lost its youth. After listening for some little time to
the woes of Darthula, loveliest of women, the children begged
for a song, and Maggie sang them that favourite song in the
Water-haiies:
' I once had a sweet little doll, dears,
The prettiest doll in the world.
Its cheeks were so white and so pink, dears,
And its hair was so beautifully curled.'
Then the song goes on to say how this doll was lost for a
long, long time, and how it was found at last, with all the
colour washed away by the rain, and with
' Its arm trodden off by the cows, dears,
And its hair it was no longer curled ;
But for old sake's sake it is still, dears.
The prettiest doll in the world.'
As Maggie finished the last verse, she turned round, and
saw that Hector had come in whilst she was singing, and
was standing just behind her.
' Aren't the children going out at all this afternoon,
Maggie ?'
The Old and the New. 371
' Well, I thought it looked too bad; but as it seems to be
clearing up now, we might perhaps go to the village. Jack,
I know that you want some new boot-laces; and I think,
perhaps, Alick, that we might get the string for you to finish
your netting. Eun away now, and get ready. I'll go and
put on my hat.'
' Is it really necessary that you should slave off after those
children, Maggie ?'
' Well, they might get into mischief if they were left to
themselves ; last time they were left alone, Bella fell into the
burn, and'—
' No doubt, it did her all the good in the world to have a
ducking. When we were youngsters no one thought of
wrapping us up in cotton wool or fussing about after us.
We might have broken our necks any day for all any one
cared; good thing, too, if we had. However, if you like, there's
that fellow of mine doing nothing; he may as weU see after
them a bit. Look here, boys, you just run off and find
Duncan, and tell him that he's to take you to the first
Lochinloan pool and show you how to throw a fly. There's
my smallest rod somewhere about, you can have that. Away
with you!    What, are you leaving the room too, Maggie ?'
' I think I've a letter I ought to finish up-stairs, Hector.
I've just remembered it.'
' Finish it to-morrow then, when I shall be gone. Can't
you be sociable and stop a few minutes witli me my last
day ? Or perhaps it's only in songs that you care to
sentimentalize over " old sake's sake " ?'
'Very well, Lochinloan, I will stop if yovi like,' said
Maggie, reseating herself with the air of a martyr; and
pulling out a pinafore, she began hemming it, on the wrong
side as it happened. The moment that she had dreaded so
long, and sought to evade in every possible way, had at last
arrived, and Hector really meant to tell her about his
engagement.
There was a pause of some minutes; at last Hector burst
out laughing.    Maggie looked up.
' I've been wondering how long you would sit there with¬
out speaking,' he said, ' with your eyes fixed on that bit of
stuff. I've no doubt that your thoughts are very engrossing,
but I wish that you would let me hear some of them. Look
here, Maggie, I've been thinking too during the last few
minutes, and shall I tell you what I thought ? Doesn't it
ever strike you as strange, that two people who've been
through as much together as you and I have, and who've
^72 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
been as much to one another as we once were, should meet
again after years and scarcely speak to one another at all ?
What on earth makes you run away whenever I come near
you ? I can quite understand that it wouldn't interest, and
might bore you, to hear what I've been about during those
years; but strange to say, I can't help being rather curious to
hear what you did with yourself in America. Does that
surprise you ?'
' There's really nothing to tell, Hector. As you kuow, I
was a governess during a good part of the time, leading a
very quiet, uneventful life.'
' And grinding hard, no doubt. Wearing yourself out, as
you always did.'
'Well, it was pretty hard work sometimes. Up at six,
began lessons at eight, and often not done till seven; and
then after that reading Shakspere with Dick Eendon, only
that I always enjoyed it if I wasn't too tired.'
' Who's Dick JRendon ?'
'A younger brother of Mrs. Whiteman's, the lady with
whom I lived.'
' What was he doing there ?'
' Nothing yet; he was to leave for the university next
year, and'—
' Oh, quite young then ?'
' Yes, about seventeen ; such a nice boy ! Oh, Hector! you
really are as great a fidget as ever! you've actually twisted
the tassel off that sofa cushion. If you were one of my
pupils, how I should scold you !'
' I wish that I were one of your pupils, Maggie, for then
perhaps you'd speak to me sometimes; and I'd rather be
scolded by you than never taken the least notice of, never
spoken to at all, when all these years my one thought has
been to see you again. It was a desperate time for me after
yoii left, Maggie. I understand now what it is that makes
fellows go to the devil. I didn't seem to care much myself
what became of me, and I knew that nobody else cared a hang.
Then I got in with a fast, rowdy set of fellows; and I suppose
that I should have gone on as I'd begun, only at last somehow
I heard of Jamie's marriage, and then I thought that perhaps-
after all you might come back again some day and change
your mind; so I just threw the whole thing up and sold out,
and settled down here, and when the lease of the farm fell in
I kept it in my own hands. But it was awfully dull work
at first living all alone, and many's the time I was nearly
taking to drink, just for tlie sake of something to do; but then
The Old and the New. 373
I didn't see why I should make a beast of myself as poor
Jock did; and when I thought of you, I felt that I couldn't
do it, for I loved you as much as ever, and though, of course,
it's no good now, I always shall love you, I suppose.'
Maggie's worst fears were realized. It would have been
easier to bear if only she had felt sure that Hector really
loved Lady Susan, and could have known that he was happy
with her. Could it be right that two people should be
miserable for the sake of one ? And would that one be happy ?
Surely even for Lady Susan herself it would be better that
tliis should end. What would be the good of Hector's
nominally fulfilling his promise if he really cared for another ?
Yet was not a promise sacred ? Ought not Maggie to try and
strengthen him to keep his word, and never let him know
how much it cost her to part from him for ever ? Oh for
some one to tell her what she ought to do, and to point out
the path of duty! She could not answer Hector; her nerves
had not yet recovered the strain of the long nursing; the
struggle was too much for her, and she burst into tears. Her
head had sunk down on the table beside her, and her face
was hidden in her hands; but she felt that an arm was thrown
round lier, that passionate kisses Avere showered down on her
hair and neck, while a broken voice exclaimed:
' ^ly darling, I didn't mean to say it, I didn't mean to
grieve you. I'm not worth worrying about, really not. I
won't annoy you any more. I know that you can't help
not caring for a fellow like me, and I didn't mean to say
anything ; but I felt that we might never meet again, and
somehow I couldn't help it.'
Was it a demon or an angel that whispered to Maggie at
that moment to let Hector at any rate have the happiness
of knowing that she loved him, whilst a wild longing rose in
her heart to be happy, if but for a moment, in the conscious¬
ness of their mutual love; would not that one moment be
worth any misery that might follow ? and surely Lady Susan
might spare Maggie that one hour out of the long, loveless
life that Hector would spend at her side. It was but for a
second, though, that such thoughts flashed through Maggie's
mind. A moment more and she tore herself out of Hector's
embrace and sprung to her feet, exclaiming:
' Hector! how dare you ?    Eemember Lady Susan !'
' Lady Susan !' said Hector, in a bewildered voice, gazing
at Maggie as she stood a few paces off, her whole frame
trembling with emotion, her eyes dashing, and a deep flush on
her pale cheeks.    ' Lady Susan!' he repeated,' what on earth
374 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
has she to do with it ?' Then, as if a sudden light broke in
upon him, he exclaimed: ' What! you don't mean to say that
you really thought that I was engaged to her ? Why, Susan
Gordon's been in love with my cousin Macdonald of Glen-
fattie for ever so long, and he's mad about her; only her
people won't hear of it, so they sent her abroad with my
mother to try and get the idea o\it of her head. But she's
sticking to it like a regular brick, so I suppose that it will
all come right in the end. I never saw a fellow in such a
state as (jTlenfattie was in about it. She took advantage of
a distant cousinship between us, to write to me when I was
ill, and inquire after him, and I tried to answer at once, but
couldn't manage it for some days.'
The room seemed to swim before Maggie's eyes; she
caught hold of the back of a chair for support.
' What! not engaged ? Nothing between iis ?'
Then a voice seemed to come from somewhere, whether
far or near she could not tell. ' No, darling,' it said, ' there
is nothing between us but your own will.' Maggie looked
up. Hector was close beside her now, their eyes met, and
from that moment there was no need of any further explana¬
tion between those two then or for ever afterwards.
' Hector,' whispered Maggie, ' there's something I ought to
tell you.' Hector's arms relaxed their hold a little. ' I hope
you won't mind, but I—I—I've written a book.'
' Well, and I shan't mind if you write a dozen more, as
long as you don't expect me to read them.'
' Oh, but I shall though, prefaces, appendices, notes and all.
I shall never go and look at those shorthorns if you don't.'
' Oh, come now, that really is hard on a fellow!' Then
after a few minutes Hector began, ' And, Maggie, then you
really don't mind having a fool of a husband, who won't care
for half the clever things that you take an interest in.'
'What does that signify?' murmured Maggie, nestling
closer to him, ' so long as he cares for me.'
At that moment there was a noise like a stifled scream
overhead. Both started to their feet. Doors were hastily
opened and shut, people seemed to be moving about in the
passage. The door was flung open, and Mrs. Macintosh
rushed in, with a look of horror in her white face. She could
not speak, but they followed her up-stairs; and it was not till
they reached Aunt Jean's room that they realized what had
happened, or knew that the dark sea of death that flows round
human life and mingles the sullen nmrmur of its waters with
The Old and the New. 375
earth's blithest strains, had burst in upon them at the very
moment when their cup of happiness seemed the fullest.
Aunt Jean had been growing gradually weaker for some
time past, but she had seemed unusually cheerful that morn¬
ing. They had left her as usual for her afternoon sleep; and
whether she was unconscious of the approach of death, or
tried to call assistance and failed, or if it was her wish at the
last solemn hour to be alone with her Maker, they could not
tell. All that they ever knew was, that at the very moment
that love opened a new life to Maggie and Hector, the old
friend who had loved them both so dearly passed away to
the presence of Him 'Who endureth in Himself without
becoming old, and who maketh all things new.''
As some hours later they stood together and gazed at the
face they knew so well, now fixed in deep repose, Hector
whispered: 'Oh, Maggie, if we could only have told her that
it was all right between us!'
' Hector, dear,' answered Maggie, smiling through her tears,
' don't think me very foolish, but I'm sure she knows.'
It may be that Maggie was right. Who can tell ? ' Per¬
haps the faintest of our whispers may reach eternity, for it
is not so far from any of us, after all.'
I SAID that the day was dead.
Its tender beauty fled;
Yet in my dreams of yesternight,
There came again the gracious light
Of a bygone day.
Once more, just as of old,
I stepped from out the cold
Of lonely self, into the heat
Where the quicken'd pulses beat;
Once more the thrill was mine
Of a joy that seemed divine.
Say, is sleep cruel or kind.
When she bringeth back to mind
Light from a bygone day ?
Joan Scott.
^ St. Augustine, Conf. Book ix.
3/6 TJie Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
\% tlje ^ctetr ©rama capable of rlcbating tfje
iSassfS ?
(Read at the Ladies' Debating Society.)
I.—AFFIRMATIVE.
To answer this question rightly would require research
and time much beyond our present limits. To inquire
whether the drama is capable of elevating the masses, we
should consider whether it has done so at any time and in
any place; the causes of its success or failure in this point;
the admiration or reprobation it has excited; the characters
both of authors and actors of plays ; its influence on society
past and present, and various other particulars. We may
relieve our audience at once from the prospect of a paper
like an old-fashioned sermon, winding up with ' fifteenthly'
and an application, by stating that we shall confine ourselves
to a short notice of two or three historical aspects of the
drama, a brief consideration of the objections urged against
it, and a mere glance at its present condition and prospects.
The stage has exercised a singular influence upon most
races and generations, both rude and refined. The relish for
it seems innate in mankind, independent of fashion; it is
only checked when religious opinions are brought to bear
against it. This taste seems to be akin to that which finds
gratification in the stirring incidents of real life—a celebrated
trial; a romantic love-story; a battle; an animated parlia¬
mentary debate; nay, even lower in the scale, a street row
or a scene at a police court. ' As good as a play' is a phrase
frequently applied to, and always in commendation of, some
occurrence.
In ancient times, we find in the most cultured nation, the
Greeks, great prominence given to the stage.^ In the
Tragedies of JEschylus, besides the refined relations of
the sexes in marriage, we are struck by the depth, subtilty,
and boldness both of conception and language. When we
remember that these poems were brought out upon the
stage, acted before an audience without a printed text or
previous knowledge of them, we find ourselves in presence
of a society which must, in intellectual culture, have been
superior to the best and most critical modern audience in
mental power, in quickness of comprehension, in correctness
of taste, and in accuracy of judgment. Pure and high moral
notions pervade these plays; in one or two instances curious
forecasts of Christian doctrine, as immutable morality among
^ See Mahaffy's Social Life in Greece.
Is tJic Acted Drama capable of elevating the Masses ? 377
the gods, and the indelible nature of sin recoiling on the
third and fourth generation. The remedy, of course, re¬
mained to be revealed by Christianity. These deep moral
ideas are also in agreement with those of Sophocles in the
^^dipus, though, like Euripides, we find different types in
his plays. In Attic comedy, as Aristophanes, we look in
vain for noble qualities, or even high refinement of feelings,
but we must not take him or his fellow-poets as trustworthy
guides to Attic social life. We must allow that in all
literature, from which the drama is not excepted, there is
some which panders to low taste, and degrades human
intellect; but as the stage was almost the only, certainly
the chief, way in which literature of the description we have
first mentioned was presented to the Greek mind, we may
fairly claim that the acted drama was a very important
means of elevating the masses in ancient times.
Our next example shall be drawn from England in the
palmy days of the stage in the age of Shakspere. Our
account is taken chiefly from Green's History of the Englisli
Feoplc. After considering how much English playwrights
may have owed to the Spanish drama, which had reached a
high standard under Lopes and Cervantes, he says that the
real origin of the English drama lay in England itself. The
temper of the nation was dramatic ever since the Reforma¬
tion plays had been produced, and so great was their
popularity that even under Henry VIII. a master of revels
had to be appointed to supervise them. Queen Elizabeth's
progresses from shire to shire were marked by a series of
interludes. The Mystery Plays of the Middle Age handed
on the spirit of the drama. The English stage burst out
with amazing genius from the year 1576, when the Earl of
Leicester's servants erected the first public theatre in Black-
friars. The theatres at first were only booths or the court¬
yards of inns. All appliances were of the roughest—a scroll
on a post intimated whether the scene was Venice or London,
a few flowers represented a garden, heroes rode on hobby¬
horses, crowds and armies were formed by a dozen scene-
shifters witli swords and bucklers. Let not my hearers
laugh. The noblest efforts of genius were thus enacted; in
this manner did Shakspere's immortal plays instruct and
amuse the masses. Will any one deny that the acted drama,
even in this rude form, was capable of elevating them ? The
stage was crowded with nobles and courtiers, the benches
below were thronged with citizens and apprentices; all the
world was there.    And if the vigorous life, the passionate
378 TJie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
energy, the reality, the life-like confusion, the racy dialogue,
the wit, the pathos and sublimity, were in the highest type
mixed with occasional grossness of expression, which would
not now be tolerated, and in less refined writings with rant
and buffoonery, coarse horrors and vulgar scenes,—what is
this but to allow the mixture of evil in all human work, the
stains which detract from, but do not obliterate, the gener¬
ally elevating effect of this great influence of culture on
people of all classes. The first public theatre was erected in
the middle of Queen Elizabeth's reign; before the close of
it eighteen existed in London alone. Fifty dramatic poets,
many of the first order, appeared in the fifty years which
preceded the closing of the theatres by the Puritans; and,
great as is the number of plays that have perished, we still
possess a hundred dramas of that period, of which at least a
half are excellent. These facts are proofs of our position as
to the effect of the acted drama.
We must slightly glance at the so-called Miracle -Plays of
the Middle Ages, of which that at Ober-Ammergau forms
almost the sole curious survival. No doubt it was necessary
to suppress them when abuses began to creep in, and
religious teaching could be spread by other means; but at
an earlier period, all research tends to show that their
influence was good. The testimony of all who have wit¬
nessed the Ober-Ammergau play is to the simplicity and
genuineness of religious feeling of all concerned in it.
Different opinions have been expressed as to its merits, and
impression on the minds of the spectators, but none as to
the character of the peasantry. Whether the crowds of
tourists and the unavoidable accessories, too great on the
last occasion, and increased this year, may spoil these
characteristics and lead to the suppression of the perform¬
ance, we know not. It will be a matter of great regret
should it do so, and leave only the memory of a unique
spectacle, and of a people whose singular purity and freedom
from vice are ascribed to the elevating influence of their
decennial acted play.
We must now in fairness consider the reverse side of the
question historically—we mean the condition of the stage in
the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. We here come
upon the state of affairs when, in France, the rites of
Christian burial were denied to an actor, and when, in
England, one of the most remarkable religious works of
that, or perhaps of any age,—Law's Serious Call,—could
characterize the theatre as the devil's house, and actors as
Is the Acted Drama capable of elevating the Masses ? 379
servants of the devil, in contradistinction to the house of
God. We shall take our account partly from Lecky's Eng¬
land in the Eir/hteenth Century. He says the profligacy of
the theatre at that time can hardly be exaggerated, and it
continued with little abatement for two reigns. Few ladies
of respectability could appear at the production of a new
comedy; those that came were masked. By the time of the
Eevolution there was an improvement. Collier's well-known
Short Vici'j of the Stage had a good and sensible effect; a
royal order and a master of revels, who exercised his function
with considerable severity, produced a favourable change,
though much remained to be done. Great scandal M'as
caused by a prologue of Garth's, spoken at the opening of
the Haymarket Theatre in 1705, congratulating the world on
the stage taking the place of the church. The two Houses
of Convocation, in a representation to the Queen in 1711,
dwelt strongly on the immorality of the stage. Swift placed
its degraded condition among the causes of corruption, and
we believe the English stage was at this time worse than
the French. We accordingly give our opponents any advan¬
tage they may derive from our admitting the degradation of
the stage for a considerable period, but it must be remem¬
bered that our subject is not. Has the acted drama alv:ays
elevated the masses ? but only can it do so ? To allow a
partial failure is not to deny its capacity,—merely to admit
that it, like many other influences, failed in its calling at
times. It was a corrupt age; and Lecky's remark that the
stage suffered from its low tone, and cannot be accused of
being answerable for it, may receive some proof from the
fact that there were more than a dozen theatres open in the
reign of Queen Elizabeth, when we have shown its effect to
have been beneficial, and only two in the reign of Charles
II. Lecky also adds, 'The religious prejudice in the latter
half of the eighteenth century against the stage, due to the
influence of Methodists and Evangelicals, was and is much
to be regretted.' He adds, ' It has prevented an amusement
which has largely added to the sum of human happiness,
and which exercises a very considerable educational influ¬
ence, from spreading anywhere except in the greatest centres
of population. It has multiplied, proportionately, amuse¬
ments of a far more frivolous and purely unintellectual
character, and it has withdrawn from the audiences in the
theatre the very classes whose presence would be the best
gtiarantee of the habitual morality of the entertainment.'
The puritanical objections apply to many other forms of
380 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
amusement—as, for instance, to dancing. To the argument
that they would deprive mankind of many of the highest
works of genius, we have heard it said, ' Oh, there is no
-objection to plays if they are not acted! nor to dancing if it
be not promiscuous, that is, confined to one sex !' No doubt
it would be most unobjectionable, but rather dull! And
can any one suppose that Shakspere wrote his immortal
plays not to be acted ? However, we have not now to
combat religious scruples, and we shall conclude by a short
glance at the general condition and capabilities of the stage.
One point we can hardly leave untouched, though we
enter upon it with reluctance. We mean the characters of
actors and actresses. To a certain degree, they are public
property, and should receive the same judgment to which
other people are subject. But we object to more than this.
We miglit condemn the study of much literature were we
to constitute ourselves the judges of the private lives of all
authors. Shall we forbid history because of the opinions of
Hume and Gibbon ? Anythiug immoral or degrading in
literature and the drama should be unhesitatingly con¬
demned, erroneous or sceptical opinions and misrepresenta¬
tions guarded against. Are they more common in the drama
than ill current magazines and other literature ? We must
mete justice to all alike. Besides, though sad tales of sin
and error meet us in theatrical memoirs, do they not also
pervade the records of courts, nobles, and people ? But
others, like Macready, who implored the blessing of Almighty
God on his efforts in Covent Garden Theatre, may teach us
a lesson; or, like the Keans and Kembles in their interesting
recollections, show us an example of purity of life and care
for the safety of the young amid the trials of the theatre, as
in other walks in life. No doubt they have peculiar tempta¬
tions ; but let us not doubt the grace that is sufticient for all
who ask it, or be the first to cast a stone at them.
There is a natural fascination about the stage and its
associations, which we must claim on our side of the question,
as it exists in varied types of mankind. Who, that is not
eaten up with Protestantism, would not give a great deal
to liave heard Garrick, John Kemble, and Mrs. Siddons !
' There is an air of romance,' says Hazlitt, ' about players ; it
is pleasanter to see them in their own persons than any of
the three learned professions. We feel more respect for
John Kemble in a plain coat, than for the Lord Chancellor
on tlie woolsack.' The drama is a force that must be taken
into account for good or for evil.    To prove the point against
Otir Library Table. 381
us, our opponents must show that there is nothing good or
elevating about it. Much requires reforming, but something
has been done. Look at Garrick, who raised incalculably
the standard of theatrical taste, and in great measure freed
his profession from the discredit under which it laboured.
Think of Phelps at Sadlers Wells, for eighteen years,
entrancing the populace at Clerkingtou witli the sublime
dramas of Shakspere. Was that not elevating them ? Let
those answer who best know to what sort of amusements
such people betake themselves when unguided by a refining
influence. Turn to Macready and the two Keans at Covent
Garden and Drury Lane, the reforms introduced, the tone
and taste created, and the corruptions checked. And now
we appeal to Irving at the Lyceum,' to the Kendals, and
many more high-minded gentlemen and ladies in the profes¬
sion of actors and actresses, to the moral and high tone of
many plays produced at the present day, though alloyed by
others of questionable taste and morality, to support our side
of the question.
More might be done if people would patronize only plays
of high standard, if the clergy, like the Bishop of IManchester,.
would speak out on the subject,^ to ensure the acted dramas
keeping the people away from low and disgusting exhibitions
like those of Zazel and Zoo, and providing them with a great
means of good and elevating amusement. M. J. U.
©ur iLibrarg ®able.
■Wintering in the Rivieka. By Wm. Miller. London:
Longmans, Green, & Co.
This book gives an excellent description of some of the favourite
health resorts of the south of Europe, and is one highly to be recom¬
mended to intending travellers. Here they will find the fullest
information on all points usually monopolized by guide-books, such
as ways and means of locomotion, where to be on your guard, and
where to take matters easily. Here we have the manners and
customs of hotel keepers and waiters, of guides and vendors of
curiosities, of Ptnaions and their proprietors. All matters relating
to money and its value are treated of, with the diiferent routes and
circular tours, such as those conducted by Mr. Cook.    There is also
1 A letter in the Daily Newx, from a working man, complaining of
the abolition of the shilling gallery at the Lyceum, shows the
appreciation of his class of a high style of drama.
'- We are glad to see ' The Stage' is to be discussed, under the
head of ' Recreations,' at the Church Congress this year.
382 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
a full description of the advantages and disadvantages of coupons.
The registration of luggage is an item not to be overlooked, and,
indeed, train peculiarities of all kinds, including those of railway
porters, may here be digested at leisure. The greatest peculiarity of
all in the eyes of the British tourist must be, if we are to believe Mr.
Miller, the invincible objection of the natives, and indeed of all
travellers except the British, to look out of the windows, even when
passing through the grandest scenery. Unfortunately they will not
allow others to do so either, but persist in keeping down the blinds,
refusing to listen to expostulation, though this experience is con¬
trary to our own, which, though limited, can testify to invariable
politeness in this and other matters. There is an amusing chapter
on pension and hotel life, the representatives of all nations who come
and go, their meals and general manner of life, with charges i^ast and
present. The postal arrangements, which are fully entered into,
convey much useful instruction.
After all these preliminary remarks, we then enter with the writer
on a tour in the Riviera, commencing with Cannes and Nice, and
thence to Mentone, the principal object of the journey. We have a
charming description of Cannes, which for beauty of situation is
almost unrivalled. It is yearly increasing in importance and in
favour with strangers, and almost its only drawback seems to be the
army of mosquitoes, who wage war in terrific fashion on the helpless
new-comers. Mentone is the paradise of invalids, and as such is the
great resort in winter, though we believe many physicians are
beginning to consider the air too relaxing, and that a more bracing
climate is in reality more suitable.
The life at Mentone is fully described, the excursions, hotels,
festivals, etc., and the picture is undoubtedly inviting. San Remo
and Genoa next claim the attention, the latter, with its gorgeous
palaces, taking one back to the days of its former glories, and then
on to Rome, whose world-renowned ruins receive every attention, as
well as its churches and picture galleries. Naples is not so great a
favourite with the writer, who considers the accounts of its beauty
are exaggerated. Florence and Venice are highly appreciated,
especially the latter. ' There was no place in Italy that was more
attractive. Its gorgeous palaces and churches, its strange, unique
kind of life, the multitudinovis canals teeming with gondolas, and
the pleasure of moving about in them, was something we never could
forget.'
But it is impossible to go on enumerating all the wonderful and
beautiful places and cities visited by Mr. Miller, whose book is a
sort of travelling encyclopedia, at least for this region; and if its
size is not objectionable, we might well recommend intending visitors
to carry it with them, for the sake of the thorough instruction it com¬
municates—instruction which, as we said before, is seldom conveyed
except through the medium of guide-books. The various good illus¬
trations give great additional interest to the volume.
©ucstton Series.
I. Hiftory.—Describe shortly three of the principal naval victories
of England, with names of the commanders on both sides (300
words).
Question Series. 383
II. Loijic.—State the points at issue between Nominalists and
Realists (300 words).
Answers to ?-fiac/t Qu. C, not later than September 5th, care of Messrs.
Morrison and Gibb, 11 Queen Street, Edinburgh. Only one side
of the sheet of paper to be written upon, and it is especially requested
that nothing but the answers may be sent to Qu. C. Any other
communication must be addressed in the usual form to the Editor,
or no notice can be taken of such enclosures.
ANSWERS TO JUNE SERIES.
History.—Eight answers received on Marlborough. Best, Apis,
though closely pressed by TnoROUGH, second. Third, Wolfra, very
good. Linda, Aeachne, Greta, Pink, and Wealdmoor have sent
fairly good answers.
Logic.—Only five answers. Best, Wealdmoor. Second, Irrlicht,
with a very good answer.    Linda, Greta, and Pink all good.
Give a short outline of the career of Marlborough.
John Churchill, the son of a Devonshire squire, was born in ICoO.
He began life in the Royal Guards of Charles II., and after five
years' service in France under Marshal Turenne, was promoted to
the colonelcy of an English regiment in the service of France.
James, Duke of York, was his first patron, and to him he remained
faithful after his accession, and during the rebellion of Monmouth.
Here his fidelity ended, for on the arrival of William of Orange,
Churchill deserted to him. Created Earl of Marlborough by his
new master, he did good service in Ireland, but his restless mind
was not long content with this allegiance. Througli his wife, Sarah
Jennings, he had obtained great influence over the Princess Anne,
and he now schemed to rouse the Tories against William and Mary,
and give the crown to his patroness. The plot was discovered, and,
stripped of his honours, the disgraced Churchill at once opened
communications with the exiled James. But, though thus untrust¬
worthy, Marlborough was recognised by William as the one captain
fitted by his military genius to break the power of France, and
recommended by him to his successor as her Captain-General. In
1702 began Marlborough's great military career—a career of unbroken
success as regards enterprises of his own devising, beginning with
the capture of the Dutch fortresses, and followed by the later victories
of Blenheim, Ramillies, and Malplaquet. But the war was un¬
popular and languishing to a close ; and the action of parties variously
perplexed and embroiled, issued finally in the dismissal of Marl¬
borough from all his employments in 1712, when he retired to the
Continent. The accession of George I. recalled him to his dignities,
■which he enjoyed till his death on June 8, 1722. Apis.
State some of the causes of ambiguity of terms, and illustrate.
Ambiguity arises through indefiniteness of statement, imperfection
of language, and defects in reasoning. The most gifted, the most
sincere, often fail to frame words so as to exclude it from their
writings or utterance, and sophists court it to veil their fallacies.
384 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
Ambiguities are caused by words possessing more than one signifi¬
cation—such  as  light,   the   opposite   of darkness,   and   light,   the
opposite of heavy.    Whence the jesting syllogism—
' Light is contrary to darkness.
Feathers are light; therefore
Feathers are contrary to darkness.'
The middle term is ambiguous, and used in differing sense in the
two premises,
' 3 and 2 are 2 numbers.
5 is 3 and 2 ;
Therefore 5 is 2 numbers.'
The middle term is ambiguous, signifying in the major premiss,
' taken distinctly ;' in the minor, ' taken together.'
Words that have grammatical affinity are sometimes stated as
having corresponding meaning and value—such as presume and
presumption, project and projection. 'Great'and 'expedient' are
words to which very varying meaning may be attached. Some words
or phrases have two intentions,—a general and a limited signification,—
as, a farmer may denote fat oxen when speaking of beasts; a
sportsman partridge when talking of birds. Fallacy is easily de¬
tected when an argument is in the regular form of a syllogism, <is
the premises standing in juxtaposition, their validity or invalidity,
can be noticed. The sophist avoids direct assertion of what he wishes
unduly to assume, and will take care to place his propositions at
such distance from each other that the inattentive may overlook
ambiguity existing in the terms.
' The remedy for ambiguity is a definition of the term which is
suspected of being used in two senses.' Logicians can say, 'We can
clear these ambiguities, and know their spring, their head, their true
descent.' Wealdmoor.
Notices to Corrcspontimts, etc.
Ladies are invited to contribute to this Magazine. All communi¬
cations to be addressed, Editors, Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine, Messrs.
Morrison & Gibb, 11 Queen Street, Edinburgh.
Papers intended for immediate insertion must be in the hands of
the Editors by the first of the previous month ; attention is requested
to this rule.
We must warn our correspondents that no MSS. can be returned
unless/«W postage be sent, that letters needing reply must contain a
stamp, and that the Editors can forward no communications left with
them unless stamped. Poems sent in letters will not be returned
unless a stamp be sent. No anonymous communication either to
the I^ditors or the Office-bearers of the Literary Society will be
noticed.
The next meeting of the Ladies' Edinburgh Literary Society will
be held on Saturday, October 9th, at 5 Chester Street, at 11 a.m.
Subject of Debate: ' Is Elizabeth properly ranked as one of the
greatest of English sovereigns ?'
Tracks of the Crusaders. 385
EraciiS of t!)e Crusaticrs.
Bound for Jerusalem, we belong henceforth to a great
company. How many hundred thousands have trod that
way before us ! How many thousands still pour along that
most beaten of tracks, so little changed through all the
centuries of Christendom! Will some of you come with us ?
for after all, to each pilgrim in turn it is new and different,
and we too are touched, delighted, or amused, often in most
unexpected ways. Come up on the deck of the little rolling
steamer, and look for the first time at the Holy Land. A
spring morning of cloudless blue; the white flat roofs and
domes of Jaffa piled up against a wooded hill all olives and
orange trees, while between rolls a wild sea flashing into
foam on the low rocks which girdle the land. All the waist
of our ship is crowded with deck passengers. Many are
Arabs squatting on their carpets—the poorer and dirtier on
the planks. Dirty they may be, but picturesque in their
black and white cloaks, with vivid dashes of colour on
Keyfya (head shawl) or belt. They are not so dirty as our
Eussian fellow-pilgrims. Half the quarter-deck is taken up
by a sort of roofed sheep-pen; and here the pilgrims huddle,
packed tight, and seldom moving night or day. Now they
are being fetched out like cattle, and the yelling Arabs that
man the big row-boats that dance by the steamer's side, are
having a fine game of ball with the other Arabs on board.
These last pick up the pilgrims in their strong arms, regard¬
less of age or sex, and hurl them into the boats—a howling
bundle of dirty sheep-skins or brown petticoats. Poor things !
theirs is no pleasure journey. We are more tenderly dealt
with, and crouch on the ship's ladder fixed horizontally, till
the boat rises on the wave, and we can drop into the Arabs'
arms below. And soon we are pitching over the waves, and
running through a very narrow channel between grim flat
rocks. On one stood Andromeda, chained, when Perseus
flew to the rescue.    But St. George has all the credit now.
There was a time when the achievements of George, the
soldier-martyr of Cappadocia, were said to be only known to
God, though from remote times he was commonly invoked
by soldiers. But early in the Crusades we find him the
hero of the dragon story. Did some early pilgrim, as Euskin
suggests, find hereabouts some allusion to the victory won
No. 69.—Skptkmbek 1880. 2 B
386 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
by the Gorgon's head, and, deceived by the likeness in the
letters, conclude that here M'as a record of his beloved St.
George ? It is likely; at all events, his unknown achieve¬
ments became crystallized into the great symbolic story of
the victory of good over evil, and he became the ideal of the
Crusaders. His shield here flashed in the sky in the crisis
of the battle, and gave the victory to the Christians. At
Lydda, ten miles off, his church still stands by the stream,
which a writer of the second century describes as running
red as blood because Perseus bathed there after his fight
with the monster. More than all, our own King Eichard
fought so often under his invocation, that 'St. George for
merry England' became our battle-cry, and he came home
with the Crusaders as our national patron saint. The story
goes in the contemporary chronicle, that at the fatal battle
of Tiberias (a.d. 1185), when Saladin wrested Palestine from
the Christians, the master of the Templars, De Mailles, who
rode a white horse, before he fell overpowered amid a heap
of slain, performed such prodigies of valour that the Moslems
announced with great rejoicing that the champion of Christ¬
endom, St. George himself, had been killed in the battle.
Our dear Sir Walter has much to answer for in the slanders
of the delicious Talisman, which has given many people their
first interest in the Crusades. The Grand Master of the
Templars is accredited with the lawless conduct of Eeginald
de Chatillon, and the whole is an inadmissible slander on
the order as it then was, if indeed it ever deserved one tithe
of the evil reputation cast on it by its greedy enemies.
Another pretty story about St. George is told by De Joinville.
He mentions the fact of there being numbers of Christian
Tartars to whom St. Louis sent ambassadors from Jaffa.
They reported that the nomadic Christians were so numerous
that they had eight hundred chapels on wheels ! The Cham
had been baptized; and De Joinville relates the story of
their conversion as told by the ambassadors. A short time
before, one of the greatest of the Tartar chiefs had been
missing for three days, and on his return told how he had
lost himself, and then had a vision of a heavenly court
where a great King, with twelve kings by him, and a glorious
company round, directed him to win a victory over his
enemies, but desired that, first of all, Christian prisoners
held by the Cham should be set at liberty, and their doctrine
listened to. This the chief promised he would try to carry-
out. ' But, Sire,' he said,' I shall never find my way back
unguided.'    Then the King said,' Come hither, George, con-
Tracks of the Crusaders. 387
duct this man to his quarters;' and a brilliant youth came
forward, and the Tartar found himself at home again.
Safe ashore in Palestine, well through the perils of the
seas, we elbow our way through crowds of dirty, picturesque
people, and into a char-a-banc, which takes us to the Hotel
of Jerusalem outside the town.    So far we have been in a
crowd of passengers, but now we draw off into our own
circle.    We are five—three gentlemen and two ladies.   There
flashes up on horseback to the inn, reminding one of a blue
dragon-fly, a brilliant being in a gold-coloured heyfya and
suit of Syrian blue, a white Arab cloak toning down the
well-contrasted colours, and a brown face bright with intelli¬
gence.   We are pleased to hear that he is our own dragoman
{Daoud, or David), and our first pleasant impression was
only deepened  and  strengthened  during all our journey.
Our suite, all in becoming Eastern costume, consists besides
of a waiter, an Abyssinian cook, and four muleteers—Am
Barak, Abu Mariam, Abu Hassan, Ali Ibraham, Abu Halil;
also Massaoud or Tic, a little vagrant ragamuffin that did
the odd work for his food, a regular camp follower.    There
are nine horses, six mules, and three donkeys.    They take
up our baggage, and all but Daoud are soon away, while we
stroll down through the covered ways and narrow streets of
the city.    Every one goes to see the house of Simon the
Tanner.    There is a tannery near, otherwise half the town
would serve for this shrine, as everywhere the sea spreads
before it.   The inn was all astir when we returned—travellers
rushing here and there in search of means of getting on,
some, whom we did not envy, being packed into a char-iu-
hanc called the Jerusalem diligence, to be bumped over the
rough track just passable for wheels.    A few, like ourselves,
had horses secured; others had to stay where they were, in
that condition of injured surliness which is one symptom of
what the Easterns call the ' curse of the Englishman,' viz.—
the impossibility of remaining still.    And now we pranced
out into the intense sunshine, through the wide market-place,
among the brightly dressed crowds, past the couchant camels
and the fine donkeys, along the white road where our eyes
were refreshed by resting on the cool olive and orange woods,
diversified by the column-like palm trees alongside of us.
So we reached the flat plains of Fhilistia.    It was a scene
of luxuriant plenty and peace—that is, peace armed in the
persons of peasants and wayfarers.    But few towns have
been  so  fought round  as  Jaff"a,  from   Samson's   days  to
Napoleon's.    Especially during  the  Crusades, battle after
388 Tlie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
battle was fought on this plain.    Here it was that the brave
Gantier de Brienne, Lord of Jaffa, in 1253, having been taken
prisoner, was tied on a cross within sight of his own garrison,
and threatened with frightful tortures if it did not surrender.
But Count Gantier ordered them on no account to deliver a
Christian fortress to the enemy for his sake, and showed he
meant it by assuring his men that if they did surrender,
they would probably all be massacred.    So they held out,
and  the   Count died a martyr.    Further  on, as we rode
through the heat, my mind recurred to our King Eichard,
who one day was out hawking here with few attendants.
Overcome by the heat, he slept, and they were surprised by
a host of Saracens.    And though the king cut his way out,
says the chronicler,' in his own royal manner,' yet he would
not have escaped but for the chivalry of Sir William de
Pratelles, who, calling out in Arabic that he was the king,
was taken prisoner in Eichard's stead.   I mention the crusad¬
ing associations not as if we forgot the many others more
sacred, which are so much more familiar to readers and
writers.    The Crusades were the last events here, where all
stands still; things are almost unchanged since then.    But
the great sacred history associations have, no doubt, been
more confused by many wars and many inventions, though
much still remains.    Perhaps we see the land more as it
appeared to Abraham than in its intermediate culture and
splendour ; and Abraham himself, we feel, was very like the
Sheiks we still see, in dress, aspect, and mode of life.    Here
the Eastern problem presses hard.   The people are miserably
misgoverned; the land is a waste.    But if they are rescued
from the Turk, will not the tide of our prosaic, puny, material
civilisation flow iu, and overwhelm all in the dead level of
food  enough,  perhaps—hideous garments, dreary railways
and refreshment bars, and low-toned tourist mobs ?    Then
it will be of no use to come here any more ; for it is not the
scenery as in Switzerland, or art as in Italy, which cannot
be wholly spoilt, but the old modes of life and thought, still
illustrating the past so wonderfully, that would be absolutely
swept away.
It was very hot and sunny, and I rejoiced in my silk
heyfya, the Arab head-dress, bound with a fillet round the
head. You can arrange it for sun or any wind that blows,
or twist it np into a turban. The rest of our party started
in pith helmets, which were all by degrees discarded for this
more comfortable and far more picturesque headgear. So
we reached Eamlah, where the palm trees set off the low
Tracks of the Crusaders. 389
"buildings. We mounted to the top of a fine ruined tower,
where, apparently, Gothic work was mixed with the Saracenic,
and we saw a beautiful sunset over the plain of Sharon and
western sea. The bare hills of Judea near us to the north
and east, glowed pink in the pure liglit—a light which went
so quickly, that when we remounted, our way through the
tall prickly pears looked quite cavernous, and our tents,
when we reached them beyond the village, glowed a welcome
of yellow candle-light under the dark-blue sky. We were,
it must be owned, if pilgrims, very luxurious ones. We two
ladies found the interior of our white tent an illumination of
blue, red, and white arabesques, carpeted with Smyrna rugs,
pleasant with fresh water, easy-chairs, and comfortable camp
beds. I had resolved to ride over to Lydda, two miles off,
to see St. George's Church, but how could I when dinner
already was served in the dining tent ?—flowers and crystal,
and a dinner that would have done credit to a first-class
Parisian restaurant. So, but little disturbed by the cries of
the jackals and the talk of our guards, we slept till the
morning broke through the olive trees round our camp.
On again, next day, through the ' blue unclouded weather.'
The hills in front, though only clothed with low brushwood,
looked shadowy and inviting. We passed many villages,
hardly to be distinguished from the mounds on which their
clay walls were raised. One showed the remains of a cru¬
sader's fort, and was called Latron; and here was the shrine
of the Penitent Thief—entirely, I believe, on crusading
authority, and doubtless a well-frequented place of pilgrim¬
age, as thieves, penitent and otherwise, were not wanting in
their ranks. We stopped for luncheon just where the road
left the plain for a narrow pass between the low Judean
hills, and there beside a grey rock, under a large fig-tree, our
rugs and refection were spread. Afterwards we wandered
about, collecting the brilliant anemones and cyclamen that
adorned the rock crevices. For already the flowers were
abundant that proved to be a constant delight to us all over
Palestine, though these were little to what we found farther
on. Now we left Dan, and rode between hills growing more
rugged. The road ascended, and showed us wide views over
the plain we had quitted, and the piled crags around. We
came to the town of Kirjath-jearim, finely situated in a
basin among the olive-covered hills. Here were the almost
entire ruins of a large Christian church, supposed to mark
the spot where the ark was left after its rescue from the
Philistines.    The nave and round apse of the old Gothic
390 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine,
church were early-pointed. It has been bought by the
Trench, and is to be restored. After this village the hills
grow bleaker, the road wilder. Some women come with
water, cool in red urns with spouts on one side, and give us
a welcome drink. They are clad in loose-flowing blue robes,
and have graceful figures, as have the men in the scanty
clothing that suits the heat. With loins girded, naked legs,
and open shirts, they toil along beside files of camels; or the
lucky ones sit sideways on donkeys, some so small as to be
hardly visible under the riders,—some so tall that "we take
them for horses. Up hill and down again, the hills grow
bare, the vines cease, the olives are smaller and plentifully
mixed with locust trees. At every turn we expect to see
Jerusalem, and do not see it. It is not till sunset that we
break into a canter, and see a white dome and buildings high
up—the Eussian Hospital. We missed any impression de¬
rived from the first sight of Jerusalem; this huge modern
hospital appears first, and, strategically speaking, commands
the town. We canter through a commonplace suburb of
detached houses, and at last draw rein on a triangular bit of
turf under a high wall. Tents are there, as of a travelling
circus—our tents. We feel like regular vagrants, the more
so as respectable conventional Europeans are passing. Be¬
yond the road ends in an ancient gateway—the Jaffa gate
of Jerusalem. I confess to being thoroughly disappointed.
From all other points the city looks venerable, if not stately,
but not from here. Darkness came at once, but silence
never; what with guards and dogs, and Eussians and
donkeys, the noises never ceased.
We spent a week at Jerusalem—not long enough, but still
sufficient to give us a very distinct idea of the once Holy
City. It won upon us greatly. The first day was extremely
hot, and it was hard work walking over the pointed stones
of the dirty streets. I wish I could draw the crowd which
thronged them. There is no room for carriages; horses even
are rare. You turn suddenly from a passage-like street, so
crammed with human beings that you can hardly shove
through, into probably a dead solitude. The crowd, where
here and there a European dress appears in its tame ugliness
among the oriental brilliancy, and also squalor and filth of
attire, is a strange collection of many nations—dark-clad
Armenians; high-capped Persians, with handsome faces and
fur pelisses; Syrians in gay suits; Arabs in white and
brown; women, ghost-like to behold, in white sheets, with
yellow or black  handkerchiefs  strained  over their faces;
The Glass Painters. 391
Eastern devotees, wearing almost nothing; and Eussians,
male and female, like bears on their hind legs, all furs, with
enormous boots. Ugliest are the poorer Jews, dirty and
pale, with greasy love-locks curling down from their high
caps. They are very numerous. The rich Jews send multi¬
tudes of poor Jews to die and be buried here, considered by
them an immense privilege; and indeed it seems, from the
appearance of many, that the sooner they avail themselves of
it the better. This crowd generally yells and bawls without
ceasing, especially when camels come waving their long
necks through, or diminutive donkeys run by under one's
arm, or goats scramble past. But there are also various
open spaces in Jerusalem, some foul with every abomination,
prowled over by the scavenger-dogs, as the pool of Bethesda;
some rescued and kept clean and trim by foreigners, as the
area of Mount Zion, on which a good school for native boys
has been founded by the Protestant bishops. The present
city is, as all know, built on the rubbish of earlier cities,
which lie ten, twenty, and in places forty feet below its
level; but still the hills and valleys are very marked, and
you have sometimes even to scramble up and down stairs in
the streets. But it is not with these streets that we can
hope to associate many sacred memories. Far under ground,
mysterious caverns and huge masonry suggest ancient gran¬
deur. Here and there above, a relic of former days remains,
evidently very old, but hard to identify. But what we now
chiefly see is in truth a mediaeval Eastern city, containing
a number of traditional shrines, some quite frivolous, and
most chiefly honourable through the halo cast on them by
the reverent devotion of many generations of Christians.
E. J. 0.
{^fo le continued?)
Ef)e ffilass painters,
CHAPTER I.
' Whoe'er hath stood to watch a mountain brook
In some still passage of its course, and seen
Within the depths of its capacious breast
Inverted trees, and rocks, and azure sky,—
And, on its glassy surface, specks of foam
And conglobated bubbles undissolved,
Numerous as stars,—that by their onward lapse
Betray to sight the motion of the stream.
Else imperceptible ;—meanwhile is heard
Perchance a roar or murmur; and the sound
392 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
Though soothing, and the little floating isles
Though beautiful, are both by nature charged
With the same pensive office, and make known
Through what perplexing labyrinths, abrupt
Precipitations, and untoward straits
The earth-born wanderer hath passed.'—Wordsworth.
One day in the autumn of 1725, two priests, in passing
before the Altar of St. Peter in the cathedral church of
Notre Dame at Paris, observed a youth kneeling before the
altar. He had been there some time before the ecclesiastics
saw him; he neither noticed their approach nor departure.
One said softly to the other, ' I know that lad; he is the
son of Le Vieil, the glass-maker. The Abbot of St. Van-
drille was talking to me about him only yesterday. The
abbot says the boy is breaking his heart because he is not
to become a priest, and enter the Order of St. Benoit.'
' What prevents him ? does the abbot not want him ?'
' On the contrary, the abbot much wishes to have him.
Pierre le Vieil is clever, well educated, can write excellently;
he has already helped the brothers in some of their literary
work. He is also handsome, well-mannered, trainable, sub¬
missive, and full of enthusiasm. He would probably become
an ornament to the order.'
'Why, then, does not Monsieur 1'Abbot keep such a
treasure ? If the boy wants to stay, surely it is a mistake
to give him back to the world.'
'A great mistake, and great weakness also. The lad's
father, Guillaume le Vieil, is ill; all his limbs shake, and
he cannot steady his hand to draM^ The doctors do not
give hope of his ever getting better, so he wants to withdraw
his eldest son from his vocation, in order that he may help
in the management of the glass manufactory. The Le Vieils
have been glass-makers for some generations, and consider
themselves noble.'
'I suppose Le Vieil depends on the glass-works as a
means of support ?'
' Yes, I believe he does. Moreover, he has dependent on
him eleven children, including Pierre, and a wife; so perhaps
it is only natural he should want his eldest son to come and
help him. But it is weak of the abbot to let him go; the
need of the Church should come before the need of man.
Young Le Vieil hesitates as to which course to follow, and
as all his inclinations are in favour of the religious life, I
doubt not a little pressure from his superior, with indication
of his wishes, would settle the matter.    But the old man
The Glass Painters. 393
will not indicate his wishes; he says the boy shall decide
altogether for himself. But enough of that. Tell me, what
about the Due de Bourbon ? will he fall ?'
The other lowered his voice as he replied. ' Yes, I think
he will ere long. The king hates him, and loves Fleury. It
will be a good day for France when Fleury comes into power.'
'It may be so,' said I'Abbe Blan court. ' M. I'Eveque de
Fr^jus might have held the reins long ago had he so willed
it, but the vigour of his youth is past. He thought of his
own ease and comfort rather than of France. There was no
need of a ministerial revolution; he was vrai monarque du
moment oit, il voudroit Fetre. Now the stupidity of M. le Due
has brought things to so bad a pass, I qiiestion if Fleury has
decision or firmness enough to taring us through.'
' The people love him; no one but he can restore order
and confidence. He can rouse himself in time of need, is
true, sincere, and has the good of the Church and of France
at heart,' replied the Father L^once.
' He is too honest, too credulous; his want of penetration
is such that he suspects not insincerity in others, and is
easily made a dupe. I do not half like his intimacy with
the English ambassador.'
Standing by the south door, beneath the great rose window,
M. I'Abbe and Pere L^once continued to talk over the news
of the times in whispers. The storms that broke so fiercely
over France in the succeeding reign were then threatening.
At that time Louis XV. was on the throne ; but a few weeks
previously he had married Maria Leczynsky, the daughter of
the ex-king of Poland. The light-hearted people of France
danced and rejoiced at the celebration of the royal nuptials
at Fontainebleau, and for a short space seemed to forget the
excessive taxation they were suffering under, and the likeli¬
hood that their country would soon again be plunged into
the misery of war. For two years the Due de Bourbon had
been at the head of the Administration, and was daily
becoming more unpopular with the people; while the king
looked upon him with no friendly eyes, and watched for an
opportunity to make the Cardinal de Fleury, his loved and
trusted old preceptor, prime minister. He had made him a
member of the Council of State two years before.
The affairs of the Church, no less than the affairs of the
State, were in disorder. Those who loved her, and watched
the signs of the times, saw her position with anxiety as she
stood opposed to the ranks of the Protestants in unconcealed
hatred; while her own ranks were divided by sympathizers
394 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
with Jansenists, by the indifference and infidelity of both
priests and people. It did not tend to ameliorate matters
that the priests, perceiving with anger their waning influ¬
ence, fiercely nailed down the letter of the law, uttering
loudly the denunciations and anathemas of Eome against
those who swerved a hair-breadth from her doctrines and
dogmas. But alas ! the breadth of phylacteries or minutely
observed ritual could not replace the spirit of Christianity
then sadly wanting in the religion of France. The Hugue¬
nots were persecuted, but not eradicated; the denunciations
and anathemas fell almost unheeded upon the Eationalists.
Young Le Vieil, when he rose from kneeling before the
altar, seemed calm, though weary with some inward struggle,
of which traces were left on his mobile features. He had
arrived at a decision, and resolved to give himself no time to
change. At another time he would not have passed out of so
splendid an edifice without lingering for some moments to
dwell on its gloriousness, but now he went out quickly by
the same door by which the priests had stood talking, crossed
the Seine by the Pont Notre Dame, and, walking rapidly,
soon turned into the Eue du Temple; and traversing quickly
about half the length of that long street, paused to knock at
the door of a tall, shabby-looking house situated therein.
The door was opened to him by a workman, having under
one arm a portion of a painted window.
' How is my father to-day, Jacque ?' asked Pierre.
'The master is as usual,' replied the man in a sulky
manner. ' You will find him in the second atelier, directing
M. Jean how to draw cartoons for the Dominican church in
the Faubourg Saint Germain. This is part of a tracery
light; I am going to place it.'
Pierre le Vieil ascended a long flight of stairs, and entered
a large atelier. The floor of this apartment was of bare,
rough deal boards, and far from clean. Against the walls
were placed designs for painted glass and wall decorations.
On a sloping framework placed against the light, there leant
a huge sheet of glass. On this sheet, fastened to it by means
of drops of bees'-wax, various odd-shaped fragments of glass
were placed, many of the pieces cut out in bright colours.
Between the fragments such space was left as would be
required for the lines of lead by which the window would
be ultimately joined together. Now it looked a little like
the accomplishment of that delightful test of childhood's
skill and patience, the successful putting together of a
dissected picture.    The window had apparently been lately
The Glass Painters. 395
touched on, as a strong smell of the oil used in glass-painting
pervaded the room. On the same table were shaped pieces
of glass in various stages of completeness.
Although the evening was not cold, the stove was heated.
Near it was placed an easy-chair, on which a man reclined,
his wasted face and thin hands giving indication of the
serious malady he laboured under, as did also the tremulous-
ness that affected all his limbs, and the spasmodic twitches
that from time to time convulsed his features, which were
at this moment white, though flushed the succeeding one.
By the man's side sat a woman—a woman whose fine and
expressive countenance at once claimed attention. She was
not young,—she was not now beautiful; she was marked by
lines and furrows, won in many a conflict with circumstances
and self. You might look at her now, and think how
attractive she was! how fine was the contour of her well-
shaped head! how beautiful were those eyes, that now
glistened with tenderness, now flashed with determination !
You looked again, and found that she was altogether repel¬
lent, cold, proud, and not so intellectual as you had previously
thought; and the mouth betrayed how changeable, how odd
and difficult to deal with was the temper of the possessor.
At times, when she felt most, Madame Le Vieil's face ex¬
pressed least, for she was too proud to desire others to divine
when she was agitated with deepest emotion; and with
strong efibrt,was wont at such times to clothe her face in an
inscrutable calm.
Shortly before Pierre entered the room, with the aid of his
wife's arm, Guillaume le Vieil had approached the easel on
which was the design at which his son, Jean, was working.
He there paused to criticize and make some suggestions.
Jean, a boy of about sixteen, listened attentively to his
father's remarks. Once Guillaume le Vieil, taking the
charcoal pencil from his son's hand, attempted to correct a
line; but alas! he was unable to guide his poor, .shaking
fingers, and something like an imprecation escaped from his
lips as the charcoal fell to the ground. Turning to two
little fellows, aged about fourteen and thirteen years, he
spoke to them with uncalled-for irritation and crossness.
Then, still leaning on his wife, he inspected the work of a
man engaged drawing outlines on glass. The glass was
placed over a cartoon on which a strong, broadly-marked
outline was drawn. The man, with his hand on a reet, held
a long-haired brush filled with brown enamel paint, with
which he traced a steady outline on the glass.
39^ The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
' You work like a snail, David,' said the master,' and you
know that they press for those windows to be finished before
the Feast of the Holy Eelics on the 26th of October.'
' It was only yesterday you said that I progressed well,'
answered David in no respectful tone. ' You know that I
am new to this branch of the work. Workmen are not so
easy to get, that you need quarrel with those you have.'
' Silence! I will have no workmen rather than permit
them to speak insolently to me;' and taking his wife's arm,
Le Vieil slowly returned to his chair, into which he sank
wearily. For a minute he did not speak. Madame Le Vieil
looked at him anxiously. However peculiar, however various
might be her bearing towards others, to him in his affliction
she was gentle and devoted. At length, holding out his
hand to her, he said in a low voice, 'You, Henriette, and
Pierre are the only ones who understand me; you know how
much I have to bear, and are merciful when I fail in self-
contfol. I dare not think how we shall get on if Pierre
decides to become a priest.'
'He will not,' Madame answered confidently. 'Pierre
will come to us in our need; I know my boy.' But she
expressed more confidence than she really felt, for she knew
that whatever course Pierre's affections might lead him to
follow, he might not the less take another path if the voice
of his conscience—or the voice of his confessor, bade him do
so.
At this moment footsteps were heard upon the staircase,
the door opened, and Pierre entered. A gleam of pleasure
passed over the sick man's face; it gave way to an expression
of anxiety as the young man came silently and gravely to
his side.
' Well, my son, how is it to be ?'
' My father, I have sought earnestly for direction, and I
think it is right that I should come to you. I fear I cannot
help you as much as I would, but I will do my utmost to
aid and comfort you and my mother.' As he spoke, a sense
of responsibility—a feeling that he was not to lean, but to
support—came over Pierre, and his boyish face took a more
manly expression, and he carried himself with a more
resolute bearing.
' You are right, Pierre,' said his father, with much sense
of relief that the suspense was over. ' You are right. Ee-
member you are my eldest; it is for you now to take my
place. Jean would do his best, but you are the eldest.
Heaven bless you, boy !'
The Glass Painters. 397
Madame Le Vieil spoke no word and made no sign.
Pierre looked at her, and she turned away. He did not
misinterpret the apparent indifference, and bided the time
when they should be alone together, to hear the blessing he
longed for from her lips also; nor did it fail to be his.
Considering Pierre's youth, it may seem strange that M.
Le Vieil should not have commanded his son's aid rather
than have asked it, so giving the boy the alternative of
refusing it. But both Le Vieil and his wife were earnest
Catholics. They thought that they had noted in Pierre a
special fitness to serve the Church. And in a time of
prosperity, when there was no reason to think but that
Guillaume le Vieil would himself manage the glass-works
till he had sons and to spare of an age to assist him,—in
this time of prosperity he and his wife had settled that their
first-born should ungrudgingly be given up to follow what
they considered his vocation. With this view, nor money
nor pains were spared over his education, and he had well
profited by the opportunities afforded him of gaining know¬
ledge ; while, from being often his father's companion, he
was conversant with the scientific knowledge needful to a
glass-maker. His parents did not look forward to his be¬
coming a country priest or hard-working cur^ in some
obscure town, but they—especially his mother—cherished a
hope that his decided ability might lead to his being a voice
in the Church that should be heard through the land. The
boy had ever rejoiced in the prospect of the destination set
before him, and it was not without much sorrow that Le
Vieil resolved to suggest to Pierre that he should give up
hope of gaining this destination, telling him how greatly he
wanted him, bidding the boy examine his conscience, and
finally decide what he would do. But knowing how much
Pierre's conscience was under priestly dominion, the sick
man had much doubt as to the decision, though he did not
misdoubt the boy's affectionate nature.
' We must even now set you to work,' said the glass-
painter as Pierre still stood by his chair. ' Henri Maget
should have reported to me half an hour ago that the fire
had been drawn from under the muffle. I never knew him
fail to draw it at the right time, but he is careless about
obeying my rule of telling me as soon as it is drawn. Will
you go and ask about it ? To-morrow I shall call together
the men and your brothers, and tell them that your authority
is equal to mine.'
' I am but little fitted to be placed in authority.    I will
398 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
now go and see if the fire is extinguished,' said Pierre; and
he left the room.
Poor Pierre! his heart sank within him as he thought of
his attempting to control the unruly workmen and the two
pupils, whose chief delight seemed to be in making a noise
and disputing with each other.
Many of the best workmen in Paris, as well as elsewhere,
had been drawn to serve as soldiers in the late wars; and
recruits were now being collected, owing to the inclination
Spain was showing to resent very strongly the insult that
had been offered to her young Infanta, who, after having
been brought to France to be educated in Paris as its future
queen, had been sent back to her own country, while he who
was to have been her husband was now married to another.
The necessity for keeping up the great army rendered it
more difficult every day to procure workmen, and such as
there were knew their value, and were exacting and insub¬
ordinate. Guillaume le Vieil, with his failing health, was
very inadequate to cope with them, while the frequent
outbreaks of hasty temper and fits of irritation that were
adjuncts to his disease, did not tend to mend matters, but
made them worse, as the men were not disposed to put up
with unreasonable fault-finding.
After leaving the atelier, Pierre descended a flight of
stairs going lower than the show-room on the ground floor,
and entered a large cellar in which stood the furnace for
baking glass and preparing chemicals, as well as apparatus
of all kinds for glass-making. Here were several workmen,
all of whom seemed to be talking loudly at the same time.
Pierre heard the words, ' Young priest! I will never serve
under a priest,' shouted out by one of the men; and Henri
Maget, the foreman, answer, 'He is not a priest yet any
more than you are ; he is nothing but a boy.' Here Pierre's
entrance was noticed, and for a moment there was silence,
and they stared at him. Then the two pupils, who were
engaged in pounding some chemicals, began in a low voice
to chant a mocking parody of a Latin hymn.
Pierre spoke to Henri Maget: ' The master wishes to
know if the firing is drawn; you have not reported to him.'
' By St. Denis, it is not drawn,' cried the man. ' Hake out
the charcoal instantly,' he said to a boy. ' Truly, M. Pierre,
I am very sorry. My memory never played me such a trick
before ; it should have been drawn more than an hour ago.'
' What will my father say ? it will cost him a night of
pain.    Truly you have  been very negligent,' said Pierre,
The Glass Painters. 399
more in sorrow than in anger, but showing something of the
bearing and authority of a master in his tone and manner,
which was not lost upon the men. The foreman was not
often blamed, even by M. Le Vieil. The silence of conster¬
nation reigned among the workmen for a minute, for they
all knew that if a whole furnace full of glass was over-fused
and spoilt, a serious calamity would have taken place. But
the hubbub resumed its sway when Henri Maget, saying
he wished to advise about the composition of some colours,
took Pierre into an inner room (for Pierre, boy as he was,
was well versed in the mysteries of chemistry). Sliutting
the door, the foreman said, ' Look you here, M. Pierre, I
have served the Le Vieils a good many years, and so did
my father. It may be that I seem to you rough and
unmannerly, but for all that I am ready to do your father
and his a good turn. We hear that he intends to make you
the master. Now, you will have no chance of getting on
unless you'dismiss most of the men. They are the worst
lot we have ever had; they own no law and no authority,
and dislike the thought of serving under you. If they keep
on here because they are regularly paid, they will always be
looking out for opportunities to do you an ill turn. They
think glass-workers are so scarce you will not be able to do
without them. Let us show them we can. Nicholas Porcher
is alway trying to incite the others to mischief, and before
long he will teach M. Louis to be as bad as himself. Now,
if you and M. Jean will put your shoulders to the wheel, I
feel sure we can keep our heads above water, and steer our
course, though we must wait for better times to make the
concern prosper as it used to do.'
Henri Maget was wont to be a man of few words ; seldom
had he spoken at such length. Pierre held out his small
white hand, and grasped the big black one of the foreman.
' Thank you, Maget; I trust you as a friend. I will well
consider your words, and consult with my mother. I can
and will work, but I own I have misgivings as to my power
to keep order among the men;' and in spite of himself,
Pierre's voice trembled as he concluded his sentence.
' Put a bold face on, M. Pierre, or they will be ten times
worse.'
' I will,' said the boy, half resenting the other's perception
of his weakness.
A discussion on the proportions of material to be used
in preparing flame colour followed, and Pierre carefully
adjusted the scales to be used for weighing the powdered
400 The Ladies Edinburgh MagaztJie.
minerals, the wrong balance of which he showed Maget was
the probable reason why some of the glass lately made had
varied from the tint it was intended to be of.
On leaving the furnace-room, Pierre again mounted the
staircase. The rudeness of the workmen had pained him
not a little, and he could not refrain from thinking with
regret on the quiet of his convent life and the pleasant
literary work in which he had shared. He already felt dis¬
couraged and faint-hearted, but the thought of his father,
the love he had for his mother, again gave him firmness;
and in order that his resolution to be strong might not be
shaken, he thought he would go and see the little ones he
must now help to win bread for. In a large attic occupying
the whole top of the house, Pierre found his six young
brothers and sisters, and old Nanette their nurse. Claire, a
girl of ten years old, was nursing the baby, Victorine.
Those two were the only girls in GuiUaume le Vieil's large
family, of which Jean, Louis, Marc, and Laurent helped in
the glass-works, though the younger boys could do but
little.
A visit from Pierre was always a pleasant event to the
inhabitants of the nursery. Old Nanette smiled in much
pleasure as the eldest of her nurslings entered; and the
children, hailing him with acclamations of joy, clung around
him boisterously, disregarding the discreet Claire's admoni¬
tion, ' not to be rude.' Eenewed acclamations greeted the
news that he was coming to live with them, and work like
Jean, even Claire becoming so excited as to dance about
with fat baby Victorine in her arms.
She came to a sudden stand-still.
' Pierre, how shall you manage ? Mamma al ways says
you will be a priest. Can you be a priest, and work and
make glass, and live with us ?'
The faces of the children grew long. There was not apt
to be appeal against the wishes of Madame, and there seemed
reason in Claire's doubt.
' I never heard of a priest who was a regular glass-maher.
A good priest is always saying mass, and how could you,
Pierre, if you manage the making of colours ?' asked Leo¬
nard.
' Perhaps he might if the church was very near indeed,'
said little Claude.
' I meant Pierre always to be my director,' said Leonard.
' And mine,' said Claude.
' Can a glass-maker be a confessor ?' asked Claire.
The Glass Painters. 401
' Shall you be a priest and a glass-maker, Pierre ?' said
Leonard.
Pierre answered, ' Many priests have been celebrated
painters on glass; but for the present, probably for many
years, I shall not be a priest.'
' Nor a deacon ?'
' Nor a deacon.'
' And you will always live with us ?'
' I do not know about always, but probably till most of
you are grown up.'
The children drew long breaths; it was a revolution of
ideas regarding the destinies of brotlier Pierre, and required
a minute's consideration, during which minute there was
silence.
' Now tell us a story,' said Philippe, the youngest boy but
one.
Pierre complied. The children were listening to his rela¬
tion, when a gentle knock was heard at the door.
' That is Marie Valmont,' exclaimed Leonard; ' she often
comes to see us, and brings eggs for father, and sometimes
flowers for us.'
Nanette opened the door. A pretty girl of about fourteen
years old entered, and, not perceiving Pierre, began vigor¬
ously fondling the children.
* Give me Victorine, Claire, a, I'instant, ma charmante. She
wants to come to her Marie; does she not ?' And in truth
the baby held out her arms, and shrieked with delight as
Marie took it.
' Have you forgotten me. Mademoiselle ? it is some years
since I saw you last,' asked Pierre.
' M. Pierre!' cried Marie; ' indeed I did not see you;'
and the girl became quiet and shy, for she regarded Pierre
with much respect. She politely asked after the health of
Monsieur and Madame Le Vieil.
' My father is weak and ill to-day, but he will be glad to
see you, and so will my mother,' Pierre replied. ' Leonard,
go into the atelier, and see if the mother is there; if the
father is asleep, tell her in a whisper that Marie is here.'
' My father sent me some eggs, and I have brought a few
for Monsieur. You can take them with you, Leonard;' and
Marie gave the little boy her basket, with which he trotted
off with an air of importance.
' Are you staying in Paris, Marie ?' asked Pierre.
' Yes, M. Pierre; I am come to live with my aunt. My
father is soon going to marry again.    Besides, my aunt says
No. 69.—Septembbe 1880. 2 C
402 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
I shall grow into nothing but a little country peasant, which
Avould be a pity after the pains the good sisters at the
convent of St. Jean took with me.'
' And you want to become a Parisian lady ? How is your
father?'
' He is well, but he has been sadly bothered by not having
got his harvest in. You see, my brother Angrand was drawn
for a soldier, and work hard as he would, my father could
not get the store crops in before the rain came. We sold
our cow to pay the taxes, and now they say there will be a
new tax levied. Many people are worse off than we are.
Douce works hard on the farm to help my father; that was
how—that was'—
' Well ?'
' I think that made my father wish to marry her.'
' Who is Douce ?'
' She is our servant, a common, strong peasant.'
Pierre felt puzzled. Of course Marie could not like such
a marriage, yet he wished to say something consolatory.
'You know I have not been much at home lately, and
had not heard about this marriage. You must not let it
make you unhappy. Douce may perhaps prove a comfort
to M. Valmont.'
' Yes, she is good, and works hard, but she is so ignorant.
My father says, if all the men are taken to be soldiers for
much longer, the country will be exhausted. He wants the
Due de Bourbon to leave off being minister.'
' Hush !' said Pierre, ' speak carefully.'
' Nevertheless,' joined in Nanette, ' we shall have no relief
from all those taxes till the Due falls, and the good Fleury
governs.    My cousin, the shoemaker, says so.'
As she spoke, Jean entered the nursery; the work hours
were over. If Pierre could best tell a story, Jean was the
best hand at a romp. While Marie held him in no such
respectful estimation as she did Pierre, she and Jean were
playfellows of long standing; for Marie was the daughter of
an old friend of Madame Le Vied's, and the girl often came
to the glass manufactory, while the young Le Vieils had
spent many a happy long day in the green fields round the
farm-house of M. Valmont.
A wild sort of dancing game began, at which Pierre stood
a spectator for a brief space, hardly taking his eyes off
Marie's graceful figure and pretty, animated face. He then
went to stay with his father, while his mother superintended
arrangements for the evening meal.
The Glass Painters. 403
When that long day of various emotions was ended,
Pierre vainly sought repose. Now one voice and now another
disturbed his rest; now one figure and then another was
before him. Now he reviewed the scene as the good Abbot
of St. Vandrille bade him seek counsel with his own con¬
science, and then blessing him, said that it was right for
him to succour his parents. Then it seemed to him that he
had not succoured them, and his mother looked at him
reproachfully, and the children were all crying. Then the
face of a laughing girl floated across his dream ; she said he
was not wanted—there was Jean, who was Pierre ? The
noisy, jeering voices of workmen repeated, ' Who is Pierre ?
he shall not be our master.' He saw their faces filled with
dislike to himself,—he moaned. A feeling of exultation
came over him: he had been chosen to suffer,—he was a
martyr.
More than once during the watches of the night, a woman
listened at the boy's door, and marked the long-drawn
breaths and restless moving. At last she knocked very
gently and entered his chamber. The feverish, over-wrought
boy started, holding out his arms to her, cried,' Oh mother,
mother! I am so tired that I cannot sleep; tell me some¬
thing as you used to do.' As he spoke he remembered that
he was now the guardian, and added, ' Why are you still up,
mother ? cannot my father sleep ? I will come and stop
with him while you rest.'
' Not to-night, Pierre; I am not tired. Your father will
want nothing till it is time for his medicine ;' and laying her
cool hand on the boy's hot one, Madame Le Vieil sat by her
son's side, and murmured some of the grand hymns and
canticles of the Latin Church, till, soothed and comforted, he
fell asleep.
Madame Le Vieil loved her other children moderately, and
her husband much, but her first-born Pierre she loved
passionately. He could do no wrong in her eyes, but she
for his sake would have done wrong with scant compunction,
notwithstanding that she was devote, in her Catholicism, as
were many of the families of the lourgeoisie even in that evil
age. She stood for a moment looking at the sleeping boy,
then stole from his room to seek that of her husband.
' Where have you been, Henriette ? have you rested ? I
have taken my medicine; it must now be morning,' said Le
Vieil.
' I have been with Pierre; he could not sleep.'
' Ah! does he begin to repent ?    You must not let him go
404 The Ladies' Ediiihirgh Magazine.
again.    The boy does not yield up more hope than you do.
It was your pet ambition that he should be a priest.'
' Yes, true; but my ambition was not that he should be
given up to the life he has lately seemed to look forward
to—in a monastery turning over musty books, but that he
should be known in society. I should have liked that he
should be a great preacher, his words listened to by the
great and poor throughout the land. He is made for some¬
thing better than to muse over Latin classics with the Abbot
of St. Vandrille.'
' It was good of the abbot to let him go.'
' Good ! he could not retain him against his will.'
' I think Pierre Avould have stayed if the abbot had
desired him. I am thankful he did not. After a while
Jean and Pierre will pull well together, though I see that
just now Jean thinks it a little unfair that Pierre should be
set over him.'
' Jean has far too much confidence in himself. Of course
Pierre must be first after you. It is quite absurd of Jean
if he thinks it could be otherwise.'
' Do not be unfair to Jean; he cannot help knowing that
he paints far better than Pierre, and he has done us all good
service by working so hard as he has.' So saying the glass-
painter fell asleep, and his wife soon sought her much-needed
rest, A. A.
{To he continued.)
W(^t STrial of STaste: ^ Sfeetd^.
By Mrs. Eamsay Laye.
It was on a raw, chill evening in early spring, that Mrs.
Linn and her four daughters—Alice, Ehoda, Fanny, and Mary
—drove up their own avenue on their return home after
a three years' sojourn on the Continent. The trees were
scarcely coming into leaf, and the backwardness of the
season contrasted unfavourably in the eyes of the travellers
with the verdure and sunshine they had left across the
Channel; a feeling approaching to depression crept over them
as they noted how the budding foliage was nipped by the
east wind, and they shiveringiy drew their wraps closer
round them. Nor was the aspect of things within doors
more attractive. The house was a good one, well-sized and
commodious, standing in its own grounds, and situated in a
The Trial of Taste : A Sketch. 405
pleasant country district nine miles from London; but the
furniture was old-fashioned and shabby. It was years since
any money had been laid out, save on the most necessary
repairs; the plan of re-furnishing entirely, which Mr. Linn
had intended to carry out as soon as his children were grown
up, remained unfulfilled owing to his death and the subse¬
quent residence of the family abroad; while the tenants to
whom the house had been let, thinking probably that there
was little worth taking care of, had knocked things about
unmercifully. Mrs. Linn even was struck by the extreme
plainness and shabbiness of her 'old home; and if she felt
something of surprise and disappointment, how much stronger
was the impression produced on the young girls! They
looked round with undisguised dissatisfaction, and ran from
room to room seeking in vain for one that was habitable
according to their ideas.
' How ugly everything is !' exclaimed Alice.
' These chairs look as if they came out of the ark,' remarked
Mary, ' and the cushions are all moth-eaten.'
' What hideous papers !' said Rhoda.
' What faded old carpets !' added Fanny. All in chorus,
' What a pity we came home!'
Mrs. Linn had felt too much in sympathy with her daughters'
strictures to dissent, but this last lamentation roused her to
interpose: ' Oh no! you must not say so. Home is home,
and soon we shall have things very different; we are going
to re-furnish the house entirely. Your dear father always
intended doing so, and there is a sum of money in the bank
appropriated to the purpose. This is all that is wanted to
make the house charming. The rooms are well-sized, and
there are so many that you will each be able to have a
separate bed-room.'
The girls were comforted; they had sense to see that an
evil for which the remedy is apparent is not worth grumbling
about; and full of hope and anticipation, they made the dingy
rooms bright with their merriment the first evening.
But many days had not passed before Mrs. Linn became
aware of a threatened trouble not so easy to remove as the
shabby furniture. The constant amusement and variety
afforded by the life they had been leading, made the quiet
routine of an English country neighbourhood seem to the
girls dull by comparison. The mother had little fear that
when once they were really settled, and got interested in
different occupations, they would be happy and cheerful,
but it would take, she knew, some little time to renew asso-
406 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
ciations which had been broken by their long absence, and
meanwhile they moped about as listless and nearly discon¬
tented as it was possible for well-brought up,well-dispositioned
girls to be. A bright idea occurred to Mrs. Linn to supply
them at once with employment and an interest. Calling
them all round her, she said :
'We have now to begin the work of furnishing, and I
intend to allow each of you to superintend the doing-up of
your own room. It will relieve me of some trouble, for I
shall have a great deal to attend to. I shall make a calcu¬
lation, and tell you how much you may expend, which sum
you must be careful not to exceed ; but the responsibility of
laying it out will rest with yourselves.'
'Do you mean,' said Ehoda, the second girl, her eyes
brightening,' that we may furnish our rooms as we like, to
our own taste ?'
' Yes, that is what I mean you to do; on certain points
you must refer to me, such as the quality and price of things
of which you are no judge, but further than that I shall not
interfere.'
' What fun it will be !' exclaimed Alice; and her sisters
seemed to be of the same opinion.
' I will have the prettiest room of you all,' said Fanny.
' You must each try to excel,' observed Mrs. Linn.
' And you will be umpire, mamma ?' said Alice.
' Not exactly; your own votes must decide the question.
I will accept the casting vote if you like, in the event of
difference of opinion.'
' It will make it much more interesting,' observed Ehoda,
' if we agree not to see each other's rooms until they are all
completed. I will not look into yours if you promise not to
come into mine.'
The compact was readily made, and Mrs. Linn, looking
round with pleasure on their animated faces, from which all
signs of languor had vanished, said:
' To stimulate you, and make it still more interesting, I
promise a prize of £5 for whichever room is the greatest
success.'
' This becomes exciting,' observed Ehoda.
' One point I must caution you on,' said Mrs. Linn, ' which
is not to spend an undue portion of the sum at your disposal
on embellishments, and forget something essential.'
' No, no,' said Mary, ' we will not lay out half our money
on an ornamental clock for the mantle-piece, and forget the
chest of drawers.'
The Trial of Taste: A Sketch. 407
' No,' rejoined their mother,' you are not children, and I
have more confidence in you than to expect you to be so
silly.    Well, I shall go into London to-morrow'—
' Oh, mamma,' interrupted Fanny,' do let me go with you.'
' That is probably the wish of your sisters also, Fanny,'
answered Mrs. Linn with a smile, for Fanny was always the
one to put herself forward. ' However, you will all have
abundant opportunity of selecting your furniture, for I shall
have occasion to go frequently to town either by rail or in
the carriage, and one of you can always accompany me; and
sometimes you can go with Evans. She is a very good judge
of the price and quality of carpets, bedding, and such things,
better than I am myself, and will see that you get proper
value for your money.'
' I have decided already the style in which I intend to
furnish my room,' remarked Alice, who for the last few
minutes had been smiling to herself over what, let us hope,
was a very pretty picture.
' You had better not tell us about it,' suggested Mary, ' in
case we steal some of your ideas.'
' I have plenty of ideas of my own,' retorted Ehoda, ' I
don't need to steal or borrow from any one. So now, I shall
get paper and a pencil, and draw out a sort of design.'
' I am not going to hamper myself with styles and designs,'
remarked Fanny,' I only mean to make my room lovely.'
The following morning Mrs. Linn went into London, and
took Fanny with her. The latter, as she parted from her
sisters, remarked:
' I am not bent on making purchases to-day; I may,
perhaps, only look about me. I do not mean to take any¬
thing but what I really like and admire, so, unless I see
things exceptionally pretty, I shall not be tempted, and will
wait.'
Her mother went to consult an upholsterer, and while she
was thus engaged Fanny amused herself looking round the
large shop. A set of bed-room stoneware attracted her eye.
It was very handsome both in design and colouring, clusters
of westeria on a cream-coloured ground, relieved by a purple
and gilt border an inch wide. ' Mamma,' said she, ' I have
been looking at the prettiest stoneware set I ever saw; I
should like it for my room so much.'
'Well,' replied her mother, 'you can take it, you know, if
it is not too expensive, and if you are sure it is suitable.'
It was a somewhat expensive set, but well worth the
money, Fanny said to herself; and having secured it, her
408 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
thoughts were quickly diverted into a different direction,
when her mother observed :
' We cannot order things to be sent home until the rooms
are papered and painted. If you like to look at bed-room
papers, Fanny,—I am not ready yet,—you might see one that
pleased you.'
The choice of her paper was a very interesting task, and
in this also Fanny was successful. After many pieces had
been unrolled before her fastidious eyes, she met with one
which pleased her greatly; the shopman described it as a
French paper,' very select.' She returned home well satis¬
fied with her day, and exclaimed to her sisters as they met in
the hall, ' I have got the start of you all, I have chosen a
lovely paper, and the prettiest set for my washstand you
ever saw.'
Now followed a busy time indeed, during great part of
which the house was in the condition understood by the
popular phrase, turned inside out. Mrs. Liun had her hands
full, and we are bound to say she did not meet with much
assistance from her daughters, who were all engrossed in
their own share of the common labour. In the eyes of Alice,
Ehoda, Fanny, and Mary, the furnishing even of the drawing-
room, let alone less interesting portions of the house, was
as nothing compared to the adornment of those four little
chambers of which they had, respectively, the entire charge
and responsibility. They adhered to their resolution not to
see each other's work while in progress, and a profound
mystery was observed in each case. Articles of furniture
were, of course, visible at the moment of arrival, but they
were usually concealed by matting or other coverings ; Alice
brought into the drawing-room heaps of white muslin and
rose-coloured ribbon, strongly suggestive of toilet decorations,
and Khoda every evening devoted herself to the production
of ' antique' lace, a work just then in great vogue, by means
of linen tape and thread; but no qviestions were asked, nor
comments made. There was one exception to this reticence,
viz., on the part of Fanny, who was often so delighted with
her own purchases that she could not refrain from repeating,
' My room will be the prettiest, you will see; I fully expect
to gain the prize.'
There were so many details to be carried out, so many
finiahing touches required, that the rest of the house was
almost brought into order before these all-important rooms
were ready.    The chill English spring had given place to
The Trial of Taste: A Sketch, 409
summer, and the climbing roses trained against the house
were blooming round the casements, when at length the
opening day was fixed. On the appointed afternoon the
whole family went with due ceremony to inspect the four
rooms in succession.
Alice's came first. She smilingly threw open her door, and
a spontaneous exclamation, ' Oh, how pretty !' was uttered
by each as they entered. They found themselves in a perfect
maiden bower of light and freshness. The small bed was
draped with spotted white muslin lined with pink; the
counterpane was a square of the same, edged with lace, and
with a dainty bow at the four corners. This, Alice explained,
was only to be used during the day, and would be removed
when the housemaid made down the bed at night. The
pillows were delicately frilled, French fashion, and the linen
prettily marked with fancy letters in engrained cotton. To
do Alice justice, the details of needlework were all nicely
finished. The toilet was decorated to correspond with the
bed, and the window curtains were also an suite. The furni¬
ture was all of light wood, birch or polished deal; the paper
white with a slight running pattern of foliage; tlie carpet
green and white, an inexpensive one, but it suited the whole
style of the room. In the window, which was rather wide,
and had a very pretty aspect overlooking the flower garden,
were suspended two rustic baskets filled with growing ferns,
and a canary's cage hung between them, the occupant of
which welcomed the visitors with an outburst of song.
Finally, on a set of hanging shelves was ranged Alice's little
collection of books, girlish, gaily-bound volumes, for the most
part, of poetry, tales, or devotion.
' Well, Alice,' said Mrs. Linn cordially, ' I give you great
credit for this; it is perfectly simple, but in very good taste,
and an extremely pretty room for a young girl.'
' Your stoneware set is not to compare with mine, Alice,'
remarked Fanny; ' I think the pattern common,—you don't
mind my saying so ?'
' Of course not, we are to criticize each other's taste,'
replied Alice good-humouredly ; ' I know my stoneware is
nothing particular, but I took it because, being green and
white, it went well with the other things.'
' This room,' observed Mrs. Linn, ' illustrates a principle
which is of great value to people of moderate means in
house-furnishing; it shows how pretty a room may be made
at small expense, by the exercise of taste and the consistent
carrying out of a design, for Alice has  had a design in
410 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
furnishing her room, and she has adhered to it very faith-
fully.'
' I spent all, or very nearly all, the money you allowed,'
said Alice, who looked greatly pleased with her mother's
commendation.
' So I suppose, and I wished you to do so. Your things are
all good. That is a delightful little wardrobe. At the same
time, the room owes its effect, not to the upholsterer, but to
the taste you have shown in the details. One thing suits
another, and the result is a harmonious whole.'
' I have always heard,' remarked Mary, looking dubiously
at the baskets, ' that plants in a bed-room are very injurious
to health.'
' On the contrary,' exclaimed Ehoda, ' that is an exploded
idea. Plants in a room are particularly conducive to health,
except one or two kinds. Do you not know that they
consume carbonic acid gas in the air, and give out oxygen,
which is what we require ?'
' But I thought,' pursued Mary, looking appealingly at
her mother, ' that at night plants reverse that process ? I
am sure,' in a rather aggrieved tone, ' I have read that such
is the case.'
' I have read something of the kind too, Mary,' replied
Mrs. Linn, ' but I am not sure it is an authentic fact. At
any rate, I should require to be well convinced that these
few ferns could be injurious to health before I condemned
Alice's pretty baskets.'
' My poor baskets,' said Alice, laughing—' I never thought
of carbonic acid gas, or oxygen either, when I instituted
them ; I merely thought of making my room pretty. But
enough of mine for the present, we must see Ehoda's now ;
do the honours, Ehoda.'
The two rooms opened off each other, the door of com¬
munication having been kept jealously locked until the
present moment. It was now opened, and as the party
passed through, the contrast was something like that which
is felt on going from the outer sunshine into a medieeval
chapel or a library. The colouring was all toned down; but
we must describe the room, and let our readers judge for
themselves. It was so arranged as to appear as much a
sitting-room as a bedroom. The bed, a small brass one without
a canopy, was placed against the wall, to occupy as little
space as possible; the counterpane was of a richly-coloured
fabric, which, though probably of English manufacture, had
an Oriental appearance.   The floor was stained a deep brown,
The Trial of Taste: A Sketch. 411
and polished about two feet from the wainscot all round ;
the centre of the room was carpeted with a large soft Persian
rug. The toilet table was furnished with many little
drawers, in which the dressing apparatus could be put out
of sight; the washstand could be opened or closed, in which
latter case it looked like a small table, and on it was placed
the water jug. To this purpose Ehoda had appropriated a
large earthenware vessel such as Italian women use for
carrying water, and which, in the course of their travels,
had been bought for a few pence, for the sake of its graceful
design, for it was of the commonest clay. The mantle-piece,
which was only of wood painted, was covered with green
cloth edged with fringe, and on it, as well as on one or two
carved brackets, were disposed the various nick-nacks which
Khoda had accumulated,—a bit of Swiss carving, a specimen
or two of Venetian glass, a statuette in terra cotta, etc.
The prospect from the windows was not so pretty as in
Alice's room, and they were judiciously veiled, but the
drapery was pretty and added to the general effect; it was
of a creamy tint, and formed of strips of' guipure,' produced
by Ehoda's industrious fingers, alternating with strips of
linen. A small oak bookcase contained, though it was not
filled by, Ehoda's little library; a basket of fresh flowers
graced a gipsy table, and was a focus of bright colour which
pleased the eye, and contrasted, while it harmonized with,
the subdued tones of the furniture.
' This is artistic, Ehoda,' said Mrs. Linn, looking round.
In fact Ehoda had profited much by her foreign tour, and
had acquired more culture of taste than might have been
apparent had not this opportunity been aftbrded her of
giving practical shape to her ideas. In the furnishing of
this little room Ehoda's mind found expression.
' This must have been a very expensive room, I should
think,' remarked Mary,—criticism the first.
' No, it was not,' was the reply, ' one expense saved
another; for instance, the small cost of staining the floor,
and it was not much, was more than made up by the saving
on the carpet.    This large Persian rug cost only £1, 15s.'
' My first impression was that the room was sombre,'
observed Alice, ' but it grows upon one. I think I should
like it more and more the longer I stayed. There is a feeling
of repose and harmony about it. Mamma, do you like it
better than mine ?'
' I can scarcely compare rooms in such different styles,'
was  the  reply; ' it really is a question to be decided by
412 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
individual taste, and even by the mood you are in. Were I
a young girl, occupied with just the things of the moment,
especially when I was dressing for a party, I might feel the
atmosphere of Alice's room most congenial; but were I
inclined to read or in a thoughtful mood, Rhoda's would be
a fitting study or even oratory. I think,' she added, smiling,
and by way of illustration, ' if anything could inspire me to
write a book, it would be these surroundings.'
' I hope, then, you will make use of my room, mamma,'
laughed Ehoda.
' I should feel such a room as this a responsibility,'
remarked Alice; ' it would be an effort to me to live up to
the level of my artistic furniture.'
' To talk of living up to the level of your furniture, Alice !
What nonsense!' exclaimed Fanny.
' Would it be amiss, Alice, to have before you an artistic
ideal, to which you felt you had to live up, as you say,'
asked Mrs. Linn, ' even though it did cost your indolence an
effort ?'
Alice only laughed.
Attention was now drawn by Fanny, somewhat disparag¬
ingly, to the plainness of the paper, which was of a faint,
intangible shade of green, with scarcely any pattern.
' I hope by and by to get a few pictures to hang up,'
explained Ehoda, ' and I chose the paper that would set
them off best.'
' I have got some pictures framed and hung up already,'
rejoined Fanny, then abruptly stopped.
' Mamma,' said Ehoda, ' there is something about my
mantle-piece which does not satisfy me.'
' I see what you mean,' said Mrs. Linn; ' there is a defect.
Do you not perceive what it is ?'
' No, I do not,' answered Ehoda; ' I have changed the
ornaments, and puzzled myself trying to find out.'
' Do any of you see the defect ?' asked Mrs. Linn.
' I don't admire the mantle-piece,' said Mary, ' but I cannot
name any particular defect.'
' Now, do not you see,' said Mrs. Linn, addressing them
all, ' that the green of the cloth is a great deal too bright ?
It puts everything else out. Let us try how this will look.'
She took from her neck a sage-green tie, and spread it over
the mantle-piece in contact with the coloured ornaments.
The improved effect was apparent, and Ehoda was delighted.
' How stupid I was !' she exclaimed. ' In theory I know
perfectly the value of those subdued tints, yet I actually, in
The Trial of Taste : A Sketch. 413
choosing the cloth for my mantle-piece, rejected a piece of
sage-green velvet, thinking it dingy in the shop, and took
pains to get a bright shade.'
' You had not assimilated your knowledge on the subject
of colour,' said Mrs. Linn; ' it was something outside of you,
and did not guide your perceptions.'
' Luckily the fault can be remedied,' said Ehoda, ' and the
expense of a new piece of cloth will be a just punishment
for my stupidity.'
' Would not a border worked in crewels look well ?' sug¬
gested Alice.
' I thought of that,' answered Ehoda,' but it would have
taken too long. 1 should not have been ready by the
opening day; by and by I may accomplish it. But I have
a greater ambition, mamma, than to embroider a mantle
border. My grand project is to paint the panels of my
door. If you have no objection, I think I could do it after
the pattern of that door we admired so much, which was
painted with branches of cherry blossom and little birds.'
' You can but try,' assented Mrs. Linn. ' I will give you
facilities, and if you fail, the door will only have to be
painted over again by a non-artist. Well, Ehoda,' she
added, ' I could spend some time longer examining the
details of your pretty room, only Fanny, I know, is dying to
show off hers.'
Fanny had been silent for some minutes, and was looking
grave. She led the way, however, across the passage to her
room, remarking,' I have not seen anything so pretty yet as
some of my things.' She opened the door, and her mother
and sisters entered. They looked round, but remarks, either
commendatory or the contrary, did not present themselves
readily. The fact was, there was no general effect to strike
the eye. The things were, unquestionably, good and hand¬
some, but they had each been selected without any reference
to previous or intended purchases, the consequence of which
was not only a lack of effect, but a want of harmony. This
was felt by those who entered before they assigned a reason
for their impression. Fanny, impatient of their silence,
drew attention to the excellence of various articles. ' Now,
is not this a prettier carpet than any of yours ?'
' It would be very handsome in a library,' said Alice,' but
it looks heavy here; and to have so much red in your
carpet, a blue and pink paper, and purple'—
Fanny interrupted: ' There is a greater mixture of colours
in Ehoda's Persian carpet than in my whole room.'
414 ^-^^^ Ladies^ EdinbtirgJi Magazine.
The girls looked a little puzzled, until their mother
observed: ' It is not only a question of colour, but of tint
and quantity.    What a pretty paper, Fanny '—
' But,' put in Alice, ' Ehoda chose more judiciously. A
paper with less pattern would show off your pictures to
greater advantage; they seem here mutually to spoil each
other.'
' I chose the paper before I thought of putting up pictures,'
Fanny admitted.
' This ought to be in my room,' said Ehoda, pouncing on a
carved oak chair.
' I am very proud of that chair,' said Fanny; ' it is really
antique and artistic'
■   ' But you have nothing else artistic or antique in your
room,' objected Ehoda; ' it is out of place.'
' This is a poor chest of drawers, Fanny,' remarked Mrs.
Linn; ' both the wood and the workmanship are inferior.
Not a good investment, my dear.'
' I know it is not,' said Fanny, ' but the fact is, I had
spent so much on the carpet, and one or two other articles,
that I was obliged to save on something.'
' Some of your furniture is of birch and some mahogany,
which looks very patchy,' said Mary.
Fanny had borne the accumulated strictures with tolerable
equanimity, but now her temper gave way.
' You are all very disagreeable !' cried she to her sisters.
' Mamma, I appeal to you as to whether my things, with the
exception of the chest of drawers, are not very pretty and
superior.'
' Yes, my dear, they are individually very nice, but—well,
we ought not to discuss the rooms until we have seen them all,
then we can compare notes.    Mary, we will go on to yours.'
She was moving towards the door when Mary put herself
in the way.
' I have furnished my room on a different plan from any
of the others,' said she. ' I admit that Alice's is very pretty,
though I do think those fallals of white muslin will cost no
end of trouble to wash and get up; and Ehoda's is artistic,
but I have not gone in for any of that sort of thing, I don't
see the use of it'—
' Let me pass, please,' interrupted Ehoda.
' Stop a minute,' still barring the way,' my aim has been
to make my room neat and comfortable, and I half expect
you, mamma, to say that it is the most sensibly furnished of
the four.'
The Trial of Taste : A Sketch. 415
' We are all impatience to see it, Mary,' said Mrs. Linn,
laughing,' while you detain us to listen to an oration.'
' I wanted to prepare you in case of disappointment,'
replied Mary,' and that you might do me justice.'
She led the way and ushered in the party.
It was just a bed-room, as one of the girls remarked, in
which, if there was nothing to please, there was as little to
offend the eye. The iron bedstead was suitable as to size,
and well placed, and Mary, turning down the bedclothes,
surmounted by a white Marseilles quilt, called on her mother
to inspect the excellent spring mattress. There was a com¬
modious wardrobe, which looked rather too large for the
room; everything, in short, was useful, plain, substantial.
' What an ugly room!' was Ehoda's unceremonious stricture.
' There is an absence of beauty, rather,' corrected Alice.
Mary did not seem the least hurt, for her mother said at
almost the same moment,' You have not wasted your money,
Mary, I must say.'
' I could not stand such a toilet table as that,' observed
Alice, ' bare painted legs, and a common little white cover
on the top.'
' I don't care for a toilet table dressed up like a lady for a
ball,' replied its owner; ' I prefer to get the use of a draw"er.'
' You have a fine wardrobe,' remarked Mrs. Linn.
* It was expensive,' said Mary,' though it is only painted ;
it left me little money for superfluities; but a good wardrobe
is such a comfort. I don't think, Ehoda, that your carved
bureau will hold your dresses well.'
' No, it does not,' answered Ehoda, ' I forgot to show you
the contrivance I have for my dresses. Come back and see
it.'
They returned to Ehoda's room, where she drew aside a
curtain which concealed a recess, and showed a row of pegs
on which to hang cloaks and other articles; then she
removed the cushion from a long low seat against the wall,
near the fireplace, lifted the top and discovered a receptacle
in which her best dresses lay nearly full length.
' This is ingenious, I own,' said Mary.
' It was a packing-case which I got out of the lumber-
room, and took the liberty of appropriating,' explained Ehoda.
' Now,' said Mrs. Linn, ' we have seen all the rooms, so
we may pass judgment, and decide who is worthy of the
prize.'
' Mamma,' said Fanny, ' before we go further I have some¬
thing to say.    I confess that my room is a failure.'
4i6 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
' Such candour disarms criticism,' said Mrs. Linn.
' Moreover, I fear it has cost more than any of the others,'
pursued Fanny, speaking with an evident effort, ' for I took
everything of the best and handsomest, so it really is
vexatious for me.'
' Do not be discouraged,' replied her mother. ' It has been
said that our failures may be the steps by which we mount
upwards. It signifies very little, even from an artistic point
of view, that your first experiment in the domain of taste
has miscarried, but it is a great thing to know and admit
that you have failed.'
' But now, can anything be done to improve my room ?'
asked Fanny with a humility which, contrasting with her
former boastful assurance, was quite touching.
' I think,' replied her mother, ' that I must take one or
two of your things which are most incongruous off your
hands for some of the bedrooms which are not yet completely
furnished, and we may make some exchanges which will be
advantageous to you.'
Fanny thanked her mother; and Mary said: ' I am willing,
for my own part, that the prize should be allotted to either
Alice or Ehoda; but I want you to admit, mamma, that I had
as much a design in the furnishing of my room as they had.'
'You had,' replied her mother, 'the design of making it
very comfortable.'
' And is that a small thing ?' asked Mary. ' If a bedroom
is comfortable and neat, it is surely immaterial whether it is
more or less pretty.'
' I am not so sure, Mary, that it can be immaterial
whether morning after morning our eyes open on objects
which are pretty and graceful, or such as are altogether
commonplace. Our taste not only forms our surroundings,
but is insensibly formed by them,—the style of the rooms
we live in, the dress we wear; and indirectly, I believe, these
things act on the character also.'
'And comfort,' interrupted Ehoda, 'does not necessarily
imply the sacrifice of beauty; Alice and I will sleep as
soundly in our pretty beds as you will in that japanned iron
thing of yours.'
' I foresee that we shall not arrive at our decision without
some debate,' observed Mrs. Linn,' so I shall sit down in
this very inviting low chair. I am afraid you are inclined
to be luxurious, Ehoda.'
At that moment a servant tapped at the door: ' It is four
o'clock, will you take tea, ma'am ?'
The Trial of Taste: A Sketch. 417
' Oh, let it be brought up here,' said one of the girls.
Mrs. Linn assented, and while Ehoda brought forward her
gipsy table to receive the tray, Alice ran out of the room.
She returned in a few minutes, saying, ' In honour of the
occasion, I have ordered the new French tea-set that we
have never yet used ;' and as she spoke she held up a very
pretty little table-cloth, embroidered with a wreath of forget-
me-nots in crewels, which had been worked during the
previous winter, and reserved for high days.
All this caused a diversion, nor was the subject of dis¬
cussion immediately resumed as they gathered round the
tea-table.
The pretty room, the pretty china, the pretty tablecloth,
gave to the afternoon tea that day an air of being en file ;
the cream seemed to pour more riclily than usual, the tea
to have a more refined flavour, the bread and butter to be
more delicate.
' After all,' remarked Mrs. Linn, ' it was nonsense getting
out these things, and bringing them up here. It would have
saved trouble to have had the tea-tray placed on the table
in the old school-room.'
' Oh, mamma, it would not have been half so nice/ said
Mary.
'Why, Mary,* said Mrs. Linn, 'the tea and bread and
butter would have been the same.'
Mary looked very significant as she said, ' Ah! mamma,
you are laying a trap for me, but I will not fall into it.'
' Your own remark only shows, Mary, that with all your
utilitarianism, you have an sesthetical side to your nature,
which asserts itself, however much you may starve it. And
remember, that for every faculty you stunt in yourself,—
every talent you fail to cultivate,—you are so much the
poorer, and your sources of pleasure so much the more
meagre. In nature we see harmonious development, beauty,
and utility combined, not the purely utilitarian principle
exemplified.'
' Except in potatoes and turnips,' suggested Alice.
' Very well, Mary shall have the potato and turnip as her
emblem if she pleases,' said her mother with a smile.
Mary looked disappointed; she had expected that her
pre-eminently 'sensible' room would have been viewed
with unqualified approbation (at any rate by her mother),
and perhaps rewarded with the prize.
Mrs. Linn pursued: ' Do not misunderstand me. I do not
for a moment mean that we should subordinate utility to
No. 69.—Septembee 1880. 2 D
418 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine,
beauty. Had Alice or Ehoda done so, I should have cen¬
sured them. Even had Ehoda been satisfied to keep her
dresses in an inconvenient chest of drawers, I should have
disapproved, but I cannot see that their rooms are less
\   comfortable than yours.'
' But another question presents itself, mamma,' observed
Fanny. ' It is not always easy to know, practically, in what
beauty consists, as I have unfortunately proved. No one
could have desired more than I did to furnish my room
with taste.'
' Taste,' said Mrs. Linn, after a moment's consideration,
' is neither more nor less than the perception—usually in¬
stinctive, though requiring to be trained and cultivated—of
certain laws and principles which underlie all beauty,—
divine principles, since they have their foundation deep in
nature. It is no matter of arbitrary choice, when we say
that such and such colours go well together,—that certain
forms are graceful. They are pleasing or graceful because
they are in accordance with the laws of harmony. The
province of art in its highest branches, we all know, is to
give expression to these principles; but we are too apt to
forget that they also have their application to every detail
of our home life—our houses, our dress, our furniture. The
reason why we see so many hideous fashions is, that dress¬
makers think only of producing variety, and are ignorant of
the principles on which beauty depends. And as Fanny
has proved, the mere grouping together of handsome pieces
of furniture will no more impart to a room an effect
satisfying to an educated taste, than does a child produce
music by striking at random the notes of a piano.'
' Canon Kingsley, in one of his sermons,' remarked Ehoda,
' says that the Greeks made their children learn music to
teach them the value of obedience, because in music you
must obey the laws of harmony and melody.'
' Just so,' assented Mrs. Linn. ' I remember something of
that sermon. And those principles of melody and harmony
are not confined to music; they, or their equivalents, are the
foundation of every art and every science. Genius is the
power of apprehending and giving expression to the principles
in nature.'
' So, in fact, we can invent nothing. Wliat we call dis¬
covery is only finding out what already exists,' said Ehoda.
' The very word implies it—to (fis-cover. But now,'
continued Mrs. Linn, 'we must not spend more time in
talking; we must award the prize.'
TJie Trial of Taste : A Sketch. 419
'I wish, mamma, you would adjudicate it,' said Rhoda;
' it would be most satisfactory. We shall not suspect you
of partiality, and none of us can becomingly vote it to
ourselves.'
' Very well,' said Mrs. Linn, ' I consider that the prize lies
between Alice and Ehoda. Between their respective claims
I really cannot decide, as each has been successful in the
style she adopted. I therefore propose to divide the sum,
and give £2, 10s. to each.'
We are happy to be able to state that on this judgment
Fanny and Mary gentlj^ clapped their hands, showing that,
though there was competition, there was not envy among
them.
Mrs. Linn produced a pretty little purse, containing five
sovereigns. ' If I had anticipated this result,' said she,' I
should have provided two purses.'
She gave £2, 10s. to Ehoda, as the younger, then handed
the purse, containing the same sum, to Alice.
' If you like,' said she,' you may each buy a little time¬
piece for your rooms.'
' That would be very nice,' said Ehoda, ' but I would
rather spend the money on material for painting my door.'
' And I have an ambition too, mamma,' said Alice. ' I
want to learn to paint on china, and I will appropriate my
prize-money to procuring some materials and a book of
instructions. If I succeed, I will paint you some plates and
tiles, Ehoda; for you deserve contributions.'
' Learn to paint on glass too, Alice,' suggested Ehoda,
' and paint my window.    I am so fond of coloured glass.'
' Painting on glass,' observed Mrs. Linn, ' is not so suitable
for amateurs. However, I do not say. Set limits to your
ambition; I only say, One step at a time.'
' Oh! mamma,' exclaimed Alice,' what a splendid mother
you are !    You encourage us so much.'
And so we leave our young people, entering on a new
chapter of their youth. That it will prove a happy period,
that there will be no more regrets for having returned to a
settled home life, we venture to predict, for we leave them
supplied with sources of interesting occupation, and therein
lies, in a great measure, the secret of happiness.
420 TJie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
Countrg Subjects anti pursuits,
XVIII.—ENTOMOLOGY.
I HEAR some of our readers exclaim in dismay at my
heading, ' Oh dear! I could never take to Entomology. I
hate killing " things," and I could never go sticking pins into
moths and butterflies;' but I can assure my friends that I
am far from advocating either of the above proceedings.
The form of Entomology I wish to bring under their notice
is that of studying the habits of the many interesting Living
things which swarm around all who live in the country.
I know that many members of my sex, old as well as
young, have a horror of any animal with more than four
legs, and that uses its superaliundant limbs (as they consider
them) in creeping. With this dislike I have no sympathy,
but I confess to a supreme aversion to those creatures that
' buzz.' I hate a bhie-bottle fly, fear a wasp, have a terror
of a hornet, and a respectful awe of a bee of any sort, when¬
ever any one of them thinks fit to pay me a visit in either
drawing-room or bed-room ; but I think them all most inter¬
esting individuals in their own homes, or in the garden.
Before, however, becoming an observer of insects and their
curious ways, I would advise my friends to learn to dis¬
tinguish the different genera and classes, and to make
themselves tolerably well acquainted with their habits and
characteristics.
It must be clearly understood that I am by no means
recommending a desultory or superficial knowledge of ento¬
mology in preference to a more thorough study of the
science, but I am writing of it now as an amusing pursuit,
and one to help what, without some such object, might be
weary hours to those who have not time, or perhaps inclina¬
tion, to devote themselves to the insect world.
I remember well on one occasion how a small wild bee
caused me to forget the time when waiting alone for a party
of friends. We had started together on a long walk to see
a lovely waterfall, but when about half-way a loose stone on
which I trod gave way beneath my foot, and I fell, doubling
my ankle under me so painfully, that though not actually
sprained, it rendered my going further an impossibility, to
which I reluctantly was forced to give way.
I was therefore left all alone in the very midst of an extensive
and beautiful, but wild, park, without book or work to wile
away at least an hour, if not two, before my companions'
Country Subjects and Pursuits. 421
return. I sat down on the grass beside a wild rose-bush,
and shaded by a fine hazel. As the merry voices and laughter
fell fainter and fainter on my ear, and finally were lost in
the far distance, I felt, I own, somewhat' eerie,' in spite of
the broad daylight and brilliant sunshine; and vague fears
of bulls floated through my mind, for I knew the park
contained several herds of cattle.
However, deriding myself for my folly, I endeavoured to
find amusement in watching the various forms assumed by the
many fleecy clouds which dotted the sky, and the shadows
they cast on the heather-clad hills around me; for the park
in which I sat, ran from the mansion to which it belonged
for some miles up a glen, between mountains whose summits
formed a grouse moor, while their feet were washed by a
small salmon stream that flowed down the centre of the
park, which was inhabited by Highland cattle and fallow
deer. These last, however, were nearly as wild and shy as
red deer.
I was fast becoming drowsy, lulled by the ripple of the
river and the soft rustle of the light summer breeze, when
my attention was roused by a humming sound close to my
ear, which was not continuous, but occurred at slightly
irregular intervals. It was not the booming of a ' bumble-
dore,' nor was it the spiteful buzz of a wasp, or the still
more vicious high note of a gnat. With my detestation of
these creatures I was learned in their tones, but this was a
low, busy sounding hum. In one of the intervals of silence
I turned gently round so as to face the rose-bush whence
the sound seemed to proceed. In a few seconds I heard it
again, and now saw a small, rather light-coloured bee alight
on a rose leaf beside me; her jaws and legs were working
busily for a brief space of time, and then away she flew,
leaving a neatly-cut indentation in the edge of the leaf.
She soon returned, and when she once more departed I
discovered the abstracted portion of the leaf neatly rolled
up and held between her legs. I strove in vain to follow
the ' busy bee,' as she was indeed, though not in storing
honey. I always lost the sound of her hum when a few
steps from the rose-bush, and so was unable to trace her to
the spot in which I knew she must be carefully arranging
those miniature leaves that she had cut out so deftly as
a cradle for the children she would never see.
I had been so taken up in watching my small insect' cutter-
out,' that time had passed unheeded, and I was quite surprised
on looking round me to see that the clouds were already assura-
422 Tlie Ladies Edinbwgh Magazine.
ing a rosy hue, and that the sun was disappearing behind the
hill. I looked at my watch and found that two hours had
sped away, and was beginning to wonder at the prolonged
absence of my friends, when I heard their voices borne on
the breeze as they sang together the old ditty, ' Shades of
evening close not o'er us.' The effect was lovely as the
chorus rose and fell to the accompaniments of the rippling
water and rustling leaves, and the occasional distant crow of
a grouse above.
Had that little bee not attracted my attention, I feel
certain that long before the return of the party I should
have passed from wonder to alarm at the length of time I
was left alone, and I have ever felt grateful to the leaf-cutter
for saving me, not only from that weariness that comes of
waiting, but from a hien mauvais quart d'heure of fears of
my own invention.
To those of my readers who are botanists I would also
recommend Entomology, as it is most interesting to make
oneself acquainted, not only with the characteristics of
plants, but also with the insects which haunt each species,
and their purpose in so doing, and the various modes in which
the leaves and blossoms are affected by their visitors, and
also the curious adaptation of insect to flower, and flower
to insect, in many cases securing the propagation of the
plant, which otherwise would become extinct.
And what is better still, the more we learn of Nature and
all her marvellous and complicated machinery, the more we
must learn to know and love the Great Creator who upholds
and governs all things, and who guides equally the move¬
ments of creatures so small as to be invisible to our human
eyes, and the course of the planets through illimitable space.
But to return to the insect world. As I before advised the
study of one order of plants, so would I now recommend a
special turning of attention to one tribe of insects, not, how¬
ever, to the total exclusion of the rest,—for indeed that would
be impossible, seeing how often the various genera prey upon
each other,—but it is as well to have an object even in a
pursuit only followed for amusement.
All the beetle tribe are most fascinating to watch, for their
^abits are endless in variety, while their persons (if that be
not a misapplication of a word) are equally various in colouring
and beauty; for beautiful they are, in spite of all that those
who hate ' creeping things' may say to the contrary. I do
not mean to say they equal in loveliness those ' winged
blossoms' the butterflies, or even the soberer moths, that suu
Country Subjects and Pursuits. 423
their brilliant wings over the flower-beds; but many beetles
are quite as gorgeous in their colouring, and far more interest¬
ing, at least to my mind, than their distant relatives, who
have become the emblem of fickleness in their final stage of
existence, though when followed through their four states of
life they are taken as the fitting type of the soul.
Spiders, too, are a most entertaining race, though not,
scientifically speaking, ' insects,' inasmuch as an insect, to be
one, must pass through the aforesaid four stages of existence,
i.e. egg, ' larva' or grub, chrysalis, and finally the ' imago' or
perfect insect. The caterpillar or larva being entirely occupied
in eating and preparing itself for its future state, is a fit
representative of man in his ordinary earthly condition; and
when it comes to its state of repose in the pupa or chrysalis,
apparently lifeless, but not so in reality, it is a type of the
human being resting in the grave, but with an immortal soul
awaiting the resurrection of the body in a glorified form,
corresponding to the lovely winged being which bursts forth
from the pupa case. The Italian poet was indeed right when
he wrote:
'Non v' accorgete voi, che noi siam 'vermi,
Nati a formar I'angelica farfalia.'
And, as my readers are probably aware, the Greeks used the
same word, psyche, for a butterfly and for the soul. While
advocating thus the pursuit of Entomology, as I have before
pleaded the cause of botany, I wish at the same time to
recommend the study of Natural History in general, i.e.
Nature in the widest sense of the word, to those whose lot
is cast in the country, and, still more, to those who only
occasionally are able to ' seek its silence and its shade ; * for
in the words of one worthier than myself to speak, ' Nature
is the work of a mightier Power than man,' and therefore the
contemplation of that work must raise our thoughts and
minds, while the arts are all represented there.    Tor
' Who can paint like Nature ?
Can imagination boast,
Amid its gay creation, hues like hers ?
Or can it mix them with that matchless skill,
And lose them in each other, as appears
In every bud that blows ? '
L. H. EOGEESOK.
424 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
Is Ifje ^cteti ©rama capailc of tlcijatittg tlje
llassfS ?
(Read at the Ladies' Debating Society.)
II.—NEGATIVE.
I AM conscious of the invidiousness of an attempt to
maintain, in this house of all others, the negative side of
this question. There are, in connection with its owners,
names of undying celebrity in the annals of the acted drama.
Pictures look down from these walls—portraits of a bygone
generation of this family—of whom one can only say, that
their public lives, their talents and triumphs, are eclipsed by
their private virtues—by the good influence they exerted on
all who came within their reach. On many grounds I should
have liked to come into the world half a century earlier, but
on none more cogent than that had I done so I might have
known Sarah Siddons.
Every subject has its theoretical and practical view.
Theoretically, the affirmative of this question would carry
all before it; so I can only reply by confining myself to the
vulgar, practical view—'the proof of the pudding is the
eating.' If the acted drama be capable of elevating the
masses, it is fair to ask for tangible proof of its having done
so. If it has never yet done so, when is it going to begin ?
No kind of poetry has had a longer trial, has run a more
triumphant course. Its very name speaks for its antiquity,
derived, curiously, from the defective verb ' to drive' (Gr.
dpa/MiTv), as in a chariot race—a poem whose action passed in
regular course before the spectators' eyes. It was invented,
we may say, 'to do good.' The rpdyog uidia, goat-song (tragedy),
was a regular act of solemn worship, with proper religious
adjuncts; while the jcw,aos wdia, village-song (comedy), was
often meant as an instructive satire on the prevailing vices
and follies of the day. As Greek manners became corrupt,
words can hardly describe the licentiousness of the comedies ;
and here I pause to mark my chief ground for doubting the
educational power of the acted drama: it rises or sinks with
the morals of tlie nation ; it has no standard of its own. The
play will never be better than the people; if it is, the
chances are the people will not look at it. The Spartans
thought that looking at drunken Helots would shame the
youths into sobriety; but this theory fell to pieces, as all
Is the Acted Drama capable of elevating the Masses ? 425
must which ignore the great trnth, that in a fallen world,
looking upon evil perpetuates moral contagion. The heathen
knew nothing of that truth ; the Jews saw it through a glass
darkly; and it is a significant fact that the only nation who
received the oracles of God had nothing approaching to the
drama among their amusements. This, of course, is a pecu¬
liarity shared by all the Semitic races; I found no theory
whatever upon it. The drama is no more necessarily wrong
because the Jews had it not, than it is right because the
Greeks had it.
But now we come to Christianity. We have not time
fully to enter upon the very interesting subject of religious
plays—mysteries. I believe firmly that in early times, when
manners were simple and unsophisticated, these plays and
shows were valuable in teaching the ignorant. As Bible
pictures to children, so were those plays to an audience un¬
lettered, but full of that reverence for the outward accessories
of religion which characterizes the childhood of men and of
nations. When childhood is past, we cannot educate by
such methods any longer. In Eussia, I believe, and in
Spain, I know, these mystery-plays are still to be seen ;
and I have been told they are so fearfully irreverent, not to
say blasphemous, that no English spectator could look at
them; so, whatever their good intentions may be, their
elevating effect upon the masses must be small indeed. The
one favourable instance left is the Ammergau Passion-Play,
and anything more exquisitely beautiful cannot be conceived.
But to the players it is a religious observance, not an amuse¬
ment. They are under a solemn oath never to change the
performance in any important respect, never to delete from
it, never to admit a player not a native of the place, nor to
carry the play elsewhere, nor to suffer a stranger to know
the actual process of the crucifixion. An unblemished repu¬
tation is required of each actor—of the Christus especially.
Speaking for myself, I attended it not as a play but as a
religious service. These villagers are full of artistic and
dramatic power. The play is taken entirely from the fourth
Gospel, supplemented by the Gospel of Nicodemus, the most
striking of the apocryphal gospels. The acting was simply
as if a set of Eaffaele frescoes had started into life before
one. When all was consummated,—when the knocking of
the nails was heard, and the curtain rose upon the living
crucifix,—one knelt down and covered one's face. It was not
Ammergau, but Calvary. ... As one walked forth into
the sunshine after the eight hours' trance (for it was not a
426 TJie Ladies Edinburgh Mag-azifte.
thiug of earth), Schiller's words, the chosen motto of the
play, filled one's heart:
w ' Mit alien seinen Tiefen, seinen Hohen,
Roll' ich das Leben ab vor deinem Blick,
Wenn du das grosze Spiel der Welt gesehen,
So kehrst du reicher in dich selbst zuriick :'
And then arose the thought, How could one bear to see this
except at Ammergau ? Ah me ! I fear even there, if Cook
and his tourists can spoil it, they will. It has been the
noble simplicity, the reverent faith of these remote Bavarian
peasants that have kept this thing of beauty so intact
hitherto. If they deteriorate, think you their play would
not ? By their vow they can only act it one year in ten,
but one dreads lest they should not be able to hinder copyists
from reproducing it elsewhere. Could you elevate the
masses by such a performance at Covent Garden ? I trow
not.
Eeligious plays, then, are a thing of the past, and prac¬
tically incompatible with public decency and reverence in
our times. No teaching they could give would counter¬
balance the harm they would do. But I engaged to deal not
with the theoretical, but with the practical view of this
question. To do so, I must take plays as they are, and
people as they are, not as they might be. I ignore and pass
by the ordinary objections made by good people to theatres,
believing that many of them might apply equally to Church
services, to Temperance meetings, to anything that draws
promiscuous crowds together. A hard-working London
man once told me he believed as much evil at least came
of young people flocking to late services without proper
guardianship as of their attending theatres. That city
churches are the favourite resort of the most dangerous
members of society is a weU-attested fact. I say this in
defence of theatres.
Plays, as I have said, always rise or sink with the manners
of the day. When Wycherly and Congreve, Beaumont and
Fletcher wrote, a grossness of manners and speech prevailed,
which was merely echoed by their plays. Here, then, is my
objection again: the theatre suits itself to the views and
habits of the age. Not long since I went to see the Beggars'
Opera, and though it was une edition Ipuree, to suit our
present ideas, I confess it was unpleasant to me from its
underlying coarseness of allusion. One looked at it as a kind
of curiosity, as one might dip into an old book ; but I felt
that so far from being a wholesome lesson, as its author no
Is ike Acted Drama capable of elcvatmg the Masses ? 427
doubt intended, it was a thoroughly harmful one to 'the
masses.' We have abundance of Macheaths and Polly
Peachums inside and outside our gaols, but I doubt if they
are bettered by such spectacles, if they ' cease their funning '
and mend their morals, from gazing on these stage models of
a dissolute life. It is either by example of good or warning
of evil that we must seek to elevate the masses; and which
shall it be ? Are we to place before the learners. Spartan
fashion, stage Helots worse than themselves, that they may
turn away in horror ? Plays, then, must be so bad that no
decent folk could endure them. Are we to institute a kind
of educational committee to supervise and expurgate our
plays, so as to make them at least innocent, if not edifying ?
Is this practicable with no public censorship of the press, no
sumptuary laws, a legislature framed on the principle of
non-interference with individual liberty ? No reasonable
person can think so; therefore I infer that we cannot make
the theatre available educationally. In saying this I neither
condemn the amusement nor those who frequent it; nay, I
rather say with Meg Dods,' they waste their time waur, I
wis,'—I merely put the theatre hors de combat as a national
educator. In this commercial age, the theatre must be a
paying concern; no manager, and no author, will be found to
peril his receipts or damn his play for the sake of the public
morals. Nobody will look at a play merely written ' to do
good.' I am inclined to think myself such plays would be
very stupid. The drama being the kilid of poem most certain
to embody in a striking form the special characteristics of
the age, I suspect it is always what will attract, not what
will instruct the masses, that will inspire our play-writers
and actors. It is to be feared that the wide prevalence of
farce and extravaganza evidences a very low and debased
condition of national taste at present, to which our managers
pander for the sake of filling their pockets. The public ear
gets so satiated with the rattletrap music which accompanies
these burlesques, that it is difficult to get people to listen to
anything better. Herr Wagner, whom I consider a greater
dramatist than musician, thinks that our dramatic taste
needs elevating; and there I agree with him. But when, by
way of emendation, he gives us what he calls 'pure humanity,'
I confess I have my doubts as to the improvement. Until
he can teach his gods and goddesses to respect the table of
prohibited degrees, I am inclined to fear that in these days
of the Divorce Court and the Marriage Affinity Bill, Wagner's
idea of pure humanity will not improve our young people.
428 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
Such dramas as Siegfried and Tristan may, in point of morals,
be classed with Mr. Swinburne's worst poetry, with the added
mischief of being acted, not read.
There is one place where the theatre has been used
educationally, and that is Utah, the Salt Lake City. Some
years ago I listened to the interesting account given by an
English clergyman, a missionary from British Columbia, who
spent some time there. He had been treated with the
greatest courtesy, and even permitted to preach on Sunday
in their tabernacle, a solitary instance of an English clergy¬
man having done so. He attended the theatrical perform¬
ances with much interest; the plays were excellent in
morality, and by no means dull, and he was told that the
whole was under the strictest supervision of Brigham Young,
who considered the theatre as a most important part of
national education. So much for theory without practice.
We should hardly care to seek for moral instruction in Salt
Lake City, or to confide our youths and maidens to the teach¬
ing of Prophet Brigham Young.
My position, therefore, is this : I do not abuse the theatre
or wish to suppress it. Even at its worst, I regard it as a
kind of waste-pipe, and believe that strict repressive measures
might make the flood of evil burst out in more mischievous
ways. But it follows, and does not lead, the national taste.
There is this advantage—the better the people, the better
the plays. The noble and great, if they choose to take the
trouble, can always make moral nastiness unfashionable, and
therefore unmarketable. When the Queen refused to go to
the Italian Opera while the Traviata was played there, she
did more for public purity of taste than if she had had the
power to make Signor Verdi stand in the pillory. Anything
that elevates and purifies a nation, will, we hope, have a good
effect on all its amusements, theatres inclusive. But we
cannot hope to make a nation good by looking at good plays,
as Mr. Brigham Young thought; nor to deter a nation from
evil by looking at bad plays, as Greek and Eoman and
English satirists have vainly thought; still less can we shut
up all theatres, and condemn all plays, like the Puritans. All
that remains for us to do is to copy the good example of the
greatest Lady in the land, and refuse to sanction anything
offensive to taste or principle.
The acted drama is therefore not capable of elevating the
masses, because it is not ' the plays that make the people,
but the people that make the plays.'
L. D.
Our Library Table. 429
©ur iLilirars Eable.
The Beleagueked City.    A Story of the Seen and the Unseen.
By Mrs. Oliphant.    Macmillan.    1880.
This is a clever, if rather unaccountable, little book. It may be
briefly described as an attempt to show the probable results of a
visitation from the unseen world upon the ordinary varieties of
character that are to be found in any mixed society,—the sincerely-
believing ; the superstitiously-devout; the shrewd and worldly,
priding themselves on a little scepticism ; and the openly profane.
The scene of the experiment is a French town, Semur in Bourgogne,
and the chief narrator of the wonderful occurrences is the worthy
maire of the city, whose account is supplemented by those of one or
two other persons. The motif oi the tale is this: Heaven is provoked
by the coarse profanity and money-loving worldliness of the men,
and the superstitious folly of the women, who, in rebuking the
impiety of the stronger sex, make a sort of appeal to the dead to rise
out of their graves to read them a lesson by allowing this miracle
actually to occur.
The departed citizens of Semur, invisible though apparently
substantial, return to their former dwellings, driving out of the town
by an irresistible though unseen force the actual inmates. The exile
lasts for three days and nights, whose perplexities and miseries are
minutely described. At the end of this time the spirits depart,
apparently with a sense of failure to produce the conviction or con¬
version they had hoped for. In short, the experiment breaks down,
and there seems nothing to justify the flourish with which ^Messieurs
les mort.t' had entered, calling upon the inhabitants ' to yield the
places which they had not filled aright to those who knew the mean¬
ing of life, being dead.' Their three days' visit does little or no good
to the living, and certainly none to themselves. The spirits depart,
and the citizens with great delight re-enter. A solemn Te Deum is
sung that evening in the Cathedral, to which the women flock, and
the men, at a hint from the maire, follow, to the unexpected joy of
their partners, and with a proud sense of their own merit in paying
the compliment. After this, true we believe to the general course
of things after times of religious excitement, life returns to its usual
course, a few continue to be impressed, but on the whole the eS"ect
of the visitation dies away. If we rightly gather the purport of the
book, this is the point of it, and the whole is a comment on the text,
■' Neither will they be persuaded though one rose from the dead.'
The impression it leaves on us is, that while ' things seen' are
depicted with much clearness and acumen, the attempt to deal with
' things unseen ' is as unsatisfactory as such attempts in fiction gene¬
rally are. There is, as usual, the fanciful earth-born invention on
the one hand, and on the other the utter collapse before the reai
mysteries and secrets of the unseen. In both ways there is the giving,
we will not say of a stone, but of a shadow to those who are longing
for bread. We indeed can be content to hunger till the appointed
time of satisfaction arrives, but we cannot feed upon the wind.
The local colouring and the tone of thought of the little tale appear
to us to be very true to French nature and manners, and there is a
vein, not at all too deeply worked, of perfectly good-natured satire.
We are, however, rather tired of the easy trick of French talk in an
English dress, in such phrases as 'that goes without saying,' ' that
430 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
understands   itself,'  etc.,   amusing  as  the  device  was  when  first
started.
Cross Purposes. By Cecilia Findlay. 1 Vol. Marcus Ward & Co.
This is the first work of a young authoress, and abounds with
graphic descriptions and touching incidents. The London afternoon
in November, with which it opens, is ably.drawn as well as the hopes
and fears of the young twin sister who leaves her orphaned family
for the first time, to obtain her own livelihood as a governess. The
household which she enters is in the country, and that of a rich
widower with an only daughter whose health has been completely
upset by the death of a beloved brother through an accident on the
ice. The widower has unjustly suspected his nephew and heir-at-
law, Frank Heathcote, and they parted under painful circumstances;
but Mr. Heathcote, discovering his error, has a paralytic stroke brought
on by remorse, and his daughter, thinking that the sight of his nephew
would relieve his mind, sends her companion, the heroine, with a
maid, to find the young man in France. He arrives just in time to
see his uncle, who is, however, not in a state to alter his will, which
makes no mention of his nephew, and leaves all his property to his
daughter Alice. The will was considered most unjust by the relatives;
but here we must observe that, as the authoress places her characters
in England, not in Scotland, Mr. Heathcote only followed the
usual course south of the Tweed, when he left unentailed property
to his direct descendant, even though a female, rather than to a
collateral male heir. The heiress wishes to relinquish the property
to her cousin, but is assured that she cannot do so by the terms of
the will. As she had long had a sisterly affection for him, it seemed
only natural that the supposed injustice should be frustrated by
their marriage ; but Frank's affections wandered off in the direction
of the penniless companion Else Bertram, and after some qualms as
to whether he ought to condemn her to life-long poverty, he proposed,
and was accepted. We must leave the reader to ascertain how the
pecuniary difficulty was surmounted. The book is dedicated by the
authoress to 'Sir Francis Sandford, K.C.B., the best and most
indulgent of uncles.'
 0 
<Q,urstton Series.
I. English Literature.—Point out some differences in the style of
novel-writing in the eighteenth century and that of the present day.
Answers not to exceed three hundred words.
II. Geology.—Give some evidences of the existence of a glacial
period in Great Britain in former time. Answer not to exceed three
hundred words.
Answers to reach Qu. C, not later than October 5th, care of Messrs.
Morrison and Gibb, 11 Queen Street, Edinburgh. Only one side
of the sheet of paper to be written upon, and it is especially requested
that nothing but the answers may be sent to Qu. C. Any other
communication must be addressed in the usual form to the Editor,
or no notice can be taken of such enclosures.
ANSWERS TO JULY QUESTIONS.
English  Literature.—Five answers received.    Best,   Wealdmoor ;
thenfollow Irrlicht, Arialpin, Pink, and Wolfra.    This question
Question Series. 43^
is somewhat difficult to answer within the prescribed limits. All
the papers are good, and are carefully written, but none of them
have followed the course of the argument with sufficient closeness.
Geology.—Five answers received, and this time all are-satisfactory.
First, Arachnb, excellent. Next Pink, very good. Wealdmoor is
also very good, but gives rather too much direct quotation. Wolfra
and Linda are good, but not quite full enough.
Give the course of the argument employed by Bishop Butler in his
Analogy of Religion.
Having presupposed an intelligent author and designer of Nature,
Butler seeks to prove that revelation bears marks of being an out¬
come from the mind of the same designer. He argues: Nature
exists as a fact, so does religion, whether a fact according with
reason or not; morality (or laws of human conduct) exists as a fact.
Are these facts independent, or have they connection with each
other ? If we trace in them systematic resemblance giving evidence
of the working of one mind, we may infer the truth of that which is
abstruse from that which is plainer and more evident to our
faculties. For instance, with regard to a future life, when we notice
that change, decay, and revival is the law of nature, there seems
probability that the mind that designed it so, would intend that
man should also live after death. In the government of the world
by rewards and punishments, we may appeal to the facts of history.
There we find ' perhaps the one and only scientific conclusion which
can be drawn, that in the long run it is well with the good, and in
the long run it is ill with the bad,' that is, the natural government over
men points to the same fact as religion states to be the principle of
the divine mind. We but imperfectly comprehend the system of
Nature, why should we expect to comprehend the system of revela¬
tion ? As God's action in the world is indirect, so may be His plan
of revelation.
Reasoning from probable, not demonstrative evidence, Butler sets
forth a powerful chain of argument in support of belief of revealed
religion, showing how extremely like the truth it is, because of the
analogy of its scheme to the visible scheme of nature.
Wealdmooe.
Give some account of coral formations and their distribution.
Coral is a kind of limestone, formed by the growth of coral
polypes. Coral reefs sometimes skirt the land, one or two miles
from shore, with a shallow water channel inside; the outside is
highest. The large kinds of coral inhabit it. The finer and
branched kinds prefer the lagoon (or channel). These are called
Fringing reefs. A larger kind called Barrier reefs are similar.
There are also the Coral islands (Atolls), each consisting of a ring
of coral about a quarter of a mile broad, with lagoon, comparatively
shallow inside, full of the pretty, delicate kinds of coral.
There is no land except narrow strips which have been formed by
the waves breaking off pieces of the coral, and washing seeds and
plants from other islands or coasts. These decay and in time make a
soil deep enough for cocoa-nut trees, whole groves of which are
found in the Pacific Ocean.
It has been ascertained that the reef-building corals cannot live
in water more than twenty fathoms deep, so (as these islands are
many of them in very deep seas) the little builders must have added,
432 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
and are adding to them yearly, the living polypes being found at the
upper part of the ridge.
The Coral islands are chiefly in the Indian Ocean, between
Madagascar and Southern Hindustan, and in the Central Pacific
Ocean, between the Carolinas and Lower Archipelago. Some of the
former are quite submerged. The largest Barrier reefs are one
skirting the continent of Australia, 1000 miles long, and some
enclosing whole islands, as Tahiti; the Fringing reefs are found on
the east coast of Africa, amongst the West Indies, and the Brazil
coast. Arachne.
S. George's Hall Students.—From the report of the Edinburgh
University Local Examinations, we learn that the students of the
S. George's Hall Classes have done creditable work in the late
Examinations. One of the orally-taught students heads the list of
successful candidates for the Senior Certificate, with an unusually
large percentage of marks. Other students secured the third, fifth,
and ninth places on the list. Two open bursaries, one of £20 and one
of £10, as well as twenty prizes and thirty-one first class certificates,
were gained by students of S. George's Hall. It seems that there
were 470 students in these classes during the past session, of whom
334 studied by means of the system now so well known as that of
Instruction by Correspondence.
The St. Andrews L.L.A. Degree.—The committee of the S.
George's Hall Classes has now issued its prospectus of correspondence
classes in preparation for the L.L.A. Degree now granted to women
by the University of St. Andrews. The subjects to be taught are
English, French, German, Italian, Latin and Greek literature.
History, Education, Logic and Metaphysics, Moral Philosophy,
Political Economy, Mathematics and Natural Philosophy. We are
very glad that the S. George's Hall Committee has come to the
rescue of women in remote places who, having taken the Senior Certifi¬
cate in the Local Examinations, have been hitherto vainly looking about
for instruction in higher subjects. But we must nevertheless remind
students, that if it is in their power to come to Edinburgh and attend
the lectures given by the Professors in the Association for the
LTniversity Education of Women, by so doing they gain something of
the advantages of a university such as no system of teaching by
correspondence can convey.
Notices to Correspotitients, rtc.
Ladies are invited to contribute to this Magazine. All communi¬
cations to be addressed, Editors, Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine, Messrs.
Morrison & Gibb, 11 Queen Street, Edinburgh.
Papers intended for immediate insertion must be in the hands of
the Editors by the first of the previous month ; attention is requested
to this rule.
The next meeting of the Ladies' Edinburgh Literary Society will
be held on Saturday, October 9th, at 5 Chester Street, at 11 a.m.
Subject of Debate: ' Is Elizabeth properly ranked as one of the
greatest of English sovereigns 1'
TJic Passion Play of Ober-Ainmcrgan. 433
E|)e passion ^lag of ©bcr^^mmergau.
In the lovely ravines and gorges which run up into the
mountainous region lying to the south of IMunich, there was
lamentation and bitter weeping some 250 years ago. Wild
and rugged as the region is even now, it is and was a
populous one, and among its towns and villages a deadly
pestilence was raging. Whole families were swept off. In
the village of Kohlgnib, it is said, only two married couples
were left; in that of Ober-Ammergau 84 persons died; and
in other places the dead lay unburied, no one surviving to
render the last offices to kinsman or neighbour. Earnest
prayers went up from the stricken people, and many vows
were made; among such was the self-dedication of the
peasants of Ober-Ammergau to show forth, in dramatic
representation at intervals of ten years, the Passion, Death,
and Resurrection of Christ, in remembrance of the awful
visitation, and with the purpose of drawing men's hearts
closer to Him, through whom alone they are more than
conquerors over sin and suffering.    The vow is thus recorded:
' In schwarzen unheilvollen Tagen,
Von Pest und Zeuche schwer geschlagen,
Wollt einst des Volkes kleiner Rest
In dieses heil'ge Spiel sich theilen :
O niiige Yon der Siinde Pest
Der Tod des Gottversohners heilen.'
And, says the tradition, the offering was accepted, for not a
single person died after this of all who had caught the
disease.
From that time forward, the year 1634, these represen¬
tations have gone on with some occasional interruption,—
in the early part of the present century during the wars
stirred up by Napoleon's ambition, and again more recently
in 1870,—and they remain now almost the sole relic of a
spectacle common enough in the Middle Ages all over
Europe, a Miracle or Mystery Play, other vestiges of which
held their ground among the valleys of the Tyrol and
Bavaria even up to the latter end of the eighteenth century.
These were all finally suppressed about the year 1790, partly
because it was felt that they no longer tended to edification ;
but such was the superiority of the Ober-Ammergau Passion
Play in this and all other respects, that it was specially
exempted from the decree. It ran some danger again of
being  put down in 1810, but the villagers succeeded in
No. 70.—October 1880. 2 E
434 1^^^^ Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
obtaining once more the necessary sanction. It was probably
in consequence of these threatened suspensions, and in
deference to the growth of good taste and discrimination, that
the text of the Passion Play has, since the beginning of this
century, undergone several revisions, which have purged it
from various elements which in a less refined age did not
appear as grotesque and rude as they would do now. The
names of Dr. Otto Weiss, a monk in the now suppressed
neighbouring monastery of Ettal, and of his pupil Anton
Aloysius Daisenberger, ought to be held in grateful remem¬
brance in connection with these revisions by all who have
experienced the wonderful impression which the Play as we
have it now makes on those who have seen it. To Daisen¬
berger, indeed, the present generation of players owe much
of their admirable training, and all the relicrious influence
and teaching wdiich, inspiring them with a high and noble
idea of their Play and its purpose, have commended it to the
most thoughtful and earnest minds of all countries. The
son of a peasant of the neighbouring village of Oberau, he
was bred up in the monastery of Ettal, and saw the Passion
Play for the first time in company with Dr. Othmar Weiss,
and longed even then that his lot might be cast in the place
where its spell had fallen on him. His wish was granted.
Visitors this year to Ammergau must have remarked an old,
white-haired priest, upwards of eighty years of age, a frequent
spectator of the Passion Play, seated among the peasant
audience. This is the Geistlicher Path Daisenberger, who,
appointed to the pastoral charge of the parish in 1845, has
spent the years of his ministry in doing all in his power to
raise and ennoble the character of his flock, and to make
them and their acting w'orthy of what they represent.
' I undertook this labour,' he himself has recorded, 'for
the love of my Divine Piedeemer, and with only one object
in view, namely, the edification of the Christian world.'
And the following extract from the good pastor's address to
his people in 1870, just before the first representation of that
year, shows what sort of teaching has contributed to elevate
this artistic and impressionable people, and to make them
conspicuous examples of purity and holy living. After
speaking of the office and work of the Holy Spirit in the
Church, he proceeds :
' Dear friends, you are called upon this year to fulfil a great and
holy vow ; you will, as it were, in some measure take part in the
apostolic office. From the Day of Pentecost the apostles went into
all lands to preach Jesus the crucified, His doctrines, His deeds,
The Passion Play of Obcr-Ammergati. 435
His life and death, His resurrection and glorification; to show to
men how ancient prophecies, how the types of the old covenant, were
fulfilled in Him, and in Him alone was salvation to be found. We
are not now to go forth into the world to make known the name of
the Crucified, but thousands will this year come to us—the pious
and the lukewarm, the faithful and the unbelieving, and ours will
be the privilege to represent before these thousands what the apostles
preached—His most holy teachings, the sublime example of His
love. His bitter passion. His sacrifice for man. His glorious triumph
over death and hell, the fulfilment of all types and prophecies in
Him.
' If we work together with holy zeal worthily to represent these
mysteries, then may we hope, with God's grace, that great blessings
may ensue. How many pious Christians, touched by the represen¬
tation of their Saviour's death, will return home edified, strengthened
in their faith and love, with renewed resolutions to continue His
faithful disciples ? How many of the lukewarm and frivolous, unable
to throw off the solemn impressi(jns they have received, will in the
future show that the seeds of a more Christian life were sown here ?
It may be that the sight of the Redeemer's great love for mankind,
of His bitter sufferings for their sin, may draw tears of repentance
from the eyes of sinners'; and these tears, aided by God's good
Spirit, may be the beginning of a sincere conversion, and this gazing
on the Passion may be the way by which the good Shepherd seeks
and finds His lost sheep. And who can tell whether it may not be that
some, led here either by curiosity, or coming to this Passion Play as
to any other play, merely from the love of theatrical representation,
or to criticize and laugh at our faults and imperfections—it may
chance, I say, that some will depart with far different feelings, that
some memories will linger behind in their souls which years hence
will spring up and bear fruit for eternity.
' But, dear friends, we can only hope that God's blessing will
rest upon our work if we undertake it with pure motives and holy
zeal. Alas! we can hope for no blessing if we are only actuated by
selfish and vainglorious motives. God will loqk down upon us with
displeasure ; we shall be misusing and dishonouring the most sacred
things. Then we shall reap to ourselves, instead of honour, blame ;
instead of gain, most bitter loss. In a time of sore need, our fore¬
fathers solemnly vowed to the IMost High to represent the Passion
of our dear Lord, with this pious aim, thereby to promote the honour
of God, in grateful remembrance of our Saviour's sufferings and
death for us, and for their own and their neighbours' edification.
With this holy intention, and with no other, let us this year fulfil the
vow. Let us have this end only before our eyes. It matters not to
us whether those who come here for other reasons than godly edifi¬
cation, blame or praise us. If only we ourselves, and many with us,
depart moved, edified, strengthened, the object we have in view will
be attained.  .  . .
' Each one who takes the least part in this work is a necessary link
in the great chain ; let him endeavour to fulfil his task to the best
of his power, and thus contribute to the success of the whole. . . .
Then the work we are undertaking will be really holy and well-
pleasing to God ; the representation of this most sacred history will
produce in the hearts of those present, somewhat of the effect which
followed the teaching of the apostles (eye-witnesses of these scenes)
43^ The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
ill the early days of the Church. But as the apostles taught men,
not alone by word, but by their holy conversation, so must we also,
if our work is to be blest to the hearts of men, endeavour not merely
before the public, but in our private life, to show by our Christ-like
moral conduct the salutary eflfect produced on our souls by the con¬
sideration of the atoning death of our Lord. . . . Dear friends, the
eyes of many strangers will be fixed, not only on our Play, but on
ourselves. Let us so live that we may have nothing to fear from the
all-seeing eye of God, and the scrutinizing eyes of our fellow-men. . . .
Oh! if this is the case, if this congregation is indeed built up in a
livelier faith by the representation of the sufferings of our Lord, as
the apostles were by the living remembrance of Him ; if this parish
should be the means of extending the knowledge of the Lord and
glorifying His name, even as did the apostles, then all hail to this
parish,—God's blessing and favour will rest upon it. . . . May that
blessed Spirit who, as on this day, poured forth the riches of His
grace on the disciples, shed His grace abundantly on us. May He
ever be with us and work in us.    Amen.'
The good old priest has now through infirmity resigned
the charge of the parish, but he still dwells among his
beloved llock, and celebrates divine service occasionally.
Though attended by thousands of the Bavarian population
for generations past, the Passion Play attracted little or no
attention from the outer world until about thirty years ago.
In 1850 the text had just received its latest revision by the
Pastor, and the principal character was sustained by Tobias
Pflunger, whose rare natural gifts had been improved by the
most careful study; and it so chanced that among other
foreigners who visited Ammergau that summer there was an
English lady, whose impressions of what she saw were
afterwards published in a book describing her life as an
art-student in Munich, which was considerably read at the
time. Ten years more, and a still more qualified pen
described the same scene. Eeaders of Macmillan's Magaziiie
twenty years ago wiU not have forgotten Dean Stanley's
graceful and appreciative paper there, and many other
persons, scholars, divines, artists, and literary men, hastened
to make known to the English public the wonder and
absorbing interest with which they had beheld the Ammergau
Passion Play. There can be no doubt that all which w-as
written and said upon the subject through the English press
gave a stimulus which was not forgotten to English curiosit}-,
and determined many people to judge for themselves, when
the opportunity next occurred, of the merits of a subject
they had heard so much of So in 1870, in spite of the
alarming state of Europe in the early summer, the mountain
village was thronged by multitudes, including English and
American strangers.    But ere many weeks were over the
The Passion Play of Ober-Ammergau. 437
Franco-Prussian war was assuming dire proportions ; Bavaria
had to take her part in it, and send a certain contingent into
the field; and as the Animergau villagers said, with tears in
their eyes, ' Der Christus musz fort,' together with about
forty others, of whom six died in the field or hospital. The
interest attaching to the peculiar nature of this interruption,
and the resumption the following year of the Passion Play
for the stipulated number of representations, no doubt
contributed to swell the number of visitors who flocked
there in 1871. I cannot help regretting, for the sake of the
people and their unique attraction, that the usual interval of
ten years was not permitted to elapse. The amount of notice
it had gained, and the publicity given to every one's thoughts,
opinions, and impressions by newspapers and magazines,
certainly tended to increase the number of intending
spectators in this present year 1880, and to suggest to
speculators and caterers for the supply of public wants, a
new means of making money by increasing facilities for
travel. Being personally indebted in some degree to these
facilities for my own presence at Ober-Ammergau, it would
be ungracious in me to speak against them; yet I can quite
enter into the feelings of those who in past years knew the
Bavarian village and its frank, simple, kindly people, and
saw them set forth with wondrous power and fidelity, free
from all jarring elements, the story of the Cross. Such
elements must inevitably appear when all and sundry rush
there out of mere curiosity, and without any attempt to
enter into the spirit of what they come to see. Yet I would
fain hope with good Pastor Daisenberger, whom I have
already quoted, that even of the careless and irreverent, if
such there have been this year, many have gone away
touched, impressed, and bettered for life by the teaching
addressed to eye, ear, and heart with such power and
pathos.
So much has been written about the Passion Play, that
I imagine almost every educated person must have a
general idea of its outline and arrangement; but in spite
of the widespread publicity the subject has obtained
through the periodical literature of the day, there are
extremely vague notions in some people's minds as to what
it is really like. I will therefore, in giving my own account
of what I saw and thought, assume ignorance on the part of
my readers, merely asking those who know all about the
matter already to pass on to some other subject.
A German writer, I believe, has said that there are three
438 TJic Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
things which always come up to the expectations fornied of
them—Cologne Cathedral, the sea, and the Ober-Ammergau
Passion Play. I think that perfect satisfaction in the case
of the third at least, must depend very greatly on the
manner of person the beholder is, and on his power of
divesting himself of all prejudice, and of entering into
harmony with something which is certainly very foreign to
all British habits of religious thought. To most of us, the
idea of representing, by dramatic action, subjects of such
sacred and solemn interest is not only novel and surprising,
but even repellent. There are many who shrink from
witnessing anything of the kind, and who cannot conceive
the possibility of deriving either profit or satisfaction from
doing so. AVith such I have great sympathy, and consider
them perfectly right in declining to witness or hear about it.
Their scruples, however mistaken, are founded in reverence,
and deserve respect as long as they are content to judge and
rule in their own individual case. But there are others who
are far from stopping at this point. Without ever having
seen the Passion Play itself, and knowing really nothing of
the persons engaged in it, or of its and their past history,
there are people who do not scruple to declare the whole
thing to be perfectly blasphemous, and to bring the same
charge against those who look on at it. I have heard of one
clerical fanatic who attributed a thunder-storm of great
severity, which did some damage in Midland England, to the
Divine displeasure at 'the imitation of the Crucifixion at
Ammergau, and the admission of Mr. Bradlaugh into
Parliament!' Why Bavaria and Westminster were not
selected for the manifestation, rather than a country town
distant from either, must be left to his profound intellect to
determine. I prefer, as far as he is concerned, to follow
Solomon's counsel,' Answer not a fool according to his folly.'
To others less impervious to reason I would say—Can you
not believe that this is a matter on which you are not
competent to judge ? From education and habits of thought,
the application of the dramatic art to sacred characters and
subjects seems to you wholly inadmissible, but it is not so
from otliers' point of view, and unless you can prove that
Music, Painting, and Sculpture stand in this respect on a
different footing to the Drama, I think it must be admitted
they are at least more consistent in their use of the Fine
Arts than you are. It is argued by some objectors, that the
events represented in the Passion Play, and one at least of
the persons, are far beyond the power of men to set forth.
TJie Passion Play of Ober-Amincrgaii. 439
This is quite true in some sense, and the Ammergau players
would be the last to deny it; but is not the same true of the
highest effort of painter, musician, or sculptor ? Would even
Van Eyck claim to have perfectly represented the Adoration
of the Immaculate Lamb, or Handel or Beethoven to have
conceived aught but a faint likeness of the praises which
are uttered, ' where the songs of all the sinless sweep across
the crystal sea.' They gave of their best those painters,
musicians, and builders of old, consecrating their powers
to the service of the Giver, and setting about their work
with prayer and devout meditation. And in the same
spirit do these gifted and artistic villagers train themselves
from their childhood to show forth the ' Life of lives,' not
only in its external circumstances, but as far as that may be
attained to, in all its imitable perfection of entire self-devo¬
tion, and this not for love of gain, nor even for notice and
applause, but as an offering to God, ' for thankful worship
and edifying contemplation.' There seems to me no logical
reason why this should not be attempted as well as a
painting, an oratorio, or such a sermon in stone as Cologne
Cathedral or St. Ouen; and to say that because you are not
profitably impressed by it, therefore nobody else can be, is as
unreasonable as it would be for one devoid of the musical
faculty to deny the power of music to elevate and inspire
devotion.
June 11th of this year found me on my way to Ober-
Aramergau, travelling by Munich. When Miss Howitt and
her sister made the same journey in 1850, the Stellwafjcn
was the only public conveyance, and the pilgrimage must
liave been a weary and uncomfortable one, with part
of a night spent at Murnau, and Ammergau reached at
four o'clock on the Sunday morning. There are several
routes by which the village can now be approached, but
they all resolve themselves into entering the valley either
by the Ettal Pass or by Kohlgrub. None can be lovelier
than the gradual ascent from the ugly flat plain round
Munich, towards the Bavarian Alps at the head of the pretty
lake of Starnberg. From Murnau, some miles nearer to the
hills, a choice of two roads awaits the traveller, that by the:
Ettal Pass being the most frequented, but not, I think, as
favourable for a first sight of Ammergau as the other by
Kohlgrub, though grander in itself. How comes the place
to be called Ober-Ammergau ? is a question which probably
occurs to many whichever way they enter it, as in either
case you drive down a considerable descent.    Going by the
440 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
latter route, you turn over the brow of the hill up which
Kolilgrub scrambles steeply, and descend into a green, grassy
valley, watered by a swift, clear river, and closed in by grey
crags clothed with abundant dark fir woods, with a back¬
ground of grander peaks where the snow rests still. One of
these nearer crags is a most remarkable spire of naked rock.
This is the ' Kofel,' whose cross-crowned summit is a land¬
mark for miles round, and is regarded by the inhabitants of
the village with peculiar veneration. Another village, Unter-
Ammergau, is passed, and the rapid, beryl-green stream is
crossed. Another mile or two through the flat green meadows
of the narrowing valley, and we reach our destination. It,
too, stands on the flatter ground, higher up the stream and
closer to the mountains, but not the steep, precipitously-
built place that perhaps most people expect to see. It looks
very like many other villages of the district, with its white¬
washed houses bright with frescoes; but wait till you have
been there a little time, and then say if you are not sensible
of a spirit—an influence around you, never felt anywhere
else. Sit down at the door of your cottage lodgings, homely
but exquisitely clean, or ramble through the little streets
and byways, thronged with men and women. At every door
there are groups eating and drinking, every house is full to
overflowing, and from inhabitants and peasant-travellers
alike you will meet the kindly greeting,' Gott grusz.' One
purpose is in every mind, one subject of interest is upper¬
most. A great solemnity is approaching, and the Bavarian
peasantry from far and near take for granted that the
stranger within their gates thinks and feels as they do.
There must have been just such an electric thrill of sym¬
pathy, just such a universal yet solemnized rejoicing, when
in days of old the Israelite was glad when they said unto
him, ' We will go up unto the house of the Lord':
'From house to house the neighbours met,
The streets were filled with joyful sound ;
A solemn gladness even crowned
The purple brows of Olivet.'
At eight o'clock on the Sunday morning, all these crowds
are assembled in the theatre, which stands, a plain wooden
structure, on the grassy flat by the river at the lower end of
the village. Over the plank walls is seen a background of
grey crag, green hillocks, and the houses of Unter-Ammergau
a mile or two distant among the meadows, bathed, perhaps,
in the morning sunlight, but when I saw them, alas ' dim
with mist and rain.
Tlie Passion Play of Obcf-Ajiunergaii. 441
The Chorus, comprising nineteen members, enters upon
the stage, and the Passion Play, which has the power to
hold six thousand human beings entranced through a long
day, begins. These singers, of whom six or seven are women,
are one of the chief elements of beauty in the drama. The
acted scenes are taken entirely from the Gospel history, and
have their own appropriate dialogue; each of them is
preceded by one or more tableaux vivants, which set forth
pictorially some Old Testament type, the fulfilment of which
is next represented in dramatic action. The Chorus is absent
from the stage during the acted scene; but before the curtain
draws up on the tableau, and during the space—often of
considerable length—that the motionless yet living picture
is before one's eyes, there is the band of Schutzgeister in
their white robes, brilliant mantles, and flowing hair, who,
with stately movements and dignified and aj)propriate gesture,
sing the description and interpretation of what is before the
spectator. The beauty of the group, like angelic forms
stepped out of an illuminated page or Fra Angelico picture;
the solemnizing effect of their graceful movements and sweet
voices, united in strains of blended grief and triumph, of
reproach and praise, must be felt to be realized. The words
of the various chorales are published, and several translations
of them may be had. The most pleasing that I have seen,
though not, perhaps, the closest to the original, is one by
Mrs. Edward Child. The music as we have it now is about
a hundred years old, with some alterations to suit the
modern revisions of the drama. The community guard it
jealously, and it exists, I believe, only in MS.
Judging from the remarks I have heard since, I think that
in the first part of the Play it is the tableaux which seem to
take the strongest hold of the imagination of our own country¬
men at least. Theyare almost all of the greatest merit in point
of beauty; the skill and deep artistic feeling shown in their
faultless arrangement and composition, in their colouring
and pose, is something perfectly marvellous ; but the special
effect I mean is that of the ksson thus wonderfully conveyed,
and to many it comes home, I am convinced, with all the
power and freshness of novelty. It is many hundred years
since John Purvey, Wickliffe's friend and fellow-labourer, strove
to enable his countrymen to ' ken well and kepe well Haly
Writ;' and in our insular pride have we not boasted ourselves
of our ' open Bible,' and taken for granted that we are far
before all other nations in scriptural knowledge, certainly far
before poor ignorant Eoman Catholics, whom some people
442 The Ladies EdinbiirgJi Magazine.
really imagine never to have heard of that Book ? Yet here
is a set of village actors, Eoman Catholics, ay, and we may
add, of peasant and citizen spectators from all South Germany
and further, who, as Dean Stanley truly said twenty years
ago, ' have for generations past carried away graven on their
memories, not a collection of medieval or mythological
legends, but the chief facts and doctrines both of the Old and
New Testament, with an exactness such as would be vainly
sought in the masses of our poorer population, or even, it
may be said, with some of our clergy.' I am inclined to
. think that the Dean's remark might justly be applied to
ranks above that of' our poorer population.' Examiners,
tutors, and principals of schools and colleges tell us that
from a combination of causes—laxity of home discipline, the
fashionableness of a shallow scepticism, the amount of time
and cramming devoted to such educational subjects as will
-pay—-a generation has grown up among the better-educated
classes whose ignorance on tliis point is perfectly astonishing.
' I never knew that before; I never thought what that meant,'
I have heard said repeatedly, and always with reference to
the tableaux; and I truly believe that to many the connection
between the Old and the New Testament has thus been made
clear for the first time, and that God's Word will henceforth
be a treasure to them which they once knew not they
possessed.
Of the acted portion of the drama I do not wish to say
much. There are only three of the roles I think, those of
the Christ, of Caiaphas, and of Judas, which admit of any
individual impress on what in ordinary language would be
called, the reading of the character. And here I must say,
especially on account of those who may feel repelled by the
use of the ordinary terms in connection with such a subject,
that I wish it were possible to find some other words in
which to express my meaning. Half the objections felt by
many good people to the idea of the Passion Play, would
die away if they could divest such words as theatre, play,
stage, and actors, of the associations commonly connected
with them ; and anything more unlike ordinary acting it is
impossible to conceive. It is generally observed that the
women's parts are more feebly rendered than those of the
men, but they are so little prominent that the fact can
scarcely be said to detract at all from the completeness of
the interest. That gathers entirely round one Central Figure,
who from first to last is scarcely ever absent from one's gaze,
and in Joseph Mayr's hands that part is filled with a union
The Passion Play of Ober-Ammergaii. 443
of dignity and meekness, of tenderness, strength, and pure
self-devotion, which do indeed go far to realize even one's
highest ideal. There is one charm possessed by every one
of these players,—even by those who fill the most incon¬
spicuous parts, but which of course is most evident in those
engaged in the principal ones,—and that is the perfect artless-
ncss and forgetfulness of self which characterize their acting,
and make it so unlike anything else of the kind. It is the
same sort of charm which may be observed in the acting
of children, especially when their ordinary play takes a
dramatic turn, and they are not acting for an audience but
for themselves. How absorbed they are ! How really and
truly they actually are the personages in history and fiction
whom they represent! In the same way do these child-like
and earnest-minded people really live the scenes they repre¬
sent, with this additional power—they do so as the offering
of their best to God, as the outcome of a devout and deeply
religious spirit.
By this time the Passion Play of 1880 is over, and the
village has returned to its wonted quiet and the occupations
of ordinary life. Will another ten years see the story of
the Cross represented once more at the foot of those solemn
crags, and under the vault of heaven ? It is more than
likely that we have seen the last this year of this most
interesting and beautiful relic of the past. There have
already been great questionings among the people them¬
selves whether it is possible, under the altered conditions of
modern life, to guard their cherished treasure from profana¬
tion. I fear that the experience of this summer will not
reassure them on this point. It may be that in ten years'
time the Ammergau people will have lost much of what the
late Mr. Erskine of Linlathen would have called, their ' other
worldliness.' The younger generation will probably have
gone beyond the secluded valley, and the community as a
whole will no longer be the unsophisticated ' peculiar people '
that their fathers were. But the reason which has made
Ammergau doubt even this year .the propriety of carrying
on the Play, is one which is disgraceful indeed to tourists in
general, and to English-speaking ones in particular, who are
the worst offenders. It is truly not to the credit of British
good taste and rij^ht feelimj, that the village Committee has
seriously contemplated the giving up of the Play owing to
the pain and disgust inflicted on the whole community by
the irreverence of too many of their English visitors. I am
aware that this is a heavy accusation, and that it is probably
444 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
undeserved by many thousands, who will look back upon
their visit to Ammergau as among the most precious
memories of their lives. I can well believe, too, that among
the inconsiderate who only came to scoff or to stare, some
have remained to pray; but the oiTence cannot have been
infrequent or of slight proportions, since it has so deeply
shocked the people of Ammergau. They do not invite the
presence of strangers to what is to them a solemn religious
festival; they welcome with courteous hospitality, and at
great personal inconvenience, all who come. It says little
for the delicacy of our countrymen that they fail to show at
least the outward respect which is due to the German feel¬
ing of a religious occasion, even if they do not personally
enter into that view of it. For my own part, I think that if
people go there out of mere curiosity, and with any violence
to their own sense of what is reverent and likely to profit
them, they are greatly to blame. Of course, those bred up
in a different system of faith must expect to meet with much
which is foreign to their Protestant notions, not indeed in
the Passion Play itself, which is remarkable for its strict
adherence to Holy Scripture; but in the houses frescoed
with Madonnas and legendary saints, in the crucifixes and
pictures in every room where the guests are lodged, in the
village church, thronged from daybreak till nightfall with
hundreds of i^ious worshippers,—in all the ways and habits
of a very earnest, devout Roman Catholic population, English
and American Protestants will find much that differs from
their own ideas. They must know beforehand that it will
be so, and if they cannot accept all this as a matter of
course, as they accept the natural scenery around, however
unlike it may be to what they are used to, they had better
stay away from Ober-Ammergau. They certainly have no
right to wound tlieir friendly hosts by showing contempt or
dislike of what they reverence; and still more inexcusable
is the conduct of those who, as many have done, shock all
right-minded persons by flippant or sneering criticism.'
I wish that many tourists shared the true liberality and
good feeling of the writer of the following passage in a very
charming little book. Bits of Travel, by H. H., an American,
and with views ' which she supposes are Calvinistic' She
writes as follows:—
^ I have heard, on undoubted authority, of a lady who was com¬
pelled to leave her place in the first class seats, and to go and sit
among the peasants, unable to endure the irreverent remarks and
behaviour of a group of her own countrywomen close to her.
T]ie Passion Play of Obcr-Avnncrgait. 445
'We have found these (wayside shrines and images) at every step
of the way since we entered Germany, of all sizes, colours, and
degrees of the horrible. At first I could not look at them, and felt
only a sense of repulsion and antagonism against the religion which
had put them tliere, but I have now entirely changed my feeling
about them. I believe that much of the sweet, beautiful recognition
which the people give to strangers and to each other, has grown out
of the habitual reverence of their daily lives for Christ and the
saints. The smallest child, the coarsest man, uncovers his head in
passing one of these shrines. We are very bigoted and stupid, it
seems to me, in assuming that it is the ildng which the Roman
Catholic reverences when he kneels before his poor tawdry saint,
or kisses the feet of the silver Christ. We, who have pictures which
we kiss daily, ought to be more just than that. Opposite this hotel
is a most picturesque old Church and graveyard. . . . Joining the
Church is a little shrine, with a group of figures in it which I defy
anybody to see without laughing, they are so grotesque, so hideously
absurd ; and yet I cannot now look at them at night, and see the
little solitary beam of the lamp burning before it, without a thrill.
I think there will be some hard moments in my life to come, when,
if I think of Gethsemane, I shall think of this dreadful little shrine
in the Tyrol, and of the earnest, pleading, praying souls I have seen
kneeling before it. It is the night in Gethsemane. The Christ and
all the apostles have wreaths of artificial roses on their heads ; the
positions of two or three of the sleeping apostles are so ludicrous I
should not dare to describe them. . . . Never, in the poorest
country Church, have I seen anything so frightfully grotesque, and
yet 1 have seen men kneel before that iron railing with that in their
faces which it smote me to the heart to see. I should never have
done justice to what the Roman Catholic religion was intended to be,
if I had not come face to face with it in these honest, earjiest, solemn
country people of South Germany.'
The amount, and still more, the kind of satisfaction which
people derive from attendance at the Passion Play must, as
I have said, depend much on the attitude of the spectator's
own mind, on the response his own nature is capable of
to the emotions therein appealed to. Some of the many
strangers, differing as they may from the Bavarian villagers
in nationality and form of religious faith, are able to look
upon it as they do,—as the Jew of old did on his Pass¬
over or his Feast of Tabernacles,—as an occasion of re¬
ligious solemnity; to others it has only the interest of
a beautiful relic of the past, and of art worthily applied
to the highest of all subjects; and between these two
kinds of appreciation there are many degrees. But it is
certain that though on this subject, as on most others, there
are many men, many minds, the testimony which alone is
trustworthy, that of eye-witnesses, proves with a remarkable
unanimity, that in the spectacle of Ammergau we have a
union of art and religious instruction marvellously joined
44^ TJie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine,
together, from whose touching appeal to heart and intellect
all rightly constituted minds must certainly derive spiritual
profit. Perhaps the most common and not the least bene¬
ficial experience is that the old, old story, familiar from
childhood, goes home to our minds with something of that
freshness and power with which it spoke on the lips of
apostles to spirits yearning after that which neither Greek
nor Eoman culture could sup^^ly. There must be many,
both of men and women, who in that often weary stage,
' il mezzo cammin della vita,' have found in that mountain
village refreshment for their souls, who have been given
there a lift out of the pettiness of ordinary life, and who will
think henceforth of tliat place and people with the feeling
expressed in the following beautiful lines published in a
magazine nine years ago:
' A mountain stands, whose lofty brow,
The Cross uplifting high, recalls
The Altar-hill; its shadow falls
Athwart the roofs of Ammergau.
* Fond memory will linger long
About those highland homes, and where
That village Church invites to prayer,
And love is keen and faith is strong.
' In shifting groups the peasants mix.
Saluting as to Mass they go ;
Unlettered folk, how well they know
The language of the Crucifix !
' The Church their Mother, they are blest ;
The Church their Teacher, they are wise ;
Wisdom makes bright their Teacher's eyes,
And love makes warm their Mother's breast.
' So taught, the things unseen they see,
The things they see they ponder well;
So taught, those peasant voices tell
The oft-told tale of Calvary.
' With praying lips and eyes that pray,
And hearts that worship, they prepare
To preach their solemn sermon—prayer
Makes eloquent their Passion Play.
' The work of loving hearts whose fire
Is kindled at the Altar ; thence
Comes that impassioned eloquence.
The preaching of that peasant quire.
Tlie Glass Painters. 447
' May we too at the Altar kneel!
Thus, only thus, can we discern
God's secret; thus alone we learn
The lessons of the Passions Spiel.
' Her net the Church spreads far and wide ;
And Mistress still of head and heart,
The Home of Truth, the School of Art,
She preaches Jesus Crucified.
' Ah ! memory will ever see
Those cross-crowned roofs, and linger where
Those awe-struck peasants kneel in prayer
Around their wondrous Calvary.''
A. D.
2r|)e ©lass painters.
CHAPTEE II.
' We need not bid, for cloistered cell,
Our neighbour and our work farewell.'
Christian Year.
M. Le Vieil's ill-health prevented him from rising early, as
had been his wont in other days. Pierre, returning from
early mass at the Cathedral of Notre Dame, found only Jean
in the atelier. Pierre was looking pale and anxious. The
good-hearted Jean came forward and embraced him in
French fashion.
' Fear not, my brother,' said the youngest boy; ' we will
work hand in hand, and keep things going. I confess I felt
a little cross when our father first spoke of making you the
master, because L have been always at home, and know so
much more about the general management of the v/orks
than you can do.'
' Yes, Jean, I know that you do ; and you can paint well,
and I hardly at all.'
' Pierre, I must tell you I showed some paintings to M.
Jouvenet the artist, and he thinks I m.ight do well as an
oil painter; but I shall keep to the old trade,' said Jean, with
a boy's pride.
' Did he really!' Pierre answered, and continued thought¬
fully, ' I do not mind saying to you that in some way I
know you are more fit to be master than I am. You are
bolder and firmer; but the difficulty is, that we are both too
' The writer is desirous of acknowledging her obligations to the
Monthly Packet, from which the above poem and the sermon of the
priest Daisenberger are quoted.
448 Tlie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
young to have real authority over the men, and I want to
talk to you about what Henri Maget has advised.'
And the plan of dismissing the greater part of the work¬
men was then talked over, and decided upon, so far as the
two boys could decide upon it.
' It will be better for you to mention the matter to our
mother,' and Jean spoke stiffly; for his mother's great par¬
tiality for Pierre was a sore point with him, happy-natured
and light-hearted as he was.
Pierre understood Jean's tone, and was sorry. He only
answered, ' I will; here she is.' And Madame Le Vieil
then entering, the matter was explained to her.
' Only you two, the children, and Henri Maget' why, we
could not execute half the orders,' she said.
' We must prolong our hours. You see, mother, we cannot
get good ouvriers; those we have now are canaille, and never
do a good day's work.'
' But the pupils, what is to become of them ? It is not
creditable to have no pupils in such an establishment as
this.'
' My father is not well enough to teach them ; they are
now obliged to be left to Henri Maget, and they do not
learn much.'
Here Jean broke in with, ' I really do not think we could
execute all the orders we have now on hand ; we must keep
our engagements. It will be better to keep a few workmen,
Pierre.'
Tliis interference of Jean's inclined Madame Le Vieil to
favour Pierre's view.
' We may just as well keep all as keep a few. No doubt
your brother has well considered the matter. I will speak
about it to your father, but question if he will like it,
Pierre,' Madame Le Vieil said.
M. Le Vieil liked the project as little as Madame really
did, though Pierre's wishes and some spirit of contrariety
made her now determined upon carrying it. Guillaume le
Vieil was proud ; he could not bear the idea of showing to
the world that he could not manage his business. He
thought, also, that the world would take a wrong view of
the case, and attribute his misfortunes not alone to failing
health, but to failing means also ; that creditors would send
in demands which would be inconvenient to satisfy all at
once. Tlie poor man was much troubled, and would give no
immediate decision. At times he discussed the subject with
his wife and sons fairly enough, looking at all its aspects.
The Glass Painters. 449
At other times, when in moods of depression or nervousness,
he spoke irritably and unreasonably. ' His wife cared only
to please Pierre. Pierre would not care if the manufactory
stopped, so that he could go back to the priests ; and he
might as well go back, for a fellow who put his shoulder to
the wheel in so half-hearted a manner was of no use. Jean
was mad to become an oil painter. The time would soon
come when the last of the long line of Le Vieils who had
been glass painters, would be in his grave. And what did
it matter ? for, as Bernard de Palissy had said, glass-making
had now become so common, that though I'itat de verricr est
noble, plusieurs sont gentilhommes povr exercer le dit art.'
Madame Le Vieil could hardly endure to hear Pierre
falsely accused, and the restraint she put on herself when
with her husband was often relaxed when away from him ;
and her children and servants found it difficult to please
her. She was over-taxed and over-tried on all sides. John
did not always answer his father respectfully any more than
did Maget or David. The insubordination of the workmen
and the pupils was a serious difficulty to Pierre, and he did
not like to trouble his parents by complaining more than he
could avoid.
' I hate it all,' said Louis, the third of the young Le
Vieils. ' I will some day go from all this quarrelling, and
be a soldier.'
' A soldier ! I congratulate you on hitting upon a suitable
profession,' remarked Jean.
' Why not ? What is the use of men spending their lives
repairing old windows ? We hardly ever compose new
windows, but repair, with bad imitations, grotesque old
things that are not worth the preserving.'
' Not worth the preserving !' repeated Pierre ; ' to my
mind anything must be worth preserving, that tells there
were once people who worked with deep reverence and
untiring energy.'
' Whenever I take the trouble to make out the subjects of
an early glass window, it makes me laugh rather than feel
reverent; but of course, M. I'Abbe, you and I do not see
things from the same point of view,' Louis answered
rudely.
Pierre looked a little vexed at the boy's mocking tone.
' And wherefore do we see things from such a different point
of view ? I should have thought every one could at least
perceive the beautiful colour of an old painted window, if
their wits were too scanty to trace through faulty expression
No. 70.—OCTOBKB 1880. 2 F
450 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
evidence of the deep reverence and piety of the ancient
artists.'
' That's right, Pierre,' said Jean ; ' his wits are too scanty
to do anything but grumble, and Ms faults in expression are
rather worse than those of the old fellow's. As for his being
a soldier, the first time he hears a gun go off he'll run away
as fast as his legs can carry him. I am now re-doing his
work of yesterday. I have had to sponge out all the out¬
lines, they were so ragged; those Laurent did are good
enough. I wonder you are not ashamed to let the little
fellow do better work than you,' Jean concluded with, turn¬
ing to Louis.
Louis did look a little ashamed as he muttered, ' that his
hand shook—he was ill when he traced the lines.'
' III! yes; and what made you ill ?' asked the elder
brother scornfully.
The altercation was put an end to by the entrance of the
master into the atelier, leaning on his wife's arm.
' All of you idling,' he said, wearily sinking into the arm¬
chair, v?hich Pierre adjusted for him as was most easy.
'Jean, what are you doing ? Did not Louis and the children
finish tracing the borders ?   They must have been very lazy.'
' I am touching on them ; I shall soon have done, and
will then finish the head of St. Nicomede,' said John, who
only too often shielded Louis from the wrath his misdeeds
would have excited had they been known. Louis, fearing
more inquiries regarding his doings might follow, succeeded
in effecting an exit unnoticed by his father. On the stair¬
case he met Nicholas Porcher, one of the apprentices, and
was accosted in the words, ' Well, my brave boy, ready for
some more fun ? You look ill at ease ; have you confessed
to your priestly brother ? and is penance impending ?'
' No, 1 do not know what you mean,' Louis answered
sulkily. ' But I'll tell you what; I suppose you thought it
a joke to give me poisou. That stuff made me so ill, I could
not help my hand shaking yesterday; and John has got to
do all my work over again. He is catching it from my
father for not doing his own work.'
' And you, like a wise boy, made off, and left the bold Jean
to bear your burdens ?'
' Jean isn't—Jean doesn't mind; he won't let out any¬
thing,' said Louis, stammering.
' Well, look here, I'll do some of the borders for you if
you can get them down-stairs just now. You did look so
funny that night, Louis ; you amused us so much.    You did
Tlie Glass Painters. 451
not seem afraid of the father or the brothers then, nor were
you particularly loyal in yonr ideas.'
At this moment Pierre came running down-stairs, and
sent a scrutinizing glance at Porcher and Louis.
' M. Porcher, my father desires to speak to you. Louis,
come with me to the furnace-room.'
In the furnace cellar Henri Maget and David were engaged
in filling the muffle, or oven for baking glass. The iron
shelves upon which the glass was to be placed, were drawn
out and placed on a low table near tlie furnace. David
sifted white chalk over the shelf, and the foreman then laid
the glass carefully on it, so that the pieces should not touch
each other. On the large pieces of glass, chalk was again
sifted, and smaller pieces of the painted window laid on it.
' I am ready for the border patterns you painted yester¬
day,' Henri said to Louis. ' I can pack in some of the
pieces, and you know, M. Pierre, we are much pressed over
this window.'
' Go and fetch all the pieces that are traced,' Pierre told
his brother ; and Louis went. At the door he met Nicholas
Porcher.
' I have got my dismissal,' said that worthy, ' and that is
all the better for me. Come along, my lad, and we'll have a
walk, talk things over, and see what the world affords of
joy.'
' Wait five minutes, and perhaps I can come ; but I say,
you said you would help to get the borders done, and they
are really wanted.'
' I am not going to work in that dingy cellar when the
sun is shining in the streets ; there is likely to be a row
too.'
Louis ran up-stairs, and brought down some of the borders.
He then dashed out at the street door, and found Porcher
smoking a pipe near. Louis was the only one of the Le
Vieils upon whom the irregularity of the education the
younger boys received had had a harmful effect. Neither
his father nor his mother understood him ; they were often
harsh when they should have been gentle, and made no
allowance for the timidity of his disposition. Consec^uently
he became untruthful. How far wise and just considera¬
tion and discipline might have eradicated his faults, it is
impossible to say, but at fourteen years of age poor Louis
was the bane of the household of the Le Vieils, while he had
cleverness enough to deceive all his elders as to the extent
of his wrongdoings, although they showed but too often,
452 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
and too strongly, the want of full trust in him they felt.
Tlie sense that he was distrusted, the continual practice of
deceptions, and the exercise of cunning needful to conceal
his faults, detracted increasingly from Louis' moral nature.
Nicholas Porcher was his evil genius—wild, audacious, and
unscrupulous. Nicholas could lead the boy where he would
never have dared to venture without the support of a bolder
comrade. Nicholas was the second son of Chevalier de
Porcher, and had become a pupil to a glass painter, because
the Chevalier's poverty rendered it necessary that his sons
should support themselves ; and in former times, royal letters
patent had declared that it was not derogatory to the dignity
of a gentleman to become a worker in glass. His birth was,
perhaps, the chief claim Nicholas possessed to be considered
a gentleman, and such advantage as that claim alone gave
him he was in the habit of making the most of. His educa¬
tion was not deficient.
' The first thing we will do,' said Nicholas as Louis joined
him, ' is to have a bottle of wine, which we will drink to the
well-being of the new regime in the maison Le Vieil. Do
you know the priestly master is going to turn off most of
the workmen, and you will all have to work a little harder ?'
' Harder ! I shall not work harder for Pierre or any one.'
' No, of course you can't; you have been made to work
too hard already, haven't you ? And when Jean has an
extra hour or two tacked on to his own working time, he
won't be able to fill up gaps for you. You and I, my friend,
were not cut out for oiivriers. But about our bottle of wine,
do you happen to have any francs with you ?'
' Yes, I have two.'
' Two !    Then we will have a dcmi houtcillc de Margaux.'
' But, Nicholas, I do not care about the wine, and I want
to pay Madame Lairesse with these francs; she said she
eould not wait any longer.'
' Where did you get your francs from ?'
' I—I—they were given me.'
' I understand; you mean you borrowed them from your
father. That is all right; who should a boy borrow from if
not from his father ? Of course you can borrow more, and
in the meantime you can lend me these. I did not mean
you to pay for the wine ; you did not suppose that ?'
' But, Nicholas, you never pay me what you owe me.'
Nicholas stood still and looked at Louis with a well-
feigned air of astonishment.
' I thought I was speaking to a friend;  I thought you
TJie Glass Painters, 453
were gentilliomme. Go along with your wretched two francs,
I will not have them. Pay for your last lot of pastry, and
stuff yourself with some more.'
' But, Nicholas, do not be angry.'
' Angry! I merely mistook. I thought one gentleman
was speaking to another. I find you are bourgeois in your
notions. There is nothing more to say. That is the way to
Madame Lairesse, and this is my way.' So saying, he turned
down a narrow street, but paused in a moment or two, and
called to the retreating Louis. ' By the way, to-morrow is
pay-day, and the cash receipts will be balanced. It will be
strange if there should be found a difference between the
book account and the cash, won't it ?'
Louis rushed back. ' Nicholas, do have the wine; here
are the francs. I do not know what you are talking about,
but do have the wine.'
' Well—well, just to please you I will. What has made
you so generous all at once ?' And turning shortly into a
cafe, where some acquaintances of the wild Nicholas were
gathered, the wine was ordered. A man there was induced
to lend him another two francs. A second bottle was ordered
and imbibed, then more. When the pair emerged from the
cafe, the glass-painter's pupil had become inclined to be noisy.
' Look at that little girl carrying a basket. What good
ankles she has ! how neatly she trips along ! I should like
to have a look at her face. Come, walk a little faster; we
will overtake her,' exclaimed Nicholas.
' It is Marie ; leave her alone, Nicholas. I daresay she is
going to our house,' said Louis.
' Marie! What ] the little girl that comes to see Madame
la mere ! So it is. She has grown so tall I did .not know
her; I am sure she has grown pretty too.'
' Leave her alone, Nicholas.'
' What an idiot the boy is ! as if she would not like to
have the son of Chevalier de Porcher walking with her. A
little peasant like that give herself airs! Besides, it would
be only civil to escort her since we are going the same way.'
Marie Valmont was overtaken. Nicholas stared rather
impertinently into her face, and raising his hat, made a
profound bow, saying, ' Pardon me, Mademoiselle; I under¬
stand from your friend Louis here that you are probably
going our way, and might be glad of an escort.'
Marie looked astonished, but seeing Louis le Vieil, she
became reassured, and replied calmly, ' Thank you, Monsieur ;
I have not far to go, and will not trouble you.'
454 Tlie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
' Trouble, Mademoiselle ! how can you be so unkind as to
speak of trouble ?' returned the youth. ' Allow me to have
the pleasure of carrying your basket;' and he made an
attempt to possess himself of it.
' No, thank you, Monsieur; I will carry it myself.' And
feeling a repulsion for Nicholas, the child instinctively
shrank to the side of Louis.
At this moment Madame Le Vieil might have been seen
advancing towards them, but Nicholas was too much en¬
gaged in forcing his unwelcome attentions upon the now
frightened child to observe any one else, till Louis pressed
his arm, saying,' Here is my mother.'
' By Jove and other powers !' exclaimed Nicholas, adding
quickly in a whisper, ' let us stand our ground.' And when
Madame Le Vieil drew near, taking off his hat with a most
deferential air, he explained: ' I had reason to believe,
Madame, that a crowd of rioters would shortly pass along
this street; I therefore ventured to escort Mademoiselle
Valmont'
In answer to this speech, Madame Le Vieil merely inclined
her head haughtily, and looking at her son, said, ' I beg you
will go back immediately, Louis. There is press of work,
and your father is wondering what has become of you.
Come with me, Marie ; I am only going to the nearest shop
I can get grapes at.    I know you like walking.'
When the others were out of ear-shot, she asked, ' How
was it that you and Nicholas Porcher were together ? He
is a bad man, and you must have nothing to do with him,
Marie.'
' He had only just overtaken me, and—I could not prevent
it, Madame. Might it not have been, as he said, that a
crowd was expected ?' poor Marie asked, looking rather
deplorable.
' You must not believe what Nicholas says. Was Louis
with him when he overtook you ?' and Madame Le Vieil
spoke gently and kindly as she saw the child's distress.
' Yes, Madame.'
' I think so badly of M. Porcher, I would rather that even
my sons had as little to do with him as possible. It was
out of kindness to his father my husband took him as a
pupil. This morning we have decided that he must stay no
longer, and we have also dismissed some of the workmen,
whom he helped to make unruly and insubordinate.'
' You must be very glad to have Monsieur Pierre to live
with you, Madame,' Marie said timidly.
Tlie Glass Painters. 45 5
Yes, it is a great comfort. How did you know it was
decided he would live with us ?'
' He told the children so yesterday, and they told me,
but—though'—
' But what ?'
' I cannot help feeling a little sorry M. Pierre is not going
to be a priest; he would serve the good God so well.'
' So he can without being a priest.'
Perhaps it was the relief and joy Pierre's return had
caused her, made Madame Le Vieil both kind and gentle
to-day. Marie began to lose a dread of being demolished
for some harmless speech—a dread those in converse with
Madame were apt to entertain, often with reason. But
to-day Marie found she might speak freely to her friend,
and have her words replied to in a kind way. The grapes
having been purchased, Madame and her inoUgt^e, went to
maison Le Vieil.
CHAPTER III.
' In contemplation of a curve, as in contemplation of a dogma, it
is possible to find oneself at the last led up to o altitudo,'
After the dismissal of the workmen, it was up-hill work
for the young glass-painters, and it was only by means of
strenuous effort they succeeded in keeping their business
afloat. As is not unfrequently the case with some intellec¬
tual natures, Pierre was disinclined to real action; he liked to
think and ponder over things and positions rather than to
act; but his aversion to activity was set aside. No ouvrier in
Paris spent fewer hours in needful repose than did Pierre.
Jean also toiled early and late. It was with grateful hearts
they received orders, the execution of which necessitated
such hard labour, and the payment for which enabled their
poor father to have doctors and all comforts that were
needful, while all the large family had enough and to spare
of daily bread.
Henri JMaget proved himself a faithful friend, devoting all
his energies to the service of his employers, giving ungrudg¬
ingly many an extra hour without asking for extra pay. The
clever but rough and unpolished workman became attached
to the gentle, refined Pierre with an almost dog-like affection.
Henri liked Jean, but paid him little more respect than he
would to a fellow-workman; but Pierre's least behest was
456 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine,
attended to, and he was treated with respect due to acknow-
leged superiority.
' How is the old master ?' Henri one day asked of Ther^se,
the new servant Madame Le Vieil had found it needful to
obtain, now that her husband so entirely claimed her
own time.
' He is very ill, but one would think he might show a little
more gratitude, when they are all trying to do their best for
him, instead of raging as he does. It was dreadful to hear
him go on at Madame and M. Jean yesterday evening, though
to be sure it did not last long. M. Pierre stayed up all night
with the master; no one can soothe him when he is in one
of those ways as M. Pierre can. M. Pierre is an angel,' con¬
cluded Therese with emphasis.
' An angel!' sneered Maget; ' I don't see much resem¬
blance between M. Pierre and those yellow-haired creatures
with wings we are always placing in windows.'
' You would not speak so of the angels if M. Pierre heard
you, M. Maget. What are those angels doing that you put in
windows ?'
' Why, most of them are singing Tc Deums, or watching
over saints.'
' Well, and isn't M. Pierre like them; all day and every
day his life is one Te Deum Laudamus, so isn't he like the
angels, M. Maget ?'
' Mademoiselle Th^rese, you are quite too learned for me;
but being like an angel is not being one.'
From that time forth Maget frequently spoke with Th^rese,
and Pierre was not unfrequently the subject of their converse.
Maget usually adopted a sneering, supercilious tone, once
asking if from an angel Pierre had developed into an arch¬
angel. Sometimes, when it was needful for Ther^se to carry
heavy cans of water to the fourth storey, Maget relieved her
of her burden and carried them for her, and by degrees some
feeling of friendship was established between himself and
the servant, though the chief evidence of such feeling existing
was the short dialogues they held together, in the which
the one differed or received with limitations and caution
everything the other said.
Therfese was a strong, active girl, better educated and
better principled than are many of her class in France. She
was handsome, possessing large black eyes that could laugh
and flash, dark hair, and a bright colour. Madame Le Vieil
liked her better than she usually did servants, partly because
she  was  well  aware  how  willing  and  efficient was  the
The Glass Painters. 457
service Therese rendered, and partly because Therese did
not manifest so great an awe of Madame and so much dread
of her displeasure as to make her liable to do wrong from
very dread of not doing right. Such stupidity as that
Madame was very impatient of.
Maget's frequent intrusions into the kitchen on most
shallow pretexts were not unmarked by the keen-sighted
mistress ; but she took little notice of them, and advanced no
step towards preventing their recurrence. Once overhearing
Jean laughing and talking with the handsome Therese,
Madame Le Vieil reproved him sternly and angrily, and for
a day and half was dignified and displeased with the girl.
Old Nanette was jealous of the new servant and of her
favour with Madame, and seldom lost an opportunity to
insinuate that Therese was sly, and other than she seemed,
and once chose an unfortunate moment, when Madame was
in no pleasant frame of mind, to complain of Maget's frequent
presence, the result of which was that poor Nanette was
coldly told to mind her own business and be silent; and in
truth it was not wonderful that Madame should be averse
to listen to one needless complaint. She was utterly overdone
with watching and tending her husband ; the continual strain
on her nervous system was so great that her son Pierre felt
she would break down if called on to exert her powers of
endurance much longer.
There was little change in the daily routine of the glass-
painters' lives, except that the younger boys were now able
to do better work, and their poor father had ceased to take
any active part in the superintendence of the business, and
that his infirmities increased. Six years had flowed by
since Pierre had adopted the profession of glass-maker, when
one day in the October of 1731, a carriage stopped at the
maison Le Vieil, and a liveried laquais gave a sounding knock
at the door.    Th^r^se opened it with an angry face.
' My master is very ill,' she said; ' who do you wish to see ?
Do you wish to shake him out of his bed ? Who do you
want to see—M. Pierre or M. Jean ?'
' You would speak more civilly, my girl, if you knew who
wished to see your masters ; it is M. the Cardinal de Fleury.'
' Ah ! pardon me,' cried the girl,' I will call M. Pierre;' and
she rushed away, leaving the footman at the door. The
occupants of the carriage descended, and entering through
the open doorway, waited in the dingy room called the show¬
room the arrival of the master glass-maker.
The visitors  consisted of two ecclesiastics  and another
458 Tlie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
&
gentleman. Of the ecclesiastics, one was M. Cardinal de
rieury, I'eveque de Frejus, then Prime Minister to Louis
XV., at once distinguishable by his upright bearing, white
hair, and noble features. His intellectual expression was
combined with that of much gentleness and sweetness, which
prepossessed people at once in his favour. He was accom¬
panied by the venerable abbot of St. Vandrille, and a tall thin
Englishman—Horace AValpole, who was at that time English
ambassador at the French court, and who was brother to the
famous Sir Eobert AValpole, and uncle to the poet, Sir
Robert's son, also called Horace. Not a few Frenchmen
looked with no favourable eyes upon the friendship that
subsisted between the French minister and the English
ambassador.
A specimen of ancient glass, representing a scene in a
market, and carefully restored and repaired by the Le Vieils,
was placed against the window. Mr. Walpole stood looking
at it.
' They have succeeded in restoring it pretty well, have they
not ?' said the good abbot.
' I suppose so, I am no judge of such things ;' and taking a
pinch of snuff, the Englishman gave his box to the abbot.
' But,' he continued, ' the men of old certainly knew how to
combine bright colours so as to produce a splendid effect;
now in these days, particularly in my country, if we try to
blend brilliant colours, the effect is vulgar.'
' That is partly because they are not what glass-painters
call " cut up " enough; but what is Pierre doing to keep his
Eminence waiting like this ?' said the abbot.
Pierre entered at that moment, and kneeling before the
Cardinal received a blessing; then craving pardon for his
delay, the young glass-maker explained he had been engaged
in a chemical operation he could not at the moment he was
apprized of the arrival discontinue, for fear of an explosion.
The Cardinal took the explanation in good part, readily
forgave the delay, and stated that he had come to treat about
glass for a small window in one of the side aisles of Notre
Dame, which he was desirous should be executed by the Le
Vieils.
' And what subject would your Eminence wish for ?' asked
Pierre, as he threw a grateful glance at the abbot of St.
Vandrille, who he divined had been instrumental in obtaining
him the honour of both the commission and the visit.
' I will leave the choice of subject to you; the dimensions
of the window are described on this piece of paper, but of
The Glass Painters. 459
course you will measure the spaces yourself, and observe
upon the style of the windows that are near. I am glad to
entrust this work to you. The abbot has told me much
about you.'
Pierre blushed with pleasure as he suggested: ' If your
Eminence will honour us by coming into the atelier, there
are there more specimens of our styles of painting, and my
brother can show you numerous designs.'
' Your stairs are steep, my young friend, and difficult to
climb; could not your brother bring the designs here ?' asked
the abbot.
' Yes, certainly ; I will ask Jean to do so if you will excuse
me a moment,' Pierre answered.
' May I come into your atelier, Monsieur ?' said Walpole ;
and the reply being a pleased affirmative, he followed Pierre
up the flight of steep steps leading to the atelier.
Jean was busily engaged putting the finishing touches to
a portion of a window previous to its being baked, and his
work-room was unpleasantly redolent of the strong-scented
evanescent oil he employed to mix his paint with.
' M. le Cardinal, eveque de Frejus, has done us the honour
to entrust a window to us,' said Pierre, almost breathless
with haste, ' and Jean, here is M. Walpole, who is so kind as
to wish to visit our atelier.'
Jean looked up with surprise and pleasure painted in his
countenance. Like many young Frenchmen who had begun
to imbibe the new ideas then beginning to circulate, he re-
garded the people of Great Britain with much admiration and
enthusiasm. Had they not more than once succeeded in re¬
sisting the encroachments of royalty, and forced their kings to
rule as the voice of the people demanded ? As a glass-painter
it behoved Jean to be loyal, but his loyalism was of a modu¬
lated description. He arose with alacrity to do the honours
of the atelier to the accomplished representative of the
English.
The Englishman entered, made an indescribable grimace.
' Faugh,' he said, ' what an atmosphere! Pray, Monsieur,
bring the designs quickly; I will return to his Eminence.'
Jean looked blank and slightly chagrined. ' So much for
the manners of your ideal people,' said Pierre, more amused
than hiirt; and giving Jean the paper he had received from
the Cardinal, continued,' Look here, these are the dimensions
of the window. Let us quickly look out some designs by
which the Cardinal may gain some idea of your skill;' and
Pierre hastily took down some cartoons from the walls, and
460 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
collecting some others from portfolios, took them to the show¬
room, leaving Jean to bring others. Two of the illustrious
visitors were gone; only the abbot remained. He explained
that a messenger had followed the Prime Minister and given
tidings which necessitated his immediate departure.
' And now, my son,' said the old priest, ' lead me to that
retreat you told me of, in whicli you sometimes seek ex¬
emption from worldly thought and worldly care, and we will
talk together. You must tell me how it has gone with you
during these years you have been following a worldly calling.
How is your father ?'
' My poor father is now altogether confined to his room;
my mother seldom leaves him. He might pass from among
us at any moment, the doctor says. The last rites of the
Church were administered to my father three days ago.'
The abbot laid his hand kindly on Pierre's shoulder, and
looking into the young man's face—a fair, good face, express¬
ing truth and gentleness, combined with that refinement
the outcome of holy thought and self-repression: ' You are
my own good boy still; the world has not spoilt you. You
did not wish to leave me; but you never knew with how
many misgivings, with how much regret, I let you go, my
son.'-
A violent flush spread over Pierre's ingenuous countenance
as he turned to precede his old friend up the stairs. Not
without exertion the good abbot made the steep ascent
leading to the little den where Pierre was in the habit of
seeking and finding solace for many an anxious hour, and
rest from work that was frequently weariful.
May we not observe that any good enthusiasm, or mind-
absorbing, disinterested pursuit, can have the effect of
ennobling a mind, shielding it from evil, and preserving its
refinement like religious devotion ? It was so with Pierre.
He now regarded his art with the reverence and love of a
true artist; he contemplated with growing enthusiasm the
possibility of its being restored to the position it once held,
as an almost indispensable accessory of ecclesiastical archi¬
tecture, teaching the ignorant of the old Bible stories, lending
the solemnity and gravity of subdued light, with the majesty
of splendid colour, to the buildings it adorned. Pierre's
ardour for his profession was intimately mingled with his
ardour for his faith. Fra Angelico never went to his paint¬
ing with purer, holier thought than did Pierre le Vieil to
his turning over of old Mss. and folios, to search for the
forgotten secrets of the art of glass-staining.
The Glass Painters. 461
Seating himself on the only chair the small apartment
boasted of, while Pierre sat on a pile of large books placed
on the floor, the abbot said: ' I have not had much oppor¬
tunity to converse with you, my son, but I have not the less
marked your course. You know I do not hold that the
interests of the Church are best served by all her most
faithful sons entering the priesthood, but for you the priest¬
hood did seem to be so much your vocation, I sorrowed
when you had to renounce that high calling, though I held
it ri"ht that vou should do so. Give me the assurance that
you are faithful, and love our holy Church as ardently as of
old.'
Pierre hesitated before he answered in a low voice:
' Keverend father, now as ever I fully believe in the creed of
the Holy Catholic Church, but with grief I confess to you
that when I would contemplate the holy truths and wonder¬
ful mysteries of our faith, I do not always feel the same
fervour, the same ecstasy that I did. I often find I regard
them coldly, and trivial, worldly thoughts intrude when I
would raise my thoughts to God.'
As the abbot looked at the candid face and pleading eyes
that were raised to his, he knew that the boy he had sent
forth from his flock yet retained the pure heart and single
mind which he had possessed six years ago; and the wise
priest, more than Pierre, recognised the impossibility of one
enthusiasm retaining in full strength its hold on a mind
much occupied with another enthusiasm, with varied inte¬
rests and varied cares. For as one group of ideas grow in
strength and fill the mind, there is no room for their pre¬
decessors to exercise the same active influence in, though
they may lie dormant as convictions, and awake from sleep
now and then.
Nevertheless, the priest asked gravely: ' It is not with
indifference you feel this change; you fight against it ?'
'Yes, my father, indeed I do; but 1 do not fight very
successfully, though with prayer and fasting.'
' You have not permitted yourself to he enticed by any of
the new ideas, the erroneous and heretical opinions, which
the enemies of the Church are now sowing abroad ?' and the
abbot crossed himself. ' I know that your brother is a reader
of the works of Voltaire.'
A shade of surprise crossed Pierre's mind at the abbot
^eing aware of the direction in which Jean's studies lay, but
he merely answered: ' No, I take no interest in these
philosophies;   I do  not understand them.    The thoughts
4^2 TJie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
which trouble me when my whole attention should be given
to devotion, are—are—mostly those connected with my
profession. It absorbs too great a place in my thoughts. I
am always thinking how I shall find out more knowledge of
its lost secrets, and sometimes I am revolving in my mind,
over and over, why an experiment has not succeeded as it
should have done. Then, when I least expect it, there darts
into my mind the reason of the failure, and I cannot pray,
because I am longing to rush home and carry out my
experiment.'
A dim smile gathered on the priest's lips. ' These wander¬
ing thoughts are snares we all have to strengthen ourselves
against, or we may not be able to extricate ourselves from
their meshes. For your profession so to engage your
thoughts leads me to suppose that you now love it, that it
lills your heart, and supplies food for that enthusiasm w^hich,
my son, you must expend upon something, because it is your
nature to do so. You no longer desire to enter the priest¬
hood ?'
' Eeverend father, you told me I might be a priest to God
in any walk of life.'
' True, but do you still hold yourself a priest to God ? do
you remember your vow ?'
Pierre blushed, then turned pale as he replied, ' I remember
my vow.'
' And would you still work for God, resting with calm and
unwavering assurance upon the infallible truth held in the
keeping of the Church ? and would you follow her directions
in unhesitating obedience ?'
' Father, I w^ould, and indeed I am mindful of my vow
when I strive to make as beautiful as I can the sanctuaries
of God. My thoughts are led to Him when I gaze upon the
inimitable colour and graceful scroll-work of an early window
no less than when I watch through the night, in fear and
hope, striving to prepare colours which shall approach in
beauty the old ones. I long that my profession might rise
once more to the eminence of other days, when princes and
kings took an interest in it, and so frequently caused windows
to be erected. Now we but seldom have orders for windows ;
our art is most often employed in repairing them. Our firm
is entrusted with the restoration of nearly all the ancient
glass for many miles round Paris. And, father, I am collect¬
ing, by degrees, material for a book upon glass-painting. I
am perhaps presumptuous, but I venture to hope that my
labours may tend to create and renew an interest in glass-
The Glass Painters. 463
painting; at least, I may preserve the knowledge that is on
the verge of being lost.'
The simple-hearted glass manufticturer continued to dilate
upon his hopes and fears concerning the well-doing of his
profession, and asked the abbot's advice as to how to obtain
permission to stxidy documents contained in the libraries of
different religious houses. The abbot promised to write
letters which would obtain Pierre the loan of some valuable
documents, and listened patiently while the young man told
of his projects, his failures and successes.
At last the priest said: ' You frequently make tours in the
provinces, do you not ?'
' Yes; I shall set out on one to-morrow, through part of
Normandy, Picardy, and perhaps Champagne. Will you
entrust me with any mission, father ?'
' Yes, I am going to give you an important one. I wish
you to note the temper of the people, the state of the country,
how much the taxes have really ground the peasants down,
or whether they complain unreasonably, how much the
Huguenot heresy is spreading; and if you come upon any of
their strongholds, inform me of all you observe there. It is
for the interests of the Church I ask you to do this. I
believe you wHl be glad to render her this service.'
Pierre's heart failed him as he listened to the abbot's
words; he would have given much to have avoided the part
assigned to him. The extreme rigour with which the Hugue¬
nots were treated filled him with sadness. He entertained
no thoughts of rebellion against the dictates of his former
superior, and replied: ' My heart is wholly with the Church,
and, father, if you require this at my hands, I implicitly
obey you, but you might find others far more fitted for this
service than I am.'
Perhaps Pierre's voice was tremulous, and somehow re¬
vealed the dread he felt of the task set before him. At all
events there was severity and coldness in the abbot's accents
as he answered: ' It cannot be that I am mistaken in you ?
It cannot be that you are unwilling to render the Church
and King such slight service as this ?'
' No, father, it is not so, but I really believe myself
unfitted for the mission. Father, you are merciful and
liberal; you are aware we do not all think alike. Do not
force me to undertake what may cause me to break with
those I love ;' and Pierre paused, the boldness and incaution
of his own words filling him with dismay.
'You grieve me, my son.   Because a house may be divided
464 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
against itself, are you to prove weak and unwilling, and
break your vow the first time you are especially called on to
remember it ?'
At this moment a voice was heard calling Pierre, and
Laurent burst into the room, saying: ' Come at once, Pierre ;
our father is dying !'
Followed by the priest, Pierre hastened after his brother
into the apartment where the dying man lay. The abbot
took up a crucifix, and held it within sight of the departing
spirit.    Pierre was but just in time.
' I leave them to you, Pierre!' were the last words
Guillaume le Vieil uttered, and with a light sigh of weariness
rather than pain, his spirit passed into the infinite. The
earth retained one sufferer the less. A. A.
{To he continued)
.Songs on t|)C ©eatfj of fjis Cljiltircn.
FROM THE GERMAN OF F. RUCKERT.
Thou, ere I knew, didst pass away
Like blossom dead ere break of day :
Like blossom at the day's break dead.
Whereon in vain the dew is shed.
The morning dew is shed in vain,
As now on thee my tears' warm rain:
My tears rain warm and fast on thee,
And thou dost not awake for me;
And thou for me dost not awake.
My blossom—dead before day-break.
II.
I saw thee waken, day by day,
Never without a smile as gay
As though from dreams thou didst arise
Of plucking flowers in Paradise.
So now I hope, with smile as gay,
Thou wilt awake up there to-day.
Where thou from life's short dream shalt rise
To pluck the flowers of Paradise.
Tracks of the Crusaders. 46:
III.
I covered thee quite closely
With roses red;
So I could not discover
That thou wert dead.
And sometimes I would fancy
Thee still mine own;
Or, that thou hadst been ever
A dream alone.
But when the wind stirs, lifting
The roses' screen,
"With terror I discover
That thou hast been. . . .
By the Author of Selections from Heine.
Eracfes of tf)e Crusaticrs,
II.
* Nor can imagination quit the shores
Of these bright scenes without a farewell glance
Given to the dream-like issues—the romance
Of many-eoloured life that fortune pours
Round the Crusaders, till on distant shores
Their labours end; or they return to lie,
The vow performed, in cross-legged effigy
Devoutly stretched upon their chancel floors.
Am I deceived ! or is their requiem chanted
By voices never mute when heaven unites
Her inmost, softest, tenderest harmonies,—
Requiem which earth takes up with voice undaunted
When she would tell how brave, and good, and wise,—
For their high guerdon not in vain have panted! '
Wordsworth.
It is rather the fashion now to scorn and condemn the
Crusaders. Gibbon's inadequate summary of motives and
results has crept into historical primers; and the curious
Turkish sympathies of many people in this country have
caused these views to be easily accepted. One motive is
insisted on by Gibbon almost to the exclusion of all others—
that is, the purchase through the Crusading vow of the re¬
mission of ecclesiastical punishment in this world and purga¬
torial pains in the next. But in reading the contemporary
chronicles we realize, on the contrary, what an extraordinary
number of various motives and circumstances led the hosts
No. 70.—OcTOBEB 1880. 2 G
466 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
of Europe to war against Asia. Beyond all others in those
simple times there was the actual, intense affection for the
holy places—a passionate devotion which may still be seen
sometimes among the Greek and Latin pilgrims. Geoffry
de Vinsauf, who was with King Eichard's forces, relates how
it was the custom in the army to appoint a herald who
at nightfall ' cried out with a loud voice, " Help ! help ! for
the holy sepulchre ! " The rest of the army took it up, and
repeated the words; and stretching their hands to heaven, with
tears prayed for the mercy and assistance of God in the cause.'
This was repeated three times, and the quaint chronicler
adds : ' The army appeared to be much refreshed by crying
out in this fashion.' Then there was the love of military
glory, and the sense of adventure in an unknown land where
all was mysterious and any tale of romance seemed possible.
There was also the intense national emulation or jealousy
even of allies, which sways countries to this day, for instance,
in their Arctic explorations. It is told how Saff'adin, Saladiu's
brother, wisely remarked: ' Thanks be to God ! Eichard was
burdened with the king of the French and hindered by him,
like a cat with a hammer tied to its tail.'
But for the bitterness of that jealousy, together with the
tendency to degeneration of race whenever Europeans settle
in Syria, Jerusalem, it can hardly be doubted, would have
been in Christian hands to this day.
But if the Crusaders failed at last in their chief aim, still
much good was done in other directions. The Turks received
their first real check in conquest; and the Order of the
Knights of St. John remained as representatives of the Crusad¬
ing spirit on guard against them in the Mediterranean. The
dangerous classes among the European nations—those who,
in later times, broke out into Jaqueries, wars of the Eoses,
white-hood mobs in Flanders, etc., were safely attracted to
foreign parts and used up in the holy wars. The arts, the
learning, and the manufactures of the East were brought to
Europe. We may add the flowers, for we see growing luxuri¬
antly in their native Palestine, many an old-fashioned, familiar
flower brought long ago to some castle or monastery garden
from the battle-fields of the East. We owe our oranges to
the Crusaders. They brought them to Italy and Spain, as the
Saracens had previously introduced them into Syria from
China. One common historical mistake should be noticed,
that the Moslems were in these wars superior to the Christians
in humanity and trustworthiness. It does not at all appear so
in either the Arabian or the European contemporary histories.
Tracks of the Crusaders. 4^7
These tell, with complete sangfroid, of deeds of great cruelty,
and also of heroic courage, together with occasional flashes
of generosity towards enemies, on both sides. We Europeans
have improved in humanity since then; but the Turks seem
unchanged, ready now as then for any cruelty and indis¬
criminate massacre. Their treatment of women and chil¬
dren horrified the Crusaders; and the massacres which they
initiated of prisoners of war, brought about bloody reprisals.
King Eichard has been much blamed for executing his
prisoners of war taken at Acre ; and as it is a case sometimes
compared with Saladin's unprovoked massacre of the
prisoners after several battles, we should remember that
Eichard's prisoners had surrendered as hostages for the per¬
formance of a treaty which Saladin refused to fulfil, and
they were only executed after twelve days' notice had been
given to the politic Emir.
' Eemember the Holy Sepulchre' was the war-cry of our
ancestors, and at the  Church of the Holy Sepulchre we
cannot but remember those who counted their lives not dear
to them  when spent in its defence.    The old Byzantine
fagade of the church is beautiful;   the  court in  front is
crowded by people who squat on mats amid their wares,
shells, rosaries, bracelets, etc. that you are entreated to buy.
And so you enter the great gloomy vestibule of that system
of  churches.    To  the  right,  Godfrey  and   Baldwin  were
interred; to the left, as the result of their wars, you see on a
divan the Turkish soldiers on guard, smoking, sipping coffee,
and keeping order.    Straight in front, people are prostrating
themselves and kissing a marble slab over which splendid
lamps burn always, one of the fanciful shrines, the stone of
the anointing.    Let us walk on through the gloom, till we
stand under the gTeat dome at the entrance of the Holy
Sepulchre itself.    It is under an inner dome, taking up only
a small part of the huge dim central area.    It is of no
particular architecture, and above are tawdry pictures and
ornaments, but much is redeemed by the beauty of the gold
and silver lamps which almost cover it.    A constant stream
of pilgrims passes in and out between two brown monks
standing sentry;   first they enter the tiny marble chapel, so
called, of the angels.    Thence a low opening, which compels
all to stoop, admits into the Chapel of the Sepulclire itself;
an altar stone of reddish marble worn with kisses covers the
original stone;   there is only room for five or six persons at
a time;  and a constant succession enter, kneel for a while,
kiss the stone, and withdraw backwards.    It is lighted only
468 TJie Ladies' Edinhirgh Magazine.
by many golden lamps. We saw outward tokens at least of
passionate devotion. Some bring rosaries, some even grave-
clothes, to rest for a moment on the consecrating marble.
And when one thinks of the passing millions that for fifteen
centuries have knelt there with the same thought,—early
Christians, medieval pilgrims, and people of our own day,—
one feels it is indeed a sacred spot, hallowed by the grandest
associations.
But the evidence against this place having ever been
outside the city walls, seems too strong to be set aside. The
early Christians seemingly did not care to preserve local
memories of which a hundred and fifty years of desolation,
from A.D. 60 to a.d. 200, may probably have swept away all
recollections. Certainly old Jewish tombs are shown in the
church close by, hewn in the rock; but such tombs are
known to have existed within the city. Some explorers
suggest the so-called place of stoning beyond the grotto of
Jeremiah outside the Damascus gate as much more probably
the real site of Calvary. And better so than within this
ancient, desecrated church, this battle-worn and blood-stained
old fortress.
The Church, or rather collection of different almost
hostile churches under one roof, looks best at night.
Straight on from the central shrine you enter the beautiful
Greek Church. The cloister to the left admits you to the
Latin Church, where the friars seem always chanting, and
where in the sacristy they show a medieval sword as the
sword of Godfrey. It is still used in the creation of knights
of the restored Order of St. John; and if ever a sword
conveyed chivalric virtue, it should. Numberless other
little ancient chapels are consecrated, more or less fancifully,
to different events of the Passion. Down a broad staircase
you come to a most interesting place, the Chapel of Helena,
a cavern in the rock wrought into form by architecture of
the earliest Byzantine type. Helena, Constantine's daughter,
lies buried under the altar. Beyond is a lower cavern where
she found the three crosses. You gain the top of this great
rock by a higher stair, and thus enter the gorgeous Chapel
of the Calvary. Here is a blaze of gold and silver lamps,
and pilgrims throng to kiss the silver slit in the rock, where
the cross is said to have been placed. From the ante-chapel
you can look down on the maze of heavy round arches, and
the deep shadows of the lower church. Now a procession of
people in strange attire, with lighted tapers, moves solemnly
by, chanting  hoarsely,  or  a  solitary monk, or a brightly
Tracks of the Crusaders. 469
dressed Greek priest, passes under the circles of light made
by the great lamps that glow here and there in the dusky
gloom, typical of the whole history of the place, so uncertain,
so mixed in character and confused in origin, but yet here
and there illuminated by a light which never dies.
Of the deepest historical interest is the Harem or supposed
site of the Jewish Temple, which we see probably as it was
in the Middle Ages. It is a large grassy open space, scattered
with olive trees, bounded by the walls of the city where
they are oldest, partly dating from the time of Herod, with
remains of far earlier buildings. On this open ground stand
two mosques, the splendid Dome of the liock, and the fine
Mosque of Askar. Underground are huge vaulted halls,
passages and caverns, relics of different periods of the long
history of this wonderful place, generally with wrong tradi¬
tions attached to them, which are being patiently investigated
and corrected by modern explorers. The glorious Dome of
the Eock, a triumph of Byzantine architecture, rises over a
great mass of living rock that surges up in the middle. Is it
the Mount Moriah where Abraham was about to sacrifice
Isaac ? the threshing-floor of Araunah the Jehusite ? the
site of the Holy of Holies of Solomon's Temple ? There
seems good reason for thinking so, though of course legends
of Mahomet are clustered round it now, one being that all
prayers made below the rock are granted. The Turks till
lately suffered no Christian to enter its enclosure, naturally
fearing some prayer might be made against their government.
BacksMsch is, however, all-powerful now in Turkey, that and
pulling off one's shoes; but luckily mosques are carpeted
with warm rugs, so they are not missed. Here under this
beautiful dome, set with exquisite coloured-glass windows,
like clusters of jewels, the terrible massacre of fugitives took
place the day after the taking of Jerusalem by Godfrey;
several thousand armed Mussulmen held out here after the
city was taken, and were all finally put to the sword, and it
was said the blood rose to the knees of the Crusaders' horses.
The great Mosque of Askar close by was originally built for
a church by Justinian, and afterwards it was assigned by the
first crusading kings to the order of knights called after it
the Templars. We went into the huge vaults beneath,
stretching away in long perspective, column beyond column
and arch beyond arch. They are called the stables of
Solomon, and it is supposed the animals meant for sacrifice
in the temple were kept here. Certainly the Templars
stabled their horses  here.     These  vaults  are said  to be
470 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
haunted, and our Mahommedan guide did not enjoy going far
in, but worried us to come away. However, by this time
we had become quite accustomed to wandering about under¬
ground, almost every building earlier than the fourth
century being below the Jerusalem of our day.
The Hospital, the Mother House of the Knights of St.
John, is one of the finest of the open-air ruins. The German
Government has purchased it, so all is upheld and cared for.
The Gothic Church, the great halls and dormitories, the
towers of the fortress, make one realize the mixture of monk,
nursing brother, and warrior that characterized the great
order of St. John of Jerusalem. We admired the sculptured
ornaments, which must have delighted many an exiled
knight long ago, and drank excellent water out of a cool
well, which gave in old times a blessed draught to many a
sick and wounded pilgrim.
It must have been maddening to the army under King
Eichard to have seen those towers and domes rising above
the city walls, which they were not allowed to assault.
These walls still stand, completely surrounding the city,
strengthened by fine old castellated gateways, and were
considered of great strength before the days of artillery.
But it was chiefly from the want of water outside them that
the knights of the Orders counselled King Eichard not to
attempt a siege. The sufferings of the army of the first
Crusade from want of water were terrible, and not forgotten
by the wiser commanders. But we feel for the disappoint¬
ment of the soldiers of King Eichard, who had all begun to
brighten up their armour, their helmets and swords, that
there might not be a single spot to spoil their brightness at
the rescue of the Holy Sepulchre, when they were led away
from within sight of their goal back to the sea-coast. It
■was near the coast that Eichard's greatest feats of arms were
accomplished. It was Jaffa he rescued from an army with
what he himself described as the 'refuse of his seamen.'
' Why did you go away ?' he said at that time to the envoys
of Saladin; ' I was nearly alone.' The terror of his name
had become overwhelming, but still it seems wonderful to
find him, a few days afterwards, charging an army with ten
horsemen, and winning the day. This was not from rash¬
ness, but to extricate his little army from a position in
which they ought, according to all the rules of war, to have
laid down their arms. The Arabs relate that he rode up
and down before their great army challenging them to single
combat; that he ate his dinner alone half-way between the
Tracks of the Crusaders. 471
two armies; that, disguised as a Bedouin, he rode into a
caravan, which he afterwards seized and plundered, thus
finding out its line of march. His enemies admired him
heartily, and at this time, seeing him ill mounted, sent him
two splendid Arab horses as a gift.
But of these wars what traces did we see ? Here and
there in the Jordan valley, and among the wild bare hills of
the wilderness of Judea, a broken tower, some fragment of a
Christian fort guarding those always dangerous passes. We
pitched our camp at Ain Sultan (the original of the
' Diamond of the 33esert' fountain in the Talisman), and rode
over flat sands in the neighbourhood, where the knight and
the Saracen might well have jousted. Again, we recognised
in the fine-looking people of Bethlehem a European type,
said to be derived from the large number of crusaders who
settled there, which also accounts for the population being
almost entirely Christians, especially of the Latin Church.
It is time to go on to Galilee if we wish to mention even
a very few of the crowd of recollections of the Holy Wars
which its hills and plains recall. We had pitched our tents
on the site of ancient Samaria, just where the hill drops
steeply down to the fertile valley below. Beyond the grass
lands above, lay olive woods and corn, but on all the great
hill there was no building left except the squalid village
clinging to one side, built chiefly of ancient fragments. Only
here and there a few graceful columns still stood, some near
our tents, some below them; whole colonnades on the other
side of the hill. Samaria is indeed heaps, but there is
one handsome, fortress-like building almost entire — the
Hospitallers' Church of St. John the Baptist. Here the Latins
assert he was beheaded, but this is a mistake. Though
much of the building may be of earlier date than the
Crusades, it was the Knights Hospitallers who gave it its
present character. There are the remains of a Gothic church,
with pointed windows; down steep stairs you reach some
ancient tombs, one the reputed tomb of St. John Baptist.
Above a hall is matted and whitewashed, and used as a
mosque. There are carved crosses of different forms, that
so called of Jerusalem, and other Christian emblems, now
partially defaced. It was interesting to see the delicate,
familiar Gothic work speaking of the faith the knights held,
in this far land, at the point of the sword. They had spared
no pains on their church; it was decorated as if it stood on
some quiet English lawn, or by some French river, instead
of among the wild, fierce enemies who have got it now.
472 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
Another picture I especially remember. We had ridden
the previous day along the windy ridge of Carmel (still a
great wild-flower garden), and were camped between the
monastery and the sea, which broke close below the pro¬
montory on three sides of us. The Bay of Acre swept to the
northward in a noble curve, bounded by hills of warm
purple. Caiffa lay almost at our feet, and the white houses
of Acre glittered across the bay some eight miles off; and
above it, but far away, Hermon heaved his snowy shoulders
high in the cloudless sky. In front rose the great square
convent fortress; on the other side, the coast line swept
south past Castle Pellegrina to Csesarea. This was all a
familiar battle-ground, from the days when Sisera fought at
Kishon (the ancient swampy river there below), to the last
massacre of the monks in the convent in 1830. There is
something noble in the way that these garrison convents in
Palestine are re-established, after the monks have been
swept away again and again by their implacable enemies.
We had visited, among other caverns in the promontory of
Carmel, the vine-wreathed hermitage of a certain St. Simon
Stock—an honest EngHsh crusader who turned hermit, and
was a friend of St. Louis, who spent four years at St. Jean
d'Acre. The country hereabouts seems quite familiar to any
student of the crusading wars. The marsh near Caiffa,
where the knights were embarrassed by the weight of their
horses ; the prickly shrubs they found so troublesome on the
march; the blue Mediterranean waves that were so refresh¬
ing to those who came, sick and weary, from the inland
fortresses; these fortresses themselves, which can be traced
still here and there on the hill-tops, guarding the way to
Nazareth, and onwards to the Lake of Galilee, all recall them,
till one quite expects to see an armed band of pilgrims ride
by, bound from Acre to Castle Pellegrina. This last, to the
south of Carmel, is said to be a noble ruin, and I wished to
visit it, but was told the country about it is far from safe—
robberies and even murders being so frequent that it was
imprudent to travel there. Caiffa, through which we rode,
is an attractive place situated on the flat sea-shore. Clusters
of palms rose out of lemon and olive woods; on the other
side we saw some cultivated fields and vines, and a cart!
Here a colony of Germans has settled, and certainly they
succeed in raising good crops. Their prosy, comfortable
houses, they themselves in blouses and ugly hats, the women
in print gowns and straw hats, were truly German in their
plodding, industrious unloveliness.    They number about five
Tracks of tlie Crusaders. 473
hundred; but it remains to be seen whether they will succeed
as settlers in Syria, where the climate does not in general
suit the European constitution. A beautiful old forest of
oaks lies between Caiffa and Nazareth, stretching over hill
and dale, and accounting, probably, for the medieval stories
of the ' fair wooded hills of Galilee.'
But we must pass here without a word places of deeper
interest, and go on to the day we came to Tiberias. We
were riding over undulating grass lands, when very suddenly
there opened below us, wide, tranquil, and blue, the Sea of
Galilee. The grassy slopes where we stood swept down to
it in steepening curves. Across the water rose a wild range
of pale, purple mountains. Below, the minarets and palm
trees of Tiberias rose by the water-side. Northward, on a
lofty hill-top, stood Safed, a city set on a hill. All was
beautiful on that fine day, but with a restrained beauty, a
solitary, withdrawn character. The shores of the lake were
desert, and no boat moved on the water. Near this, it is
supposed, is the sc«ne of the miracle of the loaves and fishes,
and certainly there is a sort of natural amphitheatre and
shelter, and much grass. Here, in terrible contrast to that
miracle of beneficence, was MarescaHia, where the battle of
Tiberias or the ' Horns of Hattin' was fought between King
Guy of Jerusalem and Saladin, a.d. 1187, which resulted in
the utter overthrow of the Christian kingdom founded by
Godfrey. King Guy insisted on fighting after a long niglit
march ; he risked an army that weakened every garrison in
Palestine to supply it, and lost all with the battle. His
men were surrounded by Saladin's lighter troops; the
Crusaders stood long at bay on the mound called Tell Hattin,
but at last were almost all slaughtered or captured from
sheer weariness. As the Christians were surrounded, many
prisoners were made by the Moslems. Saladin spared the
King, the Grand Master of the Templars, and a very few
other noble hostages. ' All the Templars who were taken,
except their master,' says Vinsauf,' he ordered to be decapi¬
tated, wishing utterly to exterminate those whom he knew
to be valiant above all others. Oh what faith, what fervour
was theirs ! One Templar named Nicholas, induced so many
to aspire to martyrdom,' he relates, ' that numbers assumed
to be Templars who were not, joyfully presenting their necks
to the sword in the pious fraud of this new costume.' Indeed,
Nicholas got mobbed by the herd of aspirants to martyrdom.
' By reason of their emulation with him, he could hardly
succeed in first obtaining the mortal stroke which he coveted.'
474 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
What different ideas from ours that one incident indicates!
Life was enjoyed with a reckless gaiety that we have lost,
and yet death was met with a careless welcome that shocks
the modern sentiment, especially when we remember what
very wild fellows many of Vinsauf's ' holy martyrs' were.
The ruined castle of Tiberias, which might, as far as its
architecture is concerned, be in England, rises picturesquely
on one side of the Eastern town, and commands a fine view
of the lake, and the one city left on its once populous
shores. There are only three boats on this large lake, and
they were moored below the castle; we were soon sailing
in one of them over the water to the site of Capernaum or
Chorazin.
The last building on the northern frontier of Palestine is
the Castle of Banias, or Caesarea Philippi, without exception
the grandest ruined castle I ever saw. We rode up through
the welcome shade of a thick olive wood, by ever steeper
paths, for an hour, the last bit being a rather anxious scramble
on horseback. The castle was like a little town spreading
over, I should think, ten or twelve acres, and from the great
cavern-like entrance to the highest remaining turret, all was
of noble masonry, compact and strong, defying time, having
suffered most from sieges. There is a remai-kable octagon
tower at the entrance, several storeys being quite entire
from the vaults upwards. Not much is known about this
wonderful building, supposed to date from a.d. 800, but
added to by Moslem, Christian, and Moslem again, for many
centuries, till its final desertion 200 years ago. It must have
been difficult to find one's way about within it. An army
might have been comfortably quartered in this one building ;
but what an operation feeding the garrison must have been !
Steep ravines protected it all around, high, snow-tipped
mountains enclosed every side but the south, where the view
was beautiful, over lake Merom and the sunny hills and plain
of Galilee. The army of St. Louis advanced here in a.d.
1253, and took the town of Banias. De Joinville gives a
lively account of the dangers they encountered on the castle
hill whither they pursued the Turks, driven out of the town.
The Saracens turned on them among the steep rocks, and
they fought up and down the precipices. 'Lord de
Joinville,' said some to their commander, ' we are much
worse off than you, for you are on horseback and can
escape, where and when you please, but we on foot are
in the greatest danger of being killed.' 'Upon this,' says
Joinville, ' I dismounted among them, to give them more
Maxims and Aphorisms. 4^$
courage, and sent my war-horse  to  the  battalion  of the
Templars, which was a long cross-bow shot distant.'
St. Louis was one of the last, the best, and the most
unfortunate df the Crusaders. Though he spent four years in
the country, and enlarged the little circle of Christian power
round Acre, he never saw Jerusalem. His nephew, our
Edward the First, when Prince of Wales, who was pledged
to his uncle's second Crusade, went on to'Acre after his death,
and for a while forced back the infidels from its walls. But
he was the last great warrior from Europe who delayed the
fate which soon overtook the degenerate kingdom of
Jerusalem. E. J. 0.
iHaxims anti apijorisms.
FROM  THE  WRITINGS  OF  GOETHE.
^ As in water face answereth to face, so the heart of man to man.^
Men who think deeply and earnestly are in bad odour with
the public.
This is due to ' the vulgar contempt which the man of action is
tempted to feel for the man of thought, and which, above all, the
soldier is tempted to feel for one who, like Cassio,
"Forsooth, a great arithmetician,
That never set a squadron in the field,
Nor the division of a battle, knows
More than a spinster."'
Lionel Tollemache.—Fortnightly Review.
If I must listen to the opinion of another, it must be
expressed positively; I have enough that is problematical in
my own mind.
M. Renan, in reference to Calvin, observes : ' Dieu qui abandonne
le monde anx violents et aux forts, leur refuse presque toujours les
dons de finesse qui seuls dans les choses Bpeculatives menent k la
verite. . . . L'homme passione et absolu dans ses opinions identifie
hardiment sa cause avec celle de Dieu, et precede avec I'audace que
doit naturellement donner cette assurance. Le monde lui appartient,
et c'est justice, car le monde ne marche que par I'impulsion de ces
fermes esprits.'
Superstition belongs to human nature, and when we think
that it is quite got rid of, it takes refuge in all sorts of nooks
and corners, whence it comes forth again as soon as it thinks
it can do so with safety.
Witness the recent spread of spiritualism. Sir William Hamilton
says of certain Germans, ' that they will believe anything except
the Bible.'    Even M. Renan, when speaking of the Pagan super-
47^ The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
stitions, admits, ' Ce qui, pour an esprit eleve, resulte du spectacle
de si longues aberrations, ce n'est ni le dedain ni la pitie: c'est la
conviction d'un grand fait; I'humawte est religieuse, et la forme
obligee de toute religion est le symhoUsme.'
There are many things which we should know better if
we did not want to know them so minutely. Is not an
object first seen distinctly at an angle of 45 degrees ?
' II y a des choses que I'homme ne pent connaitre que vaguement:
les grands esprits se contentent d'en avoir des notions vagues ; mais
cela ne suffit point aux esprits vulgaires.'—Joubekt.
In truth, the microscope and telescope bewilder the
natural human senses.
This may recall Pope's familiar couplet:
' Why has not man a mieroscopic eye ?
For this plain reason—man is not a fly.'
Everything that sets our intellect free, without enabling
us to control ourselves, is hurtful.
* Souvenous-nous-en bien, I'education ne consiste pas seulement
h orner la memoire et a eclairer I'entendement; elle doit surtout
s'occuper h, diriger la volonte.'—Joueert.
©ur ILibrarg Eable.
Memoirs of Madame de Remusat, 1802-1808. PubHshed by her
Grandson, M. Paul de Eemusat. Translated by Mrs. Cashel Hoey
and Mr. John Lillie.    London : Sampson Low.
The hero of this book is Napoleon Bonaparte; and trite as the subject
is, it is one that never loses its interest and fascination. To the lover of
history and of exciting narrative, as well as to the soldier and tactician,
the story of Napoleon in its many phases must always be a mine of
wealth ; while to the calmer student of human nature, his character is
an inexhaustible theme for study and for wonder. It is the latter who
will best find their account in this book, for it is written by one who
had a great gift for the observation of human nature, and, in this case,
the best opportunities for a close view of the subject.
Napoleon's life as displayed on the public stage, and the same life as
seen behind the scenes, differ, perhaps, more than those of other people ;
and his home life has never been portrayed before. The author of the
Secret Memoir, who, according to his own statement, never quitted
Napoleon fox fifteen years, and also M. Vieusseux, the author of
Napoleon Bonaparte, his Sayings and his Deeds, give equally with the
present Memoirs the private side of his character, and the views they
present are in singular harmony with those here brought before us ; but
still they show Napoleon as he appeared to vien—to secretary or to aide-
de-camp—whether as the young soldier flattering the Directory, the
unscrupulous general concoctiug lying despatches, or the Emperor
fenciug himself with spies  and ' Cythereau cohorts.'     But to show
Our Library Table. 477
Napoleon en famille,—Napoleon with his wife, his sisters, and his court,
—Napoleon, in short, as he appeared to women, was reserved for this
woman's pen.
The authoress, bom Mdlle. Claire de Vergennes in 1780, of a family
of aristocratic connections on both sides, was married at sixteen to M.
de Remusat, a young lawyer, a widower, eighteen years older than
herself, who had been a kind friend to her widowed mother after the
death on the scaffold of M. de Vergennes, her father. The marriage was
a thoroughly happy one; and after a few years, during which they lived
as one family with Madame de Vergennes, the young couple entered the
household of the First Consul in 1802 ; the husband becoming Prefect
of the Palace, and the wife lady-in-waiting to Josephine, with whom as
Madame de Beauharnais the de Vergennes family had had a previous
intimacy.
Madame de Remusat was by birth and inclination attached to the old
regime, and M. de Remusat cherished opinions which, at all events
later iu life, might be called Liberal; and in order to judge fairly of
their consistency in entering the service of Napoleon, we must throw
ourselves into the feelings of the actual time, not thinking of Bonaparte
as he afterwards became, but as he appeared in 1802. At that time
France, worn out with the Reign of Terror and the miseries of ' Liberty,'
and longing for nothing but repose, was sincerely ready to welcome a
strong hand over her, and the prospect of a stable government. Napoleon,
young, brilliant, victorious, and comparatively unknown, seemed to be
the saviour she needed. It was therefore with no sacrifice of principle
that they attached themselves to him; and though the husband, an
honest and home-loving man, appears from the beginning to iiave found
his duties irksome, his wife at least began with a sincere friendship for
her mistress and an enthusiastic admiration for Napoleon.
Her Memoirs, painting in the greatest detail the court life with its
gradual changes from 1802 to 1808, trace most instructivel}'^ her cor¬
responding changes of feeling from admiration to doubt, and from doubt
to disenchantment, disappointment, and despair.    The first thing that
opened her eyes was the murder of the Due d'Enghien; but as, after
that, Napoleon, feeling conscious of the aversion it had inspired, took
pains to appear, if not to be, more lenient and humane, Madame de
Remusat contrived, after great struggles, to reconstruct her faith in him,
a faith only to have it again and again shattered.    During the whole of
her life at court she was a close observer of men and things, to an ex¬
tent indeed unintelligible to those about her, who could not believe in
an interest that was speculative and not selfish ;   and she wrote careful
records of all she saw and heard at Paris, Malmaison, and St. Cloud, in
the form of imaginary letters to a friend.    Unfortunately we have not
the original documents.    Her manuscripts, handling personal matters so
freely as they did, were no doubt dangerous; and when the thunderbolt of
Napoleon's return from Elba fell, and a severe inquisition in the interest
of the vindictive and suspicious Emperor was imminent, she in a moment
of desperation burnt her papers—an act ever afterwards bitterly regretted
by her and her son.    After the second abdication, M. de Remusat was
made Prefect of the Haute Garonne, and afterwards of Lille, and in her
retirement Madame de Remusat went back to her literary pursuits.
Excited by the reading of Madame de Stael's  Considerations sur la
Revolution  Frangaise,  and  further encouraged by her son, who had
himself taken to a literary career, she set herself to re-write all that she
could recall of her former work.    It was a difficult task, and while we
478 The Ladies^ Edi)ibiirgh Magazine.
cannot but regret the loss of the original, we cannot help wondering
that the revised work should be so lifelike and vivid as it is. Her
husband used to say of her, that nobody excelled her in the talent for
heivg true. This is apparent in her work, for never were Memoirs
written with a more winning truthfulness. As to their truth to facts,
we are hardly competent judges ; but their sincerity and truthfulness
to impressions speak for themselves. Unfortunately she did not live to
complete her work. The Memoirs do not carry us further than 1808,
and we would gladly have been longer in the writer's company, at least
until the divorce and death of the Empress Josephine, the mistress whom
she had served so well, and whom she faithfully accompanied into exile.
Madame de Remusat died in 1821, the same year as Napoleon, at the
age of forty-one. She left her mss. in the hands of her devoted son,
to whom she was the great passion of his life ; but the material was of
too explosive a nature to be safely published during the political vicis¬
situdes of France almost from that time to this. Her sun in turn
bequeathed them to his own son, M. Paul de Remusat, with au injunction
to publish, which has been lately carried out.
Besides the record of her personal fortunes, which are but modestly
touched ou, and the portrait of the chief figure, the Memoirs contain
most interesting sketches of many contemporary characters, including
all the Bonaparte family, the Beauharnais, Talleyrand, Chateaubriand,
Madame de Stael, and many others. The most instructive feature of
the book, however, is (we think) the vivid idea it gives of the effects
of a despotism upon those who actually surround a despot, not only in
the cramping of action, but in the gradual stifling of will, feeling, and
thought. On this characteristic, from which Madame de Remusat with
her strong intellect and upright character suffered acutely, she is never
weary of insisting; and she supplies tis with a good test for gauging
the baneful moral results of the subjugation of the weaker to the
stronger, when it is no question of esteem or reverence, but a mere
bowing to will. Napoleon's influence on the people around him was
truly Satanic. His favours were pestilential, and intended to buy body
and soul for his purposes. He di-scouraged every kind of excellence, and
above all any approach to private friendship in those who served him.
lu the authoress's words, 'The Emperor sedulously cultivated evil
passions in the men who served him, and they flourished abundantly
under his reign. The sovereign to whom we were attached felt a
supreme and universal contempt for human nature. This was hard to
bear; it obliged every one to restrict himself to the formal duties of his
post. Bonaparte's belief that he could get more out of evil than he could
get out of good, made it more advantageous to display the worst side
of human nature. He liked to discover the weak point and to avail him¬
self of it. Where he could not perceive vice, he sought for weakness ;
or in default of this, he carefully inspired fear, so that he might be
always the stronger.'
It is curious to see how in the midst of his vanity and egotism, a flash
of self-knowledge would sometimes pass across his mind like lightning,
and his habit of self-analyzing be visited by a sudden impulse of candour.
He is recorded to have said, ' The truly happy man is he who hides from
me away in the country, and when I die the world will utter a great Ouf!''
The world has long since uttered that sigh of relief; but one can even
now hardly read a memoir that makes him so real to us. without a sense
of thankfulness that time, place, and one's own littleness have saved one
from being among the victims to the spell he cast around him.    Common
Question Series. 479
depravity is hateful to us, and meanness we turn from with loathing;
but a wickedness that borders on the sublime, and a selfishness that
touches the ideal, have for our strangely - mixed nature a strange
fascination.
(J^ufStion Scries,
I. History.—How and when was Calcutta lost to the British?
Give some account of its deliverer. Answer not to exceed three
hundred words.
II. Logic.—What are the principal factors in the modification of
language ? Give examples. Answer not to exceed three hundred
words.
Answers to reach Qu. C., not later than November 5th, care of Messrs.
Morrison and Gibb, 11 Queen Street, Edinburgh. Only one side
of the sheet of paper to be written upon, and it is especially requested
that nothing but the answers may be sent to Qu. C. Any other
communication must be addressed in the usual form to the Editor,
or no notice can be taken of such enclosures.
ANSWERS TO AUGUST QUESTIONS.
I. History.—Eight answers received. Of these, seven of the writers
have agreed upon Trafalgar as one of the principal naval victories of
England ; six have given the defeat of the Spanish Armada; four,
the battle of the Nile; two, Sluys; and two. La Hogue; while
Camperdown, Guadaloupe, and the battle of the Baltic have each
found one supporter. Best, Thokough ; next. Apis ; Linda and
WoLFRA, equal; then Pink and Aeialpin, Wjealdmoor and
Arachne.
II. Lorjic.—Four answers received. Best, Linda ; next Irrlicht,
Wealdmoor, Pink.
Describe shortly three of the principal naval victories of England,
with names of the commanders on both sides.
In 1588, Philip II. of Spain fitted out a fleet of 160 ships, the
Armada, commanded by the Duke of Medina and Vice-Admiral
Martinez de Ricaldo, for the invasion of England. They were to
join the fleet of the Duke of Parma in Dunkirk, but from the first
the fates were adverse. Storms forced them to run into Corunna
for repairs, and when the two fleets had succeeded in joining
company they were totally becalmed. The English fleet of seventy-
six ships, under Lord Howard, had been watching the enemy's move¬
ments from Plymouth, and in the night of the 7th August, Howard
sent eight fire-ships, which caused confusion among the enemy, and
next day, with Lord Seymour and Sir Francis Drake, he attacked and
disabled the Spaniards. Those that escaped were obliged by adverse
winds to sail round Scotland, and were mostly wrecked. This
defeat was the deathblow to the supremacy of Spain in Europe.
In 1782 Jamaica was threatened by France and Spain. The
English admiral, Rodney, to prevent the junction of the two fleets,
took the enemy at a disadvantage, and gained a complete victory.
He first employed the stratagem of breaking the line of the enemy's
ships, and thus dividing them into two parts.    They lost eight ships
480 Tlie Ladies' EdhibiirgJi Magazine.
and 7000 men, while the English had very slight losses. The
French commander De Grasse was taken prisoner. This was the
battle of Guadaloupe.
The battle of Trafalgar was fought in 1805 between the English
under Nelson and Collingwood, and the Spaniards and French under
Gravina and Villeneuve. Nelson broke the enemy's line, and they
were entirely beaten, but Nelson was killed. Most of the enemies'
commanders were taken, only Gravina escaped. The losses were
very heavy on both sides, and the victory was dearly bought by the
death of Nelson. Thorough.
State the points at issue between Nominalists and Realists.
Nominalists have maintained that words, and not things, are the
objects of dialectics. They were the disciples of Abelard in the
11th, and of Occam in the 14th century, and the founders of the
University of Leipsic. Realists, on the contrary, have asserted that
things, not words, are the objects of dialectics. They include the
Scotists, Thomists, and all other sects of Schoolmen, except those
previously mentioned. The latter meet with few supporters in the
present day, as it is generally allowed that nothing can physically
exist corresponding to a general notion, as its existence must be in
a certain place and take ascertain form. Nominalists, however, fall
into the error of holding that the previous invention or use of a
general or abstract name (at first a proper name) alone gives exist¬
ence to its corresponding notion. The chief fallacy of Realism is
the conversion of abstractions into realities, while Nominalists
incline to the fallacy of relativity, which consists in the suppression
of the correlatives of an admitted fact, as in the case of Kant's
autonomy ; for the same person cannot be both superior and inferior
in the same department. The via media appears to be the opinion
of the Conceptualists, who consider that before a name can be applied
or extended, the mental apprehension to which it corresponds must
exist, and that the general notion is the knowledge of the common
properties or resemblances of the things embraced under the
conception. Pink.
 0 
Notices to Corrcspontients, etc.
Ladies are invited to contribute to this Magazine. All communi¬
cations to be addressed, Editors, Ladies' Ediitburgh Magazine, Messrs.
Morrison & Gibb, 11 Queen Street, Edinburgh.
Papers intended for immediate insertion must be in the hands of
the Editors by the first of the previous month; attention is requested
to this rule.
We must warn our correspondents that no MSS. can be returned
unless full postage be sent, that letters needing reply must contain a
stamp, and that the Editors can forward no communications left with
them unless stamped. Poems sent in letters will not be returned
unless a stamp be sent. No anonymous communication either to
the Editors or the Office-bearers of the Literary Society will be
noticed.
The next meeting of the Ladies' Edinburgh Literary Society will
be held on Saturday, October 9th, at 5 Chester Street, at 11 a.m.
Subject of Debate: ' Is Elizabeth properly ranked as one of the
greatest of English sovereigns ? '
Camp Life i7i Colorado. 481
Camp iLife vx ColoraUo,
' Camping-out ' is a fashionable way of spending a month in
summer, even in the eastern part of the United States. But
when, as I have sometimes seen it, the camp is pitched
almost within sight of a large hotel, and meat can be got
from the butcher's during an afternoon walk, camping-out
becomes rather too tame an affair; the necessary dash of
adventure and the freedom of camp life are lost, and only a
few inconveniences remain to distinguish it from the ordinary
hotel existence. Camping in Colorado could not easily sink
to this dead level; but it need not, on the other hand,
involve that hardship and exposure which people in England
usually associate with all their ideas of life in the Far West.
When the summer heat sets in on the plains, every one who
can get away turns his face towards the hills; and for the
inhabitants of towns only five or ten miles from the foot of
the Eocky Mountains, the journey is an easy one. But the
hotels in the mountains are few and far between, so most of
the seekers after health and coolness must needs take to
their tents. It is not difficult to get a camp outfit; the
Denver and Colorado Springs newspapers teem with adver¬
tisements which kindly direct you where to turn for such
requisites. A greater difficulty is to get the ideal camp
servant; for unless the ladies of the party intend to rough it
very considerably, they must take a servant. He must be
clever at pitching tents, and good-tempered enough to
smile when you elect to change your camping-place for the
third time in five days; he must know something of cookery,
and understand horses. When this treasure is secured, at
twenty-five dollars a month, you stand over him while he
packs a waggon with tents, store, furniture, and provisions;
then you put him on the top of the pile, and start him off to
the mountains. If the start be made from Colorado Springs,
Maniton Park is the prettiest and most convenient spot for
a camp. It is but twenty-five miles off, and the road to it,
leading through the Ute Pass, is one of the most interesting
in the country.
Maniton Park was the scene of the greater part of my
camping experience. It was there that, coming up late one
afternoon from the plains, we found our new servant—who
bore the felicitous name of' Peace'—surrounded by the raw
material of our camp.    These are disheartening moments,
No. 71.—NOVEMBBB 1880. 2 H
482 Tlie Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
and usually result in the choice of the worst camping-place
in the neighbourhood. It was so with us. We got into a
bad situation, chiefly noticeable for a plague of ants and
gnats; and the next two days were spent in moving rest¬
lessly about to find a better one. At last, however, we
settled comfortably down in a clearing not too far from the
road, so that we could run down and hail the stage-coach,
which came up three times a week, and sometimes brought
us letters and provisions. Our clearing was bounded on
three sides by the forest, and on the fourth by a gully, at the
bottom of which flowed the stream that provided us with
water. The banks of this gully were covered with long,
rich grass, and with patches of the most gorgeous flowers.
One plant in particular, the gillia, seemed more plentiful
than the grass itself. It has a tall stem, covered with deli¬
cate, trumpet-shaped blossoms; sometimes these are white
or salmon-coloured, and again pink or scarlet, so that they
give the whole hill-side a general rosy appearance. Here
and there a spike of 'painter's brush' sent up its scarlet
flame among the grass; and in the forest there were masses
of wild rose, and great plants of the glorious Rocky Moun¬
tain columbine. We had, then, a splendid garden round the
camp, for there were many other lovely flowers, more than I
can tell of. We had also ' ruins' in our Park, for among the
trees, here and there, gleamed masses of fantastically-shaped
red rocks—the brilliant rocks for which Colorado is famous
—that looked from afar very like ancient monuments. Our
hammocks were soon slung between three splendid pines, so
placed as to give us a view of Pike's Peak, the highest
mountain in the range, which closes in the south end of
Maniton Park. The flattest spot in the clearing was chosen
for the tent of the invalid of our party; for in Colorado,
camping-out, even at a height of 8000 feet, is considered
very healthy for the consumptive patients who are now so
frequently sent there. This tent had a little stove to warm
it on very cold nights; it had the best furniture, and the
biggest buffalo-robe to cover the cot, and several other
luxuries. The other bedroom tent had only two cots, and
a set of tin washing utensils, which, in the absence of a
wash-stand, were arranged on the top of my trunk. A cord,
stretched from one tent-pole to another, served as a hanging
wardrobe, and my saddle placed on the ground in a corner
was useful as a table. We had a real table for a short time,
but that was pressed into the dining-room service, and I
took the meal chest instead.    We had, lastly, a piece of old
Camp Life in Colorado. 483
carpet on the ground, because it is so very unpleasant to
jump out of bed in the morning on to prickly grass. Next
to us, a little way off, came the store tent, where we kept our
choicest provisions, and crov^ded in to dine when it rained.
The servant's little tent, about the size and shape of a
thimble, completed the group. Our kitchen was near the
store tent; it consisted of a tiny cooking stove, and of several
old wooden chests. One did for a table, and others, with a
side knocked out, were nailed up against the trees, and made
excellent cupboards and shelves. A deep hole dug in the
ground, and covered with green boughs, was the cellar; and
there, too, the milk was buried to keep it fresh after it had
been fetched from the one farm within reach. Fresh meat,
when we got it, was too precious for the cellar; it was slung
up in a canvas bag to the branch of a tree, out of the way
of devouring beasts. For carriage-house we chose a shady
spot under the trees, and the horses gladly dispensed with a
stable; for, picketed out on the meadow, they spent all their
leisure in munching the rich grass. One of them carried the
servant to fetch the milk every morning, and Peace soon
became quite an adept at trotting along with a full can in
his hand. He had to be 'pretty spry,' as he would have
said, to get breakfast ready in time for us, for the sun looked
into our tents very early, and called us up whether we would
or no. The right way of beginning a day in camp is, after
breakfast to 'do' your tent—that is, to shake out your
carpet and make your bed. A cot does not require much
making, for the canvas, loosely stretched on the low wooden
frame, forms a kind of hammock, and renders a mattress
superfluous; so a quilt to lie on, a pillow without pillow¬
case, blankets, and a buffalo-robe are all the bed furniture.
Still, these must be aired and rearranged on the cot. Then,
with a pleasant consciousness of having ' cleared up,' one may
take a morning ride, till the sun gets too hot, as it will at
noon in summer even in the mountains. Now comes the
time for the hammock and a book; but if one of the party
be a cordon hleu,—a cook who can cope with the difficulties
of cooking out of doors,—an act of true charity may be
performed by concocting some little tempting dish to enliven
the ordinary camp fare. I speak satirically. A tempting
dish it is next to impossible to produce, as the wherewithal
is wanting; but we used sometimes to find it possible to
improve upon the attempts of Peace. I remember several
severe struggles I had with our refractory stove. We could
not often get fresh bread,—indeed, our supply was apt to
484 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
get very stale if the stage from town happened to be a
day late. So we tried to make biscuits as well as we could,
rolling them out on our rickety table, our sole rolling-pin
a long glass scent-bottle! Our fire was of very dry pine
sticks gathered in the forest, and it blazed so fiercely that
the tiny oven, only separated from it by a thin sheet of iron,
would get red-hot in an instant, and shrivel our biscuits to
a cinder; but when we tried to moderate the heat, the fire
usually went clean out, and dropped the oven down to a
lukewarm temperature. However, despite all this, the bis¬
cuits were our best efforts. I recollect that Peace was once
sent down to town on important business, and I had to
undertake the housekeeping for a whole day. This was the
more serious because we had come to an end of most of our
provisions, and I found myself pledged to provide a dinner
without having either eggs or butter to help me. There were
neither vegetables nor fresh bread,—in fact there was scarcely
anything but a can of preserved chicken, and we were tired
of preserved chicken. I resolved to make croquettes of
chicken disguised in rice; only you cannot fry croquettes in
water, and I should have had to abandon them had I not
remembered a neighbouring camp where I knew some people.
Might they not lend me a fragment of butter ? With a cup
in my hand, I trudged along down one hill and up another,
till I reached a cluster of white tents on the other side of
the gully. I found my friend near the cooking tent, where
the ' help'—for she had a maid-servant—was also preparing
dinner. I glanced enviously round me, and timidly proffered
my request. But the ' help ' at once lifted up her voice, and
said with decision, ' I can't spare the least mite 0' butter.
Mis' Brown, not if the stranger lady wants it ever so; I
want every speck I've got for your dinner.' I hastened to
assure Mrs. Brown that I would not deprive them of their
butter for worlds, but I enlarged on my eggless condition,
and mentioned my prospective croquettes. This resulted in
the loan of two eggs (they were well off for eggs) and a
lump of lard for my frying-pan. I returned home trium¬
phant, and the croquettes would have been good had I remem¬
bered that rice takes a long time to boil soft at an elevation
of 7500 feet. But excuses must be made for any cook under
my circumstances, for it is extremely trying to have pine
needles dropping into the contents of the saucepans, and to
find that the wind has blown ashes and dust into the clean-
water paU, so as to necessitate a journey down to the brook
to fetch more when dinner should be coming on table.
Camp Life in Colorado. 485
I was glad to see Peace and the third member of our party-
appear in the evening, bringing with them—as a satire on
my former troubles—such loads of provisions that we scarcely
knew where to stow them. Cabbages and chickens, tomatoes
and beef-steak, roUed on the grass: we could not eat them
fast enough, and had to trade some off to the lady who lent
me the eggs. It was not hard to find a market for provisions,
for by this time there were three or four camps in the Park,
half or three-quarters of a mile apart; besides the tiny,
primitive hotel, a mile or so down the valley. We thus had
quite a number of places to call at during our afternoon's
drive if we were so minded. One day we set out to visit a
solitary ranche or farm belonging to an Englishman, at the
north end of the Park. Here, under the shadow of the hills,
lies a small lake; the stream which feeds it winds through
a wild and narrow canon close by, and is enlivened by a
settlement of beavers. All this we were to go and see; and
we drove off, laden with instructions for finding our way
through the forest, where we should see a side track that,
branching off, would lead us to the ranche.
It had cleared to a glorious evening, after some hours of
rain; the mountains seemed to float in a purple haze, and
the stretches of pasture-land, where masses of brilliant
flowers glowed in the wet grass, shone like some mosaic of
jewels. The broad valley has a mountain at its head, and
one at its foot; the sides are shut in by lower hills, from
whose crests the forests sweep down, encroaching now
and then on the meadows below. In some places trees
scatter themselves in groups over the grass, and here the
valley has all the look of a bit of English park-land, so that
one understands why these nooks between the rocky mountain
ranges are often called Parks. In other places, however, the
woods fill the valley completely up, and glimpses of a pile
of red crags of a fantastically shaped mountain summit, re¬
mind one that one is very far away from England. It was
just in one of these thick belts of wood that our road should
have turned off; but in vain had the spot been described to
us ; we could see none of the landmarks our guide had men¬
tioned, not the faintest track of wheels over the fallen pine-
needles. On we drove, trying one or two bad paths which
appeared at intervals, but which always landed us in a bog or
a fence. Once we thought we had inadvertently passed a
turning, but on plunging back into the forest after it, we could
not find it again. We could see, on our right, a line of jagged
red peaks, gleaming brighter than ever in the evening sun-
486 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
light. We knew that beneath those very crags lay the lake
we were in search of—and yet between us stretched a maze
of meadow, stream, and forest. At last we stopped the tired
horses on the top of a hill. The valley looked infinitely
lovely, but infinitely lonely too; Pike's Peak, raising his
stern old head now far behind us, was the only familiar
object; before us was a maze of weird blue peaks, the
entrance to an unknown country. Not a house was in sight;
nor had we met a human being since we left the camp, three
hours before. We felt discouraged, humiliated, hungry. We
yearned for our tea-kettle, now surely singing on the stove.
We hated being beaten, but at the thought of tea we gave in :
the horses' heads were turned back once more, and we posi¬
tively galloped home through the forest. Needless to say that
we were received with shouts of derision and crushing remarks
about the incapacity of women; but I hope we shall not
be the last people who lose the way to that ranche.
After all, the best time in camp was in the evening, when
the great bonfires, which we lit up in the centre of our
domains, shone like beacon-lights. These illuminated circles
appearing among the shadowy forests, had a very pic¬
turesque effect, and one which may liave been startling to
any traveller entering the valley at night.
The camp-fires were one of the features of our existence,
and we used to vie with the other settlers as to who should
get up the finest and the longest-lived. The horses were
used to drag great logs from the forest as foundations for the
fire; and at last we became so extravagant in this kind of
architecture, that we built a pile in the hollow centre of which
a man could stand upright—before it was lit! We were
careful about putting our fires out, but where such customs
prevail and people are often less careful, no wonder whole
forests burn down, as I have known them do.
In the evening we visited each other's camp-fires. Sitting
round the cheery blaze, we used to sing all the most appro¬
priate choruses that could be thought of, our voices accom¬
panied now and then by a burst of fiery crackling, when
some one rose to fling a fresh bough of pitch pine on to the
pile. Occasionally another sort of accompaniment might be
heard, the howling and barking of a pack of cayotes, or
prairie-wolves, a small creature rather more like a fox
than a wolf. There was nothing to fear from the cayotes,
except for our meat, which they would doubtless have been
glad to get hold of; but as their skins are both pretty and
useful, the sound of their bark was generally a signal for
Camp Life in Colorado. 4S7
some one to jump up from the fireside and fetch his gun to
have a shot at them.
Once there was a rumour of a bear having been seen a few
miles off, and several eager sportsmen started in pursuit, but
in vain. I was sleeping alone in my tent at the time, and on
one side of it the canvas had shrunk a little, so as to leave
a round hole between it and the ground. I could not help
thinking, as I went to bed, how exactly Bruin's head would
have fitted that aperture had he been minded to pay me a
visit. One night, indeed, when we were sleeping out of doors
in our hammocks, we were awakened by a wild howl; but
the nocturnal rambler paid us no nearer visit, and we could
only conjecture it to have been a rocky mountain lion or
puma, as some have been seen in the Park. We failed to
feel any alarm, however, as the wild animals have been so
much hunted out in these districts that they are extremely
shy of venturing near the haunts of men; and I never heard
of any coming into a camp, except one misguided cayote,
which ran one night into the tent of a friend of ours, and
left more quickly than it came. At first, to be sure, it was
startling to be awakened at night by a trampling and a sound
of munching, apparently close to one's ear; but in time one
learnt to know that it was only a cow, or perhaps one's own
pet horse, grazing outside the tent, and the sound became
quite a familiar one. Sometimes in the daytime, as we lay
in our hammocks, the forest round us would re-echo with the
tramp and rush of horses' hoofs, and a drove of half-wild
Mexican ponies would burst out from the woods on either
side and surround the clearing. It was pretty to watch these
shy, graceful creatures survey the intruders' camp for a
moment with a startled glance, and then, at our first move¬
ment, wheel round and dash back into the forest. Once
some of them trotted up to our horses, picketed on the
meadow, and examined them with scorn, as creatures sub¬
jugated; not foreseeing, poor things, their own probable
future of slavery, when the owner of the Park should seize
them to ' break in.' I fancy my own pet horse, Katie, thought
herself equal to any of them, however; and when she got
away with me for a ride, would gallop over the meadows
with an air as free as the best of them. Ah, Katie ! it was
you, too, who carried me out of Maniton Park, away from
the tents, the forests, the blue mountains. It is but fitting,
then, that with the memory of you should close this bit of
talk about camp-life in Colorado.
A. G. V. S.
488 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
V^t ^lass painters.
CHAPTER IV.
' The high that proved too high, the heroic for earth too hard,
The passion that left the ground to lose itself in the sky,
Are mnsic sent up to God by the lover and the bard.
Enough that he heard it once—we shall hear it by and by.'
Browning.
The next morning Marie came to the glass manufactory,
bringing some flowers. He who was gone had ever dwelt
with delight on the form, colour, and scent of flowers, and he
loved to have them brought to him, and arranged by the
bright, gentle girl who seemed herself to have some affinity
to the sweet, dear children of the garden she imported to
minister to the sick man; and they did minister, claiming
his attention and soothing his restlessness by their good
influence.
Theresa saw Marie coming, and met her at the door with
the tidings that the master was dead. The tears welled
into Marie's eyes. She pushed her basket of flowers towards
the servant.
' Take them, you know what they will do for,' she said.
' Come in for a moment. Mademoiselle; I will see if you
can go in tlidrc. M. Pierre has been praying in the room
almost all the time, but now I think he has gone.'
' No, no !' said the girl; ' I do not desire it, I would rather
not.' She had never seen the dead, and an undefined horror
crept over her.
' You ought to see him as so dear a friend of the family.
Mademoiselle; wait here but a moment, no one will come.'
And Therese left the room.
All was very silent, there was no sound of workmen's
voices or of moving to and fro about the house, of the tend¬
ing of fires, or of the faint clinking of pieces of glass as they
were pUed up after being cut, or placed ready to be leaded
together to form windows.
Some sense of awe came over the waiting girl, her eyes
dilated and grew round, she wished Therese would return.
At last suddenly it seemed as if two or three doors were
opened together, and she heard sounds of some one in great
distress,—perhaps it was Madame,—then there were footsteps,
but none came her way; she wished she might go, but Th^r^se
would think it so odd if she came and found her gone.    At
The Glass Painters. 489
length quiet footfalls approached the door of the room she
was in ; the door opened, and Pierre entered. A light came
into his sad, pale face. ' Marie!' he exclaimed,' Marie ! do
you know what has happened—that my poor father is gone
from us ?',
In a very deplorable voice she answered: ' Yes, M. Pierre,
indeed I would not have come in while you are all in such
trouble, only Therfese wanted me to, and I was frightened,
and it is cold, and'— And poor little Marie burst into tears,
and covered her face with her hands.
' Poor child, have you been waiting here long ? surely there
has been nothing to frighten you ! You have brought some
flowers. Will you come and place them ? I shall like you to
do that for him, because he loved you, come;' and taking
her wrist, he gently displaced her hand, and lifting up the
basket of flowers led her from the room. Marie stilled her
child-like sobs and went unresistingly.
The dead lay in an upper chamber from which day-light was
excluded. Several candles were burning. Marie shuddered
as she passed from the day-light into the ghastly candle-lit
apartment.
Taking the flowers from the basket one by one, Pierre
gave them to his companion to lay on the calm form of the
once active glass-painter, and she reverently did so. In low
tones Pierre spoke to her of the quiet, painless fleeting of
the departed one, and added: ' Marie, he loved you, and you
were good to him. We must all of us love you, and you must
ever look on us as friends. Here in this presence I promise to
be a friend and a brother to you for life.' He took her hand,
it trembled in his, he dropped it and left the room quickly,
muttering something about Madame wanting him.
Marie knelt and buried her face in her hands. Even in
that presence she fell into a short reverie, from which she
was aroused by a grave voice at her side saying: ' Marie, it
will be better for you to go home, my mother could not see
you to-day.    Nanette shall walk back with you.'
'M. Jean,' said the startled girl, 'I did not know you
were there.'
' I have been here all the time.'
Jean took her from the room, and desired old Nanette to
prepare for the walk, saying that he would take care of the
children while she was away.
As the girl and old woman passed along, they noticed the
sound of loud voices from the corner of a by-street, and
looking ro\md, perceived a man and boy engaged in noisy.
490 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
angry altercation. The man, on seeing them, calmed himself
in a moment, and took off his hat to Marie with a profound
bow.
' Ma fois,' cried Nanette, glancing at the boy, ' there is
M. Louis lounging about the day after his father's death,
and that wild M. Porcher is with him.'
' Let us get on quickly, Nanette; my aunt will be wanting
me,' said Marie; and she began to hurry as if much depended
upon haste.
' Gently, Mademoiselle, you must remember my old legs.'
' True, I forgot, pardon me,' answered the girl, the colour
coming vividly into her face at the sound of quick footsteps
behind them.
' Will Mademoiselle pardon me for having overtaken her
to ask how the good Madame Le Vieil is ?' asked Nicholas
Porcher; and the tone in which he asked the question was
for him respectful and gentle.
' I have not seen her, but I believe that she is in great
sorrow,' Marie replied.
' My friend Louis does not afford me much information.
I thought Mademoiselle had surely been at the maison Le
Vieil, but perhaps I am mistaken;' and he glanced inquiringly
at Nanette.
Nanette had the habit of always evading a direct reply to
a question. She answered, ' They are all in great sorrow at
our house. I know more about Madame than any one, for
have I not lived with her since she was a child ? When she
married she said, " What shall I do without you, Nanette ?
win you still live with me ?" and I said I would'—
' I know how valuable a servant Madame has in you, good
Nanette.    Good-day to you! Good-day, Mademoiselle !'
' Good-day, Monsieur!'
' He is pleasant-spoken enough. He has a handsome face,
has he not ?' questioned Nanette. ' But he is not one to
trust; he is as false as a man can be. M. Louis would have
been different if it w^ere not for him. The old master never
knew how often they were together.'
When Nanette returned to the glass-works some hour and
a half later, she found Henri Maget in the kitchen. This
surprised her, as work was suspended for that day. She also
noticed that he appeared strangely absent, and unwilling to
enter into conversation. She would not have objected to a
little talk to keep off the blues on so dismal a day; but if
Henri chose to be churlish and would not talk, there could
be no use in his blocking up the most comfortable side of
TJie Glass Painters, 491
the kitchen stove, without even communicating his excuse
for being there. So Nanette began to bustle vigorously
about, frequently requiring Henri to move that she might
reach something near him, and making or trying to make it
evident to him that he was very much in the way.
At length he asked: ' Nanette, do you think I could see
M. Pierre ? I have something particular to say to him.'
'I do not think you could. What might you want to
say ? It is possible I might see him presently, and tell him
anything of real importance.'
' You would not understand; I must see him myself. I
have been waiting in hopes I might hear him come down¬
stairs ; it is of consequence that I should see him soon.'
' I do not know anything about your seeing him. M.
Pierre has been kneeling by his dead father's side praying
hour after hour. Then he goes to Madame his mother, and
they pray together, and so on again. He has not ate or
drank to-day. Can I go and disturb him, calling out that
Henri Maget wants him, I know not for what ? Now can
I ?    You can go yourself.'
' Do me a favour, Nanette. Look for one of the children
to go to M. Pierre, and tell him that I must speak with him.'
' One of the children! as if one of the children would dare
to go to Madame's room unsummoned ; and she has forbidden
them to go to that other room. I might see M. Pierre
presently, and would tell him this great thing you make
such a mystery about. Surely I, old Nanette, who have
lived here all these years, might be trusted ?'
' But it is something about—something about chemicals.'
' Something about chemicals! Well, I really am ashamed
of you, Maget. Would it be suitable ? would M. Pierre
thank me if I should call him from his prayers to hear
something about chemicals ? I verily believe you have
nothing at all to say, and have been loitering here to catch
sight of Therese; but that girl is with the children, so you
may as well take yourself off.'
' You positively won't look for M. Pierre ?'
* No, I won't,' cried the old woman, her voice and wrath
rising together. ' Why,' lowering her voice, ' whatever is
the matter with you, Maget ? you look as white as a sheet.'
' I am going to look for M. Pierre myself;' and the foreman
left the kitchen, unheeding of Nanette's expostulation. He
mounted the first staircase, and stood listening and hesitating.
A door higher up opened, letting out the sound of children's
voices.    Therese came down to the stage where Maget was
492 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
standing. Upon seeing him she gave a smothered exclama¬
tion. He made her a sign to draw near and be silent, and
asked in a low whisper where M. Pierre was.
' There or there,' she said, indicating two doors.
* Will you tell him I must see him ?'
' I dare not go to Madame's room while she is in such grief.'
' I must see M. Pierre.'
'Well, I wiU find him.'
Very nervously Therese softly opened the door of the room
wherein lay the dead. All was silent and still, no living being
was there. Therfese crossed herself, muttered,' Mary, save his
soul,' and in yet more awe went to seek her young master in
his mother's room. She listened at the door, there was no
sound ; she noiselessly turned the handle, the room was half
dark, for it was now dusk light. Therese could distinguish
two figures sitting silently side by side. She advanced a little
into the room, and perceived that Madame Le Vieil was
asleep, holding her son's hand. Thdrese approached close
and said : ' Henri Maget says he must see you now.' Pierre
gently withdrew his hand from that of the exhausted sleeper,
and followed Therese out of the room.
' M. Pierre,' Maget said, ' you know I would not trouble you
on this day if I could help it, and I have to grieve you too.'
' Say quickly what you have to say, Maget.'
' I came here about two hours ago to ask if I could be of
any service. No one was about, and I went into the kitchen
to see if Nanette was there; then I heard footsteps in the shop
above, which astonished me ; I went to the door and tried to
open it, it was fastened on the inside. Knowing that the
shutters were up, and the door to the street locked, I sus¬
pected something wrong, and called out " Who is there ? if you
do not open the door I wiU burst it in." No one answered, and
I did burst it in. There appeared to be no one in the room,
but the key was left in the back of Madame's drawer. I
locked the drawer, there is the key. I looked aU about, and
at length heard a deep-drawn breath from behind the stove.
In the hollow place there I found M. Louis; he came out and
offered me money if I would say nothing. I left him in the
shop and locked the door, that is the key.'
Pierre looked bewildered; he hardly took in the gist of
Henri's words, though he saw that the man was excited.
' Louis was behind the stove. I think I will call Jean,
Maget.' Jean was called, and Henri repeated his story, and
then went away, leaving the brothers together.
' Louis is unworthy of our name, leave htm to me, Pierre;
The Glass Painters. 493
you are worn out, and our mother will want you when she
wakes,' Jean said.
Willingly would Pierre have agreed to the proposition, and
shrank with the timidity natural to him from a painful inter¬
view, but ' What ought I to do ?' was usually the first question
he asked himself. He asked it now, and after a few moments'
thought, found that as head of his house he might not swerve
from the duty of seeking his erring young brother.
Both Jean and Pierre felt strong indignation that Louis
should have taken advantage of such a time to commit his
misdeed; Jean hastily wished that the boy should at once
be sent forth from house and home, declaring that he was
irreclaimable; but Pierre counselled mercy and deliberation,
though agreeing that it might not be well to keep the boy
in the establishment eventually, particularly with Maget
knowing so much. Pierre expecting to encoimter sullen
indifference or open rebellion, nerved himself for the task
before him and sought his brother, resolving that in any case
he would not be hard on the fatherless boy left in his charge;
but Louis was abject in his shame and repentance; he begged
that he might be let to go forth at once from his home, declar¬
ing that he could never see Jean or Maget. He confessed that
this was not the first time he had possessed himself of money
from the drawer, to which he had managed to obtain a
duplicate key; and having avoided taking the coins taken in
course of daily business kept in the front of the drawer,
but helped himself to portions of a large sum kept in reserve
in another division of the same drawer, his depredations had
not been detected, but were of a magnitude that would inflict
some loss upon the firm. Pierre listened to the relation of
temptations, struggle, and failure of a weak wiU, and knew that
the boy must go where he would be free from the influence
of Porcher. After much talk, Pierre took upon himself to
promise that if Louis would wait but a few days, he should
be provided with means to seek some relations in England,
who would give him a trial at employment he thought
would be more congenial than glass-painting, either in that
country, or in America, where they had connections.
Consequently before a week had passed, Louis went forth
from the viaison Le Vieil to seek a new life in a new
country, with perhaps more peace at his heart than he had
lately known, and feeling more love and trust in his good
elder brother than it had been his previous lot to feel for
any one. The memory of that long interview in the dreary,
comfortless shop or show-room, during part of which his head
494 '^^^^ Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
had rested on a brother's shoulder and his hand in a brother's
hand, remained long impressed on the lad's memory.
CHAPTER V.
* Nul n'est parfait, tous ontleurs defauts ; chaque homme pese sur
les autres, et I'amour seul rend ce poids leger.  .  .  .
' L'amour repose au fond des ames pures, comme une goutfce de
rosee dans le calice d'une fleur.'
Paroles (Vun Croyant.    Lamennais.
M. Le Vieil's death necessitated considerable delay regard¬
ing Pierre's projected tour in the provinces; but when the
reasons for delay seemed past, he still continued, now for
this cause, now for that, to put off the day of starting,
and unlike himself, became peevish and querulous when his
brother endeavoured to persuade him to set off.
Pierre had been overworked and overwrought, and that
conversation   he   had  with  the  Abbot   of   St.   Vandrille
immediately before his father's death, had taken great hold
on his imagination, and with the dread of not faithfully
performing the Church's mission came a still greater dread—
that of being the instrument of betraying his fellow-country¬
men into the hands of persecutors ; for though atheists and
deists might broach their opinions with considerable impunity,
and many of the ImuU noblesse and even churchmen were
rather proud to be known as having sympathy with  the
doctrines of the philosophers, the Huguenot Protestants were
relentlessly persecuted, soldiers were ordered to fire 'upon
congregations,  those who  afforded  shelter to the pastors
"were liable to have their dwellings pulled down and them¬
selves sent to work as galley slaves.    Pierre  became ill,
weak, restless, feverish, and at last Jean took matters into
his own hand, and set forth on the tour, for he saw that
Pierre was unfit to undertake it.    Madame Le Vieil watched
her eldest son with great anxiety; she often lingered near
his door at night, when he spoke and murmured in disturbed
sleep.    One night he screamed, and entering his room, she
found him, with distended eyeballs, looking wildly about him.
' It was only a dream, mother,' he said on perceiving her,
' I thought it was Jean,  and that they were kilhng him
because I had betrayed him;' and he told her all that troubled
him, and how he dreaded acting spy, how the dread and fear
had entered into his heart's core; and sometimes he imagined
Jean   holding  him  in  contempt  for   lending  himself   to
become a betrayer, and sometimes he imagined the abbot
The Glass Painters. 495
upbraiding him with being an unfaithful servant. Probably
his mind would not have been so affected except for the
period of over-exertion he had passed through. In truth,
the good abbot had no desire to persecute the Huguenots,
though he had been asked by Fleury to find a trustworthy
agent who would report on the state of feeling among the
people, and particularly to note if the Huguenots remained
firm in loyalty.
Madame Le Vieil took the bold step of writing to the
superior of St. Vandrille's, explaining that her son's state of
health had prevented him from making the projected tour, and
mentioning that Pierre hoped to wait on the abbot as soon
as health and the close confinement to the glass factory
his brother's absence necessitated, would permit him to do so.
The result of the letter was that shortly after receiving
it the good abbot came to see Pierre, and after an interview
with Madame, in which she showed both discretion and
ability, the abbot found how much he had mistaken his man ;
he had counted upon submission, rectitude, and obedience,
but he did not take account of the sensitive imagination,
and went away blaming himself for want of penetration.
The instrument he had intended to use had bent in his
hand; he could not admit to Pierre that he had no intention
of promoting the harassing of the Protestants, so he merely
withdrew the commission.
Madame Le Vieil saw with alarm that her eldest son
inherited much of his father's nature, and at this time fits of
nervousness and even querulousness seemed to her analogous
to those that had preceded her husband's illness. Jean had
never been away before, and Pierre missed his brother's
brightness, readiness, and skilfulness very much. He leant
upon Jean more than he believed, and the brothers trusted
and loved each other very truly.
In Pierre's weakened health he might have proved
unequal to the press of work that fell on him in Jean's
absence, had not his brave mother exerted herself to be his
right hand, and lent comfort at every turn. She remembered
when the firing should be drawn; she weighed out with
careful hand the exact proportions of substances from which
colours were to be prepared; she watched and helped as
only a mother could, and was repaid by seeing her son fast
regaining strength and calm.
The pretty, affectionate, engaging Marie Valmont still
paid frequent visits to her friend Madame Le Vieil, and that
lady promoted and encouraged those visits none the less
49^ The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazhie.
because she divined that both her elder sons regarded the
girl with something more than sisterly affection. Madame
could not herself have described her feelings towards Marie;
there was a soft and a hard place in her heart regarding this
girl. While far from unmindful of the kindness and gentle¬
ness she had shown towards the poor glass-painter, and
while remembering how much he had liked Marie's pleasant
ways, she liked the girl for her own sake, and perhaps stUl
more because she was the daughter of a valued friend. Yet
mingled with the liking was dislike, and perhaps a Httle
distrust. If Marie cared for Pierre, it was presumptuous of
her; if for Jean, she was ungrateful and absurd. Of Pierre's
feeling towards the girl INIadame was a little jealous, and
about Jean's angry, angry with an unreasonable anger, for
it was directed against Jean, not only because he loved the
Marie, Pierre loved, and perhaps desired to make his wife,
but because he presumed to be in love at all; and Jean often
felt that his mother was displeased with him without in the
least knowing why; for if he had any strong affection for
his mother's guest, no one could be more undemonstrative
than was he in manifesting it.
One evening about this time all the home party were
gathered in the salon, and the lamp was lit. Madame was
seated near the window, which was a little open, for the night
was sultry ; some fine muslin work lay on her knees, the dis¬
satisfied, uneasy look about her mouth had gone for a brief
time; the lamp-light shone upon the white, worn face, with its
clear-cut features and setting of grey hair lying in smooth
bands beneath a muslin cap; one thin hand lay upon her black
dress, and the other rested on the window sill beneath that of
her son Pierre. Her eyes, now as ever bright with life, energy,
and determination, but with that tender light in them that
few but Pierre knew, were raised to his face. The mutual
love of this mother and her boy was heavenly.
At the opposite extremity of the room were Claire and
Marie. The little Victorine was sitting on Marie's lap playing
at fortunes with the buttons of her dress; Laurent was
seated at the table studiously reading a huge treatise upon
glass-painting; Leonard, by his side, was engaged in preparing
lessons for school. In a corner near his sisters, Marie was
telling stories in an undertone to the three youngest boys,
Claude, Philippe, and Michel.
Since Louis had gone forth from his father's house, less
discord and much quiet happiness had reigned there. If
Jean and Madame upheld discipline with a firmer hand
The Glass Painters.' 497
than Pierre, he supported them, enjoined orderliness, and
introduced the elements of love and tenderness. It spoke
well for the respect in which the elder brother was held, that
none bore him a grudge for absorbing the mother's love; if
she loved him too exclusively, he had love and to spare for
all of them. They felt and believed in his love and his
sympathy; he often came between them and Madame, la
mere's harshness.    In his presence she was seldom so harsh.
' Mother,' Pierre was saying,' I had news from Jean this
afternoon; he was at Mallay when he wrote; he intends to
spend to-night at Jacque Valmont's, Marie's father, and the
next day he will be here.'
' He should not go to Marie's father, a man who has spent
all Marie's dot, and married his own servant.'
' I think he thought Marie would like to hear about her
father. You know she does not often hear now she lives
altogether with her aunt. You knew Marie's own mother
well, did you not ?'
' Yes, I used to go up to the castle to play with her when
we were both children. My admiration for her was intense.
She was a little older than I was. It is a foolish expression,
but I sometimes felt that I could have worshipped the
ground she trod on. Valmont was her father's steward. It
was a fearful misalliance. I cannot think how it came
about; he was not worthy to stand in the same room with
her.'
' Is Marie like her mother ?'
' In features she reminds me strongly of her, but she has
not the same refined expression or grace of manner as
Mademoiselle de Limousin. I do believe the charming way
in which she said and did the most unreasonable things,
her great want of stability and common sense, promoted
my enthusiasm for her; she was like no other being I
ever saw. And then she sang and played divinely. It is
time for Victorine and Michel to go to bed. How late
Nanette is in coming for them! she is no longer an efiicient
servant, but I do not like to part with her.'
' No, you could not part with old Nanette. Mother, I have
been wishing to ask you if you would go the day after to¬
morrow to St. M(5dard. It is the Octive of Corpus Christi;
you have not seen the monument to our father since it has
been placed.    Will you let me take you there, mother ?'
' Yes, my boy, I wish to go.'
'To think that Jean will be in my dear old home to¬
night !' said Marie to Claire.   ' I wish he would bring me
No. 71.—NOVEMBBB 1880. 2 I
49^ The Ladies EdinburgJi Magazine.
some bluebells and buttercups, and some of my own May
flowers.'
'You forget that this is the end of June; the hawthorn
flowers in the month of May,' replied the methodical Claire.
' It will yet be in bloom in the shady places, and better
than all, I should like if he will bring a few young lambs.
It is now two years since I have been at La Tour; shall we
go there, Claire, and take Madame la hellc mere by surprise 1'
' But, Marie, you know your aunt does not want you to
see your step-mother, and you always say you would not like
it yourself.'
' You dear old thing, of course I do not want to see my
father's wife; she has a loud voice and red hair, and I wouldn't
like her if I could; but I should like to see La Tour. I should
like to see the green fields, and my father, and old Christophe
the shepherd, and Babette his wife. What is the matter ?
Why do you look so scandalized, Claire ?'
' It does seem so odd of you, Marie, to say your father's
wife has a loud voice and red hair. I do not think you ought
to speak in that way.'
' Perhaps I oughtn't, dear, but she has, all the same.
Victorine, you little love, how sleepy you are getting ; here
is Nanette.    Good-night, little one.'
Victorine and little Michel made a tour, wishing good¬
night and giving kisses, till they came to brother Pierre;
then all the others kept silence, while, kneeling down and
clasping their hands, the two children prayed 'the good God
to take care of the soul of dear father, to make us good
children, and watch over all we love.' Still kneeling, they
repeated the hymn:
' Heart of the Holy Child,
Hide me in Thee ;
Purest and undefiled,
Purify me ;
Joy of my holy life,
Far from evil passions rife,
Troubling this world of strife,
Keep me with Thee.
' Sweet child of Bethlehem,
Open Thine heart;
Lessons from Nazareth
Deign to impart. :
Mary and Joseph dear,
.   Lat iis be to Jesus near ;
With you we shall not fear
From Him to part.'
The Glass Painters. 499
Then all present, standing, sang together the ' Hymn of the
Holy Family:'
' Happy we who thus united,
Join in cheerful melody,
Praising Jesus, Mary, Joseph,
In the Holy Family.'!
Then Pierre picked up Victorine and carried her to
Nanette; but the child would not be put down, and began
a long whispering in his ear.
' I have been a good girl all day, brother Pierre,—carry me
up-stairs,—except once, I forgot, I did slap Michel because
he trod on Eosalie and made sawdust blood come out
of her.'
' What are you saying, Victorine ? Do not tease Pierre,
he has much to think of,' said Madame.
' I know what you want, Victorine,' said Leonard, ' shall
I do?'
' No, you won't do, but I will take you to-night,' said the
little tyrant, and the stout Leonard proceeded to mount to
le denier 4tage with his little sister in his arms and Micliel
clinging on to his back.
CHAPTER VI.
' And all is well, though faith and form
Be sunder'd in the night of fear ;
Well roars the storm to those that hear
A deeper voice across the storm,
* Proclaiming social truth shall spread.
And justice, ev'n though thrice again
The red foot-fury of the Seine
Should pile her barricades with dead.'
In Memoriam.    Tennyson.
When the Sunday upon which the Octive of Corpus Christi
fell came, Pierre was unable to accompany his mother to the
Cemetery of St. Medard. While preparing colours in the
heated furnace room on the previous Saturday evening, he
had been seized by an attack, caused by a rush of blood to
the head. Jean had found him almost insensible and helped
him into a cool room. Pierre soon revived and regained
self-possession. A doctor who had been sent for, looking
grave, ordained as much rest as possible, and perfect quiet
for the following day. On Sunday, Pierre seemed much as
usual, and was so distressed at the idea of Madame Le Vieil
postponing her visit to St. Miidard's on his account, that
1 Both hymns are contained in the Jesuits' Hymn-book.
500 TJie Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
with true consideration and wisdom she went there, accom¬
panied by Jean, Claire, and Marie, to place a wreath on her
husband's grave, for it was the anniversary of his birth, and
to inspect the monument that had been newly erected. On
their return they found Pierre in the salon, and Madame,
seeing at once that her son was well and at ease, sought her
own room for a brief time of meditation.
The   sober-minded   Claire   seemed   unusually   excited.
' Pierre, we have seen something very wonderful,' she said.
' What was that, my sister ?'
' We saw a miracle! The most wonderful things are
taking place at the tomb of Father Paris, who, you know,
believed that the Jansenists hold the gifts of God. He
always followed the advice of Pere Quesnel, and he gave
everything he had to tlie poor. Well, to-day a crowd of
poor people he had helped, met round his grave, some of
them bringing flowers to lay on it. You remember that
lame man Coqueret, to whom my mother sends soup and
bread ? Well, he was there; he laid a small wreath of
margeurites on the headstone, then, throwing himself violently
on the grave, he prayed to be cured through the intercession
of the saint whose bones lay beneath, and when he got up
he was able to walk without a crutch.'
Pierre glanced at Jean.
Jean was looking grave.    'I, as you know, sympathize
with the Jansenists,' he said, ' but here they are wrong.'
Jean le Vieil, with all his brightness, could think; his
sane, sound, well-balanced nature made him little prone to
run into extremes.    He was sensitive to the exaggeration
that might be detected in all the thought of the times, and
the proneness of men to quote excitedly, at a magnified and
inflated value, the religious opinions or institutions of their
adoption, and still more to lay undue stress upon the import¬
ance of their differences.    Jean had a thorough respect for
energy, labour, and the exact accomplishment of duties.    It
was to the fulfilment of these that his attention was chiefly
turned; but as he laboured he threw keen glances abroad,
and had consciousness of the immensities that surrounded
him, and the struggle between good and evil that was going
on.    As yet he had steered clear of the quicksands that so
many of the youth of the time had fallen into—that of
catching at the philosophical theories as something which
blended with the  longings of their own young, generous
hearts  for a  fuller  life, for more  freedom, more  insight
into the relation of things, not remembering that we are but
The Glass Painters. ^Q\
children, that we can but 'lift from out the dust a voice
as unto Him that hears,' unheeding that they were casting
away bread, and accepting stones for sustenance. For in the
new-born worship of humanity they were led to ignore
the fact that all that is best in man proceeds from God, and
is consequent upon faith in God; and if a few trained intel¬
lects and self-controlled, hard-headed thinkers could abandon
religious devotion without casting loose from the anchorage
of moral restraint, many iu ranks above that of the mass of
the people were unable to do so. If he read Voltaire, he
read with caution; or perhaps the religious atmosphere in
his home weighed against the harmful influence of his
studies more than he himself knew. We cannot measure
the strength of bias when our opinions are influenced by our
affections.
' What did my mother and Marie think ?' Pierre asked
his sister, referring to the imputed miracle.
' Our mother had heard that wonderful things had taken
place there before, and you know, though she might tell you
what she thought, she would quickly silence me if I dared
to ask her. As to Marie,—well, I think Marie was as much
struck and astonished as I was, but she will defer having an
opinion till she knows if you, or her confessor, say it is right
to believe in these miracles. If some one Marie trusted told
her the moon was green, she would fully believe so, though
the evidence of her own eyes told her it was not.'
'The evidence of our eyes is not to be depended on.
Marie is a good Catholic'
' And Claire and I are not, you would like to say,' Jean
said a little hotly. ' I cannot help seeing the quarrels, the
narrow-mindedness, the abuses, and wrong practices that
abound in the Church now; and I also see that the new
doctrines contain evil, and may lead to evil, though many of
their ideas are beautiful and noble. I respected the Jan-
senists so much, and now tlicy are seeking to gain power by
a pretence. It seems to me as if there were germs of truth
and germs of evil in everything; that God is above always—
everlastingly sowing truth, and that it does spread and
increase, not here or there, but everywhere, though one lot
of people say it wiU only grow in the soil they prepare for
it, and another lot of people that it will only grow in their
soil, while in fact, as soon as it touches earth at all, it is no
longer pure truth. The Protestants thought they could grow
truth better than we could; now they are divided, and
breaking up into sects.'
|03 77/1? Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
• * Yes, so it must be if once men call the Church's authority
in question, finding first this, then that, is illogical and
against reason. There is no end to doubt. I know you
think I shut my eyes, and won't see the things that go on
around us, but it is not altogether so. I know that men are
self-interested and liable to err, but not the less does the
Church stand firm, and not the less must the voice of the
Church be true, infallible, and uncontaminated, standing
above the wickedness of man; and when people say abuses
have crept into the Church, they do not understand that the
pure Church of God is of heaven, and can no more err than
Christ could err, though those who minister in her have
natures of earth.'
' But what explanation does the Church give of all that
is now taking place,—certainly with her authority,—these
persecutions, for instance—things that you, Pierre, and so
many good Catholics must regret ?'
'The Church attempts no explanation: why attempt to
explain the inexplicable ? If a man once begins to doubt
and question why this or that is permitted, and to look
into the unknowable, he will drift he knows not where.
Just now among the Jansenists and Protestants there would
seem to be gifts of spirituality; but having once let them¬
selves have doubts about the infallibility of the Church,
they will soon have doubts and questionings concerning the
tenability of their own doctrines. The Catholic faith is
the only religion that can keep its identity without losing
its life.'
Jean made no immediate answer. When he did speak,
his thoughts had perhaps wandered a little from the sub¬
ject, following some course of their own. Pierre, at least,
did not quite trace their bearing on the subject in hand.
' Perhaps in the end it does us good to rub against each
other somewhat hardly. Anyhow, the gift of moderation
has not been granted to men or nations; it is always the
confiict of extremes. What say you, my Claire ?' And
putting his arm round his sister's waist, he danced her out
of the room.
, * I am on your side, Jean,' Claire unhesitatingly answered,
having but a misty comprehension of the meaning of the
discussion. Jean did not give her credit for much under¬
standing of it either, but not the less did he kiss Claire for
the speech, and look much pleased; for it is dear to the soul
of man to have some one ' on our side.' And in the sym¬
pathy of his grave little sister Claire, Jean found compeusa-
The Glass Painters. 503
tion for the want of it in his mother, and perhaps in part
that his opinion did not carry the same weight as Pierre's
with another also.
CHAPTEE VIT.
' A man like this
(Take from him what you will upon the score
Of ignorance or illusion) lives and breathes
For noble purposes of mind.
' And those illusions which excite the scorn
Or move the pity of unthinking minds,
Are they not mainly outward ministers
Of inward conscience \'
WOEDSWORTH.
The reputation of the Le Vieils as clever restorers of old
glass continued to increase, and Pierre's health being in great
measure re-established, he made many long progresses to the
ancient churches, abbeys, and cathedrals round about Paris,
with a view of replacing and restoring portions of coloured
windows. Sometimes one of his younger brothers accom¬
panied him, sometimes he went alone, but he was now
always willing to make these journeys,—as willing as while
holding commission from the abbot he had formerly been
reluctant. While on these tours, Pierre perseveringly and
arduously collected all material that might aid him in
writing the great work upon glass painting and making
he contemplated, the accomplishment of which he now
enthusiastically looked upon as the crown of his life-work.
Sometimes his heart almost failed him when he foresaw how
many long years must yet elapse before he would be able to
complete his researches and give the result of them to the
world, and he thought his life would not be long enough to
accomplish his end. Pierre had one evening just returned
from one of these tours, and, as was his wont, sought for his
mother previously to hearing about the affairs of the glass-
making. His mother he could not find,but learnt from Theresa
;that she was occupied in the kitchen over preparations for
soiqoer. Pierre entered the salon, and while Ther^se took her
tired master's overcoat and drew out an easy-chair for his
benefit, a knock was heard at the door.
• Th(^rese hastened to open it. ' Ah, Mademoiselle I' she
exclaimed, 'you are come at a good time; M. Pierre is just
jeturned, and Madame will be here directly;' and she con¬
ducted Marie into the salon.
504 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
Pierre gave a slight start as she entered, and rose to greet
her with quiet, gentle courteousness. As she held out her
hand to him, a low whine came from the basket she carried.
' What have you there, Mademoiselle ?'
' Something for you. Monsieur, if you will have it;' and
opening the lid of her basket, Marie took out what looked
like a ball of white cotton wool, with a head and two black
beads of eyes attached to one side. ' It is one of Coralie's
puppies. It is a good puppy, Christophe says. WiU you
have it, M. Pierre ?' and Marie glanced shyly at Pierre.
' I— Will I have it ?' and some slight flush mounting to
his face, passed, leaving him paler than before.
'Don't you like it? I thought you would, and I have
carried it all the way from Aunt Denot's for you.' The
puppy whined again, and Marie, raising its small face to
hers, kissed it between the ears. 'I have called it La
Libert(5.'
' Who suggested that name for it ?' asked Pierre.
' M. Jean pitied Coralie so for being always tied up, and I
once said that if ever I had a dog, it should be called La
Liberte, and do just as it liked. Our old shepherd Christophe
sent it to me, but Aunt Denot would have it tied up in a
corner of the yard like poor Coralie is at La Tour, and then
it would not be La Liberte. If you have it, I know you
will make it happy.    Will you have it, M. Pierre ?'
Pierre turned to the window and paused for one instant
before making reply, then turning back, said: ' Yes, you
could have given me nothing I should have liked better;
this little animal shall be a dear companion to me;' and as
the creature whined again, he took it from her arms. It
scrambled from his hands to his shoulder, and licked his face.
' See, we are going to be great friends.'
The new inmate of the maison Le Vieil did not make her
advent unnoticed. Upon Jean entering tlie room, Pierre
gave him a somewhat formal notice of his new acquisition.
' My sister Marie has given me a token of her friendship
I shall value greatly; it will remind me of her when she may
be far away. Look at this little animal, Jean, it is mine;
we shall all care for it, shall we not ?'
With gravity suitable to the occasion, Jean bade La Libert^
welcome.
' When Marie named it she thought of your love of free¬
dom, so she called it La Liberte,' continued Pierre.
' Did you, Marie,—did you think of me ?' asked Jean, a
smile, with some touch of sadness in it, lighting up his faca
The Glass Painters. 505
' Come here, Victorine, here's a new friend for you !' ex¬
claimed Marie, giying no answer to Jean's question, as
Victorine ran into the room, followed by Claude, Philippe,
and Michel.
La Libert^ soon became the object of general attention,
and infinitely amused the children, particularly by losing its
temper and going into a puppy fury because Jean suddenly
picked it up Avhen it was happily engaged in dragging
Victorine's shoe round the room. There was much laughing
and commotion when Madame Le Vieil entered; she made
slight comment about the new arrival, whose presence
was explained by Pierre. Madame, rather shortly, desired
Victorine to put on her shoe, asked Marie to stay supper,
and desired that the puppy might be put into its basket and
taken into the kitchen till the meal was concluded.
Marie declined the invitation to supper, and during her
walk home was a little troubled by thinking that Madame
was displeased with her; perhaps she did not think she ought
to have given Pierre the dog.
La Liberte grew and thrived, attached herself entirely to
Pierre, whose faithful and invariable companion she became.
Victorine soon shortened La Liberte to Berte, which abbre¬
viation became generally adopted.
Some time after Bertd was inducted into the household,
when indeed so much time had elapsed that she had become
a grown dog, and often accompanied her master on journeys,
Madame Le Vieil, with a disturbed countenance, one day
ascended to the little attic that her eldest son had appropri¬
ated for a study, and where he spent hours of leisure in
pondering over volumes he had collected or borrowed from
convent libraries. His studies were not foreign to his pro¬
fession,—for he had now fully taken that profession to his
heart,—they related to the great work we have before men¬
tioned. He was too thoughtful and far-seeing to expect that,
ill the stormy times in which he lived, much could be done
to revive the art to its primitive splendour; glass-painting,
he hoped, might some time be thought of as honourably as in
past ages, but it would be when he himself had left ' these
voices.' While collecting information about its history, and
about the process by which colours were produced, he had
found such clear evidence that the art of composing early
glass windows made of innumerable pieces of glass was
an outcome of the art of producing pictures in mosaics,
that he was now engaged in writing an elaborate treatise
upon mosaic painting, previous to beginning the great work
506 Tlie Ladies' Edinburgli Magazine.
he had laid out, that he trusted might be conducive to the
preservation of the art now fast sinking into obscurity.
The little room into which Madame Le Vieil entered was
furnished with rude bookshelves, two common chairs, and a
table. Seated at the table, Pierre was giving earnest con¬
sideration to a Latin treatise, but not too earnest to admit of
his laying a caressing hand from time to time on Berte, who
lay curled up on a red soft cushion at his feet. That cushion
was the only adjunct of luxury in the room.
Madame Le Vieil, coming in softly, bent over her son and
kissed his white forehead. He arose, brought the other chair
close to his, and placed his mother in it.
' You are troubled, ma mire ; what is it ?' he asked, taking
her hands in his, and looking at her with gentle, loving eyes
already dimmed with overwork.
' I wish you were more comfortable here, Pierre; I should
like you to have a larger room.'
' It suffices for all my wants; but you did not come to
say that, my mother ?'
Madame Le Vieil paused before saying:
' Pierre, you will trust your mother, and speak quite frankly
if I ask you something, will you not ?'
Pierre hesitated before replying. 'Mother, you are the
dearest friend I Iiave in the world; there is nothing in my
heart I would not trust you with, but there have been
times it would give me great pain to talk about. I know
how well you love me, mother, how gently you would deal
with my weakness, if you have seen, as I think you
have, that I have been near to yielding to what for me to
dream of is sin and weakness. I would not have you think
me less sinful or less weak than I am. I do not want to
hide the diseased spot from you, but you wUl be very good if
you will not touch it.'
The mother answered gently: ' Mj^ boy, what if I do not
know the nature of the diseased place, will you not let me
touch it once to discover tliat, and once again to try if I can
apply a remedy. I grieve to hurt you, Pierre, but it will
prevent misunderstanding; it will be well for all of us if you
will let me speak.'
' My mother, you shall speak if you desire it, and I will
listen and answer; but in the first place I should like to
tell you, that before my father expressed a wish that I
should come home and take charge of tlie manufactory when
he had but just begun to be ill, I knelt one day before the altar
and vowed that I would be a priest.   I vowed that nothing
Tlie Glass Painters. 507
should prevent my following the vocation I passionately
longed for, as other men long for riches or fame, and I
dedicated myself to the service of God, When first my father
■wanted me to return here, I rejoiced that my vow would
prevent my giving up my own will I told myself that I
could not come to your help even if I would, and yet I
loved you so. Then the abbot talked with me, and I told
him how I longed for the religious life, to serve as a priest
in the temple, to preach to the people, to study in the
convent, and I told him liow you, mother, had always fostered
in me the desire for the priesthood, and how my father had
wished it, and I told him of my vow; and the abbot thought
for a while, and then questioned me much. His questions
showed me how much the taste for literary labour and wish
for interchange of thought with those who would sympathize
with me influenced me ; he even warned me not to mistake
the gratification the senses receive in the grandeur and
gorgeousness of our noble Catholic ritual for the desire of the
soul to spend itseK in worshipping God. "Ask yourself," he
said, " if you would care to give yourself up to worship Ck»d
in a dungeon, or in the caves where the early Christians
were wont to worship ?" And I could not answer, for I knew
that to worship in some rude country chapel even would
seem to me dreary and unsatisfying, and I should want the
upraising of a glorious ritual, the lofty, vaulted roof, the deep,
grand chanting of many voices, the grandly robed priests
moving about the altar, and the vast congregatioti, and I
knew that I should feel but little enthusiasm if I worshipped
God in a communion where these adjuncts and incitements
to worship are not. Then the abbot reminded me of .One
who had left the most perfect and most glorious worship
that can be, even that which is offered up before the throne
of the Most High, to come on earth and suffer. He, the
great High Priest, taught that not to do our will but His will
is the mission of the Christian. Then I reminded the abbot
of my vow, and he said we could all be priests of G?od ia
many ways; they were not the only priests who led the
worship of prayer and praise in an earthly temple, but those
who upheld the honour of His name in the world, and led
holy lives, seeking to serve Him, were also priests. The words
seemed strange to me then, but since I have learnt to under¬
stand them. Then the holy father bade me not to think too
much of his sayings, but with fasting and prayer seek to
know the wiU of God and unswervingly follow it, setting
individual wishes aside, and I did  so.    At confession, the
5o8 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
abbot gave me absolution from the literal sense of my vow,
showing me it was ever incumbent on me to keep it in
spirit and in truth, and so I hope to do.'
' You ever have done so, my son.'
' No, my vow separates me from some of the rights other
men have. Not long ago I considered if I might break it.
I tried hard to believe I was free, and had had absolution
from it. I struggled with a tempting demon and nearly fell.
Mother, mother, perhaps even you would despise me if you
knew how weak I am.'
' / despise you, my son! But I understand you, if you
believe that in the sight of God you are bound by your vow.
It is not for me to wish you to break it, but you must be
brave and strong; you will have need of all your courage.
Jean has been telling me that he wishes to marry, and,
Pierre, he wants to marry Marie.'
Pierre's white face betrayed no emotion as he answered:
' I have seen that he did. Bid him God-speed, mother; he
has chosen wisely. You wiU have a daughter, and I a
sister.'
Madame Le Vieil had come to Pierre with a firm determi¬
nation, that if he would indicate he had any intention of
asking Marie to be his wife, Jean should not do so.
Shortly after leaving Pierre, Madame called Laurent, who
was working in the atelier, and desired him to tell Jean to
come to her. A quarter of an hour elapsed before Jean
appeared.
' It is not exactly respectful to have kept me waiting so
long,' Madame accosted him with.   ' May I ask what detained
you?'
' The delay was unavoidable, mother; I was showing de¬
signs to Pere L^once. We are to repair some of the windows
at Beauvais, and he came to see our style.'
' Indeed ! and could not Laurent show them to him ?'
' Having begun, I could hardly leave Laurent to it, and go
away.'
'You have so frequently some plausible excuse for not
coming when I send for you.'
' Indeed, mother, I could not help it; you would not have
me anger a patron ?'
' Perhaps, instead of talking, you wiU now Listen to what I
have to say.'
Much - enduring Jean remained silent, while in her
coldest accents Madame continued: ' I sent for you to say
that I wiU no longer oppose your wish to marry Marie
Tlie Most Beautiful Sight I ever Saw. 509
Valmont. A suitable or prudent marriage I cannot consider
it, but I hope it may turn out better than I expect it will.
I have spoken of your wishes to yoiir elder brother; he bade
me wish you God-speed.'
' Thank you, mother! oh, thank you!' cried Jean, and
seizing his mother's hand, he raised it to his lips. Could
any mother have resisted infection of the joy-light in Jean's
handsome, manly face ? Madame so far relaxed her serenity
as to give her son a kind of half smile, and say: ' God make
you happy, my boy;' and that smile dwelt long in Jean's
memory.
That evening, when the work of the day was over, Jean
paid Madame Denot, Marie's aunt, a long visit; and as he
retraced his steps homeward, there was probably no happier,
more grateful heart than was his in all Paris, unless it was
that of pretty good little Marie Valmont, who had discovered
very decidedly that if she had ever been inclined to halt
between two opinions, she did so no longer.
I think it is Browning marks that there are two points in
the adventures of a diver—' One, when a beggar he prepares
to plunge; one, when a prince he rises with his pearl.' Jean
Le Vieil that evening felt like a prince.
A. A.
©n liemg ^sfeeU to i^ame tfje IHost 23eautiful
%\^i \ E&er Sato.
November 13,1866.
Silent the ni^ht and stiU the air—
Calm, with an autumn chUl;
No moon, but a star just here and there.
Mists crowning a distant hill.
All quiet, save the river that murmurs and broods.
And keeps no silence at all.
Thundering down through the echoing woods
In a mighty waterfall.
With thy sister streams,' wan water of Clyde,'
Thou couldst tell of the olden time
Full many a legend of passion and pride
Stored up in minstrel rhyme.
510 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magasifie.
On thy rocky chasms and rifts that yawn,
On thy waters that chafe and roar,
Corra Linn—was there shed since creation's dawn
So lovely a sight before ?
Over hill and wood, and hurrying stream,
What suddenly glitters afar,
As soft, but more swift than moonlight beam ?—
'Tis the flight of a falling star.
Or ever is spent the first pure ray,
Another, another, we see ;
First in single flight they take their way,
Tlien in groups of two and three.
Lovelier—fairer—each moment the sight,
As those silent angels fly,
Each leaving a tiny trail of light
Across a pearl-grey sky.
All through the darkest midnight hour
Goes on that heavenly rain,—
The effulgence of that starry shower,—
Then all is dark again.
Science might say (we heeded it not),
These were but fragments hurled
Through endless space, from a distant spot
Of some ruined planet-world.
But who could picture such direful things
On such a night as this ?
Our thoughts were of spirits on seraph wings.
In a paradise of bliss.
As a poet hath said, each fair sight and sound
T hold as a treasure given—
An endless joy to the soul earth-bound,
Till its eyes unclose in heaven.
I have watched Highland lakes when the sun hath
kissed
Their sheeted glass to gold,—
When the mountains melted in amethyst,
As the sunset o'er them rolled.
The Threatened Change in the Marriage Law.     511
I have loved, in English forest glade,
To hear what the tall trees say,—
To list to the ' song without words' that's made
By the autumn winds at play.
I have gazed on the kindling Alpine snows,
In the dawn's first daffodil light;
And at those same peaks in their dying rose,
When the sun said his last good-night.
On glacier brink I have paused, to pass
On turf as blue as tlie sky.
And to think One Hand piled the icy mass,
And painted the gentian's eye.
Best of all, perhaps, doth my heart rejoice
In sunshine or storm to be;
On cliff or shore, where I hear the voice
Of the boundless, glorious sea.
I have thanked the Giver of all things good
Who hath made His earth so fair—
That we find by mountain, plain, and flood.
His loveliness everywhere.
But, like Dante, that night my spirit seemed
To pass through the golden bars—
To soar and to float with the souls redeemed,
'Mid those silvery spirit stars.
Then ask me to name the loveliest sight
That the echo of memory brings.
And I call up the long-past November night
When the stars took angels' wings.
L. D.
El}c Etreatcneti Change in tije iHarriagc Habi*
My Dear S ,—When w^e exchanged a few words the
other day on the subject of marriage between a brother and
sister-in-law, I was surprised to find that you had hardly
ever given the subject serious consideration. It is often
said to be a woman's question, and it must be admitted to be
one of great importance.    In case of there being any others
512 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
among the readers of this magazine who have not yet made
up their minds upon it, I should be glad to put before them
a few considerations which weigh very strongly with myself.
I do not wish to discuss the whole matter at length. The
promoters of the change have stated their case often enough,
and their arguments have been, to my thinking, ably and
unanswerably refuted over and over again. I have not read
anything on the subject lately, and wish to quote no
authorities. I expect to say nothing new or original, nothing
that has not been said, probably better said, before; but I
think my letter will be the plainer and simpler for not being
embarrassed by an immediate consciousness of what other
people have urged.
The bill for marriage with a deceased wife's sister seems
to me neither more nor less than a bill for abolishing
relations of affinity; for let no one imagine that the change
will stop there, unless we think we can say to the irregular
passions of human-kind, ' Thus far and no farther.' But this
part has been so often handled that I wdll say no more upon
it. Nor do I wish to touch the question from Leviticus.
To me,'the general'drift of the old law on the matter is
plain, viz. that relations of affinity were to be counted as
blood relations; else why (to give one instance only) the
emphatic ' She is thine aunt,' attached to the prohibition to
marry an uncle's wife ? But grant for a moment that there
were a special exception in the case of a sister (which I do
not grant), do Christian people seriously wish to assimilate
their marriage regulations to those which were permitted
among the Jews ' for the hardness of their hearts' ? I
commend the question to those who know their Old Testa¬
ment, and pass on.
My own profound dislike to the idea of this change, and
the dislike, I may venture to say, of nearly all my friends,
old and young, who are capable of considering the subject,
is based on the sense of the losses and restrictions it w^ould
bring into family and social life, even among those who are
personally uninterested in it. I do not write against those
who wish to marry their brothers or sisters in law, but for
those who do not, and who yet, in the younger generations
especially, will be indirectly affected by it.
But I shall probably be met on the threshold with the
old objection, ' You are thinking only of your own class; but
this is a poor man's question, and it is for the poor, as the
majority, that our legislators must decide.' Therefore a
AYord in passing on this matter.    To say that this measure
The Threatened Change in the Marriage Laiv.     513
Avould be good for tliC j)oor is a begging of the question ; for
if it is not good in itself, it cannot in the long run be good
for them. What right have we to separate ourselves from
our brethren, and say, ' Though this may not be the most
desirable thing in itself, it will suit you.'' If we see a higher
morality, or even a higher social state, let us, in God's name,
lift or drag them up to it if we can, and not lower our
standard to the level of an existing evil. If there is nothing
against these marriages but an arbitrary law, let us do away
with the law; but if the law itself (so long familiar to us in
the ' Table of kindred and affinity ' in our prayer books and
our churches) is the result of a deep instinct, let us re¬
member that by doing away with the law we do not make
that right which was wrong, nor that desirable which was
(questionable.
I believe the argument about the poor man's interests
really means this. A man loses his wife; he calls in her
sister to care for his house and his children; he makes her
his mistress, and then it is desirable that he should have the
power of righting the wrong as far as possible by marrying
her. But is family and social life to be shaken to its base for
the sake of the man who could not be faithful to his dead
wife for the few months necessary to make a re-marriage
customary and proper ? We will hope there are not many
such men even among the very ' poor'!
The arguments pro on this part of the question would seem
to me marvellously puzzle-headed if they did not rather
seem so wonderfully insincere! Of course I do not mean
that all who use them are insincere; yet I cannot but think
that some of the advocates of the measure are guilty of a
■imlful confusion of thought upon the subject, hoping to
snatch a suffrage now on this side, now on that. Hoio is it,
let me ask, that a man has hitherto been able to call in his
wife's sister with the same comfort and freedom with which
he would call in his own ? Simply because, hitherto, law,
custom, and instinct have put them on the same level, and
assumed that they would be treated with the same brotherly
respect. The sister-in-law has come to the widower under
the protection of her sisterhood, and that protection consists
in her being, to him, rinmarriageaUe. If her sisterhood is
abolished, she can come to him with just the same propriety
or impropriety (let society decide which) as that with which
any other young woman can come and live with any young
immarried man. Let her be either his sister or not. But
it can hardly be reasonably claimed, even on behalf of the
No. 71.—November 1880. 2 K
514 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
' poor' man, that he should first be allowed to call in a
certain person as a sister, and then to marry her as no sister.
But, as I apprehend it, this is virtually what is asked.
"With the other common arguments I will meddle little.
Those who assume that an aunt must necessarily make the
best step-mother, are assuming a great deal. If she have
children of her own, she will probably be exactly on the
level of other step-mothers ; and it might easily happen that
the children find they have acquired an average step-mother
and lost a good aunt. Again, those who allege the use of
these marriages among continental nations, will not find the
plea has much weight with us unless they can show that
family life is the happier, holier, and better in consequence.
This is a point on which I am not competent to speak; but if
what I' have read of Protestant Germany be true, the less
our feelings about the nature of the marriage-tie are assimi¬
lated to theirs, the better for us.
The only point on which I wish to enlarge, is what I may
call the social one, not because it is the most serious, but
because it is one of which all can judge, and on which the
arguments against the change are, I think, least open to
dispute.
I come back to what seems to me the good of our own class,
believing that, as we are all of one flesh and blood, and
children of one Father, what is best for one class in a matter
of this nature must in very deed and truth be best for all.
I believe, then, that the narrowing of the area of brotJier-
cmcl sisterliness—by which I mean that felt rclationsJiip which
excludes the notion of marriage from the minds of those who
live in habitual intercourse—would be a very great loss.
And let us beware how we incur it; for the wrong, if once
submitted to, is little likely to be again righted.
The comfort, pleasure, and happiness of life depend largely,
as all will agree, on the comfort of the intercourse between
man and woman, and this not in one relation of life, but in
all. There must always be love and marriage^—with that is
not our concern now; but there ought also to be friendship
and camaraderie. The blessing of our time and country is
the comparative freedom and frankness with which men and
women can meet upon terms of friendship, talk and act
together. The nucleus of this happy state of things is the
relation of brother and sister, first as formed by ties of
blood, and then, as enlarged by a wise instinct (sanctioned, I
firmly believe, by divine as well as human laws), to include
all such relations by marriage.    Under favourable circum-
Dante. 515
stances it extends farther yet, as many who have enjoyed the
blessing of man's friendship to woman will bear me happy
testimony. But in this wide area it is, of course, more de¬
pendent on circumstances, and more liable to disturbance and
invasion from the master passion. This cannot be helped,
nor need it; but with my whole soul and strength I deprecate
a change which, by abolishing brothers and sisters in law,
would recklessly narrow the region of peaceful and brotherly
friendship which has so long subsisted to the great comfort,
with the very smallest exceptions, of all concerned. ' Liberty!'
did I hear some one say. Why, it would be riveting fresh
claims upon us. The liberty to an infinitesimal minority
to marry their near relations would be a cruel injustice upon
the enormous majority, who, with the whole world to choose
from, would prefer to seek a new wife farther from home,
and yet to Ixefp their sister. And this, if duly considered, will
show the matter to be quite as much a man's as a woman's
question, if indeed the two can ever be really separated.
But one word more. I believe there are some men who
see or imagine a difference between the cases of a man and
his wife's sister, and of a woman and her husband's brother. I
suppose it is a difference that a woman cannot see; at least
I cannot. It is imfortunate for those who do, that the only
distinct exception to the forbidden marriages of affinity in
the Levitical law, should have been on this side and not on
the other (see Luke xx. 27, and the references); but on this
I do not want to insist. There may be those who will not
hear the Law or the Gospel, but will listen to a secular
teacher and a poet of our own. Believing, then, that the two
cases are morally and religiously the same, I claim Shahspcre
on my side,—no over-rigid witness surely,—who, five several
times in Hamlet, speaks of the union of widow with husband's
brother as incestuous.
I here quit the subject, which a sort of necessity has com¬
pelled me to write on, drawing me away from far happier
studies. d.
©ante.
Six Sermons by Philip H. Wicksteed, M. A.    London : C. Kegan
Paul & Co.
The five spoken discourses which, with the appendix, form
this small volume, were well worth preserving; and though
the writer tells us that his object in publishing them was to
widen the area rather than to extend the period over which
544 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
Pierre continued his journey with a lightened mind, and
returned at length to Paris with much valuable increase to
his store of knowledge respecting the obscured resources of
his art.
CHAPTER IX,
' Quand un gendarme rit,
Tons les gens d'arme rient,
Dans la gendarmerie.'
French Song.
Some years had flowed by since Pierre took the journey
spoken of in the preceding chapter, and during those years
he had sustained a great loss, for his mother had died.
The parting between the mother and son who loved each
other so truly and so well, was hardly a sad one, so Arm in
each was the faith that their separation would last but a
short time.
The firm of Le Vieil now consisted of the three brothers,
Pierre, Jean, and Laurent. The other brothers had gone out
in life in various ways. The grave little Claire had followed
her mother into the Quiet Land, and Victorine was married.
It was some time since anything had been heard of Louis ;
but as he was only in the habit of writing after intervals of
years, no anxiety was felt. Pierre had become almost an old
man before his time, and had several times suffered from
attacks of illness that had filled his friends with apprehension.
Of late he had much withdrawn from the active management
of the works, and devoted himself to his book.s. He often
neglected taking needful exercise, and sat whole days reading
and w'riting, and would have done so more frequently had
not his dog's solicitations for a walk sometimes induced
him to go for one. Berte would forsake her master for no
other reason, but for a walk she would accompany Therese,
or Henri Maget. Berte, alas ! was also aged, and nearing the
time when strength is but labour and sorrow.
The day of which w^e write was October the 4th,
1744 Some unwonted excitement might have been
observed among the people thronging the streets of
Paris. Many of them were in holiday garb; the bells
of the churches were ringing, and iiags waved from
many windows. Preparations for illuminations were in
progress, and evidently that day was to be held as a fete.
Early in the morning M. Pierre le Vieil stood before his
house, directing some workmen while they erected a very
Dante. 517
of his mediaeval creed. For him the two were indissolubly
joined—they were one thing; but if for us the shell has
burst, it is not that the seed is dead, but rather living. If
we have outgrown the literal acceptation of his teaching,
allegorically it cannot become antiquated, as long as the
three classes he describes exist among men—the impenitent,
the penitent, and the holy,—as long as it concerns us to
know the sentence which God's justice must pronounce on
them. In reference to this subject and the eternity of
punishment, we would refer our readers to the discourse on
the Inferno (p. 72). The impenitence of the sinners makes
their state hopeless. Literally, the subject with which he
deals is ' the state of souls after death;' allegorically, it is
' man rendering himself liable to rewarding or punishing
justice by good or ill deserts in the exercise of his free ivilU
Dante was no fatalist. He believed in the free will of man;
he believed in the reality of the choice which each individual
must exercise. This is a point to which Mr. Wicksteed
repeatedly draws our attention, as one of the great lessons
to be learned from Dante, if we would read him aright.
' "With an incisive keenness of vision, and a relentless firm¬
ness of touch, he strips our life and our principles of
distracting surroundings,—shows us what our choice is, and
what it leads to.'
The first two addresses are occupied with a sketch of
Dante's life—' Dante as a Citizen of Florence,' and ' Dante
in Exile.' Just enough is told of public affairs and political
factions to explain why Dante left the Guelf, and turned
to the Ghibelline party,—why, in the moral and political
chaos in which he saw his country plunged, he looked to
some restoration of the imposing Eoman Empire as the hope
for Italy. The part he took in the government of Florence
is l)riefly noticed. To shrink from responsibility was a
weakness very despicable in his eyes. He accepted the
office of chief magistrate in very troubled times, and two
years later, 1302,undertook a difficult mission to Rome. In his
absence a sentence of banishment was pronounced against
him, his property was confiscated, and henceforth his days
were spent in exile, the pain of which his well-known words
describe. But no pain could induce him to stoop to the
only terms offered for his return. We may read in Mr.
Wicksteed's pages the characteristic letter in which he in¬
dignantly refused them, saying that if no road led back to
Florence that hurt not his honour and fair fame, he would
enter it no more.
5i8 TJie Ladies' Edinhirgh Magazine.
The sketch of Dante's political life is preceded by some
account of the strange, beautiful, unique story of the part
which Beatrice played in the history of his inner life, from
the moment when the first sight of her awoke the ' new life'
in him, until she became for him the personation of Divine
Philosophy in heaven. "While she lived on earth, the
thought of her lifted him into a region of purity; when she
died, the light which had guided him was for a time hidden.
He lost his way, and was drawn into a vortex of disorder.
Then began those mournful and evil experiences of life,
which, says Carlyle, ' darkened his poet-nature into old
Hebrew sternness, and sent it onwards towards Hades and
Eternity as a home for itself.' How help was vouchsafed to
him at the intercession of Beatrice,—how he was led through
regions never visited before by mortal man, and at last
guided into the immediate presence of God,—is the subject of
the Divine Comedy. To write this sublime vision was the
task he set before him in exile—a task which taxed all his
power. He saw himself growing ' lean over it;' in ' solitary
death-wrestle he struggled with it and prevailed over it, and
the fiery life of it endures for evermore among men.' Long-
years of study were devoted to it; he spared no labour to
perfect his work. It became a treasure-store, into which
were compressed his thoughts and memories, his theories
and philosophizings.
The sermon on ' Dante in Exile,' which is one of the most
interesting in the book, is mainly occupied with the history
and interpretation of Dante's great poem as a whole; the
three parts are treated of separately in the three succeeding
discourses. There are many passages of beauty and interest,
which we would gladly quote if space permitted.
Mr. Wicksteed has done well in keeping the attention
fixed on Dante himself as the central character in his poem,
without attempting to introduce his readers to more than a
few of the multitude of figures which appeared to the poet
on his journeyings, and crowd his pages. The touches which
show their reflex effect on Dante, unconsciously draw liis
own portrait, and bring out its most prominent features,
the intensity and clearness of his convictions; the strength,
the keenness, the tenderness of his feelings; his scorn of
what is weak and false; his veneration for virtue and for
truth. "We see his reverent love for his master, Virgil; his
deep humility in the presence of Beatrice; his child-like
trust in her, who, if she knew his weakness, knew his
strength too.    She can upbraid him, for it is the reproaches
Theodoric the East-Goth ; his Rule in Italy, ^()^-$26. 519
of his own self-accusation that he puts in her mouth. She
can praise him too, and the praise is not, perhaps, exactly
what we expect, but is most significant when she exclaims
that the ' Church militant had not a son stronger in hope than
he.' Years of exile and disappointment had not weakened
his power of hoping, or subdued his indomitable courage (see
p. 41).
The words were spoken in Paradise, and there Beatrice
was his guide. ' Human wisdom and virtue could lead him
through Hell and Purgatory,—could show him the misery
of sin, and the need of purifying pain and fire.' But she
was the symbol of a higher than human wisdom, and a
diviner grace; it was only in her presence that he could feel
the blessedness of heaven (see pp. 46, 110). We might
point out many passages in which the character of Beatrice
is admirably treated. Led by Virgil, he had seen ' the souls
of men stripped of every disguise, their secret deeds of good
and ill laid bare, and so had learned to sift the true from
the false, and rise from all things base' (p. 43). He had seen,
too, the patient, hopeful endurance of suffering, and noted how
the souls in Purgatory do not wish to rise to Heaven till
purged from sin (see a beautiful passage on this subject,
pp. 156-7); and now Dante was prepared to meet Beatrice
again, and rise with her to the region where shines the
uncreated Light. To write this vision was the supreme
effort of his life, but he would have us remember that it is
but a faint, imperfect image he can give. The dream had
broken, the vision fled,—only the sweetness that was born of
it still drops within his heart. Happy are those who can
catch an echo of that heavenly mu.sic, a gleam of that
heavenly light!
' Only on wings strong like Dante's can we be raised a
moment into that divine blessedness in which sin has been
so purged by suffering, ... so blotted out by God's love,
that it has vanished as a dream, and the soul can say, Here
we repent not. How mighty the spirit that can raise
us . . . from the desolate weariness of HeU and long suffer¬
ing of Purgatory, to the joy and peace of Heaven!' (p. 158).
Efjcotioric tije (fHast=©otlj; !}is Eule in Italg, 494-526.
At the time of Theodoric, the world was in the turmoil
and disorder of the Middle Ages.    The universal sway of
520 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
Eome had been broken up ; the new races, which now took
the lead, were in the strictest sense of the term uncivilized.
For two centuries Eome had felt that her power was not
what it had been ; she tried to save herself, but it was of no
avail. The enemies beyond her frontier were becoming
powerful. The city of Eome was too far from them; hence
about the year 320 a.d. Constantine conceived the great idea
of removing the seat of government to Constantinople. He
took with him all the best of Eoman statesmanship, culture,
and learning. Constantine felt that if the Eoman power was
to endure, the attitude of things must be changed ; that she
must have for her capital a strong town, well fortified, and
able to resist all the attacks of her enemies. His idea proved
itself so far true, for the Eoman power lived on for a thousand
years at Constantinople.
But soon after Constantine's death, a new diiliculty arose
in the West. The West of Europe was not content to
be governed from the East. To satisfy this new want, the
Empire was divided, and for about a hundred years there
was a Eoman emperor in the West and a Eoman emperor
in the East.
These new races, the enemies against whom Eome was
fighting, who were they ? They were descendants of those
unknown races who had long ago, about the year 250 A.D.,
suddenly appeared in the North of Europe. At first a
restless mass of people, going anywhere, continually moving
their habitations, they at last settled down as tribes, and in
course of time came into collision with the great power—
the Eoman Empire.
The Western emperors were for the greater part men of
little courage and governing power. During their rule Italy
had for a time withstood, but eventually sank under, the
attacks of these new races, the Visigoths, Vandals, and
Huns. None of these, as a people, had settled in the land.
They went to Italy, as the centre of the power they were
fighting against; and then, having conquered that power,
settled in other lands.
But as they grew stronger, the barbarians (as the Eomans
called them) ceased to be content with simply struggling
against the Eoman power; they desired to interfere in her
government. Accordingly we find, though Eome or Eavenna
had her senate and administrative officers, it was not they
who so rapidly set up and dethroned her emperors.
The shadow of the Senate had lasted beyond its real
existence, yet screened by it, and under the semblance of
Theodoric the East-Goth : his Ride in Italy, 494-526. 521
law, the barbarians worked their own will. They saw that
the Western Eoman emperor had but an empty title, that the
government really lay in their hands, and in their own words,
or to speak more correctly, in the words of the Senate,
suggested by the barbarians: ' We disclaim the necessity, or
even the wish, of continuing any longer the imperial succes¬
sion in Italy, since, in our opinion, tlie majesty of a sole
monarch is sufficient to pervade and protect at the same
time both the East and West.' The Senate consents ' that the
seat of universal empire shall be transferred from Eome to
Constantinople.' Thus in 476, Odoacer, an Herule, who at
that time practically held rule in Italy, threw away that
which for years had only been a name, and the Western
Koman emperor ceased to exist.
Now that the last shadowy emblem of imperial glory had
been removed from Eome, it is difficult to realize the state
of Italy. For long she had been the centre of the world;
now she was only one of the western kingdoms—lier power
as a centre gone.
And this reunion of the imperial power under one emperor,
was a very different thing from the union of the Empire
under Constantine. At that time the power was centralized
at Constantinople, in order to strengthen the Empire. Italy
remained a part of the Empire, as much a part as when Eome
was still the capital. The capital was changed, but that was
aU.
Now the power that gave back the whole imperial govern¬
ment to Constantinople was not within the Empire. Italy
would have kept the power if she could, and Constantinople
did not desire it. But the new races against whom the
Western Empire had been struggling had become too strong,
and it was they who willed that there should no longer be
a Western Eoman emperor.
Thus this act of Odoacer the Herule may have seemed
little at the time, but to us it points to the growth of in¬
dependence amongst the barbarians, and implies, however
it might be concealed, that their power had grown so much,
that they did not wish to have any one ruling over them
who was near enough to interfere.
We can see in this act, and in the way in which it was
■accomplished, indications of the manner in which the new
races were gradually to supplant the old. They gained their
power by no sudden leap, but by slowly casting off one after
another those things which had done their work and were
now only phantoms of the past, till unconsciously, we might
522 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
almost say, to the old races, the new races obtained  the
supremacy.
Odoacer had taken one step, but he could go no farther.
He had only destroyed without really building up; he
was able to conquer but not to organize.
In looking back to this far-off date, we are strangely apt
to forget that during all this time of development of the
race, there was a people living, and who had to live through
that development. And if we look at their life during
these outward changes, it was anything but happy. "We
forget that this growth of new races, almost of necessity, at
the beginning especially, meant despair and a low state of
things for the old. So we find it in Italy in the fifth century.
The long struggles the Romans had had to undergo left them
subdued and exhausted; they seem to have had very little
spirit, either to resist fresh enemies from without, or those
already within the Empire, or even to oppose innovations in
their government.
Their laud was overrun by straggling bands of mercenaries,
who did very much what they liked, pillaged where they chose,
and respected no one's rights. The Eomans, or, as we may
now call them, Italians, had little or no redress. Under this
state of things nothing could prosper, no man knew what
was his 0'\\'n, and naturally commerce and agriculture fell to
a very low ebb. In addition to all this, they were not on
friendly terms with the neighbouring nations, and these
would not supply them with the additional food which they
required.
In such circumstances, it is no wonder that when a new
ruler appeared, of whom they had very likely already heard,
they received him, as we shall see, after a comparatively
short struggle, probably thinking that things had come to
such a pass they at all events could not be worse, and might
be better.
This new ruler was Theodoric. Theodoric was of the race
of East or Ostro-goths, a wild roving tribe, not savagely cruel,
and even in some ways adapted for civilized life.
They had dwelt in Pannonia, a district lying to the
north-east of Italy, and south of the river Danube. Theodoric
was the son of one of the chiefs of this tribe. He had been
sent, when a child, to Constantinople as a hostage, and
there received his education and training in muscular exer¬
cises. The entire removal from the roving life of his people
into an atmosphere of law, order, and learning—into a state
of settled government and civilized life—must have been an
Theodoric the East-Goth ; his Rule in Italy, 494-526. 523
enormous help to him for the work which lay before him.
With all this, he had not forgotten his old life, for almost
immediately on his return we find him heading an adven¬
turous incursion into his neighbour's dominions.
He rapidly endeared himself to his people, and at his
father's death, which occurred shortly, he was considered the
chief or prince of the tribe. The East Goths soon found
that Pannonia was too small for them, and so, with Theodoric
at their head, they emigrated to the provinces near Greece.
Here they were often engaged in war, sometimes against
other Gothic tribes, sometimes serving under the emperor,
till finally Theodoric induced the emperor to sanction his
going with all his people into Italy. We see in this request
of Theodoric, that the shadowy power of the East over the
West was still regarded. The East had really little power,
but in courtesy was consulted, and thus the idea of an
empire never entirely faded from the mind of those in the
West.
When Theodoric and his people reached Italy, they were
not able to enter it as their own, but had to fight for the
land. Odoacer had been for fourteen years chief ruler in
Italy, though he did not style himself king. He had person¬
ally striven to keep order, but had almost no control over
the mercenaries and hosts of foreign inhabitants.
After three hardly-contested struggles, Theodoric gained
all Italy, except Eavenna, to which Odoacer had fled. There
Odoacer concentrated his strength, and it was only after
three years that Theodoric succeeded in establishing himself
as joint ruler with Odoacer. This arrangement was speedUy
terminated by the murder of Odoacer.
But long ere this the people had welcomed Theodoric as
a deliverer. One of his first acts was to give his own people
a third of the land. This may have seemed no good omen
for his reign, yet perhaps it was the quickest way of securing
peace. It is in his aims and actions after he was settled in
the land that we see his greatness. We must clearly re¬
member, in order to give him the honour that is his due, that
he had no great example to follow, but was himself tlie first
to create a people by the union of the new and old races.
His aim was, to make all the dwellers in the land one
contented community. He tried to teach them that they
ought to dismiss from their minds all ideas of conqueror and
conquered; that they ought to live as neighbours, and respect
each other's rights. But he had no wish to make them one
in the sense of all doing the  same  thing.    He saw the
524 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
adaptability of the different races for their various positions,
and without prejudice used whichever was best for his
object. In his own experience, he had seen that the Goths
had more vigour and strength, so he kept them for fighting;
would not have them taught in schools, but trained them for
war by daily exercise. The Italians he educated and en¬
couraged in arts of peace; hence in his reign agriculture
gTeatly revived.
The Italians could best advise him. He chose from them
his counsellors, and we find some of these were very able
men. He caused a code of laws to be drawn up,—his
' Edictum,'—which differed from any earlier codes in that it
respected equally the rights of Italians and Goths. Hitherto
the codes had either been all Eoman or all barbarian; this
was the beginning of the fusion of the two. In his plan of
administration and court ceremonials, we see one of his
weaker points, for these he almost blindly copied from the
Eastern world. Though he personally despised learning,
and could never himself sign his own name, yet he saw that
it was a good thing, and encouraged it. Boethius, one of his
counsellors, was a great classical scholar.
We can see this spirit of toleration in religious matters.
The two races had not the same creed. The Goths were
Arians, the Italians Catholics, and yet there was no persecu¬
tion between the two. Theodoric allowed each to keep to
his own belief, in this way acknowledging the truth that
what is best in one man's eyes is not necessarily the only
good thincj.
Theodoric loved and admired the magnificence of the
buildings and works of art he found in Italy. He ordained
that a certain sum of money should be set aside for repairing
and keeping them in order. Not only did he do this, he
added many buildings of his own, as churches, places of
public amusement, and also the great aqueduct of Eavenna.
So much was he famed in this way, that he has been called
' the special builder and adorner of cities.'
He subdued the tribes on the borders of his kingdom, and
gained peace for its inhabitants. The hosts who came to see
and pay homage to him, the presents which were sent from
all parts of the world, show us the esteem and respect in
which he was held by the various tribes and nations beyond
Italy. And yet how was it that towards the close of his
life he was less beloved by the Italians than at the begin¬
ning? It may partly have arisen from the very fact of
Theodoric's having brought them peace and happiness.   Their
TJieodoric the East-Goth ; his Rule in Italy, 494-526. 525
position had been so much improved that they now fretted
against restraints which had not been felt at the beginning.
And as their spirits revived, they, like the Jews of old,
wished to keep all things to themselves, and obliterate from
their history the barbarian ruler and his people. And it was
natural, that the very divisions of classes which had helped
to bring about peace at first, should have a tendency to keep
up and irritate this feeling. This feeling could not but
react on Theodoric, and there were dark days when he was
driven to despair by the jealousy and intolerance of those
around him. Then were committed those dreadful acts of
injustice—the murders of Boethius and Symmachus.
It is hard to think of a life of such nobleness and grandeur
being darkened thus at its close. Theodoric died, haunted
by dreams and visions. History tells us that one evening,
whilst dining, he fancied he saw the head of Symmachus
looking at him. He was struck with remorse, took to his
bed, and in three days died. Legend tells us of the vision
of a hermit who saw Theodoric's soul plunged into the
flaming fire of the infernal regions. He was buried in a
tomb outside the city walls. This tomb was adorned with
the richest of architecture; round the top was a circle of
figures of the twelve apostles, and within this circle he was
laid.
But this was not to be his last resting-place. When the
Italians again gained power, these very people whom he had
benefited, and who had profited by his toleration, could not
show the same toleration even to his dust. What had he of
another creed to do with apostles and saints ? They dis¬
interred and scattered his bones, they allowed his tomb to
be wrecked of its costliest treasures, and all that now
remain are the great blocks of stone.
The Italians, it would seem, tried to shake themselves
free of this man and of his rule, and having thus dishonoured
even his body, they probably thought they had attained
their end. They failed to see that his work was of such a
nature that all outward attempts to blot it out would be
useless; that it was too true and universal not to be lasting
in the lesson it taught to others, if even the Italians, in
their narrowness, failed to profit by it.
It might not, perhaps, be inapplicable to compare the fate
of Theodoric's work with that of his tomb. For, as we saw,
though everything that beautified and distinguished the
tomb was lost, yet the great blocks of stone remain to mark
the spot where Theodoric once lay; so, though tlie details of
526 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
his work were soon forgotten, yet his great work has ever
remained as a foundation for others to build upon. And if
contemporary legends saw in him nothing but evil, later
legends recognised his worth; for Theodoric is known to us
as Dietrich of Bern, one of the sad, noble heroes of the
'Nibelungen Lied.' J. M. M'L.
Question Series,
I. English Literature.—Who was the chief national poet of Scotland
at the beginning of the 18th century 1 Criticize his principal work.
Answer not to exceed three hundred words.
II. Geology.—Where does Lias occur in Great Britain, and what
are its characteristic fossils ? Answer not to exceed three hundred
words.
III. History.—Give some particulars of the partitions of Poland.
Answer not to exceed three hundred words.
IV. Logic.—Explain the metaphor and the synonym, giving ex¬
amples, and distinguishing carefully the meaning of the latter.
Answer not to exceed three hundred words.
N.B.—In order to bring the Question Series to a close with the
year, and to allow of the names of successful competitors appearing
in the December issue, it has been decided to give the last question
of all the four subjects in this number. Competitors are particularly
requested to note this fact, and also that answers must reach Qu. C.,
not later than November 15th, care of Messrs. Morrison and Gibb,
11 Queen Street, Edinburgh. Only one side of the sheet of paper
to be written upon, and it is especially requested that nothing but
the answers may be sent to Qu. C. Any other communication
must be addressed in the usual form to the Editor, or no notice can
be taken of such enclosures.
ANSWERS TO SEPTEMBER QUESTIONS.
English Literature.—Eight answers have been received on 'novel-
writing. ' Apis first; Greta second, with a very good paper. The
opening contrast between the styles of the two centuries are clearly
and concisely drawn; and had the concluding sentence been less
abrupt and more connected, she would have been placed first. Linda
writes and composes exceedingly well; opinion, and not mere state¬
ment of facts, however, is too apparent in this paper. Aeachne is
mistaken in saying the ' Religious Novel' is a product of the 19th
century; the 'Spiritual Romance,' the same kind of work, was
known in medieval times. Ieelicht, accurate and careful, spoils
her writing by want of simplicity. Thorough, Wealdmoor, and
Pink, while good in parts, are unequal.
Geology.—Of four answers, Arachne the best; but Pink is
scarcely inferior. The former excels in describing the fossils, and
her answer is, on the whole, the best expressed.    Next comes Linda,
Question Scries. 527
very good ; then Wealdmoor, whose paper is correct, but not all to
the point, as only a glacial period was referred to, though it was known
that there were evidences of more than one before Professor
Ramsay's excellent address gave much more information on the
subject.
Point out some differences in the style of novel-writing in the
eighteenth century and that of the present day.
To compare and contrast the novel-writing of last century with
that of our own time is at once felt to be a task complicated by the
fact that differences of style existed contemporaneously then as now.
But, generalizing, we may say. The style of modem novels is
either more colloquial or more philosophical and laboured than that of
the novels of the eighteenth century. An almost painful simplicity
is the reaction on the one hand from the careful and sometimes
stilted style in which Sir Charles Grandison spoke and wrote, as, on
the other hand, is an equally painful abstruseness, which makes a
modem novel of a certain class as hard to understand as a scientific
treatise. The characteristic of our century is doubtfulness on most
subjects, and this characteristic is reflected'in the style even of our
novels. We find, instead of the happy certainty of bliss which
crowned at last the loves of last century's heroines, a pervading
sense of insecurity, even in the consummation of marriage at the end
of our three volumes. The doubt of the author as to the felicity of
his creation seems even to pervade the couples themselves.
An abruptness of style is characteristic of many modern novels, an
abruptness reflected often in the remarks and actions of the characters
described. A feverish hurry and movement alternates in modem
life with periods of inaction and introspection, and we have novels
whose style caricatures these different moods of mind. Speaking
generally, we may say that modem novels are written with much
more purity of expression, if not of thought, than was common in
olden times; that they concern themselves more with scenery and
the delineation of natural objects; that they go more deeply into
human nature, its wants and wishes. Apis.
Give proofs that a glacial period once existed in Britain.
In this country, Arctic animals, such as reindeer, Arctic-fox, etc.,
must have roamed about at home, for their bones have been found
underneath the soil. Fossil shells also have been found in the old
sea-beaches and elsewhere in various parts of Britain, corresponding
only with those now found in the Polar seas. The present Alpine
plants grow abundantly in the Highlands of Scotland, on the Cheviot
Hills, the Cumberland and Welsh mountains. The present natural
divisions of Northern Europe would not allow of these having spread
from one country to another, the sea-distance being too great. We
may reasonably suppose, then, that these islands once formed a part
of the Continent, with the same vegetation as the other parts. And
we can prove that these Alpine plants are really Arctic, by noticing
the height they grow above the sea-level, proving that cold suits them.
On the Alps they grow from GOOO to 10,000 feet above the sea; in
Scotland about 2000; in Scandinavia they come down to the sea-
level. Traces of former glaciers are found in various parts of,the hilly
districts of Britain, such as polished rock, and the lakes, which are
many of them (in the Hebrides particularly) scooped out of solid
528 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
rock. As the glaciers melted, the streams, constantly flowing under¬
neath the ice, would bring down pieces of rock broken oS" with the
weight of the ice, and these would become rounded and polished on
the way, the present pebbles and boulder-stones. And the remaining
rocks, when these were broken ofi', would also be scooped out more
clearly by the constant rush of stones and water together, and thus
form receptacles for water. A further proof is, that this process is
now going on in Alpine regions. Akachne.
Northern United Registry for Governesses.—This Registry
has been formed by educational committees in Edinburgh, Glasgow,
Leeds, and Liverpool, with the view of bringing more easily together
ladies in search of governesses, and governesses in search of employ¬
ment. Those governesses who have qualified themselves for their
profession by passing university examinations, receive special pro¬
minence in this Registry, by which means it is hoped that both
employers and governesses will be led to value more highly the sound
secondary and higher education of which these examinations are a
test. We believe that the Hon. Secretary of the Edinburgh Branch,
Miss S. E. S. Mair, 5 Chester Street, will be happy to give all
information on the subject.
Edinburgh School of Cookery and Domestio Ecomomy.—The
sixth session was opened on the 6th of October with an address by Dr.
Beddoe (of Clifton). He pointed out the great value to society of the
subjects taught in the school, both from the health and the economic
point of view, and urged that every woman should qualify herself for
household duties. The prospectus for the winter session promises
classes in cookery (demonstration and practice), ironing and clear
starching, doing up fine lace, cutting out dresses, etc. ; ambulance
lectures ; popular lectures on physiology and health.
j^oticfS to CorresponUents,
Ladies are invited to contribute to this Magazine. All communi¬
cations to be addressed, Editors, Ladies' Edinhurgh Magazine, Messrs.
Morrison & Gibb, 11 Queen Street, Edinburgh.
Papers intended for immediate insertion must be in the hands of
the Editors by the first of the previous month ; attention is requested
to this rule.
"We must warn our correspondents that no MSS. can be returned
unless//(M postage be sent, that letters needing reply must contain a
stamp, and that the Editors can forward no communications left with
them unless stamped. Poems sent in letters Avill not be returned
unless a stamp be sent. No anonymous communication either to
he Editors or the Office-bearers of the Literary Society will be
toticed.
The next meeting of the Ladies' Edinburgh Literary Society will
be held on Saturday, November 6th, at 5 Chester Street, at 11 a.m.
Subject of Debate: ' Is Elizabeth properly ranked as one of the
greatest of English sovereigns ? '
Studies from Shakspere. 529
.Stutiies from 5i)akS}Jcre.
By Sidney Philips.
VI. THE MERCHANT OF VENICE.
In the age of bustle and excitement in which we live, few
people have either the time or the patience to listen to
stories, and the professional story-teller is almost universally
considered a ' bore ;' but in more primitive times he was a
most important person in every circle of society. Story¬
telling was then a most popular form of amusement, not
only at the court or the castle—it extended even to the
cloister; for the composition and recitation of stories,generally
containing some moral teaching or allegorical significance,
was a favourite occupation of the monks in the Middle Ages.
Grotesque as many of the stories are, they not unfre-
queutly served to adorn discourses in the pulpit, but were
oftener still read in the refectory during meal-time by the
youngest member of the community.
In the reign of Henry VI. a number of the legends
current amongst the English monks were collected in the
famous manuscript known as the Gesta Rovmnorum. It was
from this source that Shakspere derived the two stories
on which the plot of the Merchant of Venice is founded.
The story of the pound of flesh certainly had been made
use of by other writers before Shakspere's day. Ser
Giovanni, a Florentine writer, introduced it into a collection
of tales called II Pccorone, which he published in the four¬
teenth century; it also found its way into the well-known
ballad of Gernutius the Jew. Yet, in spite of the home of Ser
Giovanni's heroine being called Belmont, and of the Jew in
the baUad ' whetting his knife,' we are inclined to think that
the real source whence Shakspere drew the plot, was the
story of ' The Emperor Celestinus' fair Daughter' that is
contained in the Gesta; for in this tale of the emperor's
daughter we have the same incidents of the bond, the
forfeiture, and the way in which the penalty is evaded, that
are to be found in Shakspere's play.
In the story of the ' Three Caskets,' however, Shakspere
yet more clearly borrows from the Gesta. The original torm
of this story is as follows: The Emperor Anselmus had
betrothed his son to the King of Apulia's daughter; but
whilst the bride was on her way to her new home, she was
No. 72.—December 1880. 2 L
530 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
shipwrecked, and all her companions were drowned, the
princess herself being swallowed by a whale. In this pre¬
dicament she managed to light a fire and to wound the
whale with a knife. The monster was thus driven towards
the shore, where he was slain, and the princess was delivered.
When the emperor heard of this, he determined to test her
to see if she was worthy to be his son's wife. So he prepared
three caskets. The first was of pure gold, but was filled
with dead men's bones. On it was inscribed: ' Whoso
chooseth me shall find what he deserveth.' The second
casket bore the following inscription: ' Whoso chooseth me
shall find that his nature desireth ;' it was of silver, but con¬
tained only earth and stones. The third casket was made
of lead, but was filled with precious jewels, and on it was
written: * Whoso chooseth me shall find that which God
hath disposed for him.'
The rest of the story is so quaintly told that we cannot
refrain from giving it in the original wording.
Then said the emperor: ' Maiden, look on these three
vessels; they be rich vessels. If thou choose that wherein is
profit to thee and to others, then thou shalt marry my son ;
but if thou choose that wherein is no profit, then in peace
return to thy father.'
The king's daughter lifted up her hands to God, and prayed
for His grace in the hour of her trial. First she looked
upon the golden casket, and said,' Full, precious, and gay art
thou, 0 casket! but I know not what is within; wherefore,
dear lord, I choose not this.' Then looked she on the silver
casket and its inscription. ' Alas !' said the maiden,' I know
not what is herein, but this I know, that I shall therein find
that which my nature desireth, even the wickedness of the
flesh. Casket of silver, I will have none of thee.'
Lastly she looked on the leaden casket. ' Poor art thou,
O casket, to look upon, yet thy inscription giveth comfort;
thou promisest " that which God hath disposed." God never
disposeth anything harmful.    I take thee, 0 casket!'
Then cried the emperor, ' Well done, thou fair and good
maiden ; open thy casket, it is fuU of precious gifts. Well
hast thou chosen.'
Then appointed he the day of the wedding, and the maiden
and the prince were married with great solemnity; and with
much honour among all the nation lived thej' until their
lives' end.^
The   Greek tale of Barlaam  and  Josaphat, written  by
^ Select tales from Gesta Romanorum, page 50.
Studies from SJiakspere. 53^^
Joannis Damascenus in the eighth century, may have served
the authors of the Gesta as a foundation for this curious
legend. An English translation of Barlaam and Josajjhat
was published by Wynkyn de Worde in 1527; but there
is nothing to lead us to suppose that Shakspere was
acquainted with any form of the story except that contained
in the Gesta.
Though not published till 1600, most critics assign the
Merchant of Venice to the year 1596, when Shakspere was
living in London, and producing the finest specimens of his
second period. About the same time he wrote Ki7ig John,
a play which is classed with the Merchant by Mr. Furnivall
as one of Shakspere's ' Life-plea plays.' Portia's famous
speech in the trial scene, slightly reminds us of Arthur's
pleading with Hubert; but it is in Edivarcl the Third, a play
that is sometimes ascribed to Shakspere, and was un¬
doubtedly known to him, that we find Queen Philippa
employing the same reasoning to induce her husband to
pardon the Calais citizens that Portia uses when entreating
Shylock to spare Antonio's life. When we compare
Philippa's speech—
' It is a glorious thing to stablish peace ;
And kings approach the nearest unto God
By giving life and safety unto men'—
with Portia's words,—
' Earthly power doth then show likest God's,
When mercy seasons justice,'—
the resemblance is so striking, that we feel convinced that
whether Shakspere was the author of Edivard the Third
or not, he must have been acquainted with the play, and
had probably seen it acted in Burbage's little theatre outside
the walls;' for we know that even before 1595 it had been
' sundrie times plaied about the Oitie of London.'* Again
we meet with the same idea in Lord Bacon's Essay on
Revenge, published the same year as the Merchant, where the
great Chancellor tells'us that 'it is a prince's part to pardon.'
The Merchant of Venice is perhaps the most popular of all
Shakspere's plays on the stage. This, no doubt, is princi¬
pally caused by the fact of its being the most dramatic of
his works, and the one that is most replete with powerful
situations, and yet we cannot help feeling that it is partly
owing to the variety of subjects contained in the play,
which make it appeal to a greater number of persons.    The
^The Globe at Eankside was not built till 1599.
''Vide Burby's edition of the Itairjne of King Edward III.
532 Tlie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
skill with which three distinct and separate stories are
interwoven with one another so that, though complicated,
the plot is never involved, is one of the most remarkable
efforts of Shakspere's genius.
The stories of Antonio and Shylock, Bassanio and Portia,
Lorenzo and Jessica, are all so blended together as to form
one harmonious plot. The principle that unites all these
varied elements, is asserted by Dr. Ulrici to be the old
juridical precept, Summtcm jus, summa injicria. Wherever
the letter rather than the spirit of the law is adhered to,
there the true object of the law, which is justice, must be
defeated. Shylock undoubtedly has the letter of the law in
his favour, but yet his tenacious adherence to his right
involves a terrible crime. Knight tells us, that from the
point of view of this drama all human life is a great law¬
suit ; where right and law are conceived as the basis
and centre of our being: ' Unquestionably right and law
ought to uphold and strengthen human life, but they are
not its basis and true centre. In them the whole of human
existence does not lie enclosed. In their one-sidedness,
right becomes wrong, and wrong becomes right. Law and
right have their legality and truth, not through and in
themselves, but they rest upon the higher principles of true
morality, from which they issue only as single rays. Man
has in and for himself no rights, but only duties. But at the
same time, against others his duties are rights; and there is
no living right that does not include and may be itself a
duty. Not upon right, then, but upon heavenly grace rests
the human being and life.' This is the true meaning of
Portia's famous speech:
'Therefore, Jew,
Though justice be thy plea, consider this,
That, in the course of justice, none of us
Should see salvation.    We do pray for mercy ;
And that same prayer doth teach us all to render
The deeds of mercy.'
Hooker's great woik on the Laws of Ecclesiastical Polity,
which had recently appeared (in 1594), may very possibly
have suggested some of these problems to Shakspere's
mind; and with the allegorizing tendency of his age, he
sought to embody in Shylock and Portia the ideas of the
law and of grace, of Judaism and of Christianity,—the one
insisting on the justice of the old principle, ' an eye for an
eye, and a tooth for a tooth,' the other imbued with the
thought of tlie blessedness of being able to show to others
Studies from Sliakspere. 533
the forgiveness that has been so freely bestowed by
heaven. Yet, though Portia's speech shows that mercy is
above law, she does not attempt to attack or destroy the
old law, only to bring out a higher interpretation of it, by
which it is more perfectly obeyed. Thus, though teaching
that there is a principle that is above law in the universe,
Shakspere yet inculcates obedience to law, which, as Hooker
says, is ' the stay of the whole world.'
Paduan lawyers were famous for their skill in evading
laws. Tonstal, who studied civil law at Padua in the reign
of Henry VIII., gives the following account of the tendencies
that prevailed in that University, in a letter to Budacus :
' My masters were the most celebrated that Italy could then afford,
very Scsevolas and Papinians as the world thought. To what a
state of agitation would I sometimes reduce them when some un¬
happy law, dragged neck and heels into their arguments, was made
to speak any opinion but its own! . . . Upon these occasions I
would sometimes venture to point out how grievously they had
wanderedfrom its true meaning, . . . but to no purpose. Accursius,
by whose glosses they swore, was to them sacred,' etc.^
Though provided with arguments that cannot fail to be
effective, it is to Shylock's conscience that Portia first appeals,
preferring to owe Antonio's life to the Jew's own sense of
right rather than to have recourse to the quibble with which
her cousin had armed her.
But her appeal is vain. It is useless to speak of mercy
to one who has had no mercy shown him. After the
inhuman treatment the Jew had been accustomed to
receive, he could not be expected to behave humanely.
As Antonio has sown so he must reap, and the Jew's utter
brutality is the result of the merchant's conduct towards
him. Shylock's character shows us, more than any other,
how tolerant Shakspere's spirit really was. Even when
he seems to yield to the prejudices of those for whom he
wrote, he does not really share them. We feel throughout
that it is the bad treatment to which Shylock has been sub¬
jected that has made him what he is. Ever suspected of
evil intentions, he has become suspicious; spurned and in¬
sulted, he has become ferocious and revengeful; and yet we
are compelled to feel for him. Who but must pity Shylock,
reviled by his fellow-citizens, forsaken by his daughter, de¬
prived of the ducats he had amassed with so much care, forced
to adopt a creed he detested, and to abandon his cherished
revenge at the very moment it seemed within his grasp !
^ Vide Tytler's Life of Henry the Eighth.
534 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
How wonderfully true this remarkable character is to life !
As Lord Macaulay remarks: ' All his propensities are
mingled with each other, so that in trying to apportion to
each its proper place we find tlie same difficulty which
constantly meets us in real life. Is he so eager for money as
to be indifferent to revenge ? Or so eager for revenge as to be
indifferent to money ? Or so bent on both together as to be
indifferent to the honour of his nation and the law of Moses ?'
It is in the perfect balance of the different motives that
impel a man to action that the power of an artist is shown.
Actions and feelings rarely arise from one cause. They are
generally the result of a multitude of causes, some
infinitesimally small, but all working together towards the
same result. Hence a caricature, in which one principal
feature eclipses all the others, is far easier than a portrait.
Shylock is a portrait, not a caricature, like Marlowe's Barabbas
in the Jew of Malta, or Gernutius in the ballad. The idea
of retribution is very prominently brought forward in this
play. Shylock is beaten with his own weapons. The justice
he has sought to wrest to his own advauta2;e recoils on his
own head; and though in the end the mercy he has refused
is granted him, yet it is coupled wdth the most galling
conditions :
' Tanto e amara che poco e piu morte.'
Throughout this play w^e see two great principles at work,
influencing men's characters and deciding their actions,—the
principles oilove and hatred. How do these feelings arise ?
What causes them ? Sliakspere points out this enigma,^
but does not attempt to solve it.
Why should Bassanio, M'ho, from the little we are told of
him, seems a mere adventurer, impulsive, warm-hearted, and
reckless,—why should he call forth not only Portia's love, but
that wondrous affection that makes Antonio willing to die for
his friend ? It can have been no ordinary friendship that
made him write thus:
' All debts are cleared between you and I, if I might but see you at
my death.    Notwithstanding, use your pleasure ; '
and that prompted him to exclaim at the approach of death :
'Pray God, Bassanio come
To see me pay his debt, and then I care not.'
But not only is Antonio willing to lay down his life for
his  friend, but   Nerissa   thinks   him   worthy   of   Portia.
Launcelot wishes  to  serve  him.    He attracts wild, noisy
^ Act iii. Scene 2.
Studies from Sliaksperc. 535
Gratiano no less than melancholy Antonio. Lorenzo, Salario,
and Salarino are his 'very friends' Yet perhaps all these
people would have been as unable to assign a reason for their
love of Bassanio as Shylock was to account for his hatred of the
merchant. ' It is partly the result of wounded pride. Antonio
has called him a dog. It is partly the result of covetousness.
Antonio has hindered him of half a million ; and when
Antonio is gone there will be no limit to the gains of usury.
It is partly the result of national and religious feeling.
Antonio has spit on the Jewish gaberdine, and the oath of
revenge has been sworn by the Jewish Sabbath.' And yet
Shylock feels that all these reasons cannot account
sufficiently for the strange violence of his hatred of Antonio.
Even so Antonio himself could have given no better reason
for the love he bore Bassanio than that
' affection,
Mistress of passion, sways it to the mood
Of what it likes or loathes.'
In Antonio's character Shakspere represented his ideal of
perfect manhood; in Portia's that of perfect womanhood.
Of her we can only say, in Jessica's words, that
' The poor, rude world hath not her fellow.'
The fault of most women's characters is a want of balance,
a one-sidedness that makes either head or heart predominate
unduly, so as to spoil the perfect harmony of their
being. But Portia stands alone in fiction, combining the
varied elements which in Wordsworth's oft-quoted lines are
ascribed to the ' perfect woman':
* A creature not too bright or good
For human nature's daily food—
For transient sorrow, simple wiles,
Praise, blame, love, kisses, tears, and smiles.'
And yet blessed with
' The reason firm, the temperate will.
Endurance, foresight, strength, and skill,'
that fit her * to warn, to comfort, to command.'
After Mrs. Jameson's wonderful portrait of Portia in her
Characteristics of Women, we hardly dare to discuss her
character at all, and yet we cannot help drawing attention
to one point, and that is her humility. She does not attempt
to question her father's somewhat arbitrary will, but submits
to his superior judgment with the implicit obedience of a
child. Yet which of all the women depicted in fiction dis¬
plays more power of reasoning than this same Portia, ' who
536 The Ladies Edhiburgh Magazine.
commits her gentle spirit to Bassanio to be directed, and
who is happy to think that she is not too old to learn' ?
Portia starts M-ith the conviction that it took Tennyson's
Ida so long to learn, that, as Lamartine expresses it, ' C'est
dans le cceur que Dieu a place le g^nie d'une femme.'
Jessica's character is less decided. She belongs so entirely
to the realm of poetry that one forgets and excuses the
deception she employs towards her father in the beauty of
her love for Lorenzo, which furnishes the romantic element
of the play. Amidst all the chaffering and bargaining on
the Eialto, Antonio's distress, the Jew's dark plots, Launce-
lot's jests, the lawyer's quibbles, Lorenzo and Jessica's love-
story flows calmly on, forming, as it were, a bright thread in
the complicated web. From stern questions of law and
right we turn to the peaceful garden of Belmont and its
wondrous moonlight, where all tlie turmoil and discord of
this bustling world resolves itself into the eternal harmony,
and ' the light that was never yet on sea or shore' beams from
bright eyes, glorifying all creation with a radiance not its own.
Such moments solemnize the most frivolous, teaching
them to catch the echoes from another world, a world that
is no less real than the busy mart or the crowded street, but
of whose glories we only occasionally catch a faint glimpse
in this work-a-day existence, made up as it is, for the most
part, of little pains and little pleasures, whose ' petty dust'
continually fills ' our soon - choked souls.' ' The great
wonder-flowers bloom but once in a lifetime.'
©nc %jit,
I SAAV a mother bending o'er her child,
With glad eyes M'atching as in sleep it smiled.
And thought how beautiful, how blest her lot!
I saw an angel pass with soundless tread:
' Be still and know that I am God,' he said;
And two sped swiftly on, and one was not.
I saw a woman in the noon of life,
Childless, but patient mid the daily strife,
And marvelled as 1 held my murmuring breath.
I saw the passion fade, and Hope remain.
And Love Divine uninterrupted reign,
And thought how passing strange are Life and Death.
B. r.
The Glass Painters. 537
E!)e (glass painters,
CHAPTEE VIII.
' Yet throiigh the hum of torrent lone,
And brooding mountain bee,
There sobs I know not what ground tone
Of human agony.'
Obbrman.
No very long time after the conversation between Pierre and
his mother, recorded in the last chapter, a man on a white
horse, followed by a Pomeranian dog, might have been
noticed one evening slowly traversing the flat country that
surrounds the city of Beauvais.
The man was Pierre le Vieil on his way to inspect and
set in hand the restoration of the ancient coloured-glass
windows contained in the cathedrals of Beauvais and
Amiens. The firm of Le Vieil had received decided direc¬
tions from the cathedral dignitaries to begin these restorations
only the very day before Pierre started to fulfil their behests.
At that time some excitement prevailed in the maison Le
Viei], for it was decided that Jean should marry Marie
Valmont in a week. Claire and little Victorine were much
occupied in thinking about bridesmaids' dresses. Victorine
prattled incessantly about hers, claiming Pierre's attention
whenever she saw him. All the members of the family
were planning presents for Jean and INIarie. Madame Le
Vieil and Pierre were conjointly to furnish the little house
which Jean had taken for his bride. It added not a little to
Jean's happiness that his mother had not been able to resist
the infection of the general interest; she looked kindly on
himself and his beloved, and engaged earnestlv, together
with Nanette and Thcirese, in preparing house linen. When
the letters came that necessitated Pierre's departure and
consequent absence from the wedding, many were the
exclamations of sorrow and entreaties that he would en¬
deavour to delay his journey. Madame Le Vieil's voice was
silent, and Jean looked rather than spoke his wishes.
Pierre had enjoyed his tour. The days had been pleasant
and warm; wild-flowers enlivened the wayside ; bright little
butterflies played over the flowers; large, contented humble
bees appropriated nectar; and grasshoppers chirped among
the grass and wild thyme. If any melancholy, troubled
thouglits had been his, the calm, quiet days in the open air
533 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
had done much to disperse them. The morning of that day
Pierre had heard early mass in a small village church, and
knelt long, mindful of two who thenceforward were to pass
their lives together; and very earnestly had he prayed that
all bliss might be theirs. It was with mixed feelings that
he now on this day approached the city of Beauvais ; and if
there was a little sadness, there was yet much happiness and
content in his heart that he had been able to tread firmly
tlie path he had marked out for himself, deriving satisfaction
from the work of each day, and ever looking forwards. He
was now thinking with some excitement of the enjoyment
of making researches among the valuable records and
histories preserved in the ancient cities of Beauvais and
Amiens, and to the glass-work he was to plan. About three
miles from Beauvais he came in sight of the massive pile,
standing high above the town, that in the evening haze—
for the sun had been hot, and much mist was rising—looked
more like a rock or a high mound of earth than a cathedral,
no tower, spire, or turret suggesting that this great mass was
a church. Looking thus at the vast height of the structure,
lofty even for a French cathedral, the want of proportionate
elongation is greatly felt, for Beauvais Cathedral consists of
only a choir and transept, no nave having ever been built to
it. As the glass-maker drew nearer the city, he was filled
with those feelings of pleasure and exultation which a keen
lover of architecture and antiquities must experience on
approaching new ground richly endowed with objects of
interest. At that time—before the devastation wrought
during the Revolution—few places could offer more delight
to the ecclesiologist tlian the quaint old town of Beauvais ;
for clustered round the huge cathedral pile were no less
than three abbeys and nineteen churches, some dating from
remotest architectural antiquity, and others marking periods
of great interest.
It was dusk as the traveller crossed the little river Terrain
and put up his horse in the stables of the Hotel Louis le
Grand in the Rue de I'Ecu. It was then too late, and he
was too tired, to pursue any archaeological researches that
night. The landlord of the Louis le Grand informed Pierre
that a priest had been there but an hour before inquiring for
him, and saying he would call again later ; and before Pierre
and Berte had finished the repast they both needed, a voice
was heard asking if M. Le Vieil had arrived. Shortly after¬
wards a good-humoured but shrewd-looking ecclesiastic was
ushered into the room where Pierre sat.    He welcomed the
TJic Glass Painters. 5 39
glass-painter to Beauvais; and having gone through some
matters of business, he arranged to take him to the cathedral
the following morning, and show him the windows that
needed repair. Then the Father Leonce began eagerly to
question Pierre about news from Paris, and imparted some
about the sadly-exhausted state of the country, and the
discontent and misery that existed among the peasantry.
Pierre was by no means able to answer all the priest's
questions about events in Paris, for he had of late lived so
much his own life, absorbed in his studies, or occupied with
the practice of his profession, that he was in truth very
ignorant about the things that had passed around him, and
ended by gaining from the father more knowledge than he
imparted. Jean le Vieil, like most Frenchmen, took great
interest in politics and in military matters, and Pierre had
often been present when warm discussions were going on
among his brothers concerning the events that had happened
that year; but only half attending to their conversations
because so much occupied with his own thoughts, he now
felt almost with shame how little his mind had been engaged
in following the fortunes of the army of France in the
campaign undertaken by Louis XV. with the view of expelling
the Austriaus from Italy, and placing a Bourbon upon the
throne of the Two Sicilies.
' Is it true that Don Carlos has relieved the Italians from
toutes les impositions dont la ciipidite allemande les avoit
accables ?' asked Pere Leonce.
' I heard that he promised to do so,' Pierre answered.
' I wish we were relieved from even a few impositions.
The country cannot support these constant wars much longer.'
' I suppose not,' answered the glass-maker, feeling much
out of his element in the conversation. ' And I heard my
brother say that we cannot replace our good commanders,
the brave old Villars and Le Marechal de Berwick ; but tell
me, are any records preserved in the Church of St. Lucien
that might give information about the history of any of the
old windows, as doubtless you know, Pere, St. Lucien is one of
the oldest churches in France ? It was built in 1078, and is
spoken of in those valuable Mss. the Cementarii.'
' Is it ?' replied the ecclesiastic. ' I did not know, nor am I
aware what documents are preserved at St. Lucien; but the
letters Monsieur bears will enable him, without the slightest
difficulty, to look through all the deeds and records that are
in the town of Beauvais. How do you mean that Berwick
and Villars cannot be replaced ?   Surely most people were
540 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
satisfied when the Due de Coigny and the Due de Broglie
received the tdton de marechal dc France; and certainly at
Parma they proved themselves worthy of the honour. It was a
glorious victoryj9o?ir la France^ enthusiastically cried the priest.
' Yes,' dreamily answered Pierre, ' but the slaughter on
both sides was very terrible. Do you know, father, if any
catalogue or inventory of the books and papers in the
cathedral library is extant ? As soon as I have inspected the
windows, I should wish to occupy myself in the library. Do
you think I should be permitted to stop there some hours
of tlie night ?'
' Some hours of the night! What! stay in that
damp, cold, dismal library, looking at musty, worm-
eaten books during the night! You must wish to commit
suicide, Monsieur. I shall do my utmost to prevent so mad a
project. But I must say farewell. A fellow came here yester¬
day, who I suspect is going about the country making mis¬
chief. He professes to lecture upon agriculture, but so strict
are the secrecy and quietness with which tickets for the
lectures are distributed, I feel sure there is something wrong;
and his principles of cultivation are probably such as neither
the Church nor Government would approve of. It is well to
know our enemies. I have two tickets ; do you feel inclined
to accompany me ?'
' Excuse me, father, I have had a long journey, and am
weary;' but as Pierre spoke, he reproached himself for self-
indulgence, and seeing that the good father would be glad of
a companion, he withdrew his refusal and went. Accordingly
our friends shortly afterwards found themselves in a half-
lighted, rather large room contained in a building to the
right of the Hotel de Ville. The lecturer was already there,
standing on a chair at the upper end of the room. Pfere
Leonce noticed that there was a small door just behind the
orator, and that two men stood close to it, probably keeping
a mode of speedy egress clear for the lecturer. The faces of
these men were too much in shade to be discernible. Our
friends remained near the door by which they had entered.
On first hearing the tone of the speaker's voice, Pierre
started and touched the arm of his companion. ' I know him.
He is altogether to be mistrusted,' whispered Pierre. The
priest made him a sign to be silent and cautious.
' My friends,' began the lecturer, ' there is much I can say
to you about agriculture, about the modes by which the
smiling harvests can be ensured. How the mighty oxen must
groan with the sinking plough, the polished  ploughshare
The Glass Painters. 54^
shining  amid yielding  furrows, and   much  labour be ex¬
pended before the field can answer the wishes of the exacting
husbandman !    From the time when the great Virgil wrote
his Georgics till now, all agriculturists perceive the necessity
of preparing the ground before they sow it with seed.    In
teaching you about agriculture, I can lay down no sounder
rule than this. Prepare your ground, dig up, burn, cut away
the rank weeds that struggle about and occupy your land,—
our land,—this land of France.     Perhaps  you  say  your
young men are all soldiers to the king, and the old men,
women, and children do not succeed in preparing the land
very well!   Moreover, instead of being able to buy seed, you
are made to spend the money with which you would buy it
in purchasing salt; and if you do buy seed, and sow it, and
the seed springs, and you collect a harvest and sell it, then
the king's tax-collector comes and takes nearly all you have
sold  it  for.     Why should you sow for another to reap ?
Well, turn from the land.    What about trade ?   This good
town is famed for its linen and woollen cloths, and for mak¬
ing woven tapestry; but I see half the manufactories standing
empty, no hands to work in them; and why ?   Why, because,
poor people, you have no money to buy clothes with.    The
tax-collector wants   your money, so  the  clothes of other
years must last; but the weaving of tapestry yet goes on.
Why is this ?   Why, because the rich nobles that are not
taxed want tapestries, or those drones in the hive, the priests,
they want tapestries to deck their churches with.    Well, I
fear it is not much use telling you how to cultivate your
land when the men are away and cannot work, and even
such produce of your labours as you can get is taken from
you.    So I will tell you of something else.    It  shall  be,
the rights of man.     Do you know anything about them ?
Do you know that in Paris now there are wise and bold
men who have found out much about the rights of man ?
Have you  ever heard of Voltaire, messieurs—that  great
spirit who has striven  to  raise humanity from  the  dust
and mire into which it has fallen ?    Have you ever heard of
Reason,—noble Reason,—which teaches us that men should
be equal, not that this one should starve that another might
feast ?  Well, use your reason; think for yourselves if it be j ust,
if it is in order, that for one man to roll in luxury a hundred
others should be miserable.    Is this Us droits de I'ouvrier ?
' And now,' hissed forth the lecturer,' I will tell you what
one of the wisest men that ever lived said, a man called
Aristotle.    Listen and mark his words.   He said, " Inequality
542 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
is tlie source of all revolutions. When the inequality becomes
too great for men to bear, then comes a revolution ; then comes
the dawn of a better day, and all things are changed."'
Near the main entrance to the room a lamp was fixed that
threw light upon the faces of all who entered, and Pere Leonce
noticed that the orator never failed to send a quick, scrutiniz¬
ing glance on all who entered. When he and Pierre had
entered the lamp was not lit. As a short man, dressed in black,
came in, the lecturer quickly changed his voice and theme.
' Well, messieurs, let us then study with care the aspects of
nature. The voice of nature dictates to us the time to sow and
the time to reap. Having prepared your ground, you must be
influenced by climate and soil as to what you will sow, and
one crop prepares the land for another. When the ground has
awoke to life, do not let the harvest-time go by; reap quickly,
and hold the fruits of your labours.' At the end of this
sentence the speaker jumped off his chair, and quickly
disappeared through the door behind him.
Almost as quickly Pere Leonce took Pierre's arm and went
out at the main entrance, quickly followed by the little man
in black. As soon as they were clear of the people coming out,
the priest turned to the little man. ' Well, Monsieur Le
Maire, he is terribly dangerous; do you mean to let him gd ?'
' The authorities have their eyes on him; he is watched. I
did not hear him say anything I could take hold of, nor did
his listeners seem excited.'
' Monsieur Le Vieil here knows him.'
' Will Monsieur kindly inform me what he knows ?' At
this moment several people pushed roughly between the Maire
and our friends, and so completely separated them that they
did not attempt to meet again in the dark street. The priest
took leave of the glass-painter at the door of the Louis le
Grand, promising to come to him early on the morrow.
Pierre was much disturbed by his recognition of the
revolutionary orator as he who had been formerly the riotous
pupil at the glass-works, Nicholas Porcher; but still more
was he perturbed and even alarmed by finding himself unable
to get rid of the impression that one of the men standing by
the door behind the lecturer was his brother Louis. In vain
Pierre told himself that Louis was in America,—but a month
back letters had been received from him,—it was utterly
improbable that he shoidd be at Beauvais with Nicholas
Porcher. The impression must be an illusive one, perhaps
wrought by the recollection of the former intimacy that had
existed   between  the  pupil and Louis;   nevertheless, the
The Glass Painters. 543
illusion, if it was such, remained, and robbed Pierre of all
desire to sleep.
No one understood better than Berte if her master was
anxious or ill at ease. If he was sitting, she would at such
times climb upon his knees, lick his face, bite his hands, and
endeavour, rather boisterously, to withdraw his attention from
other meditations to herself. Now, as Pierre paced up and
down his small chamber, Bert^ persisted in manifesting
sympathy by walking'up and down by his side. This worried
Pierre ; but rather than snub or reprove Berte, he sought his
bed sooner than he would otherwise have done, but not to
sleep.
Towards morning, long after the streets of the old town had
subsided into utter silence, Pierre heard a low grating sound
proceeding from the house opposite. He did not pay much
attention to it, and would probably have forgotten the cir¬
cumstance, had it not been recalled to his mind by the
landlord informing him next morning that the house opposite
had been broken into during the night, and some valuable
coins stolen from a collection belonging to a curiosity-dealer.
The dealer was away. Only his wife, an aged woman, slept in
the house. She had heard nothing. The thieves had been
deliberate; for they had taken time to pick out only gold and
silver coins, leaving imitation models and copper money.
Having finished his work at Beauvais, Pierre started for
Amiens; but not the space, the free open light, the green of
the meadow lands, or the moving foliage of the trees,—not all
the variety, beauty, and joyousness of nature,—could prevent
the recurrence to his mind of a great anxiety, which, while
very fully occupied in his studies at Beauvais, he had been
able in part to set aside. Pierre did not love the voices of
nature with the intensity that is so much a characteristic of
highly-cultured minds of the age succeeding his. Strange to
say, nature in all her glory would perhaps have failed to
awake in him as deep a sense of awe and majesty as the
grandeur of a finely-constructed cathedral, so true it is that
we chiefly see beauty where we have been educated, or have
educated ourselves, to see it.
At Montdidier, where our traveller paused, a packet was
put into his hands, containing an account of the progress of
some glass matters, and containing also information that news
had been received from the English friends of the Le Vieils
who employed Louis, that he had returned safely from
America, and that they (his employers) were well satisfied
with him.
544 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
Pierre continued his journey with a lightened mind, and
returned at length to Paris with much valuable increase to
his store of knowledge respecting the obscured resources of
his art.
CHAPTER IX,
' Quand un gendarme rit,
Tons les gens d'arme rient,
Dans la gendarmerie.'
French Song.
Some years had flowed by since Pierre took the journey
spoken of in the preceding chapter, and during those years
he had sustained a great loss, for his mother had died.
The parting between the mother and son who loved each
other so truly and so well, was hardly a sad one, so Arm in
each was the faith that their separation would last but a
short time.
The firm of Le Vieil now consisted of the three brothers,
Pierre, Jean, and Laurent. The other brothers had gone out
in life in various ways. The grave little Claire had followed
her mother into the Quiet Land, and Victorine was married.
It was some time since anything had been heard of Louis ;
but as he was only in the habit of writing after intervals of
years, no anxiety was felt. Pierre had become almost an old
man before his time, and had several times suffered from
attacks of illness that had filled his friends with apprehension.
Of late he had much withdrawn from the active management
of the works, and devoted himself to his book.s. He often
neglected taking needful exercise, and sat whole days reading
and w'riting, and would have done so more frequently had
not his dog's solicitations for a walk sometimes induced
him to go for one. Berte would forsake her master for no
other reason, but for a walk she would accompany Therese,
or Henri Maget. Berte, alas ! was also aged, and nearing the
time when strength is but labour and sorrow.
The day of which w^e write was October the 4th,
1744 Some unwonted excitement might have been
observed among the people thronging the streets of
Paris. Many of them were in holiday garb; the bells
of the churches were ringing, and iiags waved from
many windows. Preparations for illuminations were in
progress, and evidently that day was to be held as a fete.
Early in the morning M. Pierre le Vieil stood before his
house, directing some workmen while they erected a very
Tlie Glass Painters. 545
elaborate device over the door of the glass manufactory, which
device was to be lit up at night. Henri Maget, mounted on
a ladder, was actively engaged arranging a pattern of small
coloured lamps. Th(5r^se dashed out of the door from time
to time to observe what progress was being made, and to
offer advice and suggestions to botli her master and Henri;
she was still a smart, active, handsome woman, and had
gained, through long and faithful service, the privilege of
saying much what she liked. ' The point of the pyramid is
not straight, ]M. Maget, the lamps of the third line project to
the left; and what is to go in that great space you have
left ?'
' A beautiful device designed by M. Le Moine, nothing less
than a portrait of his Majesty; he is represented receiving
from Peace an olive branch,' answered Henri.
' Would that he would take it and hold it, and we might
have no more of these dreadful wars !'
' Uncle,' said a pretty, bright-looking little boy standing
by Pierre and watching the preparations with great interest,—
' Uncle, is the king a very, very good king, that all the
people love him so much, and are so glad that he has got
well ?'
Pierre paused before he replied evasively,' He is the man
the Lord has chosen to reign over France. France is ever
ready to honour her king, and glories in his recovery.'
' Of course, then, he must be good if the Lord chose him
to be king. I asked you. Uncle Pierre, because last night
the people were shouting in the streets, Vive, le Roi! Le
Roi est gu6ri! Vive le Bien Aim6! and my father said,
" Poor idiots, they do not know their friends from their
enemies!"'
' Louis, you must never repeat, even to me, things that you
ever hear your father say. When you want to know the
meaning of what he says, you should ask him, and you know
how kindly he will explain, or else bid you wait till you are
older.'
' Are you angry with me, Uncle Pierre ?'
' No, my boy, but I want you to be perfectly honoiirable.
Did your father say that out loud when you were in the
room ?'
' We were all in the room, but he said it in a low tone
to mother; only I was near and heard,' said Louis, getting
very red.
' And that was why you did not ask your father what he
meant.    You knew you were not intended to hear.'
No. 72.—December 1880. 2 M
546 TJie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
The tears stood in the boy's eyes as he answered, 'I suppose
it was.'
' Be careful in future, my child,' said Pierre. ' Come, dry
your eyes ; look, there is your father and mother, and your
little sisters. We shall all go together to hear the Te Deum.
Hun to meet them while I call Uncle Laurent.'
Shortly after Henri Maget and the other workmen came
down from their ladders and said all was done.
' And great credit it does you,' answered the master. ' There
are yet a few minutes for us to examine it before going to St.
Gervais; you must explain it to us.' And Pierre, Laurent,
Jean le Vieil with Marie his wife, their little son Louis and
two small daughters, stood looking at Henri Maget's device
which adorned the fac^ade of the glass-house, the children
wishing the time had come for the lamps to be lit. The
decoration was in the shape of a pyramid, in the largest part
of the point of which was a golden square containing a repre¬
sentation of Louis XV. receiving an olive branch from a figure
meant to personify Peace; beneath ran the Latin motto. Amove
nnotuo felicitas parta. The shape of the pyramid was marked
with lamps; above it was a crown, also of lamps, with the
motto beneath, Carior an darior. Gai'lands of lamps were all
over the front of the building. On the right of the door was
a transparency containing a Latin inscription; to the left
another, with the lines:
Peuple heurenx rejonis toi,
Ton bonheur est extreme.
Vis sans crainte, plus d'tiffroi;
^Fais tes delices d'un roi
Qni t'aime, qui t'aime, qui t'aime.
Henri was questioned as to where he had obtained these
lines, and at length diffidently acknowledged himself as their
author, while glancing at Therese to see the estimation in
which she held the admission ; but if Therese was properly
impressed by finding that her lover was a poet, she carefully
guarded her countenance from betrayal of feeling.
' She taught you that last line, I suppose,' said Jean,' qiti
t'aime, qui t'aime, qui t'aime.'
' If I did,' answered the ready Therese, ' son lonhcur est
extrtme' and vanished into the house.
' Vis sans crainte, plus d'effroi, Ther^se,' cried Laurent after
her.
Therese had promised to marry Henri some day, but neither
he nor she seemed in haste for the coming of that day. In the
meantime it was the family custom of the Le Vieils to make
The Glass Painters. 547
many harmless jokes at the expense of the no longer shy
couple.
' I am glad this is done,' said Jean to his workmen; ' it
becomes us glass painters to be loyal. L'6tat tie ven-ier est
noUe; we owe our privileges to our kings. Vive le Eoi ;' and
all the bystanders repeated the cry heartily, and the passers-
by joined in it, Vive le Roi !  Vive le Bien Aime !
Jean turned to his eldest brother and said, in a low voice,
' Shall I tell you why I feel particularly loyal to-day, Pierre ?
Well, first of all, who can help catching something of the
general enthusiasm, but I trust the dawn of better things is
at hand. Do yoii know, when the joy of the people at his
recovery was described to the king, he burst into tears and
said, " Ah, qu'il est doux d'etre aim4 ainsi ! et qu'ai, je fait
pour le meritcr." Do you remember telling me, Pierre, that
there is nothing has such power to make people better as
feeling that others love them ? And I have often seen that you
are right.'
' Yes, he is so right,' said Marie, who held her husband's
arm.
' You have experienced that he is right, have you, Marie ?'
questioned her husband.
' Or have you ?' asked Marie.
Pierre smiled gravely. ' The poor king, I do hope he will
try to make his people happy in future,' he remarked.
' Loyal glass-painter, your words imply more doubt than I
should have attributed to yoio about the past,' said Jean.
And now all the party set out to hear the Te Deum
chanted in the Church of St. Gervais near the Hotel de
Ville. The streets were thronged with persons hastening to
church, and the sun shone brightly as if it too rejoiced, and
all this joy and thanksgiving was because the weak, selfish
Louis XV. having recovered from a serious illness, all France
was stirred into enthusiasm that the vain monarch had
been snatched from the hand of death, and was likely to
oppress and misrule his subjects for some years longer.
Yet who is so cold-blooded as not to sympathize with a
loyal people rejoicing that the king lives ? Not Jean ; he,
as he said, had caught the infection of the popular joy,
notwithstanding that his ideas were perhaps more advanced
of late, since English notions had begun considerably to
influence the minds of educated Frenchmen, and the English
language was frequently studied. Jean had found time to
become acquainted with it, and in rendering himself con¬
versant with the thoughts of many of the highest intellects
548 The Ladies Edinbiirgli. Magazine.
among the writers of Great Britain, he was an ardent
admirer of the English constitution, of the freedom of
thought and liberty of action enjoyed by the English
nation. If he did not carry his admiration to the extent that
many of his countrymen did, that of thinking it noble and
brave of the island people to have given way to the law¬
lessness that caused them to murder one king and dethrone
another, he was fond of regarding the actions of the Erench
Government with English eyes, finding much reason for
dissatisfaction with the existing powers, and being greatly
interested in the various tenets of the philosophers.
As our friends came out of the Church of St. Gervais, they
were met by Marc le Vieil, who was a lawyer. ' I have some¬
thing sad to tell you,' he said. ' Notwithstanding that this
is a day of rejoicing, the unfortunate Nicholas Porcher was
executed this morning for speaking treason against the
Government. He was also known to have been engaged in
some robberies, and was arrested at Macon and sent here for
trial. I was at the Palais de Justice yesterday, and it was
there I met him. I wa.3 waiting to be called into the Cour
d'Assizes, where I had employment on a trial, when Porcher
was brought out of the Conciergerie. It is long since he has
seen me or I him, and we should not have known each other
had not a man spoken to me, calling me by my name, as
Porcher passed. He asked permission to speak to me in
private for a moment, and as I was known to the gendarme
the permission was given. He asked, " Do you know that
your brother is dead?" "No," Isaid,"weonly know that he has
left his employers suddenly." " He was drowned, and no one
knew who he was; that was the reason of his sudden disap¬
pearance. Some years ago I went to America. My father
managed to give me money for the passage; but you remember
that I never loved work, and I found no way to get on in
America, and longed to return to Erance. I succeeded in
obtaining means to do so. On board my return ship, to my
astonishment, I met Louis. He had been prosperous, and was
on his way to England, but meant first to come and see all of
you. You may tell Pierre that his influence with Louis was
stronger than mine; in fact, so little did he show himself
inclined to associate with so ill-conditioned a black sheep as
myself, I was angry, and resolved to get him into a scrape if
I could, and I managed to get him to go v/ith me to a lecture
I gave at Beauvais, that was not particularly calculated to
please the authorities, but I could not implicate him. In another
transaction I engaged in at Beauvais, he got safe away to
TJie Glass Paittters. 549
England. Pierre was at the lecture with a spying priest, and
I think he knew me, perhaps gave information that I was
dangerous ; for I found myself watched, and even thought it
well to follow Louis to England. I have wits, and I did not
get on badly in England. I had reason to cross a ferry near
Gloucester across the Severn, but came up just as the boat
had started. In it I saw Louis. The ferry boat was a large one ;
there were two or three horses in it, one of which becoming
restive, excited the others, and the boat was upset."'
' And Louis was drowned !' interrupted Jean.   ' Was there ^
no one to help ?    Why, Louis could swim well.'
' Louis died a noble death,' continued Marc. ' Porcher
said that he succeeded in saving a boy; and swimming into
the river again to rescue a man, the fellow clung to him,
and both were drowned.' After a pause. Marc went on :
' I willnow tell you the rest of what poor Nicholas said as
nearly as possible in his own words. It is for Jean more than
you, Pierre. "AVell," he said, "tell Jean if I could have
had him for a friend I think I might have turned out more
respectable; and if that good, beautiful child had not hated
me so, Pierre would never have iniluenced me as he did
Louis. Look here, give Jean this ring; it was my mother's,
and ask him to give it her." Here is the ring. The poor
fellow had got it hidden in his mouth. I would rather not
have taken it, but he dropped it in my pocket, and I could
not draw the attention of the cje.ndarmts to it by taking it
out.    Do what you will with it, Jean.'
' I suppose Gur cousin Bancher knew nothing about Louis
having crossed the Severn. He oidy wrote that he had gone
into Gloucestershire on business, and had not been heard of
since.    I wish I had not doubted Louis,' Pierre said.
' We all did him injustice, but you least of any, Pierre,'
Jean answered.
It was a saddened party that walked from church to Jean's
house. In the evening the children were taken to see the
illuminations. They were particularly delighted to find how
much notice those in front of the olass-house attracted.
Louis took an especial pride in them. This boy was
frequently his uncle Pierre's companion, and had already
imbibed much of Pierre's enthusiasm for his profession. Louis
looked forward to the day when he would be able to help
on the great work that was to revive the art; and the boy's
sympathy was dear to Pierre.
550 The Ladies EdinbiirgJi Magazine
CHAPTEE X.
' Observant, studious, thoughtful, and refreshed
By knowledge gathered up from day to day.
By loneliness, and goodness, and kind works,
Whate'er in docile childhood or in 3-outh
He had imbibed of fear or darker thought,
Was melted all away.
And surely never did there live on earth
A man of kindlier nature.'
Wordsworth.
A pleasant party had gathered in Madame Jean le Vieil's
little salon one evening, and a buzz of conversation went on
steadily and unceasingly. Pierre le Vieil liked to pass his
evenings at Jean and Marie's house, either when only the
family party were there, or when, as now, many friends were
gathered there. To this house Pierre's literary and antiquai'ian
friends came to meet him, and were welcomed; while Jean
had many philosophical and political acquaintances, though
he himself held no extreme opinions, and did not invite
discussion that might vex Pierre. Pierre had lately written
a little drama, on the composition of whicli lie had bestowed
much pains, to tit it for his- nieces and their companions to
act. His nieces yfexepensionnaires in a convent, so the subject
of the play was grave. The acting of this drama, and the
great victories won by the brave Marechal Saxe, furnished
the principal themes for conversation. An ecclesiastic was
giving an account of the siege of Maestricht, he having been
with the besieging army. He described in glowing terms the
bravery of both besiegers and besieged, and told sad stories
of the slaughter that had taken place. While he spoke,
Jean le Vieil and his son Louis, now a fine lad of sixteen
years of age, entered the room. Jean was much excited.
' I bring you great and good news,' he said; ' peace has
actually been signed.'
' God be praised !' cried Marie. ' Tell us about it; how did
you hear, mon mari ? '
'A messenger brought the despatch two hours ago, and it was
ordered to be proclaimed from the balcony of the Tuileries.'
' Ah! we shall have Claude and Philippe back with us
before long. I wonder how soon tliey can leave the army !'
said Pierre.
Tor Claude and Philippe, though educated as glass-makers,
The Glass Painters. 5 51
had been drawn to serve in the armies of France, and had
proved themselves brave soldiers.
' Not yet, I should imagine,' replied Marc the avocat; 'per¬
haps in time to dance at the wedding of Hemi and Thdrese.'
' I hope Claude and Philippe may return to us before then ;
for it seems to me that both Henri and Therese like best to
remain as tliey are. I cannot see how they got engaged.
Neither will make the slightest admission to the other, or
give an inch of vantage ground,' said Jean. As he spoke,
a little, dark-haired man, with a round face and lively
expression, entered with a jaunty air.
Jean greeted him,' Ah! M. I'Abbe Kaynat, how are you ?
We are all glad to see you.'
M. rAbb(5 bowed low before Madame Jean le Vieil,
respectfully raising her hand to his lips. ' I was quite
charmed with your daughters, Madame,'he said. ' I was at the
Convent of the Ursulines the other day, when the little play
your brother-in-law wrote was acted by the iKnsionnaires.
I must congratulate Madame on possessing two such delight¬
ful little daughters. They performed their parts to perfection.
M. Le Vieil has late in life developed talent in a new
direction; is it not so ? He is not much in the habit of writing
plays ?'
' No, I believe lie never wrote a play before, but he has
lately been reading some with my son. M. Le Vieil has, how¬
ever, often said it is a pity the sacred drama has fallen into
such misuse, as it might often be made available to impress
truth upon the ignorant. It was Louis asked his uncle to
write that little piece. I thought the children acted it well.
But I did not see you there, M. I'Abbe ?'
' I was behind you, Madame, but not in the next row. I
was quite struck by the acting of your eldest daughter ; she
has talent. I am told that your son will do great things
some day. I know one of the masters at his college. He
wishes Louis was destined for some other profession than
that of glass-painter; but I suppose so long a line of Le
Vieils have been glass-painters, his father would not like
him to break through the tradition of the family.'
' We should none of us like it. Louis draws well, and has
so much knowledge of Latin, he can already help his uncle
in making translations and collecting material for his woriv
upon glass - painting,' Marie answered with a mother's
pride.
' Ah! that work is still in progress then; and your brother-
in-law, does he still indulge in the Utopian ideas that he
552 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
can restore his art to its pristine splendour ?' And the Abbe
took a pinch of snuff.
' He certainly hopes that his labours may conduce to that
end,' Marie answered a little coldly as she turned to speak
to another of her guests.
Madame Jean le Vieil was beautiful now in her calm
matronhood, while she still retained much of the single-
mindedness which had been so great a charm in pretty
Marie Valmont. In Madame Le Vieil no one would have
recognised the little peasant girl of old. There was nothing
hourgeois in this sweet-mannered woman, so well able to
receive her husband's clever friends with grace and dignity,
who could converse with them with ease, and with whom
they so much liked to converse.
' M. I'Abb^, will you sing for us ?' asked Jean.
' Yes, certainly, if it will give you any pleasure; but who
will accompany me ? Oh! the friend I like best of all to do
so;' and the little Abbe darted across the room to a lady
who had just entered, and begged, that she would do him
the honour to accompany him. She did so, playing a soft
accompaniment, and the accomplished Abbe's rich, finely-
trained voice filled the room as he sang some of the songs of
his native province, all conversation being held in suspense
for a short time.
The Abbe Eaynat had not long come to Paris from a
convent of the Jesuits. His writings had not yet excited
attention, and he was held to be orthodox. When he became
known as an author, he influenced and helped on the tone
of thought that led to the Kevolution; and having done so,
the sincerity of his after repentance could not avail to undo
what he had done. He was open-hearted and pleasant-
mannered, and Jean le Vieil liked him.
At this reunion was an old friend, even the Pere Leonce,
whom Pierre had met at Beauvais, and who now coming up
to Pierre, asked: 'How does the great work get on, M. Le
Vieil?'
' But slowly. I fear some years must yet pass before it is
completed, and perhaps I shall not live to do so. I place my
trust in my nephew Louis finishing what 1 leave unfinished.'
' I hear that M. le Baron de Montesquieu says it will be
published by the Acaddmie if you offer it there. He wishes
you had offered them your essay upon Mosaics.'
' I can hardly hope that my work will meet with such
honour, the less because my eyes begin to fail me, and I fear
my memory also.'
The Glass Painters. 553
' You must not get in low spirits;  it will be you and
no one else that will finish the book.'
' With the help of Louis it is possible, it may be so.'
Pierre's fits of despondency about his work were not in¬
frequent, and in truth, since a bad attack he had had not long
since, his powers were slightly impaired; his head would
sometimes get confused, and he could not compare his mass
of notes and information with quite the even judgment of
old. The hard work and many anxieties of earlier years no
doubt told upon him now; but his life was very far from an
unhappy one. What life can be so that is ever giving and
receiving love ?
o
CHAPTER XI.
' Fear no more the heat o' the sun,
Nor the furious winter's rages ;
Thou thy worldly task hast done,
Home art gone, and ta'en thy wages.'
Cymbdine.
One morning early in the spring of 1772, the workmen
had just entered the glass factory, and were wondering with
one another that Henri Maget was not already there to set
them to work with his usual punctuality.
' Therese had desired him to sweep the apartments,' said
one man.
'Ah! truly Madame Maget keeps our good Henri in order.
There is will and determination in the black eyes of Therese,'
said another.
' Yes, Martin, you had once proof of her w'ill and determi¬
nation, had you not ? Did I not hear some rumour once of
your having had a headache, by reason of one ear coming
into violent contact with the hand of Madame Maget ?
Perhaps she thought you looked too long into those black
eyes.'
' Who told you ? There was nothing at all in that silly
story,' replied the other, looking sullen. The first speaker
laughed, and so did all the men.
At that moment Henri Maget entered, and sternly bade
them be silent.
The foreman was an elderly man now, his hair of an iron
grey; he did not walk as vigorously and uprightly as of old,
but was still strong and hale. Some few months previously
Th^rese and he had agreed to take the important leap into
matrimony.    For more than thirty years the two had been
5S4 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
faithful to a liking for disputing, scolding, flirting, and
laughing with and at each other rather than with any one
else. As lovers they had certainly been very perverse. As
husband and wife it was to be lioped they might be less so;
at all events, they had not yet repented of the plunge into
married life.
Tliurese still acted as housekeeper and guardian to Pierre
le Vieil. Nothing would induce her to leave him, but not
the less her long, faithful term of service was drawing to an
end. The wedding of Therese and Henri had been a merry
one. The firm of glass-makers had given a great marriage-
feast, over which Jean and Marie had presided, all the Le
Vieils being present at it. It did not seem as if the name
of Le Vieil was likely to die away, for Jean, Laurent, Leonard,
and Marc were there with their wives and children. The
rising generation alone numbered twenty; Victorine and her
husband, Claude and Philippe the soldiers, and Michel the
priest were there. Of those Pierre had taken as his charge, all
were present except tlie mother, Claire, and Louis, the three
who had passed into the Unknown Land.
Marc was an advocate of some distinction, and like most
members of the legal profession, he had made common cause
with the magistrates and parliament of Paris in their
resistance to the despotic and unconstitutional measures of
the King and his Minister Manpaon. Marc had seized witli
avidity many of the new ideas, both democratic and philo¬
sophical, that were then afloat. At the wedding he made an
amusing speech, and being among trusted friends, he had
ventured to allude to political events. He praised Therese
' for her long resistance before she cave in her adhesion to a
despotism, and begged Henri to relate by what means the
resistance had at length been overcome. Had some of the
means that had lately brought about the submission of the
peers of France to tyrannical government been employed ?
Their opposition to a monarch had been withdrawn by
finding how unpleasant and dull it was to be sent for long
terms into country seclusions, and to be deprived of any
portion of their accustomed incomes. Had M. Maget per¬
suaded M. Le Vieil to act in concert with him, and threatened
Therese with exile and deprivation of income ? He (Marc)
could well believe how insupportable it would appear to
the lively and witty Madame Maget to live remote from
Paris. But no ; he did not believe that was the reason they
had now the pleasure of drinking the health of M. and
Madame.    It  was as  it had been, as it  ever would  be.
Tlie Glass Painters. 555
" Omnia vincit amor." A blind boy hovering afar off had
once shot a chance arrow at the lovely Therese; he wounded
her but slightly, but the wound healed not. The mischievous
monkey came again and shot with more effect; hence the joy
of this pleasant meeting, the union of two who would love
each other as truly and faithfully as they had served the Le
Vieils.    And wliat more could be desired ?'
With Ion mots and jeiix d'esprit the young Pere Michel le
Vieil added to the hilarity that reigned. He hud that morning
read the office that united the pair, with the blessing of the
Church.
Pierre had hoped that Michel would realize some of those
dreams he had himself indulged in ; but tliough, in single-
hearted love and respect for a high calling, Michel had
elected to become a priest in troublous times, he had no
inclination for asceticism or for fame; nor did fame gild his
memory, because in after time he unshrinkingly laid down
his life rather than cease to perform the duties of his calling.
Like many a brave soldier, he died at his post, almost
unnoticed.
Pierre might well feel proud as he looked at the numerous
brotherhood, and think that of all there, not one had forgotten
that he was gentilhomme.
But to return from this digression. Henri having desired
the men to be silent, told them that work would be suspended
for the day, owing to the master being seriously ill. The
workmen loved their master, and dispersed quietly with
anxious faces. Henri going up-stairs, waited till more tidings
should reach him from the sick-room.
Pierre le Vieil was in truth very ill. He had been seized
with one of the attacks to which he was subject, and for a
considerable time had lain insensible. He had recovered
consciousness enough to understand his danger, and even to
question the doctor as to the probability of recovery ; and
learning that this probability was slight, he had desired that
his brothers and a priest might be sent for.
Now he lay calm and quiet, with a look of much peace
upon his face, awaiting both the return of the messenger
who had gone for the priest, and the summons from another
messenger.
Marie had been constituted nurse, but Pierre had begged
that all who loved him might have free access to his room ;
and now one and then another crept softly in, and were
greeted with a faint smile   and welcoming  eyes.    Young
55^ The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
Louis entered with a radiant face, which became clouded on
perceiving how ill his uncle was.
' Speak gently,' said Marie.
' You have something pleasant to tell me, Louis ?' said
Pierre.
The young man laid his hand on that of his uncle, and
curbed his excitement to say, as gently as possible, ' Yes,
they have accepted it.'
There was a moment of deep silence, light came into the
dying man's eyes. He whispered, ' Praise be to God; and
through you, Louis, I trust that our profession will rise from
the dust. I trust that your sons, Louis, will compose
designs worthy of the men of old; but I must keep my
strength for confession.'
The members of the French Academy had at length
decided to publish the work on glass-painting, the composi¬
tion of which had occupied so many years of Pierre le Vieil's
life. It was the only recognition he received of his long
labours in the interests of art.
During the year preceding the time we write of, his
memory and clearness of head had failed materially enough
for him to distrust his own ability, and deem it advisable
to commit to his loved nephew and companion, Marie's son,
the task of arranging and editing the carefully-written MS.
Louis had accomplished the task with care and zeal, and
had awaited with scarcely less anxiety than his uncle the
decision of the Prench Academy.
The work was printed, and, like its author, soon lay
forgotten. Men were occupied with sterner subjects than
glass-painting in those days. It was not till a later time
that some few searched the writings of the good Le Vieil to
gain more insight of his art; and though to him cannot be
given credit in any great measure for the revival of glass-
painting, neither must it be said that his efforts and his toil
were quite unavailing. He laid one stone on the pile, and it
was built over.
However erroneously we may estimate the importance of
a subject we love, or place fictitious value upon a work
according to the labour and difficulty its accomplishment
may have cost us, no true human effort is quite lost, no
honest labour utterly unavailing.
While Louis was yet with his uncle, Th^r^se entered and
said the messenger had returned, and the priest was now
approaching. Marie and Louis went out, leaving Therese
with Pierre for a short time.    Such of the Le Vieils as had
Hints on Painting Flowers. 557
assembled, awaited the arrival of tlie confessor near the
entrance door, all kneeling as the tinkling of the bell carried
by his attendant announced his approach. Jean opened the
door, and took him to the room where Pierre lay. The
confession being over, all were summoned to the chamber of
the dying. The priest put on a violet stole, and gave the sick
man a crucifix to kiss ; then all there having been sprinkled
with holy water, some prayers and the general confession were
recited, admonishing all in the room to pray. The priest then
administered the Holy Sacrament of Extreme Unction, ' The
Lord through this Holy Unction, and of His own most
gracious compassion, forgive thee whatever sin thou hast
committed by seeing,'—and the confessor signed on the eyelids
of the dying a cross in the consecrated oil. Ere the anoint¬
ing was completed, Pierre le Vieil had fallen into a gentle
sleep, from whence there was no awaking. A. A.
{Concluded?)
faints on fainting Jloluers.
By M. Montgomery Campbell.
In the last generation flower - painting was a favourite
pastime amongst ladies, but it merely ranked with such
feminine pursuits as making gaudy purses, tapestry-work,
and so forth. Many of us have stowed away amongst old
keepsakes, some of the finely but stiffly drawn oleanders,
stocks, passion-flowers, etc., on which our mothers and grand¬
mothers bestowed so much patient labour, and with which
they adorned their friends' scrap-books. But whilst we admire
the perseverance those remembrances display, we never dream
of conceding to them a place even amongst the humblest
works of art; and this contempt for flower-painting has
lasted until very lately. At English exhibitions there have
of late years always been some, often very good, water-
colour drawings of fruit and flowers; still the interest dis¬
played in them by visitors has been comparatively small, and
it is only quite recently that this branch of painting has
come really into fashion.
It is a vexed question, whether oils or water-colours are
most suited to flower-painting. For myself, I incline to the
latter; at least they are certainly most often successful. I
have seen very beautiful and delicately executed oil-paintings
5S8 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
of flowers both by English and foreign artists,—roses so true
to nature as to make one almost fancy they must possess
its fragrance,—and azaleas of exquisite transparency. Still
these are rarities, and flowers painted in oils too often look
painfully heavy and unnatural. In this paper I intend to
confine myself to speaking of water- and body-colour. I
know that in England there is a strong prejudice against
the use of body-colour; yet I maintain that, if used judi¬
ciously and sparingly, it produces rapid and striking effects,
which are otherwise unattainable, and that without at all
sacrificing the transparent look of a flower. Only I lay a
stress on its use being judicious and sparing. In this I am
supported by no less an authority than Madame Hegg, the
well-known artist resident at Nice. It is in a great measure
owing to her that much fresh interest has been aroused in
the study of immortalizing some of nature's choicest though
most fleeting gifts; and it is she who has specially put forth
a claim for it to rank as a branch of true art. This surely
is no unreasonable demand. The subject, though it must
ever take a lower place than figure- or landscape-painting,
is no unworthy one; only its earlier handling has been a
lamentable failure.
I would only have readers of this paper bear in mind that
unless they really know Madame Hegg's works, they should
not judge of her method either by amateurs, who, having
had a few lessons from her, show their own crude perform¬
ances as specimens of her style; nor even from the many
artists supposed to be followers of hers,' chromos' of whose
paintings are just now the fashion. Madame Hegg has
really only one acknowledged professional pupil — Made¬
moiselle Gay, of Vevey, a young Swiss lady of much talent,
whose paintings have been exhibited in Paris at the Salon.
Other artists, of various degrees of merit, may have copied
Madame Hegg's style, but are not entirely faithful to it, and
use colouring, sacrifice truthfulness to effect, and arrange
their groups in impossible curves, in a way she wholly
condemns.
At home, opportunities for getting good lessons in
flower-painting are rare, and yet many ladies living in
the country or travelling in regions where flowers are
plentiful, would gladly be able ■ to take the likeness of rare
specimens or old favourites; only they are often at a loss
how to set about it; or if they try the long process of using
transparent colours on white paper, the blossom may wither,
and in warm   climates the bud expand into a full-blown
Hints on Painting Fiozvcrs. 559
flower before they succeed in finishing their drawing. To
such the following hints may perhaps be of service ; and to
make my suggestion really practical, I will begin by the
smallest details.
1. Colours.—It saves time to have a good many. Half-
cakes of moist colour are best. They must be kept in a liquid
state. It is a good plan to take away half of each cake,
putting it by till required, and fill up the rest with water,
adding a few drops of glycerine. This process should be
repeated whenever the paints begin to ge't dry, as it is far
easier to work with liquid colours. An old box, in which
the paints have become very dry and hard, should be filled
with water and left to soak for twenty-four hours; then each
colour must be taken out separately, mixed thoroughly with
water, and have glycerine added.
Made greens, if used much, are apt to render a drawing
monotonous ; still, it is useful to have some in one's box.
Pure scarlet, Indian yellow, and gallstone are to he avoided,
as they do not last.
The following colours are permanent, with the exception
of the lakes, which, however, last very fairly when mixed
with madders or other durable colours :—
Indigo. Light Eed.
Prussian Blue. Indian Eed.
Prench Blue. Mars Orange.
Cobalt. Vandyke Brown.
Vermilion. Burnt Umber.
Pure Scarlet. Lamp Black.
Scarlet Lake. Neutral Tint.
Crimson Lake. Olive green.
Eose or Pink Madder. Green oxide of Chrome.
Brown Madder. Emerald green.
Brown Pink (useful, but not in- Chrome Yellow,
dispensable). Naples Yellow.
Cadmium. Lemon Yellow.
Aureoline (which replaces Indian Yellow Ochre.
yellow).
A tube of Newman's slow-drying White.
2. Bnishes.—One really good one of medium size is all
that is wanted for flowers. No. 6 of English brushes is very
useful. Of course for the washes of backgrounds a large one
is necessary, like those required for skies in landscape paint¬
ing.    An old brush, of which the point is worn down, is
560 TJie Ladies Edinbiirgli Magazine.
excellent  for  making  a  general  undertone  for masses  of
flowers or blossom, such as lilac, heliotrope, etc.
3. Paper.—Light shades of grey and brown, more or less
warm in tone, are best. It is not advisable to get into
the habit of using very dark paper; for though pleasant to
paint on, employing it constantly spoils delicacy of both
taste and touch. Nevertheless, paper of a full chocolate
brown is convenient to have when one wishes to sketch
white flowers which are likely to fade soon, as an effect can
be very quickly produced on it.
4. Charcoal, finely pointed, should be used for outlines ;
not a pencil, traces of which can almost always be seen.
The superfluous charcoal can easily be dusted off with a
handkerchief before be^innins' to colour.
5. Glass-mediiun is useful for bringing out the depth of
colouring in scarlet and crimson flowers, also for the shades
of leaves, but should be employed rarely and sparingly. I
do not advocate its being mixed with the colours ; it should
only be put on when the drawing is finished and thoroughly
dry, and never on the extreme lights.
Having made mention of the necessary materials, I will
say a few words about the paints I have found the most
useful in rendering the colour of particular flowers, and then
speak of some important points on which the charm and
success of a group of flowers greatly depend.
To begin with. For white flowers one must not use white
alone, but add a very little Chrome Yellow. Aureoline with
Neutral Tint will make good shadows. Great care is necessary
to avoid putting on too much colour, or the transparency
will be sacrificed. If one has fallen into this error, it is
often better to try and remove a portion quickly with the
finger whilst still wet than to wash the place. Washing
generally takes away the crisp look of a flower. Bright
blue flowers, such as gentians, require a generous use of
Cobalt, with the addition of French Blue for the darker
parts.    Cobalt with white makes light forget-me-nots.
Scarlet or crimson flowers, especially where there is a
large surface, have a much fresher look when the shades are
run into each other on the paper, not mixed on the palette.
This applies likewise to yellow flowers, whether requiring
Lemon Yellow, like primroses and sulphur anemones, or
wanting a good deal of Clirome Yellow, like jonquils and
daffodils.
Green oxide of Chrome should be used with a mixture of
Chrome. Yellow or Prussian Blue, or both, according to the
Hints on Paintirtg Flowers. 561
shade required. Emerald green also wants toning down
with Lemon Yellow, and should be used sparingly; it can
often be replaced to advantage by Prussian Blue mixed with
Lemon Yellow.
It is difficult to say exactly what darker greens should be
composed of, there being such a great variety of shades and
degrees of warmth of colouring; in short, to lay down a hard
and fast rule would be to risk the monotony which too
frequent use of made greens entails. Indigo, Aureoline, Burnt
Umber, Vandyke Brown, Chrome Yellow, Olive green, and
even Crimson Lake, some or most of these may be required
together in foliage.
Likewise, as to what should be employed for shadows,
artists must be guided a great deal by circumstances, and
their own preference for more or less warm colouring.
Sometimes a hap-bazard mixture of such paints as are on
one's palette makes a better shadow than one carefully
chosen. Brown madder makes an excellent shadow for
many red and pink flowers ; and for yellow. Burnt Umber or
Vandyke Brown with Cobalt may be used.
It is better, till one can work fast, to make an unfinished
painting, and get a general effect at one sitting, than to try
putting in too many details, and have to begin again.
Flowers fade so soon that it is often a very difficult matter
to finish next day, and generally results in a heavy-looking
performance. Therefore let all beginners bear in mind not
to attempt too much; one can always add to a bouquet,
which is better than leaving it for a while and then painting
over it.
Delicacy of execution is so essential in flower-painting
that everything should be done to ensure it; therefore to all
who attempt it, I would say, Use as much thought and as
little paint as possible. I do not mean that one should put
on the colours meagrely, but only not do a single stroke
without thinking whether it is necessary. Many washes
may sometimes add softness to a landscape; with flowers it
is otherwise. What can be done with one stroke of the
brush should never be done with two. Some beginners put
on one colour after another till they find the right one. I can
only describe the result as stuccoed.
I have said nothing about backgrounds. They form a
subject for oral rather than written teaching, as they must
be worked up together with the flowers themselves, and
their treatment depends much on what colouring harmonizes
with the subject in hand.   Tliis makes it impracticable to deal
No. 72.—Decembee 1880. 2 N
562 TJie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine,
with them within the limits of my present paper, and they
are by no means a sine qua non to flower-painting. Unless
one intends to paint a background, there is no necessity
for stretching one's paper, as it does not become very wet in
Hower-painting; therefore blocks and boards can be dispensed
with. Ordinary sketch-books are the most handy for doing
single flowers, and paper fastened by means of drawing-pins
on to a substantial piece of cardboard will suffice for larger
productions. These save both space and weight, which is of
importance if one is not stationary. A portable easel, which
can be done up with the umbrellas, is a great saving to the
back, as it enables one to sit quite upright when at work,
and helps one to judge of the effect of a painting far better
than when seated at a table.
One may have made some progress in flower-painting and
yet be wholly unable to achieve a rose capable of giving
one the slightest satisfaction. There is no reason to be dis¬
heartened. Even experienced artists find it requires their
veiy best efforts to paint a rose really well. It is excellent
practice to fill sheet after sheet of paper with roses and buds,
omitting calices, branches and leaves, and concentrating
one's whole attention on the intricate mass of petals. One
great point is not to attempt to draw all one sees; half
closing the eyes and then looking intently at the flower, one
will learn which are the important lines which give
character to the whole. These only should be reproduced.
We should all, of course, seek to represent everything as it
reveals itself to us, and not according to some hard and fast
rule laid down by another. If my readers will bear this in
mind, I do not think it can harm them to be told how I
have seen roses most successfully painted.
Before me lies one of those lovely Sofrano roses, to be
found in such abundance at Nice. Having sketched its
contour very lightly with charcoal, I take a mixture of
Chinese White, Gadmium, Chrome Yellow, and Permanent
Scarlet, and beginning at the extreme lights, make a general
undertone, taking care to follow the shaping of the petals,
and to use the right tint at once, so as not to lose the fresh
look of the flower by being obliged to go over my work a
second time. To obtain this result, I add more white or
yellow when required, and more scarlet to the flesh-coloured
petals. For the parts in extreme shadow, I use no body-
colour.
I then mix some Cobalt either with Burnt Umber or
Vandyke Brown, and put in the shadows carefully with this,
Hints on Painting Flowers. 563
looking to see that no body-colour on my palette gets mixed
lip with them, for the beauty of the shadows lies in their
perfect purity and transparency. Now all that is wanting
to the completion of my rose is the variety of warm tints
towards the centre. These Indian Eed, Cadmium, and Chrome
Yellow will supply, with a touch of Permanent Scarlet for the
heart of the flower, and Aureoline, and here and there a little
Naples Yellow for the turned-back edges of the petals.
Whatever I add to this rose must be made subordinate to
it if I would make a pleasing picture. Many people make
the mistake of not considering this fact, and consequently
paint flowers which give the beholder no pleasure, because
they lack concentration of effect. Whether I add buds or
ferns, they must have a soft, dreamy look. Yellow Ochre
will help to give distance to yellow rose-buds.
The outline of both fertis and leaves should be made
distinct at once ; the second touches are only for putting in
the shadows. Prussian Blue with Cadmium gives a far-off
look to ferns. Chrome Yellow brings them forward. For
sprays on which the light falls strongly, white mixed with
bright green and Lemon Yellow may be used.
What colours to employ depends almost entirely on
whether the bud, flower, or foliage in question belongs to the
background, or that portion of the bouquet in which the
effect is centred. Thus a Mart^chal Niel bud, which would
require much Chrome Yellow if it formed the centre point of
a picture, should, if fllling a subordinate part, be painted
very softly, with only a small amount of Chrome, and
shadows containing much Aureoline and Neutral Tint.
In this utilitarian age, people like flower-painting because
it serves to adorn all kinds of wood-work, satin, china, etc.;
and there is no reason why all this should not be done most
artistically, only I would give my readers this parting caution:
' Do not take up these things too soon, that is, before you
have some real practical knowledge of the right way to work,
or your standard will be imperceptibly lowered, till you will
rest satisfied with very inartistic performances. Bear in
mind Gellect's warning, that if it looks bad when a wise
man finds fault, it is far worse when the artist's work
receives lavish praise from the vinwise.'
564 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
'€\\t ©peratton of f^caltfj, EntrlUgence, anli JHoralttg
on lEconomic progress.
' The human race is one'—might be the motto inscribed
over the portal of Economic Science, for on this solidarity of
mankind must all its conclusions be based; and, as it is with
mankind as a whole that Economics deals, so it is on the har¬
mony and perfection of the whole of man's nature, moral, in¬
tellectual, and physical, that its progress depends. All science
is the pursuit of law, and it is in the laws which regulate human
desire and will that we must seek for the sources of Econo¬
mics ; for it is demand which creates supply, it is consump¬
tion which regulates production, it is the gratification of the
enjoyer's desire which is the final cause of the labour of the pro¬
ducer. Hence, though dealing with material data, Economics
is in fact a mental science, or perhaps, more strictly, a science
of which the root is mental, deep down in the hidden regions
of human desires and motives, while its outcome is material
and physical. On this two-sided science, then, which has
its root in men's desires and motives, and its fruition in
ministering to his necessities, it is evident that all parts
of man's nature must operate, and that on every side; and
not all parts of individual men's natures only, but all parts
of all men's natures; and, as the whole is made up of its
parts, so every part of the nature of every individual of the
human family must bear its share of the mighty burden.
Isolate ourselves as we will in selfish exclusiveness, the
well-being of the individual is ever inextricably bound up
with the well-being of the whole; and strange as the reflection
may appear, I, sitting by my comfortable fireside this wintry
day, am in some degree less well oft' because yonder man,
whom I never saw, is reeling drunken home to his frightened
wife and shivering little ones. ' Am I my brother's keeper ?'
were the words of the first murderer. ' The voice of thy
brother's blood crieth against thee from the ground,' the
Almighty's answer; and ever since, the human race has been
slowly learning, that not one member can suffer without
all the members suffering with it.
It is,then,the bearing of the health, intelligence, andmorality
of the whole human family on the progress of Economics which
we have to consider; and in order to do this, we must en¬
deavour to define in a few words the region which this science
The Operation of Health, etc., on Economic Progress.    565
claims as specially her own. Economics has been defined as
' the science which traces the production of wealth up to its
causes, either mental or physical.' The subject-matter, then,
of the science, is wealth, and, economically considered, wealth
means abundance of the necessaries, comforts, and luxuries
of life, i.e. of those things which contribute to the weal or
well-being of the individual or the community, and what we
have at present to inquire is. How do the health, intelligence,
and morality of a community tell upon this production of
wealth ?
' The first wealth is health,' says Emerson in his Condiict
of Life, and all experience bears out his words. Let us see,
then, how the want of health in one individual acts
upon the wealth of the whole race of which he is a member.
It may seem strange to say that I have fewer pictures, let
us say, in my room, because Tom Brown, the cobbler in the
Grassmarket, broke his collar-bone last spring; still more
strange, that the same result follows from the visitation
of jungle-fever which attacked the coolies in Ceylon last year.
Yet in their degree both of these statements are true. Of
course taking me as an individual, Tom Brown's broken collar¬
bone did not rob my walls of a single picture, but it robbed
the community of the results of Tom's labour in the market,
and all shoes were a fraction dearer because Tom's shoes were
missed from their accustomed place. Shoes viust be bought,
and pictures only may, so by the fraction which I paid more
for my shoes, because of Tom's broken bone, I am a fraction
poorer when the shoes are bought, and a fraction less in the
position to adorn my walls, so that by, let us say, the forty
thousandth part of a picture, my walls are the loser by Tom's
broken bone. The same, of course, applies to the other
example cited; in the fractional degree in which all sugar
was the dearer from the loss in the market of the labour of
the fever-stricken coolies in Ceylon, in like fractional degree
all consumers of sugar are the poorer, and the less in a
position to indulge in articles of luxury and refinement; and
this impoverishment of the consumer of course leads to the
impoverishment of producers in other lines. The artist is the
poorer, in that there is less demand for the produce of his
labour, and his impoverishment, in its turn, tells upon the
producers whose commodities he, in his turn, is less able to
purchase, and so on ad infinitum, till in the end every
individual of the race is a fraction less wealthy for Tom
Brown's broken collar-bone. If this is the result in one in¬
stance of one single insignificant shoemaker's lapse through
566 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
sickness from the ranks of producers, what must the aggregate
result of millions of such cases be on the general wealth of
the race ?
But, it may be said, it is quite true that Tom Brown's
broken collar-bone causes a loss to the sum of human wealth,
because, in his humble way, he is a producer of that wealth ;
but can the same be said of the slow decline which is wasting
Tom's five-year-old child, or of the death which untimely
nipped his babe in the cradle ? Are not these simply con¬
sumers, not producers, and will not the cessation of their
consumption increase rather than diminish the aggregate
wealth of the world ? Of course, in the matter of actual,
personal production, sickness or health makes little difference
in Tom's five-year-old boy, for, sick or well, he is equally at
present a consumer, not a producer. But does his sickness
not interfere with production still—not his own, but that of
others ? Tom's wife, let us say, is a washerwoman, but she
cannot leave her sick boy. Her labour is lost in the market,
and all washing a fraction dearer for the loss. Yes, you say,
but how is the untimely death of Tom's baby an economic
loss ? Surely here at least, economically speaking, we have
a case of pure gain. The little waxy face we look at in its
little coffin may leave an aching void in its mother's heart,
but what loss can it be to the wealth of the world ? Yet
in each untimely death we have a break in the mighty
revolution of the great economic wheel which goes on ever
producing that it may consume, and consuming that it may
produce; in every such life cut short, we have the consump¬
tion only, without the production to which by right that
consumption should have led. The consumer dies before he
becomes a producer, and the great wheel stops at half its turn.
All that has been consumed becomes thus an economic loss,
because it does not go on to its lefritimate outcome of future
production. Death in the ordinary course of nature, when
the old fall as ' shocks of corn fully ripe,' is not an economic
loss, for in such cases the revolution has been completed,
and comes round to simple consumption again, but every
sickness that attacks a producer's health, every untimely
death, diminishes in its degree the aggregate wealth of the
world.
So much, then, for the influence of the health of the in¬
dividual on the wealth of the race. Let us next look at the
operation of intelligence.
We have already said that Economics is first and chiefly a
mental science, having its root in human desire and motive.
The Operation of Health, etc., on Economic Progress.    567
though in its visible outcome it deals with material things.
Necessarily, therefore, more important to its progress than
even the physical health of its agents, are the vigour and
intelligence of the minds from whose motives and desires
it has its growth. It is clear that Economic Science of any
kind would have but a poor chance, could in fact have no
existence, in such a community as that represented by the
Greenlander's question,' I have as much train-oil as I can
drink, and a fish-bone through my nose, and what more can
I want ?' The soil of motive and desire in such a community
is too scant to give even a fibre of its roots a foothold, for the
train-oil and the fish-bone are both within the reach of the
Greenlander's own harpoon. They require nothing beyond
individual prowess, no concerted effort, no division of labour,
and in division of labour Economics as a science begins. In
the first place, then, the measure of the intelligence of a com¬
munity is likewise the measure of the motives and desires
from which Economics spring. Thus the higher the intelli¬
gence, the greater, to begin with, are the demands of the
consumer, and it is the demand of the consumer which
determines the supply of the producer. Demand, then, is in
proportion to intelligence, and demand is the first essential
in Economics ; for who will sow corn for which there is no
buyer, who will weave cloth for which there is no wearer,
who will spend labour from which there is no profit ? And
if intelligence is thus necessary to create demand, it is none
the It'Ss needed to meet the demand when created, and not
to meet the actual demand only, but to gauge the pro¬
babilities of that demand. That merchant will be the most
successful who not only is readiest in resource in bringing
desired produce to the market, but who is also farthest sighted
in prophecy of what men's desires will be. To be a truly
great merchant requires much the same qualities of mind
as to be a truly great general—prophecy of requirements,
gauging of resources, promptitude of action. If intelligence
then is thus needed to create demand, and to bring the right
supply at the right moment to meet it, it is obvious that it
is equally indispensable in the producers of the supply. All
the merchant's forethought would be of no avail without the
intelligent co-operation of those whose business it is to pro¬
duce the supply which his forethought is to place within the
reach of the consumer. In vain might he perceive a coming
dearth, and devise wise measures to forestall it in the yet
continued years of plenty, without the intelligence of the
corn-grower who is to place the raw material in his hands.
568 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
In vain might the corn-grower strive to do his part without
the intelligent co-operation of those who till and sow and
reap ; and just in proportion to the intelligence brought to
bear at each step of the process, will be the amount of the
supply wherewith to alleviate the years of famine. It is
plain, then, that as in the matter of bodily health one
member cannot suffer without all the members suffering
with it, so the intelligence of each is necessary to economic
progress; and as is the ratio of intelligence, so the ratio of
economic well-being will be.
Let us look now for a little at the last question proposed to
us—What operation has morality on economic progress ?
We have seen how important a bearing health of body and
health of mind, i.e. intelligence, have upon its advancement,
and indeed their importance to it may be said to lie almost
on the surface. The third question may seem somewhat less
easily answered, yet it is by no means the least important of
the three.
It was a dogma of the old philosophy that reason and
morality were co-equal, that morality, in short, was only right
reason ; and in one sense, of course, the dogma is true, for all
morality is right reason, and all departure from it is also a
departure from reason, andyet we know that practically intelli¬
gence and morality are often only too sadly divorced. It is too
often not the most intelligent who is the most moral man. A
manmay have a clear intellectual perceptionofrightandwrong,
and even a far-reaching understanding of their consequences,
and yet through weakness of will, or strength of passion, he
may choose the evil and eschew the good. Therefore morality
has a bearing independent of intelligence on the subject
before us. We must pass with merely a glance over the
indirect bearing of morality on Economics through its influence
on the two former subjects of this essay, health and intelli¬
gence, though the amount to which morality affects both of
these, and so indirectly affects Economics through them, can
scarcely be over-estimated; but at present we shall confine
ourselves to its more direct operations. And first, it is
evident that all economic progress presupposes the possibility
of trust between man and man. The belief in others' good
faith is the foundation of all credit. Shall I put my money
into the bank unless I trust my banker ? Shall I send my
goods over the seas unless I have confidence that I shall
receive from those to whom they are consigned the due value
for my possessions ? Honesty, then, good faith between man
and man, is the necessary substratum of the whole system of
The Operation of Health, etc., on Economic Progress.    569
Economics, without which it would be built upon shifting
sands. It is true, there is much commercial immorality,—
bubble companies, high-sounding investments in which the
interest is paid out of the capital till both collapse together;—
but were commercial immorality the rule and not the practical
exception, no such thing as Economics could exist; and even
exceptional as they may be, every case of commercial fraud
is a barrier in the way of economic progress, whose effects
reach to the very boundaries of the whole system, as the
widening ripples from a stone thrown into a lake do not
cease till they reach the shore. Economics, then, must have
commercial morality as its very basis.
Kut it may be said, all that is true as far as honesty in
commercial transactions is concerned, but what bearing
have vices of a more private kind upon this subject ? Much
every way and on all sides. There is no breach of the moral
law which does not tend to hinder economic progress. The
drunkard staggers home to his wretched hovel, where every
available article of furniture has been offered to the demon
that governs him. He himself is a producer disabled, and the
whole community is taxed to support his helpless offspring,
who are growing up with the seeds of the same vice in their
very blood, and destined, unless rescued by compassion.
Divine and human, to repeat in their own man- and woman¬
hood the same dreary story, and leave to their children a
like miserable heritage. I have taken drunkenness as a
patent example; but all private vice has the same outcome
—a diminishing of production, and an added burden on the
community. Poor-rates, workhouses, prisons, are all more
or less directly burdens laid upon the world by immorality.
But, it may be asked, can the same be said of the vices
of luxury and dissipation ? In them money is lavishly
expended; ■ is there not, then, economic gain rather than
loss ? Not so, for the economic system is a mighty
wheel going round from production to consumption, and
from consumption to production again, and whenever the
wheel is stopped at half-turn, when production consumed
does not lead in some shape to production again,—in other
words, is not in some form capital for future use, be it as
the subsistence of the labourer in added power of body, mind,
or soul, as tools, or as material for his work,—there is waste
and economic loss. Expenditure, even lavish expenditure,
may not be waste but the truest economy, when by it we
advance our power of body, of mind, or of soul, and so render
ourselves fit for higher service and worthier production, but
570 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
to the luxurious, the spendthrift, the man of pleasure, whose
expenditure ends in selfish and deteriorating gratification, and
forms no capital for future good to the world, we may well
quote the words of old : ' Wherefore spend ye money for that
which is not bread, and your labour for that which satisfieth
not ?' Jeanie Morison.
5Lcttcr from tlje lEliitors.
The Editors are sorry to announce that the present
number is the last that will be issued of the Ladies
Edinburgh Magazine. It is not necessary to go at any
length into the reasons which necessitate the stopping of our
little periodical. A larger amount of public support and a
wider circulation would doubtless have enabled us to continue
its issue ; but failing these, we have only to thank the kind
friends, readers, and contributors who have helped us in the
past, and announce to them that, as far as its public circula¬
tion is concerned, the Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine has come
to an end.
[The debates of the Ladies' Literary Society will be
carried on with unabated vigour, and, we hope, with still
wider success. Members will continue to be enrolled, whether
resident in Edinburgh or at a distance; the latter are invited
to send to the President papers to be read at the monthly
meetings.
It is proposed by some members of the Society to make
an effort to continue the printing, for private circulation, of
a smaller magazine, under different editorship. No payment
will be made to contributors, and although any friends will
be welcome to subscribe, only members will be permitted to
write in it.]
Finis. 571
JFinis.
A RONDEAU.
To S. E. S. M.
For fifteen years we've wrought and sung;
First girl, companions blythe and young,
Here sought to tell their visions bright,
Here strove to speak their thoughts aright;
And life grew strong, and flowers sprung.
And truer still the numbers run2f,
And deeper thoughts found nobler tongue,
As time sped on through day and night
For fifteen years.
'Tis ended all, the lute unstrung—
But are there flowers our leaves among ?
Give them to her—her toils requite,
Our editor by royal right,
So bright a charm o'er all she flung
For fifteen years.
E. J. 0.
©ur iLibrarg ^Tablc.
Reata.    What's in a Name ?    By E. D. Gerard.
This is a brilliant and original novel. Absolute originality of plot
can scarcely be looked for in this age of the world, when it seems as
if every possible variety of incident must be exhausted; and there is
an early story by Miss Drury, called 'Friends and Fortune,' in
which the substitution of the heiress for the companion is also the
moving-spring of the piece. But in the book before us the idea is
much more elaborately worked out. We may, perhaps, question
how far it is within the bounds of probability ; but after all, proba¬
bility is but a tedious guide, and when we are transported to the
Mexican prairies or the forests of Poland, we can very well afford to
leave her behind. Reata herself is a charming character. She is so
real, so full of genuine nature and freshness, that she quite takes
our hearts by storm. We forgive her all her errors, and we feel
towards her as a naughty child, who yet is so irresistibly winning
that we scarcely know how to look grave over her misdeeds. Indeed,
all the principal characters are most carefully drawn and admirably
contrasted, and the gradations of feeling are touched with such a
delicate hand that all seems natural and plausible enough.    Otto,
572 TJie Ladies EdinbiirgJi. Magazine.
fascinatinti; and fickle; Arnold, with his sterner nature, in which
slumber depths of passion of which he himself is unaware;—are
throughout consistent with themselves even in the midst of their
inconstancy. We have probably all met people who made on us the
same sort of impression as Countess Halka at the ball given by the
fire brigade. ' To look at her sauntering through the figures of the
quadrille in her old yellow silk, made one think that to be young
and fresh was to be vulgar; that to be airily dressed was to be
tawdry, that nothing was worth looking at but that aristocratic pale¬
ness, and no vivacity so fascinating as those graceful, impassive
motions.'
The book is written with force and fluency, and the writer has
sufficient command of language to express her meaning correctly in
all its varied shades ; but there are perpetual little slips and awkward¬
nesses which grate upon the reader, and against which we wish to
protest. For instance, such a phrase as ' tolerably composedly' is
clumsy to a degree. 'Plenty dancers,' 'plenty brother officers,' is a
vulgarism unworthy of the author's powers. Still worse are the
constant errors in the employment of will and shall. The forms of
the future tense in our language depend upon such subtle shades of
meaning, that if instinct does not guide us it is most diflicult to
reduce them to rule. But when 'I will' is used, some effort of will
is clearly presupposed. ' I will dance the second quadrille better
than the first.' 'I will get a message to say. Come to your dying
Otto, and I will arrive just in time to receive his last breath.' In
all this, the will has nothing to do with the matter ; it is a simple
future, 'I shall.' 'Probably I will break my neck,' says Otto. His
neck was in his own power ; onlj', if it was his will to break it, there
was no room for probability. And yet it is curious to observe, that
when we speak in the second person all this is reversed. ' She will
dance' is the future tense ; ' she shall dance' expresses my determina¬
tion to make her dance. Custom and education ought to render
these fine distinctions easy to those who speak the language of their
birth; and it will be well worth the author's while to study this
knotty point before she writes again, for such slipshod English is a
blemish in an otherwise superior book, and jars upon the ear like a
false note in music.
Question Scries.
Our year's series being now complete, we shall give the best
answers for October, November, and December, and then announce
the result to the competitors. As a whole, the series has been
very successful, the interest well sustained, and the average of merit
extremely high. The number of those who have persevered through¬
out the year, seems to prove that not merely for the sake of a prize,
but from an intelligent interest in the subjects given, the candidates
have felt the pleasure of doing well, even though others might do
better. The general improvement in style and writing has been
marked with great approval.
Question Series. 573
ANSWERS TO OCTOBER QUESTIONS.
History.—Eight answers. Thorough is the best. Apis and
Akialpin very good. Pink also. Linda omits the most notable
incident in the taking of Calcutta, the ' Black Hole.' She also says,
' It is almost impossible to find an impartial writer ' on the character
of Clive, and then, ' It is unquestionable' that his conduct left a stain
on his moral character. If authorities differ, why be so sure ?
Geeta, Wealdmoor, and Irrlicht exceed their limits.
How and when was Calcutta lost to the British ? Give some
account of its deliverer.
Suraja Dowlah, Subahdar of Bengal, united most of the vices of
Eastern princes in his own person with few redeeming features.
He easily found causes for a quarrel with the English, and advanced
against Calcutta, which was poorly defended, as he knew. The
outposts were attacked on June 18th, 175G, and after a short resist¬
ance, the English resolved to retreat. The women and baggage were
to be embarked in the boats by day, the garrison following under
cover of night. By mistake, no precise orders were given; the
embarkation was a scene of confusion, every one only looking out for
himself ; and, fearing capture, the ships made off too soon. Part of
the garrison was left to its fate, easily falling a prey to the enemy
after two days of gallant resistance. On the entry of the Subahdar,
the question of a safe place of committal for the English prisoners
arose. The notorious Black Hole, a small, unventilated room was
chosen, and into this the unfortunate men were packed. In the
morning, of the one hundred and forty-six put in, only twenty-three
were taken out alive.
The deliverer of Calcutta was Robert Clive, born in 1725. He
entered the army in 1747, and soon distinguished himself against
the French in India. He compjetely defeated Suraja Dowlah, and
compelled him to sue for peace after the victory of Plassy, in
1757. After other military successes, he returned to England, and
was made a peer. He was president of Bengal from 17G4—C7. On
his return home, he was accused of mal-administration of the public
money, and though acquitted, took the charge so much to heart,
that he committed suicide in 1774. Lord Chatham called him ' a
heaven-born general, who, without experience, surpassed all the
officers of his time.' Thorough.
Logic.—Five answers. Pink undoubtedly fullest, clearest, and
most concise. Wealdmoor next; an original paper. Greta very
good. Irrlicht dwells too much on association, and too little on
generalization and specialization, the main factors. We think Linda
has mistaken the question, which was not: ' What are the requisite
qualifications of language 1'
What are the principal factors in the modification of language ?
Give examples.
The three principal factors which modify language are generaliza¬
tion, specialization, and metaphorical or analogical extension of
meaning. The first consists in the act of comprehending under a
common name several objects agreeing in some point, which we
abstract from each of them, and which that common name indicates.
For example, the word heart has undergone extension of meaning, for
as well as to the primary organ of the blood's motion in the animal
574 1^^'-^ Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
body, it is applied to the chief or inner part of anything, to the
seat of the affections, the understanding, and of the will. Proper
names also are often generalized, as a strong man is called a
Hercules, a famous musician an Orpheus, and a deceitful woman a
Circe. The name horse is given to several articles of furniture
which are used, like the animal, for bearing burdens. Specialization,
by a contrary process, restricts a name to a narrower class by
decreasing its extension and increasing its intension. Pastor, for
instance, which used to be applied to those who tended flocks and
herds, is now confined to men who have the charge of souls.
Specialization frequently creates a difference between words origin¬
ally considered synonymous, as steed and horse, the former of which
is now generally used in poetry, and the latter in ordinary conversa¬
tion. Metaphorical extension of the meanings of words causes
great changes, as in lion, gem, light, and star, which arise in an
indirect manner from the process of generalization, and enrich
language with the expression of many beautiful ideas. Pink.
ANSWERS TO NOVEMBER QUESTIONS.
I. English Literature.—Two answers. Apis best. Arialpin very
good.
Who was the chief national poet of Scotland in the eighteenth
century ?    Criticize his principal work.
Allan Ramsay, born at Leadhills, in Lanarkshire, October 15th,
1086, of gentle though impoverished parents, was without doubt the
chief national poet at the beginning of the eighteenth century.
Apprenticed to a wigmaker in Edinburgh in 1701, he spent a long
life in the city, dying in his own quaint house on the Castle Hill in
1758. His chief poetical work is the Gentle Shepherd, a Dramatic
Pastoral, which he published with great success in 1725. It is a
drama in five acts, whose scene is laid among the Pentland Hills,
and whose time of action extends only over twenty-four hours. The
personages are shepherds old and young, and the plot extremely
simple. Patie and Peggy, the hero and heroine, are a pair of rustic
lovers, who are ultimately discovered to be of gentle birth and restored
to their place in society. Patie, the ' gentle shepherd,' is introduced
to us feeding his flock along with Roger a brother herd, and dis¬
cussing in Lowland Scotch the gentle passion of love. Confident of
Peggy's affection, he sings a pretty song in her praise, and encourages
Roger, who is more diffident of Jenny's favour. Then Jenny and
Peggy by the burn have like discourse, and so the summer day and
summer tale glide on to the pleasant end. In times when Arcadian
affectations were so much the mode, Allan Ramsay deserves credit for
having made his Pentland herds so true to life, and for the clear and
faithful descriptions of the scenery amid which they dwelt. Never
rising high above the level of ordinary life, the poem is wonderfully
free from coarseness, and remains a healthy, pleasant picture of what
delighted Scotsmen a century ago, and of which their descendants
have no need to be ashamed. Apis.
II. Geology.—Of three very good answers, Linda is the best. She
al<5ne has given the geological place of Lias. All give the geographical
distribution very well.    Pink is second, Mayflower third.
Question Series. 575
"Where does Lias occur in Great Britain, and what are its
characteristic fossils ]
The English provincial name of Lias has been generally adopted
for a formation of argillaceous limestone, marl, and clay, which
forms the base of the Oolite. It occurs in England, from the well-
known cliffs at Lyme Regis in Dorsetshire to near Redcar on the
Yorkshire coast, passing through the counties of Somersetshire,
Gloucestershire, and Northamptonshire on its way. The most cha¬
racteristic fossils of this strata are the Enaliosaurian reptiles, which
are extraordinary for their number, size, and structure. Among the
most singular of these are species of Ichthyosauri and Plesiosauri.
It is evident that the former reptiles, from their fish-like vertebrae,
their paddles, the length of their tail, and other parts of their struc¬
ture, were aquatic. Their jaws and teeth show that they were
carnivorous, while the half-digested remains of fish and reptiles found
within their skeletons indicate the precise nature of their food. The
Plesiosaurus had an extremely long neck and small head, teeth like
those of the crocodile, and paddles resembling those of the Ichthyo¬
saurus, only larger. It is supposed to have lived in shallow seas and
estuaries, and to have breathed air like the Ichthyosaurus and our
modern cetacea.
But besides these reptiles, there are no fewer than 120 species of
British fossil fish in this strata, with about 1000 species of mollusca,
2C7 of which are Cephalopods. More than two-thirds of this latter
class are Ammonites, the Nautilus and Belemnite also abounding.
But there are fresh-water deposits as well as marine to be found in
the Lias strata, the principal of which are the insect beds found in
the midland and south-western districts of England, and among the
vegetable remains several species of Zamia found at Lyrae Regis, and
remains of coniferous plants at Whitby. Linua.
III. History.—Six answers. Thorough best. Apis second, Greta
third. Pink good. Linda too long in coming to the point, ' the par¬
titions.' Arialpin, a clearly and carefully written paper, but she
differs widely from the best authorities as to the shares of the respective
powers.    Linda alone gives 1773 as the date of the first partition.
Give some particulars of the partitions of Poland.
In 1770 the Poles were a brave but badly governed people, under
a weak king, Stanislas, who was entirely under Russian dominion.
They thus seemed an easy prey to their powerful neighbours ; so
Catherine of Russia and Frederic of Prussia (with whom the scheme
probably originated) resolved to annex a great part of Poland respec¬
tively. In order to do so undisturbed, they took Austria into their
counsels, and let her take a share of the spoils. The first partition
treaty was signed at St. Petersburg in 1772. The claims advanced by
the powers to justify their conduct in the eyes of the rest of Europe
are so weak as hardly to merit consideration for a moment. The
Poles did not tamely submit to this treatment ; but the majority of
the nobles being easily bribed to betray their country, the treaty was
at last ratified.
Now followed some years of peace for Poland ; but the attempts at
giving the country a better constitution failed, and it again fell a
prey to its enemies in 1792, who, as before, annexed large portions
of the Polish territory on the slightest and most absurd pretexts.
576 The Ladies' EdinbiirgJi Magazine.
The second partition treaty was signed under protest in 1792, and in
this Austria bore no part.
Soon after this an insurrection broke out in Poland, with Kosciusko
at its head, and spread rapidly. Though at first successful, the little
army of patriots could not resist the combined strength of Russia,
Prussia, and Austria ; and the insurrection being crushed with cruelty
on both sides, they divided the remaining portion of Poland, which
thus ceased to exist as an independent state in 1795.
In 1815 a new kingdom of Poland was formed by the three par¬
titioning powers, but in 1832 this was swallowed up and incorporated
by Russia. Thorough.
IV. Logic.—Three answers. Linda decidedly the best, clear and
full.    Pink and Greta both rather vague.
Explain the metaphor and synonym, giving examples, and
distinguishing carefully the meaning of the latter.
The word ' metaphor' is derived from the two Greek words
signifying ' over' and ' to carry,' and apparently expresses the
transference of a word from its ordinary to a peculiar purpose.
The word 'pale,' for instance, is used as a metaphor, when we speak
of 'being beyond the pale of the law.' All the following words,
weight, straightness, rock, waves, and wind, may be used as
metaphors. We talk ' of anything being a weight on one's mind,'
' of a rock of defence,' ' the waves of sedition,' etc. In addition to
these, almost all the terms employed in mental philosophy or
metaphysics, to denote actions or phenomena of mind, are ultimately
derived from metaphors. Comprehension is the taking of things
together in a handful ; interruption, the breaking between ; intuition,
the seeing into, etc.
Two or more words are said to be synonymous when they both
have the same meaning, or rather, nearly the same, for there are
almost always some shades of difi'erence to be found between words
said to be synonymous to each other. The word ' synonym' is
derived from the Greek 'with' and 'name.' The following are
examples : mud, mire ; field, meadow ; boundary, limit; recollection,
reminiscence ; and many more.
It is a logical defect in a language to possess a large number of
synonymous terms, as we acquire the habit of using them indifferently
without being sure of the difl'erence in their meaning. The English
language is especially subject to this inconvenience, as it possesses a
complete series of words, derived from Greek and Latin roots, nearly
synonymous with others of Saxon or French origin, and we often, as
Whately has justly remarked, seem to prove a statement by merely
reproducing it in diflTerent language. Linda.
The result of the year's competition stands therefore as follows :—
Each of the four having answered in more than one subject, the
English Literature prize falls to Apis, Geology to Arachne, History
to Thorough, Logic to Linda.
It has sometimes been difficult to choose between best and second
best, and all the candidates may consider themselves honourably
distinguished, especially Pink, Arialpin, and Irrlicht.
\
'JMl
1-t**      ,    •K.'H
■;■ 5■,Si^:i,•^'^'\■:'"*.":', -;K:„.,X./,
;;;£&i|-:
.•■-■A-
•«:^-;
^F'"-^^'-.' ■■■■- .,■^^T■^■./■'^^'l■■^■^■ ■^'^'V-'"
A.'
,1J
'-^^
^:t
%
fc'-x»
r- X
■i<^
&^.
.'>^>'
;% :}^^'.-9y|''M
f.i
K*
II. ■>
ft*i
:m^^-^^:a,
* <,
1*.     I. ^ 7   ^'
H
Ml > ■
V,
ri^
> M
'ft.\i»l„-fj'*■
