I
%
THE   ATTEMPT
A  LITERARY   MAGAZINE
CONDUCTED BY THE MEMBERS OF THE
LADIES'  EDINBURGH LITEEAEY  SOCIETY.
VOLUME    VIII.
" AUSPICIUM   MELIORIS   jEVI."
PRINTED FOR THE LADIES' EDINBURGH LITERARY SOCIETY,
BY
COLSTON   &   SON,   EDINBURGH.
MDCCCLXXII.
y^N 1935 .<5y
CONTENTS.
Birthday Wishes, by Frucara,
Bit of Indian Life, A, by Elsie Strivelyne,
Burning Prairie, The, by Madge,
Calling of the Sea, by Mas Alta,
Cat Friends and Acquaintances, by M. S. S.,
Christmas Party, A, by M. S. S.,
Convent Window, The, by E. J. O.,
Dress, by Dido, ,
English Hymnology, by M. S. S.,
Faith and Reason, by Maria Margarita,
Fame, by Jeanie Morison,
Farewell to 1871, by Elfie,
Few Popular Delusions, A, by Dido,
Few Remarks on some of Shakespeare's Heroes, A, by Des
Footsteps on the Wind, by La Maurice,
Forest, The, by Thekla,
George Herbert's Poems, by M. S. S.,
Heroines of Tennyson, The, by Yolande,
Home, by Noli-me-Tangere,
How we got up our Private Theatricals, by Dido,
How we went from Bigorre to Luchon, by La Maurice,
Incident of the War, An, by Enna,
Is Prospero a Hero ? by E. U. S.,
John Brown of Priesthill's Wife, by Jeanie Morison,
Kelpie's Hour, The, by Meigeag Bheag,
Lines, by Lutea Reseda,
Many or Much ? by Lutea Reseda,
Eaux,
PAGB
363
295
370
85
231
9
308
102
283
57
339
28
152
309
70
252
10»
72
87
. 51,79
245, 268
318
129
113
329
261
39
IV
CONTEXTS.
iS^KVi-
PACiE
353
304
33
151
363
90
8
212
120
220
189
Marjorie's Story, by E. J. 0.,     .
Memory and Association, by Grace,
Miss Austen's Works, by Des Eaux,
Morning at Villa Eeale, A, by Mas Alta,   .
Mother's Tea-Party, A, by Meigeag Bheag,
Mr Freeman's Historical Essays, by Grace,
My Resting-Place, by Liebchen,  i^SC^h^ )^,
Norna, The, by Veronica,
Old Age, by R.,
Old England, by Enna,
On Prejudice, by Lutea Reseda,
On the Connection of Thought with  Language, by Rustica,
142, 161, 206
On the Nature of Poetic Imagination, by E. J. O.,   . .       321
Only, by Christie,         .               .                . . .107
Orpheus, by E. J. O.,   .               .               . . .160
Our Library Table,       .               .               . 128, 192, 255, 288, 350
Partitionofthe World, The, by Thekla,     . • .359
Pedestrianism for Ladies, by E. J. O.,        . . 24, 45, 65, 121
Persian Sibyl, by E. J. O.,           .               . . .        171
Princess Use, The, by Thekla,      .               . . 132,183,200
Puritan Heroes, by O. M.,                            . . •          12
Re-appearance of the Frog, by Frucara,     . . .17
Rest, by Yolande,         .               .               • . .127
Rose, The, by Thekla,                   .               . . -       276
Shakespeare's Heroines, by E. J. O.,          . . .        340
Silence, by Melita,        .               .               . . .50
Sir Walter Scott as a Poet, by Elfie,          . . 174, 193, 225
Sir Walter Scott's Prose, by Laura N. Smith, . .        257
Sleeping and Waking, by O. M.,                 . . .       230
Soldier's Remininscences, A, by A. M.,      . . 60, 86, 97
Solitary Hour in an Old Library, A, by Elsie, . .        172
Song, by La Maurice,                   ....       344
Song of the Pirate, The, by Mas Alta,        . • .338
Sonnet, by Melita,        .               .               . . .191
Spring Song, A, by Mas Alta,     .                . . .101
Stars, The, by Madge,                  .               . • .267
Stranger's First Impressions of Edinburgh, A, by Barbara,       .        237
CONTENTS.
Struggles of a Chaperone, The, by Dido,
Tale, A, by Xaomi S. Smith,
Taste for Music, A, by E. J. 0.,   .
Then and Now, by La Maurice,
Three Novels, by Mrs Whitney, by Dido.
Tout de Suite, by Naomi S. Smith,
Two Voices, by Christie,
Waiting, by Melensa,
Westminster Stage, The, byElsie Strivelyne,
Wet Sundays, by Des Eaux,
White Rose, The, by Yolande.    .
Why has this Happened ? by Sigma, ^, H-^'-.J^-/^ '■
Will there be Whips in Heaven? by Jeauie Morison,
261, 289, 331
301
214
140
1
274
180
199
16
345
244
114
27
INDEX  OF   CONTRIBUTORS'
NOMS   BE   PLUME.
A. M.,
Barbara,
Christie,
Des Eaux,
Dido,
E. II. S.,
E. J. O.,
Elfie,
Elsie,
Elsie Strivelyne,
Enna,
Frucara,
Grace,
.Feanie Morison,
La Maurice,
Laura N. Smith,
Liebchen,
Lutea Reseda,
Madge,
Maria Margarita,
Mas Alta.
Meigeag Bheag,
Melensa,
Melita,
M. S. S.,
Naomi S. Smith,
Noli-me-Tangere,
O. M.,
R.,
Jlustica,
Sigma,
Thekla,
Veronica,
Yolande,
24,45, 65, 121
1,51,7
, 160, 171
132
PAGi
60, 86, 97
237
107, 180
33, 309, 345
, 10% 152, 261, 289, 331
129
, 214, 308, 321, 340, 353
28, 174, 193, 225
172
16, 295
220, 318
17, 363
90, 304
27, 113, 369
70, 140, 245, '268, 344
257
8
39, 189, 251
267, 370
57
85,101, 151, 338
329, 363
199
50, 191
9, 108, 231, 283
274, 301
89
12, 230
120
142, 161, 206
114
183, 200, 262, 276, 349
212
72, 127, 244
E R R A T A.
 0^0 
Page     8, line 33, for " needless," read " heedless."
Page 116, line 23, end sentence with "experience."
Page 150, line   1, insert " , as " after " that."
Page 150, line   4, insert "," after " spirits."
Page 150, line 16, insert ", " after "sign."
Page 163, line 26,/or "connecting," read "connoting."'
Page 166, line 24, delete "," after "attributes."
Page 167, line 31, insert "what is " after " admit."
Page 208, line 39, for " revised," read " revived."
Page 210, line 12, insert " , " after " however," and for
" dangerous it was," read " it was dangerous."
Page 210, line, 17, delete " For."
Page 219, line 26, for " newer," read " Weber."
Page 342, line   4, for " comes," read " cowers."
Page 349, line 22, for " bearing," read " leaving."
Page 350, line 24, for " living," read " long."
Page 351, line 24,/or "proving wise," rea^Z"probably will."
Page 351, line 2Q,for " tuition," read " suited."
Jaxuaky 1872.
Yolande, . ...    72, 127, 244
B
THE   ATTEMPT.
These three novels are. The Gayworthys, Faith Gartneys
Girlhood, and Hitlierto; and their author is an American
lady whose popularity is rapidly increasing on both sides
of the Atlantic. From causes wliich I will shortly touch
upon, her popularity can never become universal; but to a
certain class of minds, and a large class it is, her books
are attractive in the very highest degree.
This is more especially true of Hitherto, a book whose
leading characteristics have been most ably defined in an
article in Blackwood for October 1871, entitled American
Books. But it seems to me easiest and most natural to
speak first of The Gayworthys, which in many ways leads us
up to the other two novels; for the great pecuUarity of style
and spirit so strongly pervading Faith Gartney''s Girlhood
and Hitherto, is not nearly so fully developed in The Gay¬
worthys. From this and other causes. The Gayworthys is
inferior to the other two. It wants that dreamy mysterious
charm, that constant blending of the ideal with the real,
so observable in their pages; its plot is rather unnatural,
and many of its situations forced and stagey ; and its
Americanisms are sadly apt to degenerate into vulgarisms.
Yet it is undeniably a clever book, and in many parts a
great deal more than clever. It is, like all Mrs Whitney's
novels, the history of a girl, Sarah Gair; though num¬
erous other plots and side-plots are woven in with her
history—too numerous, I think, from an artistic point of
view, and even for the general reader, for our interest is
greatly weakened by being so often subdivided and dis¬
tracted.
Jaslahy 1872. A
The Attempt.
Sarah Gair is tlie least interesting of Mrs Whitney's
heroines. She has less individuality, less character
than one likes in a heroine. She is simply a very
sweet, gentle, true-hearted girl, dominated during the
first part of the book by an essentially vulgar, sordid,
deceitful mother; and afterwards, sorely perplexed and
troubled by the fitful passions of a very violent and tem¬
pestuous lover. Say would be a charming girl to know,
for she is no insipid piece of mere amiability, as we see
from the way she insisted upon righting the victims of
her mother's fraud; but she does not come up to what
one expects in a heroine; her character is too unequal,
she is too miich the creature of circumstances.
Rebecca Gayworthy is better drawn, though she occupies
only a subordinate place in the story. Her love episode is
too absolutely absm^d, however, to be passed without re¬
mark. It is perhaps consistent enough with the Puritan New
England ideas of religion and duty, to represent Rebecca
deliberately unfastening her hair, which has been dressed
in the latest fashion, because she finds it so becoming that
she fears it may prove a " snare to her soul." But that
the man Avho had previously felt and shown at least a
preference for her, and to whom she had unconsciously
given her whole heart, should, influenced solely by a point
of hair-dressing, withdraw himself from Rebecca, whose
ideas, tastes, and feelings were all in harmony with his own,
and offer not only his admiration, biit his whole life, to the
utterly frivolous Stacey LaAvton, is a libel upon human
nature on both sides of the Atlantic. We do not deny
that personal attractions incessantly triumph over sterling
worth, but here there Avere personal attractions in both
cases, there was no violent contrast in externals, and the
contrast of character was too strong to be overlooked ;—it
was simply a question of hair-dressing on a single evening,
and we are gravely told that, by her conscientious adher¬
ence to Puritan braids on that one evening, Rebecca
sacrificed her happiness ; and that the Reverend Gordon
King, allured by Stacey Lawton's puffs and rolls of hair,
made shipwreck of his. No, no; this is unquestionably
nn pen trop fort; men are generally very foolish about
siuih matters, but not quite so foolish as Mrs Whitney
represents. Golden hair may turn a man's head, but
a well-dressed chignon will scarcely achieve it; and we
may feel tolerably certain that the Reverend Gordon
King Avould  have  succumbed  all  the  same  to Stacey
Tlie Attempt.
Lawton's pretty face, even had Rebecca appeared at
that strawberry party in the coiffure whose advantage
Mrs Whitney represents as so overwhelming. Joanna
Gayworthy's story is better told than her sister's, though
there is a degree of improbability in it also ; and her
character is not so attractive as the calm placidity of
Rebecca. Joanna is rather too much of the Yankee in
ideas and expressions.
But the flavour of Americanism throughout Tlie Gay-
worthys is mipalatably strong, and for readers in this
country, at all events, spoils the enjoyment of many
otherwise delightful chapters. And on one other point,
I Avould venture strongly to remonstrate with Mrs
Whitney,—the dreadful names she bestows upon her
characters. She absolutely " out-Uickens Dickens." We
can stand a great deal of this sort of thing now-a-
days,—Faith, and Hope, and Joy, and Anstiss, we are
reconciled to ; we can put up with Huldah Hatch, and
submit (with a sigh) to a hero entitled Gershom Vorse;
but there are limits to human endurance, and Mrs "Wliitney
persists in transgressing them. What are we to think of
two sisters, entitled Remember and Submit ? Of Mrs
Pelatiah Trowe, Mrs Parley Gimp, of a lady whose
baptismal name is Wealthy, and a maid-ot-all-work
rejoicing in the appellation of Gloriana M'Whirk? All
these, and many, many more, do we find in the three
novels by Mrs Whitney, of which I am writing; but I
tJiink the crowning and culminating instance is found in
TJie Gayii'orthyK, where we are expected to bestow our
interest and sympathy upon an individual condemned by
Mrs Whitney to bear the name of Jaazaniah Hoogs!!
Jaazaniah Hoogs! Phoebus Apollo! it surely cannot be
that any mortal is so cursed by fate and his godfather,
as this unhappy being of Mrs Whitney's creation ! Juliet
would certainly never have uttered her famous and oft-
quoted inquiry, had her soft Italian lips ever sought to
frame themselves to the uncouth syllables of Jaazaniah
Hoogs ! The little episode relating to this unfortunate
man is, however, beautifully told; and there is great
power in the scene between Gershom and Say on the
mountain, and the long-delayed reconciliation of Gabriel
and Joanna.
But in Tlie dayworthy-'^, I\Irs Whitney somehow never
attempts the sublime without at least suggesting
the  ridiculous ;   and   even  in  the   most   pathetic   pas-
"4 The Attempt.
sages, the effect produced is rather more hysterical
than sympathetic. Inferior in all respects to Faith
Gartneys Girlliood and Hitherto, The Gaywortkys is
especially so from an artistic point of view. The common¬
place peeps forth so intrusively from the poetic, the
ludicrous suggests itself so forcijjly in the midst of the
pathetic, that we feel quite provoked with Mrs Wliitney,
for so wantonly spoiling the effect of her really very
interesting and most original book.
The gi'eat fliult of her two other books is, that their
plots so much resemble each other; that is to say, the
great interest of both plots turns upon exactly the same
circumstances. Each of these books is the history of two
girls brought together by chance, ,and standing to each
other in a connection—that of mistress and maid—which
would in this country preclude close confidence and friend¬
ship, though things may be different among our Re¬
publican sisters in the West. In both books the one girl
—the mistress—is wooed by two lovers; and in both
behaves most weakly, if not wickedly, to one of these
men. And in this lies the Aveak point, morally speaking,
of the two books. Anstiss Dolbeare (the heroine of
Hitherto) and Faith Gartney treat Allard Cope and
Paul Rushleigh in a manner which, if not dishonourable,
was certainly most heartless; but which evidently is, in
the eyes of Mrs Whitney, most natural and innocent—
indeed, in the case of Faith Gartney, it is held up to us as
highly commendable. And yet Faith Gartney is of the
two heroines, incomparably the guiltier. We can excuse
poor dreamy Anstiss, a sensitive, poetic, romantic girl,
whose ultra-Yankee hyper-I'uritan surroundings jar most
painfully upon her refined and beauty-loving mind. We
can Avell excuse the lonely girl for clinging to the friend¬
ship and society of the Copes, the only means she pos¬
sessed of entering a congenial world, and we can easily
understand how her dreamy unworldly nature remained
unconscious of the real meaning of AUard's attentions, till
tlie mischief was well nigh done. Moreover, when poor
Anstiss has fully realised her position, she makes all the
atonement in her power, Avithdraws herself from Allard's
society, and when he at last speaks out, honestly tells
him that she can never love him. But Faith Gartney is
a young lady of a very different stamp; her practical
mind takes in the whole bearings of the case ; besides, the
pretty broad hints dropped by her sister and aunt prevent
riie Attempt.
the possibility of any unconsciousness. Without even
pretending to herself to love Paul Rushleigh, she allows
him to devote himself entirely to her, she permits and
encourages his attentions, until her own mother says,
" Faith has tacitly belonged to Paul Rushleigh these three
years," she is at last formally engaged to him, and then
a few months afterwards, upon the appearance of the
' hero' of the novel, she breaks off" her engagement Avith
much firmness and decision, amidst the admiration and
applause of Aunt Henderson (the mentor of the tale), Miss
Sampson (the said aunt's sick nurse), and her spiritual
adviser, Mr Roger Armstrong. There is a fearfully false
ring about all this, and we would fain hope that Mrs
Whitney's standard of truth and honour is not xiuiversal
in New England. We are very sure, indeed, that it is
not; and that there, as well as here, Anstiss Dolbeare
would be deeply blamed, though pity mingles with our
blame for her ; and Faith Gartuey, who played with Paul
Rushleigh's heart as a cat plays with a mouse, who accepted
all from him and gave nothing in return, who took upon
her the most solemn bond save one that a woman can
take, with scarcely an intention, certainly not a wish, to
keep it—this girl woidd, in the minds of all to whom
honour has any real meaning, have' a mark set against
her name that years of penitence would hardly efface.
But I turn gladly to the pleasauter task of saying some¬
thing of the many excellences of these novels of Mrs
Whitney's. Most attractive they undoubtedly are,—to
a certain class of minds, irresistibly so; but what that
class is will be better understood, and the character
of Ilitlierto better appreciated, if 1 qucjte a few lines
from the article in Blackwood for October 1871, to which 1
have already referred. The writer has been criticising
The Gales Ajar, and goes on to say:—
" Of the same class is a novel called Hitherto, which is brim¬
ful of this strange consciousness of the unseen. ... It is
its spiritual side—the extraordinary pressure of the unseen
everywhere,   without,   however,   any  I'elapse   into    the   vulgar
supernatural, which is the charm of the book The gates
are ajar, too, in Mrs Whitney's book ; but the revelation, or
fancied revelation, of strange light which shines through them,
concerns not the dead but the living. The whole of existence is
wrapped in that veil, which gives meaning and mystery to its
slighest incidents Thus this subtle spiritual  sense—if
we   may  use  such   a  word—this   consciousness   of  the   unseen,
fi The Attempt.
embraces the visible world all round about, appearing at every
chink in a suppressed yet unquenchable glow of light."
It is this which constitutes the great charm, and at the
same time prevents the general popularity of Mrs Whit¬
ney's novels ; for the above passage is also true of Faith
Gartneys Girlhood, though in a very modified degree.
To many minds of great intellectual power, the larger
part of Hitherto is a sealed letter; while it lies open
and easy, and attractive beyond description, to other,
possibly far inferior minds, if they are but gifted with
sympathies for the unseen world brought so close to us
there,—Avith a power to blend the ideal and the real, as
Anstiss Dolbeare did in her reveries and imaginings. To
one class of minds, Grandon Cope's exquisite interpre¬
tation of the precious stones in the Revelation reads like
the utterance of one inspired; to another, it is but a wild
incoherent rhapsody; the first feel their hearts throb
with sympathy for the ecstasies of Anstiss, when Grandon
Cope shows her the spiritual scale of colour; the others can
scarcely restrain a smile at the idea of a grown man and
woman so moved with such a trifle. And the same holds
true of the character of Anstiss herself,—so intensely
sympathetic to some'natures, so strangely incomprehen¬
sible to others. And yet I think that most of those even
who fail to appreciate the full power and beauty of the
book, must feel vaguely that there is in it great power
and beauty, though veiled fi'om them by the dreamy
mysticism which prevails throughout. Hitherto is no
common book, and upon many minds it will exercise no
common influence.
The character of Hope Devine, in spite of the more
lenient judgment expressed by the critic in "Blackivood,
and in spite of the very beautiful ideas and sentiments
to which she gives utterance, appears to most readers
utterly overstrained and unnatural. She would be a
phenomenon under any circumstances, and with any
upbringing; but imder the conditions described in
Hitherto, we venture to pronounce her utterly and
totally impossible. Grandon Cope and Augusta are
masterly sketches, and Aunt Ildy very natural and amus¬
ing in her puritanical precision and stiffness. But there
can be little doubt that next to Anstiss herself, the
interest of nearly all readers centres in her husband.
Richard Hathaway is emphatically one of nature's noble-
The Attempt.
men. His utter unselfishness, his child-like liumility,
his entire devotion to Anstiss, and unshaken trust in her,
the thorough manliness and nobility of his whole char¬
acter, scarcely leave room for a single adverse criticism ;
for though Richard Hathaway is the embodiment of one
of the highest possible types of human character, there is
not one feature strained or overdone. All is most natural,
most life-like ; and though all readers of Hitherto may
not be so fortunate as to know a Richard Hathaway,
most, I think, will be reminded by him of some friend,
quiet and undemonstrative, but possessed nevertheless of
true greatness of soul.
Mrs Whitney is gifted with a most vivid perception of
the beautiful and pictm-esque, and all through her books
we come constantly upon little felicitous touches, reveal¬
ing the artistic nature of the writer, and adding incal¬
culably to the interest of tlie reader. The description of
natural scenery, too, so utterly wearisome in the hands of
many very excellent authors, becomes with Mrs Whitney,
a sort of prose poem,—glowing, vivid, and sublime; her
power of word-painting is of no ordinary kind. In par¬
ticular, I would instance the exquisite cliapter in Ilitlierto
Avhich is devoted to Anstiss' and Richard's sail on the
river; and the scarcely less beautiful description of the
treat prepared by Anstiss among the woods for her city
friends; and in Faith Gartney s Girlhood, two beautiful pieces
of descriptive writing may be found in the account of
Faith's walk with Glory in the frosty morning, and of her
walk with Roger Armstrong in the woods bright -svith the
colours of the Indian summer. In Mrs Whitney's estima¬
tion, evidently, "a thing of beauty is a joy for ever;" and
she has, by her wonderful descriptive power, imparted the
joy to many a far-off reader.
I have said but little of Faith Gartney s Girlhood, and
that little has been all, or nearly all, on the subject of its
faults. Yet it has many beauties, though the extreme
similarity of many of its characters, and much of its plot,
to the characters and plot of Hitherto, incessantly force
one to compare it with that far superior book. But Faith
Gartney is a loveable heroine too, despite her treatment of
Paul Rushleigb, and her unaccountable preference for
Roger Armstrong, who somehow irresistibly suggests the
red-nosed Shepherd of Pickwick notoriety. Aunt Hender¬
son is excellent,—a downright, determined, independent
old  lady, Avho calls a spade a spade without any peri-
8 The Attempt.
phrasis, and Avhose kindly benevolence is of the most
practical type. Miss Sampson, too, the hard-featured,
strong-minded sicli-uurse, who " takes no easy cases," and
whom the doctor describes as " a woman who goes through
the world choosing to eat drum-sticks," strikes us as in¬
tensely real, and doubtless very necessary. And the
sub-heroine in this book, Glory M'Whirk, is a far better
conception than the impossible Hope Devine of Hitherto.
One of the very best chapters of Faith Gartneys Girlhood
is that relating to poor Glory's struggles and trials, long-
endurance, and final despair, under the yoke of Mrs Grub-
bling; though, surely, a more repulsive character than
that of Mrs Grubbling has seldom been transferred from
real life to a novel. Glory's rise and progress, too, are
much more gradual and natural than Hope Devine's ; and
her final settlement in life is a very "happy thought" on the
part of the authoress. Old Mr Rushleigh is a charming old
gentleman; and the eccentricities of Mis' Battis render her
a most amusing specimen of Yankee " servant-galism,"
I can only, in conchision, express a hope that these re¬
marks, disconnected and superficial though they be, may
lead some of my readers to make personal acquaintance
with the Avorks of this very talented and original Ameri¬
can authoress.
Dido.
I KNOW not when, I Imow not where,
I shall lie in my dreamless sleep;
If on earth's wide space be my resting-place.
Or in ocean's sounding deep.
Perhaps this very day my feet
All carelessly have trod.
In needless mirth, on the dark-brown earth,
Where my gi'ave waits xmder the sod.
Perhaps where I wandered this very morn,
I have seen from ocean's shore.
Where, imder its Avave, shall be my graA^e,
Till time shall be no more.
The Attempt.
The hungry waters may be my bed,
Or the quiet graveyard's slope;
But wherever it be, or on earth or in sea,
My flesh shall rest in hope.
And if where her weary children strive,
I lie on earth's troubled breast,
Nor grief nor fear shall reach ray ear.
For He shall give me rest.
Nor ocean's self shall break my calm.
With its ceaseless murmurs deep ;
In the restless sea He will give to me,
To me. His beloved, sleep.
Nor care I whether my body lie
'Neath the waves, or in churchyard sod ;
For in heaven above, through the Father's love,
In my spirit I shall see God.
LlEBCHEN.
^  Christmas   IParto.
Bills and bells, parties and presents, carols, annuals, and
holidays immediately rush into the mind at the mere
mention of Christmas time; to say nothing of frost and
snow, yule logs and plum pudding, holly and mistletoe.
But all these things have been written upon so fre¬
quently, that it would be next to impossible to speak of
them in any new and interesting way. However, we
may perhaps be allowed to give a description of a little
Christmas entertainment which is not likely ever to have
been made the theme of an article before. It was not a
dance, nor was it a dinner, nor could it be called a family
gathering; it was as unhke a musical soiree as possible,
and there was certainly nothing of a theatrical character
about it. It was merely a tea-party, given to about
forty poor and aged widows.
The place of meeting was a large and cheerful kitchen,
which was prettily decorated with holly and laurel, and
well lighted by gas and an immense lire. The guests
began to arrive about four o'clock, and when their bonnets
JAMARI 1872, B
10 The Attempt.
and cloaks had been removed by some kindly attendants,
they entered the room with pleased smiles and old-
fashioned curtsies.
The costumes were useful and picturesque rather than
elegant and fashionable. Instead of wreaths and chignons,
there were large white caps, with coloured handkerchiefs
tied over them, and short gowns of dark stuff or lilac
print, took the place of long-trained silks and tarlatans.
Nearly every one wore also a small woollen shawl over
her shoulders.
But the faces formed a more interesting study than the
dresses. Some were certainly weak and expressionless;
afid others, it must be owned, had those unpleasant lines
about the mouth which tell of discontent and a sour
temper. Many, perhaps the majority, had care and
trouble written unmistakeably upon them, but not a few
wore that gentle, peaceful look which can conquer all
plainness of feature, as well as the fiuTOws and wrinkles
of old age. Those women who desire to be " made beau¬
tiful for ever " would do well to learn that, after all, kind¬
liness makes the prettiest, softest eye, and a sweet temper
the best-shaped mouth.
When all had assembled, a sort of short service began.
The 90th Psalm was first read, and many a sigh and
moiirnful shake of the head told plainly that the mention
of " labour and sorrow " had come home to the hearts of
the poor hearers. Then came a hymn, the first two linea
of which were—
"And are we yet alive,
And see each other's face ? "
It was sung to a tune called " St Plungent's," a " short
measure," which is not to be found in " Hymns Ancient
and Modern," nor indeed in any recently-published tune-
book that I know of.
This was a trying time to some of the young tea-makers.
It might be difficult to say at what precise age the singing
voice fails, but it may safely be asserted that after seventy,
high notes should be avoided as dangerous. The effect of
forty cracked voices all giving way at once is startling,
remarkable, and not a little absm-d. It would be impos¬
sible to describe the extraordinary trills, turns, jerks, and
shakes in which the old ladies indulged, but to the singers
themselves the harmony seemed perfect. They shut their
eyes, and swayed slowly backwards and forwards like
trees moved by a gentle breeze.    When a short prayer
The Attempt. 11
had been read, the tea began. The long tables were
loaded with hot toast, buns, and what in the south of
England would be called " cake," but what in Cheshire
and Lancashire is spoken of as "currant bread," and eaten
with butter. And now every one looked supremely happy
and comfortable, and even those who had seemed shy at
first began to talk unrestrainedly.
Need I say that not a single guest shrank from her cup?
To balance a saucerful of hot liquid in one hand is by
no means an easy accomplishment, but om- old friends
were all adepts in it from long practice.
When the tea was over (it was by no means a hasty
meal), and a pleasant chat had been enjoyed around the
great fire, the widows began to prepare for their walk
home. The cloaks were brought out, long garments,
black, brown, and red, fastened with large brass clasps ;
also the bonnets, which were merely black satin tunnels
closed at one end, and ornamented with one or two
enormous bows.
A very old woman was observed to be struggling vainly
with her heavy wrapper. Age had dimmed her fine black
eyes, and her trembling hands seemed almost as power¬
less as an infant's, A young lady came to her assistance.
" Thank you, my luve," she said; " you're very koind.
This is my wedding-dress, luve." (Here she gave a funny
little laugh, and held up a scrap of that venerable gar¬
ment.) "It is, for sure. I've been careful on it, luve;
it's more till fifty year old."
Another ancient dame was as full of fun and frolic as a
young lamb, and kept all her neighbours in a state of
continual merriment. " I hope," observed a girl who was
helping to find lier bonnet, " that if I live to be eighty,
I may be as cheerful and contented as you are." " Eh I
bless you, child," she answered, " it does na mak' things
better to be allus fretting o'er 'em, and nought can hurt
me for long now."
When every cloak and tunnel had found an owner, each
widow received a loaf and a half-crown, and gave a bless¬
ing and good-night in return; and then home they went,
facing the snowy evening with a good courage, the
stronger ones giving a supporting arm to those who were
the most infirm.
M. S. S.
12 The Attempt.
iJurUan   P^rocs.
History hands us down the portraits of the men who
lived and died, who fought and suffered in bygone cen¬
turies, coloured by the passions and affections of their
contemporaries. The same character which appears
stainless and noble when drawn by a favouring hand,
loses all its better qualities, and becomes dark and
repulsive when we see it as it seemed to an enemy, or
perhaps to a mere political opponent. And at no time
have the strongest passions in our national nature been
more strongly roused than at the period when Cavalier
and Puritan, Royalist and Roundhead, were ranged in fierce
conflict, when the love of liberty, the very backbone and
stay of the British character, was opposed to the loyalty,
which is the life-blood of the land. The Puritans have
painted the Cavaliers for us, and the Cavahers have done
the same good ofiice by the Puritans.
Certainly the Cavaliers have, on their side, the romance
of what the French would call the " situation." We have
treasured in our minds an ideal Cavalier, perhaps very
wide of the reality ; still I would fain hope that such were
not wanting among the men in whose veins flowed the
oldest blood of England, and who arrayed themselves
for the defence of king, and, as they thought, country, as
to a solemn duty, as to a glorious festival.
My ideal Cavalier, as to his outward man, I picture to
myself like a portrait of Prince Rupert which 1 once saw
at Wilton House, near Salisbury. The long loose love¬
locks, the great dark mournful eyes, which seemed to
follow one, as the eyes of all good portraits do, the clear-
cut, refined, noble features, formed altogether an imper¬
sonation of the supporter of a forlorn hope, of a failing
cause. We knoAV that Prince Rupert was the wild, reck¬
less leader of a plunder-loving band of German mercenaries,
but I maintain that if his character had matched his face,
which I fear it did not, he would have made a model
Royalist, one of those who took up the cause of their king
as calmly and sacredly as the best of the Puritans took up
the opposite side, and fought for it to the death with
clean hands and a pure heart.
Of course, many will deny that there were any such
on the side of the king. Some people seem to imagine
that a good cause must necessarily be a magnet which
The Attempt. 13
draws to itself all the good men of a country, but I
think we find in reading history, that it is not so. I do
not for a moment deny that the Puritans were on the
right side, not because they were on the winning side,
but because their victory was also the victory of truth
and purity and freedom; but I think that where men see
eye to eye in " the palace of eternity," many of the brave
and true who shed their blood on both sides have met in
peace and gladness long ago.
After all, this is an essay dealing with Puritans, not with
Cavaliers. And I think the best of the Puritans presented
to the world a type of character singularly noble. They
" loved not their lives unto the death." They knew, what
in this ease-loving century we are apt to forget, that there
are better tilings than leading a comfortable untroubled
life; they were taught " That a country's a thing men
should die for at need,"—still more that justice, liberty,
and religious toleration were things to suffer for, to bleed
for, and even to be killed for.
They struck off the chains that were being stealthily
wound round the civil and religious freedom of their
country, and we have to thank them for it to this day.
They gave us three men who stand out clearly against
the back-ground of trouble and confusion, when men's
hearts failed them for fear, and households were torn
asunder, and fi-iends and lovers were parted by the fierce
dissension which clove the coimtry in twain,—Cromwell,
MUton, and Bunyan.
Cromwell is fiercely abused by some, and strenuously
upheld by others. He is "a bloody minded and hypo¬
critical usurper;" he is "the saviour of his country, the
upright, brave defender of her liberties." He is to one a
pitiless regicide, to another a military saint. But what¬
ever friends or enemies may say, no one can deny that he
was " the right man in the right place," the man whom
God appointed to take the rule of the bleeding, struggling
country, the " still, strong man in a blatant land," whom
Tennyson describes. Whether we regard him as a saving
angel or a destroying scourge permitted to arise for the
punishment of a siniiil land, it is the power in the man
that we admire, the tremendous energy that brought
the son of the Huntingdon brewer to take the seat of
princes, and to make tlie country, as all allow, greater
and more terrible than for centuries before, or centuries
after his time.
14 The Attempt.
I believe Cromwell to have had a higher end in view
than his own elevation; nothing but the conviction that
he was the destined ruler of the distracted people who
were suffering such miseries, coidd have raised him, even
in that seething tumult, to such a height. He proved
himself fit for his high vocation. He did the work God
gave him to do, and though some heavy errors defaced
it, among others, and chief of all, that which Milton sternly
justifies in his brief translation from Seneca,
" There can be slain
No sacrifice to God more acceptable
Than an unjust and wicked king ;"
yet, desperate evils demand desperate remedies, and he
has answered for them to Heaven. Certainly the execu¬
tion of Charles I. roused such a storm of sympathy Avith
the ill-starred prince, dying as his beautiful ancestress had
died before him, and of rage and horror against his mur¬
derers, that the king's errors, and the usurper's merits,
were both forgotten. The mists of death hid Charles'
faults, and the ineffaceable stain of his blood fell like a
curse upon Cromwell, never to be removed in the eyes of
the English people, even by years of patient labour for his
country's good. Had Cromwell been guided by his usual
wisdom in this matter, not to mention any higher consider¬
ations, he would never have given Charles the part of a
martyr to play, with the eyes of the world looking on at
the slaughter of a king by his subjects.
In after times, when royal blood was po^^red out like
water in Paris streets, men grew inured to such
doings; but in England, in the seventeenth century, they
still clung to the doctrine of the divine right of the Lord's
anointed, still pointed to David sparing his royal enemy
as an example, to Jehu and Zimri as warnings of what
would befall those who broke the holy bond of loyal
duty between prince and people. In thinking of the Six¬
teenth Louis who fell in the French Revolution, we are
prone to forget his weakness and incapacity, his incapa¬
bility either of yielding or ruling, and only to remember
the calmness with which he met his last hoiu-, amidst the
hideous uproar and blind fury of the thousands of tyrants
who had so lately been slaves. And in the eyes of many,
Charles I. atoned for his life by his death.
Let us turn from Cromwell to his immortal secretary, to
the man Avhose blind eyes saAv such glories as are not
The Attempt. 15
g^ven to mortal vision. Surely he would hardly have ex¬
changed such darkness for
" the light of common day."
One poet, and one alone, stands with him on his Alpine
height of stainless fame, and to him, Milton looked up with
the noble and ennobling admiration of one great soul for
another. Dante Alighieri, patriot and poet, trode insoul the
same path where Milton went, but, though Milton equalled
him in purity and magnificence of idea, it seems to me
that, as a man, the English poet was inferior to the Italian.
Beneath all Dante's sternness and horror of corruption and
vice, there was a warm heart full of such tender sympathy
as only pure and noble hearts can know. He, as Brown¬
ing says,
" Loved well because he hated,
Hated wickedness that hinders loving."
Would Milton, even in fancy, have felt his blood freeze
and liis eyes grow dim, and swooned from pity, when
Francesca told her tale of guilt and miseiy, and the shade
who "nevermore was divided from her," wept hopeless
tears over the short-lived joy and the eternal sorrow ? 1
think not.    Milton's poetry is
" Pure as the naked heavens, majestic, free,"
but it is more poetry of the head than of the heart. Still
there is no gi'ander vision of olden times than that of the
Puritan poet, mixing freely in the strife of men as long as
sight was left to him, and then shut in by cloud and ever-
during dark to a temple, whence such strains of consecrated
melody arose  as have never died away.    A temple  of
f)atient waiting and glorious revelations, lit by a clearer
ight than the sweet light of the sun,—even the light
" which shineth more and more imto the perfect day."
Milton's mixture of the lore of heathen mythology with
the truths of the Christian religion gives scandal to
many, while for others, it has a distinct charm of its own.
His was a classical mind, and though his powers were
heightened and hallowed by his faith and love, his scholar-
craft remained with him. His muse, though nightly
visiting
" Thee, Sion, and the flowery brooks beneath
That wash thy hallowed feet, and warbling flow,"
could not forget the sparkling spring of Helicon. He
saw to the heart of the old Greek traditions, he felt the
human spirit throbbing through them to reach the truth
of which they held out the dawn and the foreshadowing,
16 The Attempt.
and so we find them twining and blossoming about his
poetry everywhere.
A few words about the third Puritan whom I have
mentioned, and I shall conclude. John Bunyan was
widely different from both the Protector and the poet,
and yet his name will last as long as theirs. He had
neither the administrative genius of Cromwell, nor the
cultivated intellect of Milton, but his book, of whose
merits he was so very diffident, has immortalized him.
The world is the better that he lived in it. And he
may stand for a type of the humbler Puritans, of those
men who filled up the ranks of Cromwell's Ironsides,
and heard the preaching of the military ministers, who
fought, and prayed, and worked, and strove against
the Royalists and the Devil in the field and in the
closet. Their faults have been censured, their peculiarities
caricatured, many a time. But in the main, they were
faithful, just, and wise. Let them rest beneath the turf
at Naseby and Worcester, within the sound of solemn
chiming from church bells, in many a green " God's acre."
Their fighting is finished, their work is done. And over
their graves rises another conflict, not fought with swords,
but with pens. Round theii* rest swells an alarum, as of
coming terror; men whisper that the faith they lived and
died for is shaken to its foundations, that false creeds are
creeping in among us, that belief and truth have deserted
England.
" The corpse is calm below our knee,
Its spirit, bright before Thee,
Between them, worse than either, we,
Without the rest or glory.
Be pitiful, 0 God ! "
Yet between these graves and that sky, who can really
fear that all our forefathers valued more than life will ever
be trampled beneath om- feet'? " He sitteth between the
cherubims," be the earth never so unquiet, and in his own
good time, will bring light out of dimness, and faith out
of doubt. 0. M.
C^c   Wt^imxvL^ttx   stage.
Our politicians, born to vex the age,
Lilce players, " fret their hour upon the stage ;"
With bickerings, not alone behind the scenes.
They ask what this one said, or that one means;
132 The Attempt.
A Tale of the Harz Mountains.—From the German.
Part I.
At the time of the flood, when all the water in the world
had run together, climbed the hills, and flowed in wild
waves over the highest mountain peaks, there was great
confusion among the different floods ; and when our Lord
at length took pity on the poor world, made the clear
light of heaven shine throiigh the gray cknidy covering,
and commanded the waters to separate and find the way
home into their glens, neither brook nor stream would
ever have found its native bed again if hosts of good
angels had not descended upon earth, and led them
careftdly back to the right path. Wherever the long
mountain tops peeped up above the flood, the angels
alighted on them, and went slowly down the valleys,
driving the waters before them. And as they got deeper
and deeper down, they directed the course of the rivers
and streamlets, marked out the boundaries of the sea, and
enclosed the lakes in pointed rocky chains, or in green
woods and meadows. Then, with large brushes made of
the rays of the sun, they swept the mud out of the grass,
and dried the heavy foliage of the trees, working with
such zeal, that the water dust which they stirred up, hung
in the mountain clefts hke vaporous veils of mist.
Their work had gone on for some time, and was nearly
finished, when, one day, a wearied angel sat resting on
one of the highest Alpine peaks. Thence he had a wide
view towards north and south, east and west, and gazed
pensively down on the green earth, which now rose,
mnocently smiling, above the vast waters of atonement.
" How beautiful it is," he thought, " how radiant in its
purity—but will it always remain as pure ? Will all the
guilt which has been now Avashed away, not spring up
again? Will sin never again press its black finger on
the blooming countenance of the purified world ? "
A sad foreboding sighstirred thebosom of the good angel,
and he turned his dazzled eyes away from the morning
sun which rose on the horizon in blood-red flames. He
looked long towards the side where the German streams
had  gone  down.    He  saw them  gliding away in  the
18 Tlie Attempt.
bable that some of the animals had prohibited his report¬
ing to me tlieir sayings and doings ; or what if they had
ceased their toils ! What if some pitiless storm had beat
upon the noble edifice and laid it low! Ah, that was a
thought I could hardly bear to entertain.
My readers will therefore understand how glad I was to
see my little visitor once more. I told him he was very
welcome ; and entering at once on the subject which inter¬
ested me so deeply, I enquired if the Palace still existed.
The Frog did not reply for several seconds; a quiver
seemed to pass through his frame, which I thought expres¬
sive of strong emotion, and then in a truly awful tone, in
which there was a volume of rebuke, he said, "My friend,
can you ask such a question ? "
Now, I thought this touch of indignation was highly
commendable; indeed, I was glad to see it, fir I had
thought my little friend had not the pride and interest in
the Palace which he ought to have had, especially as he
had the very great honour of being associated in some
degree with the builders. I was aboxxt to say as much to
him, and to tender an apology to his injured feelings, but
the next moment I perceived he was laughing heartih/. He
was very fond of laughing, and indulged in it sometimes
imseasonably, I thought. " Ah, yes," he said, recovering
gravity, " it exists ; it prospers ; the sun shines kindly on
it, and in future may shine still more brightly, and that
wind, that sharp, cutting, remorseless wind, that blows
with such cruel vehemence on many fair buildings, has, as
far as I kno"w, been gentle and temperate towards ours."
" What A\and, Froggie ? "
" Oh, don't you know ? " replied the Frog ; " they call
it criticism, I believe."
" And what have you to tell me about our mutual
friends ?    Do they still play at their game of debating ?
" Oh, yes ; very often, with great skill and zest."
" And does the Stag still superintend the affairs of the
Palace; and are the others as industrious and energetic as
before?"
" Yes ; I am glad to say the Stag maintains his impor¬
tant duties with uncreasing vigour and strength. He has
at present an excellent coadjutor-in-oflfice, namely, the
Beaver."
" Ah ! that's a very intelligent animal, I believe."
" Precisely so," said the Frog.
" I don't think you mentioned him to me before."
The A ttempt. 19
" Probably not; but during the years that have elapsed
since I have had the pleasure of conversing with you,
several other animals have joined the builders. 1 am
going to make special mention of one of these this after¬
noon, I refer to the Eagle." Here the Frog paused, and
drew a long breath. My expectation was raised as to
some wonderful announcement about to be made, but
nothing came but the following, as it seemed to me,
meaningless sentence,—
" An eagle is an eagle."
" Well, what of that?" I said. " Ah yes! I think I know,"
I continued. " He will build too high for some of you ; "
and I laughed to think of the poor little Frog, straining
his eyes to follow the proudly soaring eagle.
" Nay," replied the Frog," as regards that matter, should
not all have height in their aim as they build '. " Here
my little friend paused, as if doubtful of my comprehending
his meaning, but finding I did not speak, he continued,
" The higher you ascend, the further you see, and in the
far-off vision much beauty may lie. It seems to me that
the true builders ynW ever think of the benefit to be con¬
ferred on those who may visit the palace ; sometimes
giving them entertainment, at others aifording subjects of
interest to their aim, or again, building so as to give them
that far-off visifjn I have just mentioned. These chambers
they will build with care, placing in them large windows
framed with truth, and formed by some magic crystals,
such as hope, faith, love. These can purify the vision,
can dispel intervening mists, and so the viewer can
behold light and beauty, where he saw but darkness and
deformity. Doubtless you can recall the great builders
who have built thus, one I thmk of now, from whose
windows the beholder has seen, breaking through the
dark cloud that bounded the horizon, a flood of glorious
li2;ht! * But pardon this digression, I was talking t)f
the Eagle."
" Does he build as you have been describing ? "
" He does," replied the Frog, " but," with a little laugh,
" I was thinking of his ambition in another direction, as
you will see presently. One day when the animals were
met together to discuss the affairs of the palace, this noble
creature begged leave to call their attention to an error
connected with the  building, which he thought  might
* See "In "Mcinorinin " Stanza LIII.
20 The Attempt.
and ought to be corrected, that was the name it bore. An
electric thrill passed through the assembly at this an¬
nouncement, perhaps there was a small degree of bristling
and ruffling, but the animals are not given to much
demonstration in their fellings of disapprobation; nor did
they all disapprove of the Eagle's view of the subject,
some were much pleased with it, and hailed with joy the
prospect of having this grievous wrong removed. Such
being the case, it was appointed that a battle should take
place between the opposing parties."
" Another battle !" I exclaimed; " I am afraid our friends
are rather of a belligerent nature."
"But is not warfare good in a good cause?" returned
the Frog.
" True, but "   I w\as about to ask if he thought the
cause was really a good one, but seeming to divine what
I was going to say, the Frog begged I would not discuss
the point Avith him.
" Well," I said, " you will perhaps allow me to say that
I cannot see why such importance should be attached to
the name of the palace."
" Ah! my dear friend," replied the Frog, " it sometimes
comes to be a very serious matter; for I have heard it
asserted as a fact, that certain persons have actually
refused to enter within the palace waUs, purely because
of the name inscribed over the door."
" How very absurd!" was my indignant exclamation.
" Yes," said the Frog, gently, " but I suppose there will
be absurd people as long as the world exists. However,
I must tell you abovit the battle."
" I presume it was just a ' strife of tongues'' Hke the last;
no injuries received on either side ? "
Kind concern prompted me to ask this question, but to
the Frog it appeared an excellent joke; he burst into a
fit of laughter. " I have yet to learn that a strife of
tongues may not be injurious," he said, " but I daresay I
may assert no injury was sustained by the members of
either party."
But to proceed. Considerable excitement and interest
were felt by the animals as to the result of tliis second
contest about the name. Hopes began to revive in the
lireasts of the reformers that their cause, overthrown as
it had been in the last struggle, would noAv prevail. At
length the auspicious day arrived. The Stag and Beaver
of course were present, also the Bull-dog, Peacock, Turtle-
The Attempt. 21
dove, Horse, Hare, and many others. The signal having
been given by the Stag, the combat commenced, and with
breathless interest, the assembled animals listened to the
flow of eloquence which proceeded from the hps of the
Eagle. He had a good deal of wdt and humour, and these
are nice accomplishments in a combat of words.    Then,
too, he had a very efficient supporter in the , can you
guess who?"
" I don't think 1 can, but I should suppose it would be
a strong animal, the Bull-dog, perhaps'?"
" No," replied the Frog, laughing, " that worthy in¬
dividual was of the opposite party, and he confined him¬
self to sundiy low growls, inaudible to all but myself.
No ; the Eagle's firm and faithful ally was no other than
the gentle -toned Hare! and he was well fitted to be so.
He had all along protested against the retaining of the
odious name, and now he entered heartily into the
struggle for its abolition. His eloquence was different in
kind from that of the Eagle's, yet each was excellent in
its own way.
Such were the leaders of the reformers, and it was
well they were such talented and skilful ones, for they
had a very formidable enemy to encounter in the leader
of the opposite party, the illustrious Bat! With that
attractive and forcible eloquence winch is his peculiar
forte, this noble animal pled for the preservation of the
name, which he deemed was not at all detrimental to
the general welfare of the palace, and to which I presume
he, and many other of the builders, had become attached,
since it had borne it from the date of its commencement,
and that was not unnatural, was it ? "
" I think not," I replied; " and now pray tell me about
the banners borne by either party. You remember you
told me about them when describing the last battle, and
I have since discovered the meanings of the emblematical
trees and flowers, which you told me were traced on
them."
" I will willingly oblige you," said the Frog, " but you
must bear in mind, what I think I stated before, that it is
not an easy matter to discern these emblems accurately.
Still I think I am wrong in ascribing to the Eagle's banner,
the Mountain Laurel, mingled with Hawthorn* and to that
of the Bat, the Mountain Ash, and, I daresay I may add,
Ambition and Hope.
22 The Attempt.
the Violet* for one is ever reminded of this sweet flower
in the presence of the Bat."
"And who had the Mulberry Tree?"^ I asked, laughing.
" I suppose, as in the last combat, both parties would
declare they had it."
" Ah!" said the Frog, with a troubled sigh, " that was a
very difficult point to decide. I think each had a branch of
it; but you must pardon me if I decline venturing to
state who had the largest. And now I must proceed to
tell you about the noble position which the Horse assumed.
Being conservative in principle, he, of course, testified his
great dislike to changes, but yet he declared that if any
advantage might be gained for the palace by the change
of name, he would be willing to sacrifice his own feelings
for the sake of that advantage. I think that was highly
commendable. I am sure, my friend, had you been
present"—(I think it w^as cruel of the Frog thus to remind
me of such privilege, lying, as it did, beyond my reach)
—" you would have felt admiration for him, and would
hardly have forborne patting his proudly arching neck."
"And now, what of the Stag?" I enquired. "Of course,
he would take a very important part in the proceedings."
My little fi-iend did not immediately reply, but at last be
began, in a very low mysterious w^iisper,—"Ah, my
dear friend, you will be surprised to hear that a tretnor
was actually visible in the limbs of this most noble and
sagacious animal"—a pause. '' The antlers had not that
proud bearing which they have in general." Here the
Frog made a longer pause, I suppose to give more em¬
phasis to his final sentence ; then, in a still lower tone,—
■' he confessed to iveakness ! !" As my companion sank his
voice, i leant forward in order to hear his words better,
and the reader may fancy how shocked I was to perceive,
as he made the latter painful announcement, that his eyes
were twinkling with an expression of mischievous delight!
Resuming his usual tone, he continued,—" However,
the Stag had strength enough {loeakness, some would say)
to pronounce himself to be on the Bat's side, and he ap¬
pealed to all the animals to make their decision with due
conscientiousness." Again the Frog gave vent to a
troubled sigh, as he added, " Ah, was that not a hard
matter for small weak animals like myself? And then, if
you had only heard the contradictory statements which
* Prudence and Modesty. t Wisdom.
The Attempt. 23
were made by some of the animals. One declared that the
palace had ever been a strong substantial building, cap¬
able of enduring storms; whilst another spoke of it in
such a way as would lead one to suppose its walls were
formed of pasteboard or some such material, which the
change of name was to transform into solid masonry I
But now I must tell you how the battle ended. Conser¬
vatism won the day! The followers of the Bat numbered
more than those of his opponent, so the victory remained
with the former."
" And how did the Eagle bear his defeat ?"
" With the grace and dignity that became an eagle."
" And may I know on which side you were found ? I
feel pretty certain you would follow the example of the
Stag and the Bulldog."
" Pardon me, dear madam," said the Frog courteously,
" for I must decline answering your question ; but (if you
don't despise a frog's advice) I would bid you not be too
sure of anything. I fear I must now be bidding you
adieu," he continued, " for though I have permission from
our mutual friends to converse with you, our conversa¬
tions can only be of a certain duration."
This appeared to me to be rather singular, but, of
course, I could not be so ungrateful as to utter any com¬
plaint, since these amiable animals had so kindly con¬
ceded to the Frog's giving me intelligence concerning
their affairs.
"I wish, my dear Frog," I said, "I could make our
mutual friends sensible of the gratitude I feel for the
honour they have thus bestowed on me."
" Make yourself quite easy on that point, dear madam,
I shall be sure to convey your thanks to them; and now
adieu." So saying, the Frog hopped off" the stool, and
went towards the door; then, once more addressing me,
he said,—"Shall I also tell them'that the issue of the
battle met with your warm approval ? "
" Nay," I cried, " I must have a little time to think the
matter over."
But the Frog had already left the room, and no answer
came back, but his low mocking laugh.
Frucara.
24 The Attempt.
ctr^strianism  for   l^abUs,
Chapter i,—The Burn.
" Foot it featly here and there."
Everyone travels now-a-days, but the oldest ways of
travelling, namely on horseback or on foot, remain, and
ever will remain, the pleasantest. About them still
lingers the aroma of adventure and romance that has
quite departed from our wanderings by machinery; and
crowds of English gentlemen on the Swiss mountains,
in deserts, and in prairies, testify to their superior delight.
The ladies are sometimes rather left out; too much
limited to high roads, carriages, or even mule-back,
which, to one who can walk, is contemptible and un¬
pleasant ; so, on their behalf, I set down a perfectly true
and iinexaggerated sketch of some of ]\Iarjorie's (let us
so call our heroine) wanderings on foot. They are within
the powers of any fairly strong and healthy lady, and as
enjoyable in their way as the very newest, highest ascent
to the most enthusiastic member of the Alpine Club. Mar-
jorie's usual companion was her brother Martin—a delight¬
ful travelling companion. First, he was so cool, that no
weather or country, in Europe at least, was ever too hot
for him—so cool, that he was never worried or flurried,
never lost baggage or temper; and if he was rather too
cool for some flery enthusiasts at times, declined looking
at the moon on the ridiculous plea of .having seen it
before, had been heard treasonably to call a glacier " dirty
ice full of holes," and thought being at the foot of a moun¬
tain no sufficient reason for going up, these qualities made
him a better companion to a sister than an ambitious
moTuitaineer would have been.
Then Martin worked so hard at home that he enjoyed
everything; he enjoyed a good inn for its cooking, a bad
inn for the joke of it; fine scenery for its beauty, dull
scenery for its novel-reading privileges; he enjoyed
table dhotes of Yankees only, and things hackneyed to the
Giesbach point; he even enjoyed French railways.
Indeed, he had a rare natural gift for knowing all about
railways. He loved reading Bradshaw, and, it was
whispered, took it in as a magazine on the same principle
that people take in the  CornhiU.    Foreign Bradshaiv he
The Attempt. 25
thought less of, as being too discursive, too flippant,
with too much letterpress for its liieroglyphics. No one,
however, needed to have a railway anxiety of any kind
when he was there; and when I add that he had a re¬
markable facihty in mastering varieties of currency, and
always knew what and how much to pay, I think it will
be allowed he was a pleasant travelling companion.
Marjorie enjoyed the delights of travel more perhaps
than Martin; but she was less equable as to its discom¬
forts ; a bad inn depressed her, and an extra good one,
which was rather contradictory, depressed her more;
such an inn, I mean, as the Three Crowns, Vevay, or the
Three Kings, Basle, Then her enjoyment of the little
comfortable Swiss ones, of the out-of-the-way French
hostels, where you have such delicious coffee and
dinners; of the lonely Highland ones, where pink trout
and small.inutton are served by a host, as hospitable as if
he were not paid for it—was the more intense. She was
always making friends among landladies, boatmen,
guides—who not, and knew them again after years.
Finally, she was an enthusiastic mountaineer, a strong
walker, a steady climber, with secret aspirations, held in
check by fi-iends, but encoiu-aged by guides, to go over
the Col de Geant, up Monte Rosa and such like expe¬
ditions.
There is no use going on moimtains unless you are
fairly sure-footed, and have a good head. You are
otherwise a vexation to yourself, and a terror to your
wretched friends, who in those places where Murray
says,—"Here a single false step would precipitate the
traveller, etc.," will be in constant expectation of your
making that very unnecessary false step. As to distance,
long walks should be avoided by ladies two days run¬
ning ; but they will probably soon find that twenty miles
in a day is not more than pleasantly and wholesomely
fatiguing among the Alps. Every alternate day should
be an easy day, and fatigue should never be felt in the
back, but only in the feet, like weary shoes.
Our travelling companions were brought up within reach
of the moors, and early used to rough walking; one of
their favourite pleasures being to go up the stream of a burn
—a walk we recommend to all lovers of natural beauty.
You propose as an object not to wet your feet, and some¬
times leaping from stone to stone, sometimes scrambling
along the precipitous  bank, you work   your  slow   way
JANUARY  1872. E
26 The Attempt.
upward, finding new beauties at every turn. In the great
moor above, all is open and known, at least to the shep¬
herd, the keeper, and the sportsman; but what lovely
secrets the burn hides in its deep channel, what exquisite
little cascades of brown water, shpping swiftly over the
edge to dissolve in a cloud of foam, whitening above the
dark yet clear pool, where the trout swim round and round,
deeper shadows in the shade; what fairy islets covered
with tender wild flowers, looking the more fragile for the
strong sAvirl of water round; what delicious brakes loved
by the deer, where the great ferns, thriving in the damp,
grow six or seven feet high; what fair rowan trees,
hanging their bunches of bright coral berries over the
brown stream; and what a sense of remoteness and
soKtude, as if one was "the first that ever burst into
that silent" land, I believe that is sometimes the case;
but a native or even a habitation sometimes surprises
you.
One such I remember, and the contrast it presented
to the loveliness outside. An old feeble, nearly sight¬
less, woman lived by the great burn-side in a ruinous
hut. A neighboiir did for her, but usually she was
alone, and she was very poor. Bad health, want, lone¬
liness, and life with a drunken husband, then dead, to
look back upon—how did the day pass for old Chirsty ?
Could it have been the mere pleasure of seeing com¬
pany that made that old woman smile so sweetly, that
gave so cheery an inflection to her pretty Highland
voice whenever we saw her? We never left her without
feeling, that in spite of squalor and pain, there was
no such contrast as at first appeared between her and
the rejoicing creation round her. If she was well enough
to sit on her hard wooden chair, with the Book open
before her, she wanted nothing more—if she was not,
she would say, " It's no ill to wait." So she went on
waiting till she died, and then the friends, who had
not thought of her living, gave her, in the Scottish
fashion, a grand funeral, with black plumes and a horse
to draw her, for the first time, probably, since that far-
oif ill-fated wedding day, and the little hut became a
grassy ruin.
Before leaving the moors for the Alps, let me beg once
more to recommend to all ladies who love wild beauty,
that best of moorland guides,—the bm-n.
E. J. 0.
The Attempt. 27
" Will there be whips in heaven," said
A prattler at my knee,
With earnest eyes and flaxenhead
Uplifted anxiously.
I had been telling of a land
With streets of golden sheen,
Where walk the white-robed angel band.
Fair pearly gates between.
A land where a living river
Flows amid pastures green,
Where cloud nor tempest ever
Shadow the radiant scene.
And " Will there be whips up yonder ? "
Is the question he asks the while ;
With blue eyes wide with wonder,
I pause e'en while I smile.
The answer seems so simple, yet
When I meet the anxious eye.
And see the small hand fondling it,
His toy bought yesterday ;
I cannot tell the little child
That amid the glories given.
To bless the ransomed undefiled,
There are no toys in heaven.
For what were heaven to baby-mind.
Without his whip to-day ?
" My darling, all you want you'll find
In that bright land," I say.
And he clasps his new whip fondly,
Close to his little breast.
And the blue eyes brighten gladly,
And the little heart's at rest.
28 The Attempt.
But the simple childish wonder
Wakes many thoughts, and deep,
And I sit me down to ponder
When the little one's asleep,
" Will there be whips in heaven i " why
Smile at the childish prayer,
At the eyes so blue and anxious ?   My
Whips can I then spare ?
Methinks God smiles on my treasures, even
As I on the blue-eyed boy,
He knows that heaven would scarce be heaven,
To each without his toy.
And He answers my own wild yearning
" Will the joy I so cling to here.
My nature's rest and crowning.
Be mine in yonder sphere ? "
As I answered the child's quaint question,
" When babes are grown to men
Their playthings are forgotten,
You may not wish it then.
Peace, foolish heart, by a Father's hand.
There shall all joy be given.
If whips you want in yon bright land,
There unll be whips in heaven."
Jbanie Morison.
Jfaraurll   to  1871.
" The years that were, the dim, the gray,
Receive this night with choral hymn
A sister shade as lost as they,
And soon to be as grey and dim.
Fill high : she brought us both of weal and woe,
And nearer lies the land to which we go."
From the Spanish.
The shade of 1871 glides from among us with a yet
sadder aspect than that usual to the dying year. Its
shadow, thrown athwart Time's dial, is one which will be
gloomily reflected on the page of history ; and even in our
narrow' retrospect   of its   course,   personal  regrets   are
The Attempt. 29
swallowed up in a sense of national griefs and world-wide
troubles.    The life of this year has indeed been sad from
beginning to end.    It began with a change of national
destinies, which, through the operation of all the horrors of
war, siege, famine, plague, and anarchy, perfected the humi¬
liation of the bright, gay, impulsive Gaul, aud the triumph
of the more sober, steady, calculating Teuton ;   and its
close has been darkened by a cloud of calamity impending
over   Great Britain, the lightening of which leaves her
now in an   attitude   of trembling  thankfulness  that  a
nation's  prayers  have  been  answered.     The brightest
spot in the picture, indeed, is that which shows Britain,
distinguished as  she is by her ministrations   to  all  in
distress, whether on the battle-fields   of  one continent,
or  the homeless, burned hearths of another, receiving,
in  her  turn   such  an   overflow   of sympathy  from all
quarters of the globe, as proves that now, as in the oldest
times, " one touch of nature makes the whole world kin."
The nations of Europe are now Uving ostensibly at
peace with each other ; but who can  attempt to describe
the evil results of the late unhappy war, which are now
everywhere working with baleful effect on trade, politics,
society, and even religion ?     The direct national conse¬
quences are  striking enough.    A second-rate monarchy
has become the centre of a great confederate empire ; the
quondam supreme potentate of Christendom, though still
the " Pope at Rome," is no longer " the Pope of Rome ;"
and   the   man   who,   for   so    many   years    held   the
threads of   all  European   schemes  in   his   own   hands,
lives   an   almost   forgotten   exile   in    England,   where
he   received   a  welcome,    the   reasonable   warmth    of
which  was   sufficiently   explained   and   justified   by   a
comparison of the well-known Paris of the Empire, with
the miserable spectacle of Paris under the Commune.
l>'JVIany of the general national tendencies of the present
time may be traced the slow but deadly influence of a
poison which was subtly infused into the European system
more than a century ago.    The effects  of the leavening
process appear in the levelling disposition, which so fre¬
quently shows itself in this age, sapping religious principle,
speaking evil of dignities, and aiming at the destruction
of all mutual confidence in society.    So has originated
that mistrustful, discontented feeling on the part of the
various classes of society towards  each other, which has
organised an International Society, and Trades Unions, and
30 The Attempt.
produced the present gigantic irreconcileability between
the claims of capital and labour.
The Republican spirit has received a salutary check in
the display of loyal feeling so spontaneously evoked by
the severe illness of the heir to the crown; which, as a
trial shared alike by Queen and nation, has been the
means of strengthening that bond of sympathy which
renders impregnable the hereditary British attachment to
the throne, by increased devotion towards our beloved
sovereign and her family. Let us trust that the salutary
influence of this communion of sorrow vnll lead to a
higher and more enduring appreciation of our own
national benefits in the season of prosperity; and that,
on the other hand, the knowledge of the affection and
confidence cherished by the people for him, will strengthen
our prince for the discharge of his difficult duties.
Another happy link between sovereign and people was
knit in the late royal alliance with a member of our own
aristocracy. There was always something of regret to
the nation in parting with its princesses to foreign aspir¬
ants ; and the Queen has been held in high honour for
having freed her daughter from the trammels of an
exclusive royalty, in favour of the nobler ambition of a
union, not merely of hands and fortunes, but of minds,
tastes, and sympathies.
The war-like dispositions of the Continent necessitating
some examination into the efficiency of our own military
resources, the result has been an extensive mimic cam¬
paign, which displayed, with usual English frankness, the
prowess of our troops, under the immediate observation
of the foreign powers from whose less amiable attentions
they aimed to protect us; and the re-purchase, at an
enornius expense, of the stores which were sold cheap
under the economical dispensation of the Chancellor of
the Exchequer, whose last matchless device proved of
such an explosive nature, as well-nigh to make
" The engineer hoist with his own petard."
Army reform also engaged the attention of the Legis¬
lature, especially with regard to the law of promotion ;
and the Abolition of Purchase Bill was carried by a coup
de force on the part of the Premier, Avhich effectually
abolished the House of Lords for the time being, though
he mercifully promises to think thrice before doing so for
good.
The  length  and  barrenness   of   the   last   session   of
The Attempt. 31
Parliament has helped to give additional strength to a
cry for " Home Rule," which, raised as usual by Ireland
without any reason at all, might have reasonably enough
been taken ujj by Scotland, considering the nature of the
attention which her most important business receives in
the House of Commons. A necessity having been acknow¬
ledged to educate the masses, in order to prevent abuse of
their increased political power, a bill for Scotland was
introduced, which, ei^Jea^s&i^V proposed to accomplish this
end by banishing the Bible from schools, which should
be taught by under-paid men, and managed by a London
Board. But this proposal has not been accepted, and
hopes are held out of a three-fold amendment in the next.
Such agencies as the British Association, whose late visit
to Edinburgh must be noted as one of the most important
events of the year, when they devote themselves to in¬
vestigating the laws of nature, health, and ethics, are
invaluable to civilisation. Not the least wise, and cer¬
tainly the most graceful act of the philosophers while here
was their bowing before the shrine of the grand genius
of modern literature, whose influence is all pervading and
immortal, because it is at once great and good. The
Edinburgh demonstrations at the Scott Centenary were
somewhat ridiculed by the London press, and doubt¬
less a " feast of reason and flow of soul" is a Barmecidal
banquet to English taste; but a Scotchman's appropriate
tribute to the great Scot whose spirit is knit Avith his
country's, was one of the heart and mind, and not of
the senses.
The remarkable preponderance of female population in
Edinburgh revealed by the census lends additional weight
and interest to the gallant struggles of a little band of
intrepid women, to secure for themselves the means of
conferring lasting benefits on the whole sex. Except in
the chivalrous middle ages, when the distinctions between
nurse and doctor were less finely drawn, and wonaen cured
as well as endured with impunity, it seems fated that the
study of medicine should be a lasting source of perse¬
cution to the sex. Now that the very inveteracy of a
prolonged opposition has raised up so many friends to
the cause, all old objections seem merged in the con¬
sideration, that the education of medical ladies would
ruin the University, both in prestige and popularity; but
we may well doubt whether a failure to perform distinct
obligations undertaken by the University, may not be
32 The Attempt
equally unworthy of its high honour, and yet more
withering to its celebrity.
Edinburgh is left by the defeat of the St Mary's Loch
Bill, which, however, was thought by many an unwise pro¬
posal, without any decided scheme,—a defect which should
be speedily mended, as the help of all sanitary measures
and charitable agencies is needed, to stem the course of
the sickness which prevails around us to an almost unpre¬
cedented extent. The vaccination mania of last winter
has now its value and significance unhappily proved; and
the necessity of many sanitary reforms is acknowledged
in the common dread of threatening epidemics.
A new era in our street travelling was marked by the
adoption of the tramway system, which, notwithstanding
the recommendations afforded by the cars of superior
height, airiness, and smoothness of motion, has already
proved itself a dangerous one. It is to be hoped that the
better management that comes with time and use will
soon do away with all risks.
We have to record the loss, during the short twelve
months of the past year, of a great historian in George
Grote; of a noble warrior and patriot in Sir John Bur-
goyne ; and of a true friend to both science and literature
in Robert Chambers; besides the quenching of the hopeful
spirit of the great geographer and geologist, Sir Roderick
Murchison, wliile his sanguine expectations of the return
of his friend Dr Livingstone are yet imrealised.
The present publishing season seems imusually rich.
We have new poems from four of the greatest living
poets ; another Idyll from Tennyson, an historical drama
by Robert Buchanan, two new poems by Browning, and
a sacred piece by Longfellow; besides two volumes
of Forster's Biography of Charles Dickens, and the
beginning of a new novel by George Eliot.
A few words are now due to Tlie Attempt itself, on the
occasion of its wishing its readers, a Happy New Year
in a ncAV guise, which has been assumed in deference to
the wishes of many contributors and subscribers for an
increase of space, such as will do better justice to the
length of the articles, and so widen the sphere of the
reader's pleasure, though at the sacrifice of the old familiar
dress. Elpie.
A Prize is offered for the Best Prose Article
appearing in the February Number of "The
Attempt."
The Attempt. 33
^        Uliss   Justin's   Morhs.
Thirty years ago it would have been scarcely necessary to
preface any remarks on Miss Austen's works, by recalling
them to the mmds of our readers by name. At that time
we might have relied on all fairly educated people being
acquainted with her works, and so able at once to follow
any discussion of tlie characters contained in them.
But thirty years have worked their usual changes, and
new writers of fiction have sprung up, writers who busy
themselves with the hard questions and problems of our
age, and who naturally enough claim our sympathies.
Yet we are glad to think that there are still many who
reserve the chief corner of the fictional department of their
library for the works of Miss Austen.
However, lest some of our readers may not at once be
able to run over in their minds the names of her
novels, we shall mention them. They are six in number,
and fall naturally into two groups. The fu-st of which
may be called the Stevcnton group, being written in her
early youth, when she dwelt in the parsonage house of
Steveuton, of which parish her father was rector. The
Steventon group consists of Pride and Prejudice, Sense
and Sensihility, and Northanger Ahhey. These three novels
were written before she reached the ago of twenty-five.
The second group may be called the Chawton group,
being written later in life, when Chawton Cottage had
become the home of the diminished ftimily party. It
consists of Mansfield Park, Tkiima, and Persuasion.
Her biographer has in a few discriminating words
touched on the difference between these two groups; he
says, " If the former shewed as much originality and
genius, they may perhaps be thought to have less of the
faultless finish, and high polish which distinguish the
latter. The characters of the John Dashwoods, Mr Collins,
and the Thorpes stand out from the canvas with a
vigour and originality which cannot be surpassed; but I
think that, in her last three works, are to be found a
greater refinement of taste, a more nice sense of propriety,
and a deeper insight into the anatomy of the human heart,
marking the difference between the brilliant girl and the
mature woman."
FEBBCABY   1S72. E
34 Tlie Attempt.
Lady Susan cannot rank among her finished works,
being one which Miss Austen only considered fit to remain
shut up in her desk. The Watsons, which has also beeu
lately published by permission of her relatives, is only a
fragment, but contains many of the true Austen touches,
such as we rarely meet in any modern novels.
Miss Austen's genius is of the highest type; it is the
creative genius; we do not mean to say that it is equal
in degree to that of the very greatest writers, but it is the
same in kind. The writer who has no creative genius
may give us faithful copies of what he sees around him,
he may, with an observant eye, note peculiarities and
failings, and transfer them to his pages, but without
some of the creative genius he cannot make characters
which shall be consistent with themselves. Miss Austen's
characters are not imitations, but life-like creations. In
the small circle of her acquaintances no Mrs Bennet, no
Miss Bates, no Mr Collins was to be found. This, her
creative genius, is then what we note as the first dis¬
tinguishing mark of Miss Austen.
The second is one on which Lord Macaulay speaks very
strongly, it is that she is no caricaturist.* Her characters
are all distinctive, there are none put in simply to fill up
the back-ground, or to help on the story, as is the ^vay
with so many novelists, each person is Kfe-lilfe, having his
character different from all other characters,—just as in the
world we live in, no two persons are alike; but Miss
Austen's genius is such that she has done all this withoiit
giving us one caricature.
In the third place, we must note, as a special charm to
many minds, that in Miss Austen's works there are no
wearisome descriptions, a few short paragraphs at most
tell us all that, at setting out, it concerns us to know of
the cu'cumstances and surroundings of the actors. She
trusts to their future conversations and actions telling us
all that is necessary. In real life we study character for
ourselves, and need no showman to interpret to us w^liat
we may not at once understand. It is just so in Miss
Austen's n ovels, we are at once ushered into a small com¬
munity, and gradually by mixing with its members we
know them as thoroughly as we know our every-day
acquaintances, we soon laugh with them, and at them;
having arrived at wliieli  stage we need no  descriptions.
See Macaulay's Essay on Madame D'Arhlay.
7'Jte Attempt. 35
It is the same with scenery, by accompanying her actors
in all their daily occnpations, we become almost as nun ii
at home in their favourite haunts as they tlicmselves can
be. _ How easily we set out with tlio Miss Benneta on
their trips to the small garrison town of Merriton; or with
Emma Woodhoixse and Harriet Smith, in their frequent
visits to Highbury ; and how clearly we see Hartfield, with
its lawn and shrubbery with the gravel path, which just
sufficed for the winter walk of the amiable valetudinarian
Mr Woodhouse. Donwell Abbey, and Pemberton, the
future_ homes of her favourite heroines Emma Woodhouse
and Lizzie Bennet, are dwelt on with more minuteness,
but no tediousness.
The fourth distinguishing mark, and thaj; which is the
chief charm to most of her readers, is her keen sense of
humour. It cannot be said that there are any "jokes" in
her pages, yet every paragraph runs hke the stream,
sparkling in the sunlight. The humour, though keen, is
so delicate as almost to elude the very vulgar mind; but
Ave can remember no novelist who has afforded more
genuine amusement to ordinarily educated people.
The fifth and last excellence in her writing, on which
we must dwell, is the high finish of her works; she has
not left us one slovenly sentence. It is true that writuig
came naturally and easily to her, but, instead of letting
this tempt her to send forth her works hurriedly to the
world, she kept them by her, adding yet one more and
one niore touch till the whole was as perfect as the
paintings of some of the greatest artists. " Miniature
painting," she called her performances, scarcely aware of
what perfect paintings she was ijroducing.
Some clumsy critics complain of a want of strength in
her works, meaning by this that there are in them no
striking uicidents, no tragic scenes, nor any stronger
emotions portrayed than those of love and friendship. It
sepms to us that, in tliis fact, lies the peculiar strength of
Miss_ Austen, in that, without touching on any of the
passionate longings of the human heart, without placing
her people in any exciting situations, which may bring
out rare phases of character, without any adventitious
aid whatever, she has given us a set of novels which,
standing merely on their own intrinsic merit, can challenge
comparison with any yet written. It surely needs a
greater genius to invest scenes of everyday life with such
an interest that we return again and again to the study
3G The Attempt.
of them, than it does to paint with tolerable correctness,
strong emotions, and trying circumstances, which of
themselves call forth our sympathies, let the artist be
more or less skilful. A novelist is not great in proportion
as his subject is great. Shakespeare would have stood
above all other dramatists, though he had never written
"Othello" or "Macbeth"; such dramas as those of "Much Ado
about Nothing," and "A Midsummer Night's Dream" would
of themselves have testified to his surpassing genius.
Miss Austen's genius is as great in creating her favourite
half-county, half-village society, with all its accompanying
troubles and joys of everyday life, as is that of writers
who deal in the tragedies of occasional life.
Let us now glance at the heroes and heroines of Miss
Austen's novels. In her heroes she is pecuKarly success¬
ful, she has succeeded in what most novelists have failed,
she has protrayed gentlemen. It is strange that it should
be so, but it is an unquestionable fact, that but few
novelists have managed to make their heroes gentlemen.
Some have aimed at making them such paragons of ex¬
cellence, that they have ended in making them " snobs ;"
others have tried to imbue them Avith all that is heroic and
Byronic, and have produced uncouth boors, such as would
not be tolerated in good society; while many others, less
ambitious, have given us mere " walking gentlemen," on
whom they hang all manner of virtues of mind and graces
of person, but who never show by their conversation that
they really possess what their kind authors have so lavishly
bestowed on them in their introductory descriptions.
But Miss Austen's heroes stand out in clear, though well
toned colours ; all are gentlemen, all moving in much the
same class of society, landed proprietors, clergymen, or
naval officers, yet each is as distinct from the other as
would be the case in real life.
For our own part, we should place Mr Knightly, with
his quiet dignity, his exceeding kindness of heart, his well-
controlled temper, and his warm attachment to the
wayward Emma, first on the list of Miss Austen's heroes.
But there may be those who would give the first place
to the somewhat proud Darcy, whose character is
subdued and mellowed as the story goes on. But it is
difiicult to place them in any order, foi- diftbrent characters
attract dift'erent dispositions, and we can well understand
the fascination which Henry Tilney lias for mniiy readers.
His oxtrcme, thougli quiet humour, is such as must attract
The Altanpf. 37
any readers with a spark of answering wit in their own
composition. Captain Wentworth, too, cannot fail to have
many admirers, while Edmund Bertram and Edward
Ferrars can hold their own against most modern heroes.
Lady novelists have succeeded Letter in their young
ladies than in their young gentlemen,—and it is natural
that it shoiild be so. They know the ins and outs of a
girl's life so exactly, that they can work freely; whereas
when they attempt to depict gentlemen in situations
where they cannot be acquainted with all the particulars,
they either make blunders, or feeling themselves ham¬
pered, they write stiffly. Miss Austen's own good sense
is her great safe-guard against these errors. She never
leads her characters into situations where she is not qiute
at home, so there is an ease in her writing which gives
it a peculiar charm.
Between the contending claims of the two very different
characters of Anne Elliot in Persuasion, and Lizzie
Bennet in Pride and Prejudice, who shall decide as to
which shall receive the palm ? Anne Elliot is so good, so
constant, and so true ; while Lizzie Bennet, overflowing
with wdt and vivacity of spirits, is yet so tempered by
good sense and kindness of heart, that it is hard to decide
which is the best. Some readers might seek to put the
attractive Emma Woodhouse before either, but Ave cannot;
there are little blots on her character, delightful as it is,
which all her wit, all her candour, and even all her gentle
love for her father, cannot quite efface, and which must
always make her second to the equally lively but better
controlled Lizzie Bennet. In Sidney Smith's estimation,
Fanny Price in Mansfield Park stood very high. In
No7'ihanger Abbey ISIiss Austen has achieved the difficult
task of givuig us a heroine, who, without special beauty,
with not more than very ordinary intelligence, and with¬
out the aid of any interesting situation, both attracts and
jtleases us. Certainly, the simplicity and enthusiasm of
Catherine Moreland, are very refreshing in these days
when so much false sentiment abounds in our novels.
As is proper in novels, the chief interest of Miss Austen's
stories centres in her heroes and heroines, but it radiates
to the very circumference of the circle she describes.
There is not one superfluous sentence, not one '' dull hne "
in all her writing,, every touch is needed, no necessary
toucli is omitted. There is not one laj- Hgure in all her
worlds.    Look for instance at Pride and Prejudice, in that
38 'Jlie Attempt.
one novel we have the Beiinet family, the Lucas family.
Darcy, Bingley, the Miss Bingleys, the Philips, Lady
Catherine de Burgh, with her patronising, interfering
ways, and the inimitable Mr Collins, with his long-
speeches, and his pompous condescension to his " fair
cousins," the Miss Bennets, and Mr Wickham, all so
clearly drawn, that we can never cease to admire the
genius of the girl who, at the age of twenty-one, could
so discriminate character.
But it would only weary those of our readers who are
not acquainted with her works, were we to go over
minutely all her novels ; and those who have read and
re-read them, need no lengthy comments on them fi'om
us. We say read and re-read, but it is needless tautology,
for one peculiarity of these books is, that to read them
once involves.with most people the reading of them over
and over again, there is in them so nmch delicate humour,
that every new perusal brings out fresh matter for
delight and entertainment.
We should like here to insert the testimony borne to
the genius of Miss Austen by many great men, such as
Sir Walter Scott, Macaulay, M. Guizot, Southey, Lord
Morpeth, and several others; but we must content our¬
selves with that of the first mentioned author, referring
our readers for the rest to the interesting little biography
of Miss Austen lately publislied by her nephew, J. E.
Austen Leigh. Sir W. Scott says in his diary for March
14, 182G,—"Read again for the third time at least Miss
Austen's finely written Pride and Prejudice. That young
lady had a talent for describing the evolvements and
feelings and characters of ordinary life which is to me the
most wonderful I ever met with. The big Bow-Wow strain
I can do myself like any one now going; but the exquisite
touch, which renders ordinary common-place things and
characters interesting from the truth of the description
and the sentiment, is denied to me. What a i^ity such a
gifted creature died so early !"
It seems strange that the young people of the present
day should turn so little to this genius of fiction for
amusement, and so much to the passing effusions of
writers whose names in a few years will be forgotten, as
though they had never been.
It is true that every age has its own writers, its own
poets, its own novehsts; who interpret for the multitude
the aspiratic>ns. Avho seek to unravel the mysteries, with
The Attempt. 39
which each age is fraught. But there are writers who
identifying themselves with no peculiar phase of feeling
leave marks which no succeeding tide of thought can
sweep away, and whose works are therefore " not for an
age, but for all time." As of such we do not hesitate to
name Jane Austen. Des Eaux.
llann   ax  '^ut\1
It is rather an important question for us to weigh in our
mental balance, whether it be really better for ordinary
people to have a good general information, or a thorough
particular knowledge; somewhat of mauy subjects, or
much of one, given equal opportunities. If I assert the
former, I must make my position clear before I attempt
to support it.
Looking at humanity as one great unit, it is better
that each member, each faculty should devote itself to
perfecting itself in one subject, for tliereby greater things
are gained and retained, and these more clearly defined.
But the mystic philosophy that holds each soul a part of*
one great individual reason, and the unnatural disinter¬
estedness that would sacrifice individual interests to what
seems that of the race, we must equally oppose. For we
hold that there can be no true good for the race that does
not grow out of individual good. The claim of indepen¬
dence, of individuality, of personal responsibility, natural
to every heart, is supported by all true philosophy and
religion. The great German philosopher, Kant, says that
every intelligent being is an end to himself, and that only
by completing that end does he aid to elevate humanity ;
the rights of every other member being meanwhile re¬
spected as an end in himself. The Bible, too, is fiill of
proof that the one man is of more value to himself than
all the other ninety and nine ; though also full of counsel
to love and help these neighbours. Neither (though we
hope to prove that what is best for one is also best for
others) must we look at man here as a social unit. The
division-of-labour system is immeasurably more profitable
to society as a whole, and to man as a mere member of
society, than a general intelligence would be. A pin-
maker provides better pins than any of us could make
40 The Attempt.
with much greater outlay of time and trouble. He has
gained his skill from practice, thereby permitting others
to devote their time to gaining skill in making gloves,
boots, etc., and society as a whole is more skilful. But
supposing our present state to change so that the pin-
maker needed neither food, shelter, nor clothing, or the
pin purchasers no longer desired pins, of what value
Avould be his art? It was only a means to an end, to
attain the money that represented all his gains of comfort
and support. Thus it is with all practical training. Even
the higher professional education, though dealing with the
same subjects, is distinguished from the education called
liberal; because the first is but a nobler means to the pin-
maker's end, and the second is an end in itself, the satis¬
faction of human capacities.
We must also protest against the well-known lines of
the poet:—
" A little learning is a dangerous thing,
Drink deep or taste not the Pierian spring;
A shallow draught intoxicates the brain,
But drmking largely sobers it again."
The philosophy of the Essay on Man is not all philosophy.
It is oidy an example of the conservative influence of the
mere form of poetry upon what can easily be proved a fal¬
lacy. For, if learning be dangerous, it must be less dan¬
gerous to know little than to know much; and large
draughts must be more intoxicating than small. Beyond
the slight intoxication of delight in the novelty, there is
no difference, save in degree, between knowing little and
knowing more. A little learning is a precious thmg, and
the more we drink the better. It is vanity that is the
dangerous thing, and that lies in the student and not in
the study. For he who would be vaiu of a smattering of
astronomy, geology, and botany, would be just as vain
had he spent all his time and troiible on the last, and
knew more botany and no astronomy nor geology. W^e
must class in this sense vain people wath professional stu¬
dents, for their learning also is a means to satisfy their
vanity. So we must only turn to ordinary people who,
Avith their share of faults and difficulties common to
humanity, strive to conquer them and raise themselves.
To one of such, it is better for himself, as an end to him¬
self, and to his neighbours as ends to themselves (for they
ever act and re-act upon each other), to have a general
intelligence than a ■particular proficiency.
The Attempt. 41
In running through his advantages, we notice 1st,
he makes a better listener. A good listener is not one
who can be still as at a lecture, where the lecturer
can never surely know which of his audience under¬
stand him, follow him, sympathise with him. A good'
listener must speak just so much as to show that he
follows with interest, and desires to benefit by the
conversation without breaking its thread, or turning
it away to another subject more familiar to himself.
Such a listener kindles new power and pleasure in the
speaker, and increases his own knowledge. But he must
know something of the subject, however little, and must
wish to know more. An ignorant person may sit silent,
but cannot listen; a man, learned on some other subject,
feels ashamed of ignorance on tliis point, and forcibly
turns the current of the conversation into regions where
he is more at home, where he may shine, not absorb;
speak, not listen. And his neighbours often drift away
also from his subject, finding it heavy, for they too, per¬
haps, have also their pet proficiency.
The good listener, however, is, 2nd, a better talker.
That may seem but an inversion of the last, but it
is more. General information, we have seen, gives
general interest. It also provides a wide vocabulary,
a thing not to be despised, for, beyond its other merits,
it gives great facilities to men to fit truly words to
their thoughts; and thus, in a reflex manner, it aids
the cause of truth, and tends to peace,—for many a
war reigns and rages through misfitted words and
thoughts. Look at the clear and exact expression, the
rich and full diction, the forcible illustrative figures in the
speech, spoken and written, of the widely inteUigent man.
He approaches the universality in sympathy and speech
of the poet, whose power lies in speaking to every man
in his own tongue (and all know how much sweeter to
his ears are the most stammering accents of his native
speech, than the most fluent harangues in a language
that conveys no meaning to his mind); and in one sense,
there is such a difference in language peculiar to each
study, each profession, each rank in life.
Professor Masson, in his noble criticism of Shakespeare
and his works, claims for him a crown, not as the greatest
artist, the greatest philosopher, the greatest poet even,
lest that might be disputed, but as the greatest expresser
the world ever saw.    He had attained this by being a
FEBRDARY   1872. '
42 The Attempt.
good listener, learning from all; and thus the plough-boy,
the soldier, the courtier, the philosopher, hear him speak¬
ing in their very tones. The history of literature and of
society gives innumerable fm-ther instances. Perhaps our
own Sir Walter Scott may also exemplify how a good
listener becomes a good talker, a master expresser.
What, on the contrary, is more painful than to see a
great man, after having spent his life and energies in one
train of thought, find himself almost unable to reveal the
long-sought, now discovered secret, in language intelligible
to man. For not in the sentiments of poetasters alone,
but in the discoveries of the sage, are there often " things
inexpressible to common ears." They have learned deeply,
but not widely; they " talk like a book " sometimes, and
at other times not at all, and the world is left the poorer.
2>d. He becomes a more useful member of society. With¬
out resorting to the crucial experiment of turning men
adrift, myriads of Robinson Crusoes on separate islands,
to see who could best do the best possible for himself;
we may easily notice that, in the common conduct of life,
men of general intelHgence are most useful. One can¬
not have professional assistants ready at his beck every
moment of his life ; and how far a little knowledge can go
in directing willing hands, one knows not till he tries.
How many little economies, comforts, amusements may
be devised by the application of a little knowledge ot
mechanics, for instance, or some other science; how much
pleasin-e in the development of the rudimentary principles
of some art! Great men are seldom prompt, quick-witted,
beforehand with appliances; indeed, they are generally
set aside as useless by their friends (except in their own
pursuit) and this depends, not on their knowing too much,
but on having spent all their energies on some one aim,
to the detriment of other subjects that might have aided
better to complete then- life. The great Sir Isaac Newton
himself forgot that, though a cat could not get through a
hole too small for it, a kitten could go through a hole too
big for it, and made two holes in his door for them, when
the larger would have served for both. And how much
pleasure is often given by such general intelligence; for
a little music, a little di-awiug, on a rainy day in the
country go a long way; and the giving of pleasure is
a grand utility. Not to be forgotten under this head
is the development of the sense of humour. The recogni¬
tion of relations, analogies, contrasts, which is induced by
The Attempt. 43
this general acquaintance, in mirthful hours shows itself
as humour, in serious hours as interest; a quality, we
believe, not to be possessed by the devotees of special
studies.
4</i. His knowledge increases more rapidly. Let us
learn the meaning of a new word, and we smile to
ourselves, to see how often we meet it in books or con¬
versation. We have no recollection of it before the
period of our regular introduction, though we know we
must have met it. Let us learn but a fragment of infor¬
mation regarding mathematics, or physical science; of
history or philosophy and it seems as if it were a magnet
to attract round it innumerable kindred particles, that
without it would have floated away unrecognised on the
outer air. Our minds love order, and to keep their
possessions tidy, they classify their perceptions with their
memories, and gain the more by reflection upon both.
Nay, our little odds and ends are more than magnets;
which, at best, can only increase by addition; they grow
by vegetation, they have life. They are as seeds cast into
the soil of the mind, that, by merely lying there, come to
germinate under the atmospheric influence. What fell
on us erewliile, as the rain-drops upon granite, unim-
pressing and unabsorbed, hfeless and unproductive, now
falls like the same rain upon ploughed soil through
many a little channel, down to feed the seed. Nowhere
is there so powerful an illustration of the proverb,
" Unto him that hath shall be given even more than
he hath." Doubtless the special student also shares
in this blessing; but he has planted only one seed. The
harvest he expects he values more than the harvest from
many seeds; but he forgets that there are chemical ele¬
ments in soil and atmosphere that suit differing plants;
and if they be not naturally appropriated, they clog the
action of the other elements, bo that the same growth
too long on the same soil necessitates some times of
lying fallow—a double loss.
bth. His mind enlarges itself thereby. He is better
educated who has seen one other country, than he who
has not travelled at all; but he who has spent his
" Wanderjahre" in roaming far and wide, than he who has
dwelt in one place till he has learned thoroughly its manners
and its tongue, and has become, as it were, naturalised. Be¬
cause travel is the corrective of that narrowness of mind
that makes a man think his own island, his own province,
44 The Attempt.
his own valley, the centre of all truth and perfection;
and if he only include within it the merits of one other
spot, he doubles the number of the objects of his atten¬
tion, but does not widen his mind. Whereas, if he
travelled over the face of the earth, he might discover
the unity in variety of nature and humanity. He would
find that truth and happiness are nowhere complete,
nowhere awanting, and a liberality of opinion, and catho¬
licity of sympathy would be induced. To study other
men's thoughts is travel intellectual, and its expansiveness
produces similar results. Objectively, our mind finds
itself in a larger sphere; subjectively, it becomes larger in
its sphere. And what is the true end of education but to
enlarge the mind?    That is an end in itself.
%ih. He reaches nearer Truth. Though a line of so
many feet is of equal length, whether measured perpen¬
dicularly or horizontally, it occasionally acquires an extra
value by its position. And this value we claim for the hori¬
zontal line of general information, over the perpendicular
one of special proficiency. Creation is the volume God
has presented to us ; and who are we to choose a para¬
graph thereof and say, "In this we are content;" or to
open a page and say, " This will we spell out until we
master it, and in our choice deem ourselves wise," unknow¬
ing that further on may be many a chapter as good, if
not better. Were it not wiser to know somewhat of the
contents of the whole; of the title and argument of each
chapter; that thereby we might more nearly grasp the
meaning of the writer, and conceive his plan. For no
one science can satisfy the soul, no amount of special
learning complete the man ; and it is only when in the
All we seek the One, that we truly learn anything worth
knowing : and the many seems at last transformed into
the much. For we learn more of ourselves, of our Cause
and of our End; we have not pursued a fragment of
truth, and gained but a fragment of that, but we have
reached out unto all truth, and our daring hands are left
the fuller. We have not attempted to perfect a part of
ourselves, but our whole humanity. Is it given us to
choose which of our talents we shall put out to usury,
and which bury in the ground? If the man of the five
talents had traded only vn\h. the two, would not both
his master and himself have been left the poorer ?
Further, what means have we of choosing which talent
we should put to profit ?    Not that which has fewest
Tlie Attempt. 45
difficulties, for that is most likely to draw interest on its
own account; not that which is most congruent to our
natural disposition, because it is not the things that
please us most that we need most—these we already have.
It is rather their opposites—the things difficult and even
distasteful to us—that we have the more need to acquire ;
to round our being to completedness. Thus each special
choice is fronted by a question—"Wherefore thus
choosest thou ?" on the answer to which depends our
right or wrong.
After all, we have been somewhat Quixotic—tilting
against a giant, and it is only a windmill. Is there any
such thing as studying a single science % What is
navigation and astronomy without mathematics;
geology without natural history and chemistry 1 Even if
one tried, could he exclude all knowledge from his mind
but the one he seeks % And though he should admit only
so much as he finds he cannot possibly do without, this
admixture is the mortar that binds together the mighty
blocks of stone he would pile into a tower whose top
should reach to heaven. Without that cement, how
could it withstand the storms and earthquakes ? when
with it, it shakes throughout, for its base is narrow.
But the pyramids have resisted the combined assaults in
the ages, for their base is broad and their material firmly
welded. They begin with the many, but they seek after
and end in the One—and this figure would we take to
symbolise our idea of the Intelligence that reaches out to
as many subjects as it can, thereby to admire more, and
to learn more of the One that crowns them all.
LuTEA Reseda.
cb-estrianism  for  ^abus.
II.—Alpine Passes.
Thou glorious land!
With all thy snowy peaks aud emerald valleys,
Thy thundering torrents, passes dark and grand^
Pine forests hoar, and verdant chestnut alleys,
And dark brown chalfits.
One fine summer afternoon, several years ago, two travellers
might have been observed slowly wandering up one of the
most hacknied of Alpine passes, the Wengern Alp, between
Grindelwald and Lauterbrunnen in the Bernese Oberland.
4fi The Attempt.
They incongruously followed their horses instead of
riding them, while the man in charge of the horses
again followed them. So on they plodded, past the little
inn near the summit, where pretty carved toys distract
the attention from indifferent food, and past the view
where everyone expects to be enraptured, and halts for
the purpose ; when the horses, weary, doubtless, of ha^dng
had no riders since the first start, sniffed each others
noses in consultation for a moment, and then darted off
at a round pace to make their way to Lauterbrunnen.
After them rushed their responsible owner, and Martin
and Marjorie remained looking at each other, for the
first time alone on the high Alps.
" I want to know," said Marjorie, why " we have been
following those animals hke cattle-drivers all this way ? "
" Because," said Martin, " other people do."
" Do you know," she answered, " I never thoroughly
enjoyed the whole thing till now; first, let us leave the
beaten track, and i\vni so, hap-hazard down the hill
side. Now here is romance and uncertainty, and ex¬
pectation to add spice to the scenery. What matter
that thousands of tourists have gone over here—to us it
is now strange and mysterious. Away with hack-horses
and mercenary natives that take the gloss off every¬
thing."
" Very well, if you can walk and find the way, it will
be both cheap and cheerful," said Martin. Will it be
believed possible to lose the way, or at least to go in a
very roimd-about-way, from the Wengern Alp to Lauter¬
brunnen. Emphatically we affirm that it is ; so Marjory
and Martin, confirmed by the delicious walk in the
resolution to forswear horses, were deterred by their
wanderings, which, later in the day, might have been
unpleasant, from dispensing with the services of mercen¬
ary natives. So they engaged a gay yoiuig guide to
carry their modest packs, show the tracks, and cheer the
way with German talk. This youth had many good
qualities, but not much experience; he had evidently
never been able to make out what brought foreigners to
his native mountains. He took great pains to point out
new barns, and exclaimed, apropos of the rapturous
remarks of the travellers on the point of view on the
Grimsel, "I knoAv what you are saying—'what a fine new
house I'"—meaning an eyesore in stucco in front of them.
Their first expedition was  over the (xreat Scheideck, and
The Attempt. 47
Marjorie started, with the solemnity suitable to a great
occasion, on a walk of eighteen or twenty miles, her first
essay of any such distance.
Who that has sauntered up that sweet mountain path
can forget it! Shadowed by the great snowy mass of
the Wetterhorn from the morning sun, it winds up
and up through the delicious dewy pastures, all fra¬
grant with flowers, and musical with cattle bells; the
cattle themselves showing like mice under the huge'
crags that soar up straight from the green valley. Ah,
what a breakfast that was on a httle bench in the open
air at the highest point of the pass, where the delicious
cream atoned for the bad tea, and the bread and cheese
were bo good ! And so dovsTi through the pine woods
to Rosenlau, where a halt was made to view the glacier,
shown by a number of natives to the last degree mercen¬
ary. Some carried stones to toss into the torrent, some
torches to light the glacier caves, some chairs to carry
the light-footed travellers, some crystals for them to
carry away: all expected to be paid. Downwards still,
throiTgh the narrow pastoral valley; on either side foam¬
ing water-falls flashed, half-seen, half-hidden through the
shadowy pines and brighter foliage. And now Marjorie
became aAvare how easy and pleasant walking was to her;
merrily the little party swept past the slower travellers
who had preceded them, and when they reached the brown
village of Meyringen, after a walk of twenty miles, and
had feasted on cutlets and strawberries and cream, they
were so fresh that they went out again to see the great
cascades, and stroll in the picturesque streets. Then
arrived at the inn eighteen school-girls—six on horse¬
back, twelve on foot, commanded by a master, who had
no small trouble in finding quarters for all; and the
clatter and chatter which ensued were not considered by
Marjorie, as Martin put it, sublime enough for the scenery;
while he cautiously sat at his open door with his coat off",
to prove possession.
The degree in walking being won by the ease with
which the Scheideck was crossed, Martin and Marjorie
walked at different times over the following Swiss
passes; all delicious walks and not too fatiguing. The
Grimsel, Furca, Brunig, in the Oberland; Tete Noir,
and Col de Balme, at diff"erent times from Martigny
to Chamonix, Col de Voza, St Gervais to Chamonix;
passes between Chamonix and Courmayeur (three days
48 The Attempt.
needed); Visp to Zermatt (two days needed, or a horse
half way); and some others less easily designated.
Most of these passes bring you from rich vegetation
and a warm climate up to barren regions where only
the lichen and the moss can thrive, and where the
slowly wasting snow lingers the summer through in
patches, till the first storm of autumn wraps all in white
again. Often in the same day you descend into summer
warmth towards evening; though sometimes two or three
days are required to pass the mountain barrier. This
wonderful change of climate in a small space constitutes,
perhaps, the chief charm of Switzerland; the variety and
excitement are so far beyond what the lovliest scenery
can give that has not the element of perpetual ice
and snow.
Let us follow in imagination our travellers over a pass,
which, if one of the least beautiful, is the most historically
interesting of all, the great St Bernard; soon we fear to
lose its time-honoured characteristics from the railway
communication now established through the Alps. It was
early June, and it would be difficult to exaggerate the
heat in the lovely Val d'Aosta. Happily the trellised
vines and the lordly chestnut trees give a great deal of
shadow, but it needed much resolution and a rush, to cross
a patch of sunshine,—the cook was said to do the frying on
the wall outside; even Martin called it warm, even Mar-
jorie grew too lazy to aspire to the ascent of the pic de
Paradis, the object of former hopes. They started very
early and drove as far as the road goes to San Remy,
where they halted for luncheon. It was not good, but
everyone's hopes were fixed on some foaming beer which
looked delicious, Martin first tasted it and smiled, that
he might lure the others on, and enjoy the exclamations
of horror with which each in turn put down the fatal
glasses. After this Spartan refreshment, some of the
party mounted their mules, and Martin and Marjorie
clambered up alone by the little steep foot tracks. They
won their way upwards, till they came to a great sterile
basin or amphitheatre among the mountains; barren,
desolate, strewed with fallen rocks and great grey stones,
and streaked with drifts of snow. A place where all the
winds of heaven might meet and wrestle, and rave round
the traveller overtaken there by bad weather. They
passed the refuge, a strongly built hut, daily visited by a
monk  in  winter, that   travellers may be guided thence
The Attempt. 49
across the worst of the pass; they gained a tall cross
rising out of the snow, which noAv lay thickly round, and
stood on the frontier of Italy and Switzerland. Before
them lay the little steel blue lake, and beyond it, dark
against the snow drifted up to the second floor windows,
the two grey buildings of the hospice.
Here they received a kindly welcome from the pleasant
monk who entertains guests, and were soon cowering
over the wood fire in the hall waiting for dinner. No
other party had come that day, which wonderfully en¬
hanced the mediaBval flavom- of the whole situation. The
monk dined with them, conversing with the most pleasant
courtesy, and then they wandered across the deep snow
to the black lake, and to the little Morgue, where Martin
peered through the small grated window.
"Oh!" he said, with a long, slow emphasis, that made
Marjorie ask to see too. "Better not," said Martin,
but of course she looked, and saw the little dusky
vault full of strange figures, stiffened as they fell—
some with arms extended—some leaning forward with
drooping hair—most of them long dead, and fading,
rather than mouldering, out of human semblance into
formless horror. Back to the ruddy lights of the genial
convent, to attend the sweet church service in a freez¬
ing chapel; then later to try to sleep under piled
duvets, and long be kept awake by the cold, while the
wind raged and the snow beat at the small windows, as
if furious at not getting in. The cold, after Aosta, was
indeed wonderful; the monks cannot withstand it many
years, they have to be sent down to the milder air of the
other convent often only to die, after a term of service at
St Bernard. But they do good service there. As the
shortest pass to Italy, it is the most frequented by foot
travellers; and all are lodged and fed and helped on
their way out of the resources of the convent, which,
though large, are inadequate to meet all demands with¬
out the help of those who can well pay. Even in Roman
times this pass was much frequented; St Bernard found
it in the tenth century notorious for banditti and storms,
and he founded the convent, which has proved the safety
of countless travellers.
Next day, Martin and Marjorie walked off early through
deep snow, accompanied by some of the dogs—noble
fellows—but at that season very shaggy, and unlike the
smooth specimens generally seen elsewhere.    Gradually
FKBKUAKr 1872. Gr
50 Tlie Attempt.
as our travellers descended by the side of a wildly
foaming river, the scenery softened in character; first the
snow, then the bare rock was left behind, then the little
hospice farm, where the climate is about the Scottish
mark, and thence they wandered down through the rich
woodlands that extend to the valley of the Rhone.
Soon, probably, there will be no call for the hardihood
which dared the St Bernard pass in all weathers, and at
all seasons; no demand for the hospitality that for cen¬
turies has cheered thousands on their way; and the self-
denying charity Avhich has dispensed it, will take some
other form. For a few pence all will be able to burrow
through the mountains, untouched by their sublimity,
blind to their grandeur, aware only of a railway carriage
like any other. " The old order changeth, yielding place
to new,"—much may be gained, but sometliing too is lost;
and among the losses will be, we fear, a beautiful link to
the charity and zeal of the past, in the hospice of the
Great St Bernard. E. J. 0.
{To he continued.)
Silence.
I. In Joy.
She stood with white hands softly clasped,
As he had left her there,
In early spring-time's golden gleam.
And lost in a delicious dream,
With sunshine on her hair.
Her fair head drooped as if to hide
The love-light in her eyes.
While on her cheek there dawned a rose.
Like that which at the day-break glows
Far in the eastern skies.
And there she stood, remembering
The sweet things she had heard,
A living picture, motionless,
Silent for very joy's excess,—
She never spoke a word.
The Attempt. 51
II. In Sorrow.
She stood, her hands pressed close in pain,
A note beside her lay,—
There, in the centre of the room.
Wrapt round in sad autumnal gloom
One dim November day.
There is no sunshine on her hair,
No love-light in her eyes,
And on her cheek the roseate hue
Fades fast, as dies away from view
The light in western skies.
And there she stood, remembering
The tidings she had heard,
A marble statue, motionless,
Her heart knew its own bitterness;—
She never spoke a word.
Melita.
Pofaj foe got up our %x\'aviit ^^falrirals.
Part I.
I OUGHT to mention at once that our theatricals were of
the very humblest description, and that no one need expect
to obtain useful hints or directions from reading this
account of them. My reason for writing it is my recollec¬
tion of the amount of amusement which we, the actors,
enjoyed in preparing and performing them ; and also my
very grateful remembrance of the kindly forbearance of
our audience, which leads me to hope for similar indul¬
gence on the part of my readers. Our theatricals were
the result of a very sudden idea occurring simultaneously
to ourselves and our friends, the Smiths, let us call them.
On Christmas Eve last year, my sisters and I—our Chris¬
tian names are Jane, Ellen, and Mary, and our patronymic
is Brown—went to call on the Smiths, and mentioned in
the course of conversation that our brother Charley had
just returned from school, where the boys had a grand
bi-eaking-up   party,   witli   private   theatricals,   in   which
52 The Attempt.
Charley had sustained, to his own great satisfaction, the
part of " Box." " Dear me ! " said Maggie Smith, " how
curious ! our Willy came home last night, and they had
private theatricals at his school, and he acted " Cox." A
momentary silence ensued, suddenly the idea above-men¬
tioned flashed into existence in each of our minds, we all
looked up, our five pairs of eyes met, we started to our
feet, and with one voice exclaimed, " Let us have private
theatricals I "    It was settled from that moment.
However, when we came to arrange preliminaries, we
found it was one thing to resolve upon private theatricals,
and quite another thing to carry that resolution into effect.
First of all, we had to obtain the sanction of the parental
authorities, which we did with a high hand, informing our
parents of the projected entertainment in a tone of cool
indifference, as if their consent was a matter of course.
Hypocrites that we were ! When our hearts were beating
like sledge-hammers as we spoke, in terror lest a decree
should go forth to nip our plans in the very bud. Happily,
however, both our father and mother, and Mr and Mrs
Smith took up the project very warmly; and Mr Smith, in
particular, displayed so much interest in the affair, that
we resolved to make his drawing-room the scene of action.
But after thus obtaining license to act, and a place to act
in, we were met by a series of difficulties so appalling,
that we often repented engaging in a scheme so ambitioiis.
Willy Smith and our brother Charley were delighted to
have the opportunity of figuring as " Box and Cox," before
an admiring circle of friends and relations ; and Charley
secured the attendance of the boy who had performed the
landlady's part at his school. So ''Box and Cox " had a fair
prospect of success. But our horror almost amounted to
despair, when Charley and Willy flatly and persistently
refused to act the smallest part in any other play. In
vain we entreated, implored, scolded, cajoled, nay wept—
they remained obdurate. In vain we assured them, that
had we not confidently expected to benefit by their
experienced assistance, we should never have aspired to
act at all; they replied that their experience was at our
service in the form of criticism (and I am bound to say
it was, in abundance), but that they must distinctly refuse
us any more active kind of assistance. They told us that
they had with the greatest pains and labour, with days
of rehearsal and nights of study, acquired the parts of
" Box and Cox ;'" that they had succeeded in completely
Tlie Attempt. 53
identifying themselves with these characters ; that " Box
and Cox " had, so to speak, become their second selves ;
that, in short, they could not, should not, must not, and
would not make any dramatic appearance, save in the
parts of " Box and Cox;" and that the inevitable con¬
sequence of their attempting any other character, would
be the interpolation of " I3ox and Cox" upon that
character, whatever it might happen to be. We were
reluctantly compelled to acknowledge that such a result
was too horrible to be contemplated; and leaving Charley
and Willy to concentrate their energies upon "Box and
Cox," we looked around us for some more versatile
assistants.
The Smiths possessed another brother, so did we, and
our brother possessed a very obliging friend, whom I
shall call Mr Jones. On the day that we finally give up
hopes of Charley and Willy's assistance, Mr Jones
happened to call at our house; w^e laid our case before
him, and had not much difficulty in enlisting his services
for our coifs dramatique. We next turned our attention
to securing our elder brothers—a task attended with the
utmost difficulty. After matiu-e consideration, it was
agreed that bribery was the best, if not the only means
of conquering their objections to the stage, and our
parents kindly enabled us to carry on our operations on
a more extensive scale than would otherwise have been
possible. So when, on the morning of New Year's Day,
our brother Henry woke to find himself the happy
possessor of a new pair of skates, a large microscope, an
illustrated copy of the Ingoldsby Legends, a set of shirt
studs and sleeve-links, a knife with a perfect tool-shop in
its handle, and a knitted waistcoat,—and when we, striking
while the iron was hot, there and then humbly entreated
his aid in our dramatic representations, he had not the
heart to refuse, and graciously consented to join our
company. We hurried off to tell the joyful news to
Maggie and Katie Smith, but met them at the corner of
the street, on their way to inform us that their brother Fred
had succumbed to the combined influences of a breast¬
pin, a couple of silk neck-ties, six pairs of white kid gloves,
an opera-glass, and a cigar-case; so that we might at
last consider ourselves ready to begin rehearsals, could
we only fix upon a play to rehearse.
That difficulty proved the least formidable of the whole.
We went, on the morning of the 2d January, to a book-
54 The Attempt.
seller's shop, to look at several plays recommended to
amateur performers, and in a very short time decided upon
one, entitled the "GameofRompsi"as being much the most
suitable to our capacities. I am sure all, who have any
experience of amateiir theatricals, will agree with me that
one of the chief points—I might almost say the chief
point of the performance—is the dress. It is the one
thing which is almost always good; and it is the thing
which above all others rivets the attention of a drawing-
room audience. Now the " Game of Romps " offered a
first-rate opportunity for this kind of display. The scene
was laid in France, in the middle of the last century ; and
visions of hoops, powder, patches, toupees, buckles,
rosettes, and clocked stockings swam before our delighted
eyes. Moreover, one of the " persons represented," was
a Marchioness ! a character subject to an almost endless
amount of bedizenment! Clearly the " Game of Romps "
was a most attractive play.
I fear it would be totally uninteresting to the world at
large were I to give a detailed account of the plot of this
play; and indeed " plot," strictly speaking, it had none
nevertheless, it was really a lively little composition, and
quite capable of being made, in action, a very amusing
performance ; so, without much difficulty, we decided to
commit our fortunes to the " Game of Romps," and we
all met at Mr Smith's that same afternoon to organise
our rehearsals and allot our parts. The dramatis personce
were as follows:—A Marchioness, her daughter, her niece,
her nephew, her lawyer, her nephew's tutor, her maid,
and her daughter's confidential friend ; the Marchioness
being thus, as it were, the pivot of the play—the centre
round which the other characters revolved in nearer or
further proximity.
My sister Jane, Avho Avas indisputably the tallest, hand¬
somest, and most dignified of our would-be actresses, was
unanimously selected to sustain the part of the Marchioness;
and Ave also agreed, without much discussion, to allot the
parts of the daughter and the niece to myself and my
sister Mary ; and those of the maid and the confidential
friend to Katie and Maggie Smith. Then came an argu¬
ment, long and loud, on the subject of the gentlemen's
parts. Katie Smith nearly shipwrecked the whole affair
by informing Henry and Fred Smith abruptly, and with¬
out any diplomacy, that knee-breeches and powder Avere
indispensable,—but AA^e succeeded in waiving that part for
llie Attempt. 55
the present, until they could make up their minds as to
their parts. Mr Jones, with gallantry and self-denial
really beyond all praise, at once volunteered to take any
part we should assign him ; and we took advantage of
this to tell Henry and Fred, that if they could in the first
place agree which of the three gentlemen's parts was
the most objectionable, it should at once be handed to Mr
Jones, and the matter would be in some degree simplified.
Even this cost them a world of doubt and discussion, and
to each of the three parts they raised the most original
and extraordinary objections; but at last they agreed
that the lawyer s part was upon the whole the worst, and
Mr Jones withdrew to the further end of the room to
study it. After this it was soon settled that the mar¬
chioness's nephew (the lover of the piece) would be far
better represented by Fred then by Henry; and Henry,
of course, had to take the only remaining character, the
nephew's tutor, and " comic man" of the company.
It was only then, I think, tliat we realised our utter inex¬
perience and ignorance.    Here we were, eight individuals
who had never even performed in a charade, who had
seen no amateur acting, and but little professional; who
knew neither how to enter the stage, nor how to leave it,
much less hoAV to conduct themselves  when there ; who
did not even understand how to  study  their parts ; it
would have been difficult to find a more thoroughly in¬
capable set of performers.    But we " were in for it now,"
as Henry remarked to Fred, and banishing the thought
of failure, we set vigorously to work.    Our stage was
the top end of the drawing-room, which was to be  cur¬
tained off on the night of the theatricals ; we entered the
stage by a door opening from a back-room, which was to
serve as green-room; and as the exigences of our play
demanded  two   other  doors, the  curtained recess  of a
window served for one, and another was extemporised out
of two folding screens placed in a corner.    The  entire
action of the play being confined to the drawing-room of
the marchioness's chateau, no change of scene was required,
and the furniture was very easily chosen.    Before  we
separated that afternoon we made one attempt at walking
through the p.ay with our books in our hands (as  none
of us, Mr Jones excepted, knew a word of our parts yet),
but the confusion that ensued really baffles  «iescription.
We ran up against each other, we got behind tables and
could not get out again, we entangled ourselves in groups
56 llie Attempt.
in the corners, we addressed ourselves to the wrong people,
we went out at wrong doors, and came slap against the
person we should have avoided, and we invariably
delivered our speeches with our backs turned full upon
the audience, or at least the place where the audience was
to be. And when we had stumbled on to the end, and when,
instead of forming ourselves into the orthodox half-circle,
the Marchioness in the centre joining the hands of the
lovers, and Doctor Rhododendron (the tutor) uttering the
final witticism, when instead of this we were promiscuously
scattered over the stage, Fred Smith and I at opposite
ends of it, the Marchioness wringing her OAvn hands
instead of joining oui-s, the niece, the confidential friend,
and the maid huddled together in a corner, Dr Rhododendron
warming his hands at the fire (with his back to the
audience, of course), and the Lawyer in the foregi'ound in
a frenzy of despair,—our incapacity was so palpable, our
disorder so utterly absurd, that we one and all went into
shrieks of laughter, which pealed forth again and again
till Mrs Smith looked in at the door, and innocently said,
"My dears, I'm so glad to hear you laughing! the play
must be getting on capitally!"
On consulting Charley and Willy as to the length of
their holidays, we found that the 20th January was the
latest date that oiu" performances could take place; and
that day was accordingly fixed, with the rmderstanding
that rehearsals were to take place daily, from four till six;
to which Henry and Fred agreed with a better grace than
could have been expected. But the laboiu's of the
actresses were far more arduous than those of the actors.
We dined with the Smiths that night, and the moment
dinner was over, we plunged into the question of toilette.
Whatever forebodings we might have with regard to
other parts of the play, in this department we felt our¬
selves sure of success. A large book of coloured histo¬
rical engravings was of great use to us; our recollections
of the last fancy ball, and our own ideas of the artistic
did the rest; and before we separated, we had not only
satisfactorily arranged all the costumes, but had planned
then- manufacture from old dresses of our own, so that
only a few very trifling purchases had to be made. This
of course, involved an immense amount of cutting, con¬
triving, stitching, trhnming, etc, etc., but we were all
tolerable seamstresses, and grudged no trouble in the
cause.    We were greatly encouraged too, that evening,
The Attempt. 57
by our success in reconciling Fred Smith to the powder,
knee breeches, laced cravat and ruffles, white silk stock¬
ings, and buckled shoes necessary to his part; he also
promised to procure for himself a rapier, and volunteered
to persuade Henry to wear the much plainer dress, suitable
to Doctor Rhododendrons part. This relieved our minds of
all anxiety on the score of dress, for we knew well that
Mr Jones would wear, without a murmur, any costume we
might choose to describe, from " the Garb of Old Gaul,"
to that of the Emperor of China. And we retired to rest,
feeling that we had done a good day's work towards the
fulfilment of our desire for dramatic laurels.
Droo.
(To be concluded in our next.)
Suggested by reading the "Lines " on Faith and Reason in November
Number of " The Attempt."
" All reason and natural investigation ought to follow faith, and not go before
or infringe upon it."—Thos. a Kempis.
Sir Noel Paton has painted us a picture of Faith and
Reason. Faith as soaring above the world, seeing
beyond the clouds, while Reason wanders on the earth,
but ever holds fast by Faith. And this picture is the
subject of the " Lines" which have suggested this paper,
Alas ! that the world has so much need at present of a
picture such as this, to remind it that faith ought ever to
go before reason, and reason follow after faith. Too
often now-a-days do people forget that
" Reason's sword alone
Cannot divine God's way."
So much is judged by reason, so much is given up to
reason, that the world almost seems to forget that reason
is not the only faculty of the human mind. Its relations
with God and another world, its articles of faith and
belief, its religion, in short, does the world put under the
dominion of reason. Such or such a doctrine, it says,
cannot be believed, for it is against human reason. Let
us glance for a moment at what people mean by " reason,"
as opposed to faith and religion.    All our reasonings are
FEBKUAKT 1872. H
53 Tlie Attempt.
deduced ultimately from certain primary principles,
which we accept as true, and which cannot be proved.
We know them and believe them intuitively. Of
these primary principles, there are two kinds, namely,
those of the material world, and those of the spiritual
world. And men, taking the reasonings deduced from
the primary principles of the world of matter, apply them
to the world of spirit, and say, " this doctrine of belief is
against human reason, it cannot be accepted." Human
reason appearing in their estimation to mean, the laws of
the material world. They do not apply the methods of
reasoning to the spiritual world, but the results obtained
by those methods as applied to the physical world.
Given the first principles of ftiith, we can apply the
methods of reasoning to our religion, and all is easy.
The two worlds of matter and of spirit are so entirely
different, that the laws of the one cannot be made appli¬
cable to the other; therefore, if we use reason as a
help to religion, we must accept the primary principles of
faith and reason from them. For that reason is a help to
faith and religion we cannot deny, though we must by no
means let it supersede or infringe upon faith. Reason is
the highest of our intellectual faculties, but faith is higher
still. It is something more than mere intellect, for it sees
and grasps at once what reason cannot comprehend. It
is greater than reason, great as reason is. Faith is one
of our conscious states, and it appears to be in us by
intuition. We all seem to have it in a greater or less
degree of one kind or another. In some it is matured
from childhood, in others it gradually awakens like the
dawning of the day. Others again receive a great gift
of it in after life. But still we all have a portion of some
kind of faith bestowed on us at our birth; for through
our daily life we exercise faith, faith in those around us.
We have faith in the love of our friends, we have faith in
the uprightness of those we trust. But the highest and
the purest kind of fliith is that which passes through the
material world, and, entering the world of spirit, fixes
itself firmly there. The differences of the two worlds do
not distress it, it does not try to put them under the same
laws, it feels itself secure. Tlirough all the distresses,
the sufferings, and the pleasures of this life, he who
possesses this kind of faith keeps fast his belief in
things unseen, and which he will never see in this world.
Peacefully, hopefully, trustfully he leaves it, and his soul,
The Attempt. 59
winging its flight to heaven, sees there in the reality the
greatness and the holiness of the gift of faith. There also
it sees and understands the weakness and obscurity of its
intellect while it was in this world, for now " dark¬
ness has melted from before it. Weakness has fallen off
from it. Time has vanished that cramped it so. There
is no ignorance.    It sees the Eternal."
But do not suppose that we wish to cry down reason,
because we say so much of the necessity of faith. On
the contrary, we count reason as one of the greatest of
the gifts that Almighty God has bestowed upon us. He
has given it to us to help us on our way through this weary
world. It teaches us to know right from wrong; it
assists us in the work we were sent into this world to
do ; it helj^s us to moderate our evil passions, and to
cultivate the good that is in us. Oh would that men
did not turn this gift against the Bountiful Giver!
Clouded, cramped, dulled, as our understanding is during
this life ; was it not given us by God ? Is it not to be
used for His glory ? It guides us well through our
worldly affairs ; it is when we apply it, unassisted l)y
faith, to spiritual things, to the revealed truths and to the
wonderful works of God, that it fails us. It seems to
obscure them, to prevent our seeing them aright. " And
therefore," says Bacon, " it was most aptly said by one of
Plato's school, that ' the sense of man carrieth a re¬
semblance with the sun, which, as we see, openeth and
revealeth all the terrestrial globe; but then it again
obscureth and concealeth the stars and celestial globe :
so doth the sense discover natural things, but it darken-
eth and shutteth up divine.' "
Oh why should men have given themselves up so much
to the dominion of reason'^ If we look through the
history of the world we shall see how many great and
learned men have fallen from faith and religion, because
they have trusted to their own frail and unaided reason.
First, they would give up one doctrine of faith, because
they said it was contrary to reason ; and then another
and another, all must go. In order to be consistent, if
they set reason in opposition to one article of faith, they
must set it in opposition to all; if they bring it to bear
on one point in their belief, they must bring it to bear
on all; and no religious belief is kept but what can be
accounted for by their own reason. The belief in the
doctrine of the J\Iost Holy Trinity, in the Divinity of our
Blessed licrd, and even in Almighty God, fall away in time
60 The Attempt.
ii'om those poor benighted souls who have made reason
their idol. Deism, Rationalism, Atheism, follow one after
the other whenever reason is set above faith. And so
they wander on in their darkness, those poor imfortunate
ones, who have set up reason as the standard by Avhich
they are to judge spiritual things; missing their grasp
of faith, losing their sight of heaven, filled with pride in
their own poor, weak, dull, human reason, with which
they think they can understand the wonderful works of
God. They cannot see up to heaven, for faith is not
there to pierce the vail; they stumble on through the
dim world in their blindness, all hope is gone since faith
is lost.
Let us then hold fast by faith, and not trust in pride
to our unassisted mtellect. Oh the greatness and the
blessedness of the gift of faith! Who are we that we
shoiild try to fathom the marvellous works of God?
Faith admires, adores, believes, let it then go before,
reason follow after. " If the works of God were such
that they could easily be comprehended by human reason,
they could neither be called wonderful nor unspeakable."
Maria Margarita.
§1   Sfllbur's   |i^minisffnt£S.
Chapter I.
As I look back into the days of the past, a picture rises up
before me, gorgeous, but misty and dreamlike, for years
have rolled over it. I see an old chateau, with tall trees
on one side and a lake on the other, a still quiet lake,
over which the trees bend and hang lower and ever lower;
and everywhere are flowers, roses, red and white, splendid
purple fleurs-de-lis, and others that I do not know, for we
have no flowers lilco those now. And I see my mother
with smiles in her eyes, and a fresh bloom on her cheeks,
and my father, dark haired, grave, Avith brilliant eyes,—
of him, alas! I have no farther recollection. How we
were forced to leave our home, how my father was
imprisoned, and afterwards executed, murdered by a
tyrannical government,—my mother has told me, but of
that I myself know nothmg. My next recollections are
connected onl}^ with our little village of Mouens ; games
of play with Pi(!^rre and Jacques, and little Suzanne, my
special  friend;   lessons  with  my  mother   and with the
The Attempt. 61
Cure; summer evennigs in the place, where we children
gambolled in the sunlight, and the women knitted, and
the men loitered about and chatted. My mother, how¬
ever, seldom joined those village gatherings; it was hard
for her, a lady born, to mix with the common people, for
though she had lost husband and home, she could not lose
her birthright,—a pure and refined mind, a generous and
elevated soul. Often in the evenings she wandered down
the hill-side, and strolled through the fields of standing-
corn, or under the shadow of the trees, and we watched
the golden sun rays flash through their dusty green, and
caught in the distance the sparkle of blue water. Then
my mother told me the stories of her heroic husband's life,
of his brave goodness, of the battle he fought against
tyranny and oppression, of the death he died, when
justice and truth had become to him a forlorn hope. And
my soul was fired by stories of deeds like these, and my
heart burned to take up the cause for which my father
shed his blood.
So the golden years of childhood rolled by, a
summer without a cloud, but they passed so quietly their
flight was scarcely noticed. I grew up a quiet, studious
lad, with a craving for learning of all sorts, which in our
village it was difficult to satisfy. My father's Kepublican
sympathies had descended to me. I revelled in some
odd volumes of J. J. Rousseau, which had found their way
into our house; also in our Cure's library, which was so
much waste paper to him, was some food to satisfy my
hunger,—a few books of divinity, a few of rationalistic and
materialistic philosophy to counter-balance these, several
Latin authors,—that was about the sum total. With the
village lads, formerly my playmates, I was not very
intimate, they regarded me with respect, I them with
a little contempt. Yet we were poorer than most of our
neighbours, who rejoiced in the possession of spaall por¬
tions of land, their " proprietes," and I was glad to work
under one of these small farmers. But then they, those
peasants, had no future; before me it lay unfolded, half-
veiled in its brightness, for me there should be nothing
impossible to do, nothing impossible to win.
I had reached my twentieth year, when a stronger,
more powerful motive was added to all the others,—then
I first learned what it was to love. Distinct among all
days that day stands out, when Madamoiselle Elise
Gautier, for the first time since her long sojourn in Paris,
strolled with her father through the village.
62 The Attempt.
It was the evening of a burning, day and the little breezes
stole shyly over the hills, as though still dreading the
power of the great sun-monarch; the houses cast long
cool shadows on the place, and there was a soft murmur
amoBg the leaves of the chesnut trees. Moving about
among our women, with their weather-beaten faces, great
black hats, and bright kerchiefs, she in her white garments,
with delicate, pure face, and soft dark eyes seemed a being
from another world,—I gazed entranced. Ah, this was
indeed loveliness ! I envied the very wall on which she
rested her hand, how much more the old woman on whom
she was bestowing her sweet words, her sweet smiles.
In a moment I learned what life might mean, what life
coidd be. Not a weary nionotonous toil from day to day,
not a perpetual striving to rise higher in the scale of
humanity; here, suddenly unfolded before me, lay the
highest good, the El Dorado, not toil, nor struggle, nor
pain; but love, joy, happiness.
I started, M. Gautier was speaking to me,—he had
known my father. "Bon jour, mon ami," he said, "it is
long since I have seen thee, thou hast been busy this
summer ! " Mademoiselle Elise came softly up and laid
her hand on her flxther's arm. " Oh Elise," he added, " I
saw thee speak to Madame de Villeneuve—this is her son."
She raised her dark eyes to mine, then bowed. I stood
as in a dream, not daring to utter a word; but she
suddenly said, " It is so long ago M. de Villeneuve, you
do not perhaps remember, but I have not forgotten the
day when you found me sleeping in the wood, and carried
me all the way home."
It was true, 1 had forgotten for the moment; but was
it possible that little sobbing girl could have changed into
this beautiful young creature! I know not what I
answered, but she smiled on me, on me, a poor village lad,
with no good thing on earth but a noble name. Oh ! she
did not knoAV, she could not tell how much she had given
me, how dearly prized was the gift.
That night I could not sleep. The question of my
whole life was in agitation. Rise I must, become great I
must, but how ? I could not leave my mother ; since my
father's death she had almost merged her being in mine,
to me she had given all her love, I was her one earthly
good. No, it would be cruel to leave her even for a few
years; noAv,  when  she had  no  longer  the  strength   of
TIls Attempt. Oil
youth to support her, when all her life she had tasted so
little happiuess, had endured so much sorrow, it would
kill her if we were separated. I longed to get to Paris,
the city of my dreams, but how could I take her with me
there, where her husband had been executed, every street
would seem to her blood-besprinkled, the very stones
Avould remind her of her agony. How could she endure the
sight of gaiety and pleasure, how could she bear to hear the
sound of laughter, there where my father has shed a man's
binning tears upon his son's infant head, where he had
spoken to his wife the last strong words of encourage¬
ment, of high-minded patriotism—the last sad farewell.
At last I made up my mind we would go to England.
My mother herself was English, though all but the first
few years of her life she had passed in her adopted
country, she still remembered the language, she had
taught it to me. Yes, we would go to London, there I
would become clerk in an office, something, anything. I
would have opportunities for study, I would make my
way. True, my mother would feel leaving France for a
country whose language she spoke, indeed, but where she
had no friends; true, when hitherto I had talked of
England, she had ever silenced me, trying to avoid the
subject. But I knew she would not permit me to give
up all my life even to her.
All that summer I worked perpetually and spent no¬
thing ; my mother had acceded to the plan with less diffi¬
culty than I expected ; we saved up money for the jour¬
ney, and to give us a little to start with. Sometimes I
saw Mademoiselle Elise, sometimes she stopped to speak
to me; doubtless she pitied me, knowing of my lost
birthright. Ah, those were blcRsed days indeed—when
the gentle " Bonjour " fell upon my ear, when the
large dark eyes met mine; but how I loathed my course
dress, how hated my rough hands! What could she
think of me when she saw me work in the fields the of
peasant " proprietaires," a common labourer; while she
with her delicate beauty was almost too fair for the
winds of heaven to blow upon; yet my love dared to
leap the gulf; and how I loved her, she was to me as an
angel from heaven!
Bo the summer passed away, and my mother and 1 said
to each other, " Before winter is over we shall be in
England," and we laughed, for she had begun to be eager
with my eagerness.
64 The Attempt.
But one morning terrible news convulsed our little
village. The women went about with scared, fi'ightened
faces; the men forgot their work, every mouth quivered
as it uttered the terrible word—" the conscription," and
with the news of the intended conscription had come
tidings that the long-expected war had broken out.
That curse of our country! I had almost forgotten the
doom that hangs over every poor Frenchman, for the rich
can buy off. Here was the overthrow of all my hopes,
here was that which could overcome all energy, which
was stronger than the strongest will. My mother sat
still all that day, heart-stricken; in her white face I
read the confirmation of my own fears; neither of us
had any hope of escape from this great trial.
In the evening she said to me, " Henri, thy father held
it wrong, wicked to fight, thou also thinkcst thus, nest ce
pas ? " My heart beat fast, my tongue refused to move, I
could scarcely articulate the one word " yes." " Then my
son," she said, coming close and putting her arm aound
my neck, " Is it not possible for us to go now to England
in some way, to save ourselves from this evil V I felt
a wrench at my heart; how it rejoiced at the bare possi¬
bility of carrying out the plans which, but yesterday,
did not seem so very bright; but then, to fly! that would
be to give up the end of all my aspirations, for how should
I ever dare to ask EKse to give her hand to one who had
fled, to one whom she would consider a renegade, a
traitor ? No, it could not be, anything rather than to be
despised by her.
" No, mother," I said, rising and shaking off" her hands,
" it is impossible, impossible!" and I left the cottage.
Hurriedly I went down the hill, across the stream that
rippled gaily in the rays of the new-risen moon, down the
little ravine, till I stood in front of my loved one's home.
How white it shone in the moonlight! How calm and
peaceful was the murmur of the dark pine branches as
they swayed to and fro in the night breeze ! How softly
moved the leaves of the vine that was trained up by the
door! All nature whispered rest. Oh, earth! thou art
but a false deceiver when thou tellest of peace, a cruel
mother, who, when thy children cry, answerest them with
a smile. " Ah, Elise !" I sobbed, for the bitter tears
would come, "how is it possible for me to leave thee, how
can I, how can I give thee up !" A. M.
(To be continued.)
Tlte Attempt. 65
^ tbeslrianism   for   Rabies,
III.—Glaciers.
Thej- wind with speed their upward way,
An icy path o'er rocks of ice.
SODTHEY.
Hitherto we have only spoken of passes, where, though
there may be real climbing in the short cuts, the dangers
of falhng may be classed with the perils of tumbling
down stairs. _ But with ice a new element enters, a little
spice of possible danger, and slipping becomes a chance
to be carefully guarded against. However, those who
know nothing of the delight and excitement of walking
over glaciers lose, we think, the most exquisite pleasures
of mountaineering. " c'est dommage," remarks M. Topfer,
apropos of Alpine excursions, " que le danger soit chose au
fond si dangereuse," for a slight degree of it is a very
exhilarating sensation, and people often like to imagine
it where it does not exist. The Alpine hterature of some
thirty years ago bristles with dangers and terrors evi¬
dently exaggerated; now, the athletes of the Alpine Club,
who tell us so lightly of then- feats, err perhaps in the
opposite direction; at any rate, their standard of ease
and safety is not one to be accepted by ladies. Marjorie
even must not serve as a Will o' the Wisp, luring travellers
to their destruction. Yet the dangers of ordinary climl>
ing _are_ mostly in imagination, though not the less real ;
the ice is granulated, and for ice not slippery; the guides
take care that you are not offered a jump too wide for you,
and that you have room to put your foot, but you have
very frequently not more than room, and it is the desire
for more that is the true difficulty.
The guides are pretty good judges, and, as a rule, will
not take incompetent people cm glacier expeditions; but
there is a peculiarly dangerous class of tourists who may
easily get into a scrape, those, that is, who have more
spirit than real nerve or strength, and who go on not
confessing their fears and difficulties till they are in a
predicament. Such a young lady once wished to go over
the Straleck, but happily, in a trial expedition, when she
and Marjorie mounted an ice-slope at the foot of the
Grindelwald glacier, behind a guide cutting steps, it was
MAKCB  1872. I
66 The Attempt.
discovered that though she went up with great  pluck,
when they turned to descend she dared not move.    She
put first one then the other little foot helplessly oiit in the
air, and needed to be half lifted down by the guide, and
extra steps cut, before she could be landed below, cured of
glacier aspirations.    Such a gentleman Marjorie once met
on the passage of the Glacier des Bossons, between the
Pierre de I'Echelle and the Grands Mulcts.    The party,
who were not all previously acquainted, had met at the
last hut called the Pierre Pointue, eome 4000 feet above
Chamounix.    Some were going up Mount Blanc, others,
Marjorie among them,  only going to explore the wild
Glacier de Tacconay.    One French-speaking gentleman,
who wore a well conceived and point device " toilette de
montagne,"   rope and  axe complete, and posed himself
effectively whenever he had the opportunity, told Marjorie
that he had never been on a glacier before, but was en¬
chanted with its grandeur.    She could not help thinking
this glacier a bad one for a first essay, as it soon becomes
exceedingly fissured and needs a steady head.    The track
was made and steps occasionally cut by the leading guide,
then  came two or three  active gentlemen and  guides,
then  Marjorie's  special guide;  the  Frenchman, herself,
and his guide brought up the rear.     As they went on,
and  the  way  became  more   difficult,   the  Frenchman's
chatter died away, and except for an occasional query as
to whether it was not becoming too dangerous for ladies,
he became quite silent.    Meanwhile the path grew worse,
and at the junction of the Glacier de Tacconay its ice rocks
seemed to crash upon those of the Bossons, interrupting
all regular cleavage, and forming a scene of the utmost
magnificence.    It was as if some ancient massive city had
been ruined by an earthquake, and then changed into ice ;
such wild likenesses of overthroAvn towers and castles and
bridges rose white out of the  sombre blue gulf below,
into the deep blue sky above, sometimes poised threaten¬
ingly over the heads of the travellers, as if a touch would
bring them crashing down.
Suddenly the Frenchman stopped and refused the jump
in front. Marjorie was sure it was nothing difiicult, as the
men before them had taken it in their stride,— nor was it,
—but a fine example of those imaginative perils before
mentioned. They were to cross a long and wide crevasse,
Avhere a sort of pyramid rose from its depths and formed
a kind of stejiping-stone, wide euotigh for one but not for
The Attempt. 67
two persons to stand on ; quite firm, an easy stride from
the edge on one side, an easy spring on to firm ice on the
other. It was only looking down the sheer walls of ice
into the blue darkness below that could make it formid¬
able ; but the Frenchman looked, stopped, and murmured
"impossible ! " Marjorie's guide, who had turned to hold
his pole across to the last man to give her a balustrade,
said, in a tone of some contempt, " Let the lady pass at
least," when the leading guide turned quickly back, and
clearing the crevasse at a bound, asked to see the French¬
man's shoes. " I thought as much," he said, " you are ill
shod for ice, not the proper nails. I am very sorry, but
must request you to go no further with those shoes; they
might cause you to slip. Will you let Jean guide you
back? Madame can pass," with a glance at Marjorie's
boots. The Frenchman, again quite talkative, and pro¬
fuse in expressions of regret, turned back, evidently much
relieved, and Marjorie crossed. It is curious that though
she would not in general have looked twice at the place,
it now needed a certain exercise of resolution to step over,
—so potent is imagination on the nerves. Her guide re¬
marked later to the leader that the Frenchman was well
shod. " Possibly," was the reply, " but he had vertigo,—
and you to try and make him cross by showing that a
lady could do it! and he a Frenchman!—betise !"
To sum up; on a glacier, a lady has two responsibilities ;
she must not be dizzy, and she must be sure of her own
endurance, for it will not do to knock up in the middle of
an icy wilderness. The guides have the responsibility of
guarding against concealed crevasses, sometimes necessi¬
tating the use of the rope, and of avoiding avalanches and
falling stones. No precautions can, however, entirely
avert the latter risk; there are places always liable to a
discharge of stones, and the only remedy is to go over
them quickly. But walks on a glacier wdll be best under¬
stood by a detailed accomit of one from the lady's point
of view. So we "wdll relate how Martin and Marjorie
crossed the Mer de Glace to the Jardin, a charming expe¬
dition, and one involving no serious difficulties.
It was their first long day on ice, and they rode early
from Chamounix to the Montanvert to breakfast, and by
8 o'clock were ready to start on foot. They had each a
guide; Martin's they called the doctor, as he was always sen-
tentiously talking of "la sante," prohibiting rest and food
and drink, except at propertimes. Marjoriehad as her guide
68 The Attempt.
Peter, a handsome, powerful youth, daring in aspect but
gentle in manner, a man of few words, and not many ideas,
but a pleasant comrade in several excursions. They
climbed along the rock ledges for half-an-hour before
taking to the ice. When there, what atoms they felt to
the enormous proportions all aroimd. The head must be
strained back to see the sharp points of the aiguilles that
surround the glacier. The Mer de Glace widened to a
sea indeed, and what had appeared from above mere un¬
important cracks in its surface were now azure crevasses,
broad, deep ,and long,perplexingly crossing and recrossing
in an icy labyrinth. Sometimes they were gapiug and wide,
with fantastic peaks and blocks of ice rising up _ in the
centre, sometimes quite shallow, or again sinking to
a blue depth awful to see ; blocks of rounded ice some¬
times rose up like large waves frozen as they cm-led over
to break; here slender snow bridges crossed the blue
gulfs, there huge icicle spears flashed back gleams of
sunshine from the cold caverns beloAv. There was no
sound of Kfe, and yet no continued silence. Under the
intense sunshine you heard the ice crack and shiver with
a muffled subterranean explosion; now and again from the
circling mountains came the boom of an avalanche,
repeated in thundering echoes to right and left till it died
away at last into the stillness; then perhaps a sharp
rattle like that of musketry would announce the discharge
of stones and shattered ice from some overhanging crag.
Each day at this season new fissures yawn and old ones
disappear, so the track across a glacier is constantly
changing.
The various difficulties on the travellers' path were
met by the guides in various manners. Sometimes they
led their charges carefully over narrow ice bridges be¬
tween crevasses, sometimes cut footsteps up ice slopes,
but generally they skirted the fissures till they found a
good place for jumping over them. Marjorie enjoyed all
intensely, and only once " refused," at a place where the
walls of the crevasse fell away so below that nothing but
space could be seen; here she declared she dared not spring
without hold of the '• doctor's " hand, instead of merely his
pole from the other side; as the crevasse was too wide for
that, Peter took her by the waist and supported her
slanting over the abyss till she could take the doctor's
hand, saying,—" Nayez pas pern-, c'est moi qui vous
soutiens.''    But they soon acquired a confidence in their
The Attempt. 09
guides that left no room for anxiety; experience has
given the superior (]hamounix men not only wonderful
sagacity about ice, but also a quick apprehension of the
capabilities of travellers.
The finest point is perhaps where the Glaciers de
Lechand and Talefi'e meet. Here the great ice-crags
and toAvers of the Talefre seem to beat back as it were
the serried masses of the Lechand, like a combat of ice
giants. There is a strange feeling of vitahty about
glaciers, the lines are so entirely those of motion that you
half expect the movement to become visible. Those
tumbled crags and rearing masses of ice glittered under
the glowing August sun, as though strewn with diamonds,
darkening in the shadows into lovely emerald greens
and transparent blue; the forms were so startling, the
colours so pure, the scale so enormous that the whole
scene was magnificent beyond words. It brought that
over-powering sense of the beauty which reveals itself
through nature, as a message to the soul from its own
true land, whither all its best aspirations tend in the exile
of this confused and bhghted world.
The August sun felt hot when they left the ice for
a hand and foot cUmb up rocks well named Les
Egralets; and hotter still when they waded upwards
through deep snow, till they reached the so-called Jardin,
where Marjorie at least was very glad to rest after her
five hours' walk from Montanvert. The Jardin is a
rocky slope where snow does not lie; mosses and flowers
even, grow there scantily. It is in the very heart of the
mountains, and, save the shattered peaks too steep for
snow to rest on, nothing but ice and snow can be seen
all round. Mount Blanc rises on one side seen from the
glacier to the summit; the horizon is everywhere bounded
by sharp aiguilles or crests ot ice, and the valley below
is filled with sparkling glaciers descending in three
mighty divisions to the Mer de Glace. With an appetite
that can be imagined, our travellers discussed their
dinner, then Peter and the doctor fell asleep behind a
stone. Martin and Marjorie were too excited to do more
than pass from one mood to another; for there are
several generally experienced during a long day on the
mountains—at times the over-powering sense of sub¬
limity and beauty, before-mentioned; then secondly, a
wonderful exhilaration of spirits from the delicious air and
excitement, which turns all couleur-de-rose and makes a
70 The Attempt.
small joke go a great way. There is also the much lower
form of delight of a ravenous appetite for the dainty
little feasts spread on a stone, while the wine cools in the
glacier behind you; and lastly, a curious phase that Mar-
jorie at least often experienced in the sleepy afternoon
of a long day, a feeling as if one had been walking on
and on, almost ever since one could remember, and as
if one would go on walking till, as Kingsley says, " the
coming of the coqcig7'ues." This may result from the
re-action of keen excitement, the sated mind refusing to
entertain more than the present impression. In the
highest spirits, then, the companions slid down the snow-
slopes and stepped swiftly back to the Montanvert, over
the glacier in about three hours; after that they entered
the last-named mood. In a wakmg dream they walked
down through the dark pine forest, now lighted by a
rising moon, and when at last, after eight o'clock, they
reached Chamounix, it seemed weeks since their start
thence early that same morning.
Various days since on glaciers, some perhaps more
difficult and awful, none more beautiful, have not dimmed
the glory of that expedition. The glaciers leading to the
Grands Mulcts on Mont Blanc, the Eis-Meer on the Straleck
Pass, the Tschlingel glacier, the GornerandTeodule glaciers
were visited by Marjorie; but as to their general accessi-
blity to ladies, it is difficult to give an opinion; each
can soon ascertain by a little practice on a glacier edge
whether she is sure-footed and has a good head. But let
all go high who can ; the glacier where it debouches
on the valleys, dingy with soil, and heavy with moraine,
gives little idea of what it is where its ghttering spires
rise from the eternal snows. E. J. 0.
(To be continued.)
Footsteps on the wind—
While I go and while I stay,
All the night and all the day.
Footsteps slow, and sad, and dreary.
Footsteps travel-worn and weary;
Sounds like rain-drips from the eaves,
Sounds like fall of Autumn leaves;
Childish footsteps gay and glad,
The Attempt. 71
Old age feeble, slow, and sad,
Youth and beauty treading past
Passionful unto the last,
Crowding each on each behind—
Footsteps on the wind.
Footsteps on the wind—
Footsteps merry, gay and light.
Once kept measure dancing bright
To my own ;
But in noon's full flashing tide,
One by one they stopped beside
A churchyard stone:
And I went my way alone.
And the footsteps came behind
On the wind.
Footsteps on the wind—
There was one,
Louder, dearer than the rest,
That for ever forward prest,
Waking throbbings in my breast;
Bringing still a martial tread.
From the chambers of the dead.
Which was wont to make me thrill
With a tremble of delight.
Now—nothing wakes the long, long night
With deep-wrought memories entwined,
But footsteps on the wind.
Footsteps on the wind—
There is one
Though he rides upon the blast.
Yet no sound mine ear doth greet,
Though his steed
Is the fleetest of the fleet;
There is darkness in the an-.
And I fold my hands in prayer.
And the sound of steps is lost
In the music of a choir.
Which is drawing up my soul
In a longing, wild desire;
And the heaven come nigh and nigher.
All the darkness left behind.
And hushed for ever, ever, ever.
Are the footsteps on the wind.
La Maurice.
72 The Attempt.
%\t  Peroincs   of  C^nnuson.
It is always an interesting task to follow the develop¬
ment of character presented to us by various authors,
whether in prose or in verse. The heroines of Shakspeare,
for instance, have been criticised, eulogised, "taken to
pieces" as it were, by divers essayists, till Lady Macbeth,
in her mingled strength and weakness, and Rosalind,
true and tender, are as familiar to us as the friends of our
dailv life.
I by no means wish to claim for my imperfect
remarks the dignity of a " review " on Tennyson ; a duty
which has been performed by many hands worthy of the
task ; but I would draw attention to some of the femimne
characters portrayed by our great Laureate, who as¬
suredly has scarcely been surpassed in this branch of
delineation. Many, which I will pass over, are little more
than graceful pictures; beautiful, it is true, and drawn with
a master's hand, but otherwise possessing no special signi¬
ficance. In this class may be mentioned " The Gardener's
Daughter," " Edith " (Aylmer's Field), and pre-eminently
" Maud." About this last, Uglitly touched as she is, there is a
charm almost irresistible, so tender and delicate is the
colouring of this perfect portrait; but it is only a
portrait.
" Dora," though the poem is but a sketch, possesses a
more distinct character than those in the other shorter
pieces. Her love for her cousin, unspoken, yet none the
less true, has a pathos of its own, nowise modified by the
simplicity with which the story is told. That love trans¬
ferred to his child, her meek submission to the old man's
anger for that child's sake, are very toiiching, and the
last words of the poem have a sad significance :—■
" As years
Went forward, Mary took another mate ;
But Dora lived unmarried till her death."
That touch completes the story. William never loved
Dora ; moreover he is dead; but she is loyal still. Mary,
who had the treasure for which Dora pined in vain, can
bury its memory, and turn from it, nothing loth. Dora
loved hopelessly, but the grave of her buried love is
green with sacred tears to her life's end. A true story
all the world over, but no less sorrowful for that.
The Attempt. 73
But it is time that I should turn to some which possess a
fuller development in description, and, therefore, merit a
more careful scrutiny.
I will begin with two who may be taken as examples
of the author's power in delineating the baser side of
character,—" Ettarre " and " Vivien." Of these, the
former is, in many ways, the more repulsive. She
is the embodiment of vanity, and that of the lowest
order. Everything must be subservient to that one
passion. Pelleas, the young knight, " but lately come to
his inheritance," who loves her with all the fervour, the
reverence of a first love, is only interesting to her, so
long as he can minister to that vanity, as thus:—
" And whfle they rode, the meaning in his eyes,
His tenderness of manner, and chaste awe,
His broken utterances and bashfulness,
Were all a burthen to her, and in her heart
She mutter'd, ' I have lighted on a fool,
Raw, yet so stale !'    But since her mind was bent
On hearing, after trumpet blown, her name
And title, ' Queen of Beauty,' in the lists
Cried—and beholding him so strong, she thought
That peradventure he will fight for me.
And win the circlet : therefore flatter'd him."
She does not and cannot appreciate the true young
heart which is laid at her feet; the chivalrous devotion
which, even if hopeless, would so deeply touch a true
woman's heart, is only wearisome to her. She does not
even manifest much pleasure in her conquest for its own
sake. He must win for her the circlet, and then—he is
cast off like a worn-out glove. It is easy to give hun
promises, if, by so doing, she can win glory to herself; and
so Pelleas, brave, yet a very child, is plunged into a
wild dream of happiness. What does it matter to her if
the awakening for him therefrom prove a very rending
of the heartstrings ? There is something most sad in
that blissful ignorance of his :—
" His face
Shone like the countenance of a priest of old.
Against the flame about a sacrifice
Kindled by fire from heaven : so glad was he."
And all because of the promise of a woman fair, yet most
false, hghtly given, and destined to be as lightly broken.
Powerful as is the whole description of Ettarre, it is
nowhere more so, than where, finding that he whom she
disdained had at last learnt to give back scorn for
scorn—-
HABCH 1872. K
74 The Attempt.
" Her ever-veering fancy tum'd
To Pelleas, as the one true knight on earth,
And only lover ; and thro' her love her life
Wasted and pined, desiring him in vain."
It is the true and fitting retribution. Vanity is life to her;
and through her wounded vanity her cold heart is at
length touched, too late.
Vivien, undoubtedly the least popular poem in that first
series of the Idylls in which it appears, nevertheless merits
attention. Vivien herself is a character of far more inter¬
est than Ettarre. Vivien may be feared, Ettarre can only
be despised. There is something almost terrible in the
steady perseverance with which the former holds her end
in view. There is no effort that she will not make, no
duplicity to which she will not stoop, there is even a
certain grandeur in the recklessness of her endeavour;
we feel dimly a sort of fascination. Pitiable as is the
defeat of Merlin, the enchanter, the sage, yet we cannot
marvel that this beautiful woman, with all her passion,
her sweetness, her thousand charms, should so enthrall
even him. Power, absolute power, is the end at which she
aims; she gains it, and at last the fatal secret is yielded
to her. Beautiful still, but wth the beauty of a Pytho¬
ness, of a Medea, she instantly avails herself of the charm
" of woven paces, and of waving hands." Merlin is
chained in deathless sleep, and she goes her way pitiless,
triumphant, with a bitter intensity of scorn that lays
bare her whole nature before us.
Over Guinevere I will pass briefiy. She figures in
most of the Idylls, and there is always an interest attached
to her name. But, matchless as is the poem which takes
her for its especial heroine, pathetic beyond description,
the character of Guinevere herself presents little field for
analysis. A beautiful, wilful woman, proud and impetuous;
loving wildly and fatally; with a passion always sorrow¬
ful, as if with the foreshadowing of its doom; and at
length repenting with that fervour and eagerness which
always mark her.
Can anything so express this as the cry, imutterably
sad, unutterably despairing—
" Now I see thee what thou art,
Thou art the highest and most human too,
Not Lancelot, nor another.    Is there none
Will tell the king I love him, though so late ?
Now—ere he goes to the great battle ?    None ?
O shut me round with narrowing nunnery walls,
Meek maidens, from the voices crying ' shame.'"
The Attempl. 75
And there follows the piteous clinging to the one Hght
left her in the gathered darkness—
" I must not scorn myself ; he loves me still.
Let no one dream but that he loves me still."
Then the end comes ; the tempest-tost life lays down its
burden, and the wayward, passionate heart is at rest for
ever. She is followed to her grave by Lancelot, who, like
her, has sought place for repentance in a cloister—
" So groaned Sir Lancelot, in remorseful pain.
Not knowing he should die a holy man,"
says Tennyson, and the old romance tells us that when
the body of the abbess-queen was brought from Amesbury
to Glastonbury to rest with the dust of the " blameless
king," on that sad journey "ever Sir Lancelot and his
fellows went about the bier."
Guinevere's hapless, yet in one respect more fortunate
rival,—for she has not the sting of remorse to add to her
other woes,—Elaine,—is, notwithstanding this, less inter¬
esting, sad as her story is. True, it is small marvel that a
simple, impressionable girl should, as it were, dream her¬
self into love with such a paladin as Lancelot; but we
cannot sympathise with one who suffers her hopeless love
to kill her outright. The noblest hearts suffer and are
still; and, if they cannot live down their sorrows, at
least, bear them manfully; but Elaine succumbs at once.
The picture is so perfect, so intensely graceful, of the
girl's death, and the journey to Camelot, that it is hard
to recollect this, that she dies for love, and for nothing
else. Let me recall those peerless hues, though they do
not exactly bear upon the subject in hand :
" The dead
Steer'd by the dumb went upward with the'flood,—
In her right hand the lily, in her left
The letter,—all her bright hair streaming down,
And aU the coverlid was cloth of gold,
Drawn to her waist, and she herself in white
All but her face,—and that clear-featured face
Was lovely, for she did not seem as deafl
But fast asleep, and lay as tho' she smil'd."
" Slowly past the barge
Whereon the lily maid of Astolat
Lay smUing, like a star in blackest night."
Beautiful it is, beautiful the whole story; sweet and
touching the great knight's sore sickness, and Elaine's
tender and watchful care, but that one weakness spoils
her, though not the poem.    We cannot altogether admire
76 The Attempt.
one who, whatever may be her feelings, can say un¬
asked—
" ' I have gone mad.    I love you : let me die 1'
' Oh, sister,' answered Lancelot, ' what is this ?'
And umocently extending her white arms,
' Your love,' she said, ' your love—to be your wife.'"
This is surely plain speaking, if ever such were, and
scarcely consistent with one's ideas of maidenly dignity.
A fairer character, though the poem is scarcely as beau¬
tiful as that of which I have just spoken, is Enid. She,
indeed, is a very pearl of womanhood; pure, noble, tender,
patient to the uttermost; forgiving, unmurmuring under
all the suspicion and cruelty of her mistaken lord.
Infinitely touching is this picture—
"Enid heard the clashing of his fall,
Suddenly came, and at his side all pale
Dismounting, loosed the fastenings of his arms.
Nor let her true hand falter, nor blue eye
Moisten, till she had lighted on his wound,
And, tearing off her veil of faded silk.
Had bared her forehead to the blazing sun,
And swathed the hurt that drained her dear lord's life :
Then after aU was done that hand could do
She rested, and her desolation came
Upon her, and she wept beside the way."
Not till she has tended him, not till she has done all in her
power for the healing of his wound, does she suifer her tears
to fall; and yet no more tender heart than Enid's was ever
portrayed. But strong by virtue of that very tenderness,
she can control herself, and minister to Geraint;
" Then after all was done that hand could do,
She wept beside the way."
And this after a treatment which would have exasperated
and estranged a woman who loved one whit less loyally;
a treatment the more galling, because unexplained; yet
meek Enid asks no question, makes no moan, only—
"Ever in her mind she cast about
For that unnoticed failing in herself,
Which made him look so cloudy ajid so cold ;
Then thought again, ' if there be such in me,
I might amend it by the grace of heaven,
If he would only speak and tell me of it.' "
The loving heart is sore wounded, yet she never accuses
him, even to herself, of the hurt, but believes humbly
that the fault is her own, though she knows not how.
It  is consistent  with  all   the   rest, that, when  at last
The Attempt. 77
Geraint's confidence is restored, Enid exacts no penitence,
utters no reproach, but greets the happy change with
silent though unutterable joy. Truly is Enid a noble story,
and its heroine a noble one. Misty legend though it be,
springing first from the brain of the old trouveur of the
Middle Ages, yet the genius which in modern times has
Eresented it to us, with all its fair companions of the Idylls,
as invested it with a great significance. It has made
this " fayre ladye " of far back ages a type of fair and
glorioxis womanhood, fulfilling the purposes of her life
sweetly and tenderly.
One more example and I hare done. This is, it seems
to me, a very remarkable one. "The Princess" is in some
respects an unsatisfactory poem, nevertheless, it contains
passages of such beauty as none other of the poet's works
possesses. On the merits and demerits of the work I will
not now enlarge, but will simply take from it one, and
that the most prominent character.
Ida, the Princess herself, full of imperfections and
contradictions as she is, bears the stamp of greater genius
than any of Tennyson's other heroines. Weak, yet
imperious; self-opinionated, yet easUy led, she exercises a
strange fascination over the reader. She is throughout
such a thorough woman in all her flights and extrava¬
gances, that we cannot choose but foUow the example
of the enchanted Prince, and love her. Nature peeps out
even at the first, in spite of all her self-enforced disdain
of everything outside her college walls. She learns that
the supposed students have come from the unknown
prince's country—
" Are you ambassadresses
From bim to me ? We give you, being strange,
A licence : speak, and let the topic die."
She hears of him with contemptuous pity, as it were;
still she listens. Everywhere the womanly nature rebels
against the self-imposed rules: even when deeply offended,
when she would fain do violence to her own tender
instincts, and cast forth Psyche's child, she cannot do it—
" For this lost lamb,      .    .    .
" Our mind is changed, we take it to ourseM."
And as we pursue the story, most pathetic is that
renunciation of all that has become so dear to her, the
yielding up of her golden dream, her fancied Utopia. The
proud heart is breaking, but she submits, knowing herself
to be but very woman after all—
78 The Attempt.
" Some touch of that
Which kills me with myself, and drags me down
From my fix'd height, to mob me up with all
The soft and mUky rabble of womankind.
Poor weakling ev'n as they are.    Passionate tears
Followed."
It is the breaking doMTi for ever of her grand design, to
which she must perforce consent. She knows it, and does
not spare herself, but lashes her own weakness with bitter
scorn in her agony, burdened with the " night-mare
weight of gratitude." That debt is paid, but the wound
is not yet healed—
" Sadness on the soul of Ida fell,
And hatred of her weakness, blent with shame."
Nevertheless, her sacrifice is not in vain; a new happi¬
ness is born of the resignation, though she is slow to
believe and accept it. The tender heart, under all its
armour of defiance, is touched at last—
" Out of hauntings of my spoken love,
And lonely listenings to my mutter'd dream,
And often feeling of the helpless hands.
And wordless broodings on the wasted cheek—
From all a closer interest flourished up,
Tenderness touch by touch, and last, to these.
Love, like an Alpine hare-beU hung with tears,
By some cold morning glacier; frail at first.
And feeble, all unconscious of itself.
But such as gather'd colour day by day."
And then follow those wonderful words, infinitely ex¬
pressive :—
" Out of languor leapt a cry,
Leapt fiery Passion from the brinks of death."
The love that has long worshipped her is victorious ; the
old mistaken life is left behind, and the perfect woman,
nature, is triumphant.
"AR
Her falser seH slipt from her like a robe,
And left her woman.
Repentance comes.
Repentance comes,
" She said,
Brokenly, that she knew it—she had failed
In sweet humility; had failed in all;
That all her labour was but as a block
Left in the quarry.
Her great heart thro' aU the faultful past,
Went sorrowing in a pause I dared not break."
But she is not now ashamed of her repentance, only of
that which needed it.    Transformed by the might of the
The Attempt. 79
new love within her, she turns, fairer and nobler in her
weakness than in her fancied strength, to that love in all-
confiding trust.
Truly, looking at this " Dream of fair women," to borrow
the title of one ol this same poet's works, of all the
succession there seems to me to be none whose character
is so deeply significant, so strongly yet delicately drawn,
as the Princess; and it is for this reason that I have
devoted more attention to her than to the rest. She is
not the first, nor will she be the last, who has striven
after an impossible ideal; yet the endeavour, hopeless as
it is, is what makes her all the nobler. It is something to
have an ideal, even if it be only a golden dream that
vanishes when the magic sleep is past. The eagle may
not quite reach the heavens, but at least he rises above
the earth into the purer air beyond.
YOLANDE.
Pofo \xit 0Ot Up our frifafalc C^calrirals,
Part II.
Next morning we spent partly at our needles', partly in
studying the play; and punctually at four o'clock we
assembled for rehearsal. The result of our studies was,
alas! far from satisfactory. Mr Jones was as usual equal
to the occasion, he was thoroughly acquainted with his
own part, and was tolerably well up in all the others; he
had also most carefully studied what may be called the
topography of the play, and knew exactly at what doors
we should make our various entrances and exits, and how
we should group ourselves in the principal scenes.
But as the rest of us had totally neglected the topo¬
graphical part, poor Mr Jones,—what with acting, and
prompting, and pushing, and shoving, propelling us to¬
wards the right doors, and intercepting us as we were
trying to escape by the wrong ones,—was, by the time
we had gone once through the play, utterly exhausted,
dishevelled, hoarse, and panting.
Katie Smith was the second best; a bright lively
piquante girl, the part of the saucy waiting-maid exactly
suited her; and she was much quicker than the rest of
80 The Attempt.
us at comprehending the fitness of things with regard
to the grouping. But her memory was very bad, and she
was most deficient in her part. The same remark appHed
to Jane {the Marchioness), and she was not so quick as
Katie at comprehending the stage " situations;" however,
she also was remarkably well-suited to her part—could
she only remember it.
Maggie Smith had learnt her part with the utmost
accuracy, and had repeated it, as she assured us, three
times over without a mistake, before the rehearsal be¬
gan ; but she had unfortunately quite omitted to
notice her cues, and could only deliver her part as an
uninterrupted soliloquy, without any regard to the dia¬
logue of wliich her sentences formed a portion. It was,
no doubt, a great triumph of memory over meaning, but
not exactly the thing we wanted; so poor Maggie had to
resume  her  studies on a different principle  altogether.
Mary's little part of the Marchioness'' niece, Blanche, was
carefully learned; but she and Maggie both found the
difficulties of sitting, standing, and walking on the stage
well-nigh insurmountable. The tables and chairs seemed
to have entered into a league against them; they could
not move without treading on some one's toes; they
eluded every efibrt of Mr Jones to keep them away firom
the wrong doors, and nothing would induce them to face
the audience. The fault of my preparation was just the
reverse of Maggie Smith's; her study of the play had
been too particular, mine too general. I really felt as if
I knew everybody's speeches better than my own, and
was with difficulty restrained from appropriating various
scraps of dialogue, the rightful property of my cousia
Blanche, and my confidential friend   Therese.
But our acting was absolute perfection, compared to that
of Fred Smith and Henry. Fred, who was always rather a
puzzle-headed fellow, had apparently studied his part just
enough to involve himself in the wildest confusion as to the
names and relationships of the different characters. The
Marchioness, his aunt; Violet, his cousin and innamorata;
Blanche, his sister; and Therese, his and Violefs friend ;
were all jumbled together in his mind in hopeless disorder,
and the havoc he made of their respective identities Avas
really terrible. He did not even attempt to distinguish
hetween Blanche and Therese; and mth Violet he was
but Uttle better. When Mr Jones had succeeded in hust¬
ling him into the proper position, and he himself had sue-
The Attempt. 81
ceeded in stammering out an ardent declaration of his
feelings towards me {i.e. Violet), with the aid of consider¬
able prompting from myself, and various surreptitious
glances at his play-book, the next moment he Avould
come flying back and address me as his " venerable aunt,"
in the belief that I was personating the Marchioness. I
really think had it not been for the thought of the rapier,
(which had already arrived), poor Fred would have thrown
up his part in despair.
As to Henry, his appearance as Dr Rlwdodendron
was simply disgraceful. He had not even opened his
book since the previous day, and walked through the
play reading his part. It was utterly impossible to
get him into the right place at the right time; and
the disorder he occasioned in the final tableau put the
finishing stroke to the distress of Mr Jones, who sank
down exhausted, as I have already described. Upon re¬
covering, he gave it as his opinion that we were attempt¬
ing too much at a time; and entreated us to concentrate
ourselves upon the first scene, and go over and over it
till we felt sure of our ground. We agreed to do so, more
especially as the Lawyer (]\Ir Jones) did not appear in the
first scene, and was therefore at leisure to direct and mai-
shall us. So over and over that first scene we went, Mr
Jones applauding, remonstrating, advising, flying hither
and thither like a Will-o'-the-Wisp; dragging the Mar¬
chioness on to the stage, warning the maid Jeannette off" it;
forcing Blanche into a chair, and hemming in TMrese be¬
hind it; bringing Violet and Julian together in the fore¬
ground, and imploring them to " get on ;" and never for
an instant losing sight of Doctor Rhododendron, nor omit-
ing the warning, "Look out now. Doctor! " when his
turn to speak came round.
Thanks to the energetic drill of Mr Jones, by six
o'clock we had performed the first scene with a con¬
siderable degree of success, and began in some measure
to see our way. We adhered to Mr Jones' plan of learn¬
ing scene by scene at our succeeding rehearsals, and
found it an excellent one for performers so inexperienced
as ourselves. The amusement we obtained from those
rehearsals was immense; and we all, even Henry, agreed
that, whether the play turned out a failure or not, the
preparation for it was the greatest piece of fun we had
ever enjoyed in our lives. The thrill of anxiety that
sometimes crossed our minds at seme inexcusable blunder
iiAi.i 11 1872, li
82 The Attempt.
only added a pleasing excitement to the affair; but as
the days passed on, our anxiety became less and less, and
GUI- hopes rose higher and higher.
The Blarchioness and her maid Jeannette both promised
to be a triumphant success, as Jane and Katie grew
familiar with their parts; and Blanche and the Lawyer
were also very good. Therese was very accurate, but
that was all that could be said. Maggie Smith had
no more idea of acting than I have of flying; and if
she repeated the words correctly, and sat and stood
at the proper times, she was abundantly satisfied. She
would come up to me and say, "Oh, Violet, Violet! all
is lost! a convent is your only refuge!" her rosy good-
natured face beaming with smiles, and her manner and tone
the same as when, an hour later, she dispensed afternoon
tea to the performers. Still she knew her part thoroughly,
and there >vas no fear of her breaking down. My part of
Violet was improving, but the sentimentality attaching
to it was rather endangered by the erratic and fitful
■memory of Julian, who broke down at the most unex¬
pected places. It was trying, when I had posed myself
with considerable care, and exclaimed in pathetic accents
—" Julian, dearest Julian! can you not trust me?" it was
trying, to receive for answer—"Zes—oh no—stop a minute
—what comes next f by Jove, Tve lost the place ! " and to
see poor Fred wildly fumbling the leaves of his play-book,
in search of his answer to my pathetic demand. He
improved very much, however, as the rehearsals went on,
and we confidently expected that the inspiration of the
rapier, knee-breeches, &c., would bring him quite up to
the point on the night of the play.
The grand difiiculty was Dr Bhododendron, who, on the
19th January, one day before the great day of action,
had really not improved one whit. Still he read his part
from beginning to end; still he turned his back on the
audience; still he was invariably missing from the semi¬
circle at the end. As to the doors, he had announced at
an early stage of the rehearsals that unless he was
allowed invariably to go out and come in by the same
door, he would relinquish his part. Remonstrance was
unavailing; so Mr Jones and Katie Smith went into com¬
mittee on the subject, and the result was that one of the
three doors was set apart for the exclusive use of Doctor
Bhododendron.
He  was indeed  a  very  serious   difficulty;   and   the
Tlie Attempt, 83
importance of his part became more and more evident
to the rest of us as the 20th of January drew near.
The Doctor was the leading comic character of the piece,
and we were well aware that by its comic side our play
must stand or fall. Besides, the comic character among the
ladies, poor little Katie, had the effect of her really good
acting sadly marred by want of co-operation on the
Doctor's part; for her crack scene was one in which
Jeannette made burlesque love to the Doctor, to draw ofi"
his attention fi-om Julian and Violet. A.nd on the 19th of
January, as I have said, he was still so ill-prepared, that
Mr Jones announced a morning rehearsal on the 20th to
be absolutely necessary, in consequence mainly of the
Doctor's inefficiency. Hemy, with the blandest of smiles,
assented, merely remarking that he hoped we all saw noiv
what folly it was to ask him to act.
We were depressed in spirit that evening, for our
pleasant rehearsals were nearly over, the coming ordeal
was very near at hand, and Doctor Bhododendron was a
source of deep anxiety ; but when we met at twelve next
day, what was our delight to see the Doctor take up his
usual position, without the play-book in his hand ! With
breathless anxiety we listened for the opening sentences
of his part—they were correct and fluent; we watched
for his first exit—it took place exactly at the right
moment; for his re-entrance—we w^ere not kept a second
in suspense. We came to his crack scene with Jeannette,
—he took up every point; to his hunt for a suspected
love-letter—he did not miss one of the places it was his
duty to search. In short, when we had gone through
the play, and the Doctor, in his proper place, had deli¬
vered his proper valediction, we all acknowledged that the
part was at last correct; and though decidedly rather
stiff and lifeless, it was better than we had ever dared to
expect. It was just as well that we had this drop of
comfort, for all the rest of us, partly from excitement,
partly from the intensity with which we were watching
the Doctor, acted very badly that morning; and the
criticism of Charley and Willy, who were looking on,
made our ears tingle as we thought of the evening.
Our performance was to begin at nine, but before half-
past eight we were all shut into our green-room ready for
action, and listening with beating hearts to the laughing
and talking in the drawing-room, where the audience was
rapidly assembling.    Fred and Katie rushed from time to
84 The Attempt.
time on to the stage to peep through a hole in the green
curtain, and at ten minutes to nine they announced that
every seat was occupied; in five minutes more the overtnre
began (Miss Jones at the grand piano constituted our
orchestra); we took our ^places for the first scene; and
after an interval, apparently endless, the green curtain
drew up, or strictly speaking, drew asunder, and the play
began.
Our first feeling was that Fred was right; there was
inspiration in the dresses. Conscious that w^e looked our
parts to admiration, we found it infinitely easier to act
them. The glare of light, the crowd of listening faces,
the hearty laughter which greeted our first witticisms, all
excited us, and raised our hopes; we talked, laughed,
moved with an ease and spirit that astonished ourselves.
The Marchioness was hailed with a torrent of applause
before she opened her mouth, and no wonder;—for her
dress had cost us hours of work, and she w^as laden with
jewellery on every part of her person. Her acting was
as good as her dress; and Katie's renderm^ oi Jeannette
fairly brouglit down the house ; but the triumph of the
evenhig was Doctor Rhododendron. He had not uttered
three sentences when we saw that Henry had been play¬
ing with us all along, and that he had a better idea of
acting than any of us. His face, his voice, his manner, his
gestures, his gait were all alike admirable ; he made ten
times more of his part than we could have believed
possible. He took snufi^, he sneezed, he groaned, he
hobbled about the stage, he adjusted his immense horn
spectacles, and the simplest action brought shrieks of
laughter from the audience; the scene with Jeannette was
applauded to the echo; and, at the end, when the whole
corps dramatique had been called before the curtain to
receive a farewell round of applause, there "vvas a second
peremptory call for the "The Doctor! the Doctor!" who
thus turned out the very pillar of our play, instead of its
overthrow, as we had at one time feared.
We all found seats among the audience to Avitness
the representation of Box and Cox, capitally performed
by Cliarley and Willy; after which we adjourned to
supper, where one of the guests, in a neat and com¬
plimentary speech, proposed the health of " Doctor
Rhododendron and his company." The Doctor replied,
and had the grace to acknowledge that had it not
been for his friend Mr Jones, the play would have been a
The Attempt. 85
complete fiasco; upon Avhich we drank the health of
Mr Jones with three times three. Then we dispersed,
I saw Fred Smith glance mournfully at his rapier as he
handed me down stairs; and we were all rather dull that
night as we took off our rohes bouffantes, and brushed the
powder out of our hair; for humble though our efforts had
been, and numerous as were our difficulties, there were
few things that had given us so much genuine enjoyment
as Our Private Theatricals.
Dido.
'*^\t Calling ai i\t S^a."
'TwAS a dark and stormy midnight, on a rough and rocky
shore.
And the foaming waves on the suri-lashed bay, broke into
a savage roar.
That mingled with the raving wind in furious gusts, that
blew
O'er the wat'ry waste, a stricken barque and her doomed
and helpless crew.
Fast and more fast before the blast the reeling vessel flies,
And the yell of the seething billows drowns their wild
despairing cries.
Hope there is none, and help there is none, and escape
there cannot be
From the fathomless grave in the yawning depths of the
black and demon sea.
One mighty prayer goes silent up from each bowed and
throbbing soul,
"Lord, save! we perish I" but nearer the ship drives on to
her awful goal.
One thunder crash through the tempest's roar, one wail
through the howling night;
The barque shall be seen on the waves no more, when
Cometh the morning hght!
A maiden sat by a dying fire, and watched the flickering
flame,
And listened, as sad through the blustering wind a hollow
echo came,
A sound as of weeping voices, and many trampling feet,
Borne on the blast from the wild sea-shore, where the
waves and the dark chffs meet.
86 The Attempt.
And oh 1 her cheek was white with woe, and her eyes
were dark with tears,
And her heart beat fast with the  agony of sharp  and
torturing fears.
For her love was far this desolate night, out on the angry
main,
Oh, would that he were but safe on shore, back to her
side again.
She knew how high were the  waves  and  strong,   and
white with lashing foam;
Alas!   for the dear brave hearts at sea, that must never
more come home.
When would  that  dismal  fearful  sound  of dread  and
terror cease ?
Say, would the morning never come, to bring her rest and
peace'?
The long dark night of tempest passed, the morn broke
fair and still.
And the maiden hied her to the shore, o'er meadow, holt,
and hill;
And there upon the grey sea sand, dark sea weeds round
him spread,
All 'mid the wtranded spars of wreck, her own true love
lay dead.
\ Mas. Alta.
Part II.
At last dawned the terrible day when the lots were to be
drawn. Our old village church was crowded, Avomen with
white faces passed in and out, and hands were clasped,
and knees bent in supplication to the Virgin. To what
avail ? With smiles of supreme calmness, the saints throw
back the prayers that have burst from quivering human
lips, and human hearts may break upon the cold stone
floor, and who is there that will heed, or who will give
them help ? Yet if their belief comforts those poor crea¬
tures, let them dream on, it may do them some good; how
can I know ?    I, who am tossed about in the mad whirl
The Attempt. 87
of rage and despair. I, who having held war as utterly
abominable, am yet forced to fight. I, who am torn by the
pangs of love, yet hate my fellow-men I What can I
know ?
Like a horrible dream that day passed; up to the Mairie
I went in my tiu-n, and drew the fatal number, then, un¬
heeding the crowd, scarcely feeling the pain, returned
straight home. I heard my mother's cry as I entered the
door; there was no need for words, she read the news in
my face.
Oh I mother, I could scarcely think of your sorrow,
because of the sweet face that was always before my eyes,
that with its smiles woiild have seemed to mock me had I
not loved it so. The great love that you heaped upon me I
scarcely heeded, for my whole soul was agonised thinking
of one who had smiled upon me but once or twice, who
would smile as brightly upon others, though I—ma mere,
ma mere! I am an ungrateful son; unto me thou hast
given all thine heart, and I give thee back so little!
There was sorrow enough in Mouens that night as the
sun went down; the sound of weeping was in all the
streets. Men muttered curses on the government that
had broiight war on the country, mothers sobbed over
their sons. Ah, to the parents, the soldiers are not mere
goods and chattels; to them, the Hets of the slain are not
arithmetical calculations. The mother can tell how
precious was each lost life; she knows the pain that was
borne, the prayers that were offered that her son might
grow lip brave and good, that he might serve God and
his fellow-men, that he might do the work that never
finds too many labourers, the bettering somewhat of this
not over-righteous world,—she can tell how loved, how
dear was the young life; to God alone is known the worth
of it.
We left the village. How my heart filled as we marched
through the little Place. There were the tall trees under
whose shade the old people were accustomed to sit, there
were the stone seats over which we jumped when children;
here beside the wall was the very corner where Elise and
her father had stood when they spoke to me that day I
saw her first. It was hard to leave it—this little village,
where so many happy days had been passed, where dear
friends still remained. At a bend in the road, we got a
last glimpse of the blue waters of the far distant Mediter¬
ranean, a last look at our home as its gray houses lay
88 Tlie Attem-pt.
peacefully under the noon-day sun; then the encircling
hills closed it in, and our backs were turned on all peace,
and joy, and beauty of life, and our faces were towards
the dried-up withered slopes of the hills in front, beyond
which lay the land we were soon to know,—deluged in
blood.
Those were weary days; long marches under a hot sun,
drill, discipline, men grumbhng and reviling. My heart
was almost dead in its despair, yet how I hated even my
feUow-sufFerers, how bitterly cursed the crowned heads
that had brought this misery upon us.
As we marched onward, we came to places where war
had left terrible marks; one village near which we rested
for the night had been almost entirely destroyed. From
ruined homesteads, haggard women came weeping out,
their children hanging about them, and begged for bread
to eat. The fields that one fortnight before were covered
with the ripening grain, now lay black and bare in the
sunlight; there was no hope of escaping starvation, and
what had these people done that such a fate should come
upon them ?
There was not an able bodied man about the village,
—only women and children, with aged men. It was a
terrible thing to pass on and leave them to die in their
misery, but Avar knows no mercy either to friend or foe.
The days dragged on; and now we were in front of the
enemy, and expected fighting every hour. At last the
terrible morning dawned, the last morning of some thou¬
sands. The Bun rose golden, the sky was of that clear
blue into which one gazes, feeling there is no end to it;
but the stillness of the autumn air was broken by the
booming of cannon, and a black cloud of smoke soon lay
over us like a funeral pall.
Again and again we rushed on the enemy; I saw my
comrades fall one after another, one after another. I
heard the groans and cries of the wounded, yet on we
pressed, and ever the ranks thinned and closed again. It
was fearful work. After many hours of heavy fighting,
when our soldiers were completely worn out, we retreated,
slowly and in good order, but we left our dead upon the
field. It was a bitter thing that retreat. I had rather
have died than fight, yet, having fought, it was hard to be
beaten.
I grudged the enemy their triumph. For the first time I
felt hatred towards them; they were no longer fellow-men
The Attempt. 89
and brethren; victorious over our troops, the murderers
of my countrymen : they were become to me as wild
beasts, to be slain and trodden under foot.
As we retreated I was wounded; so far I had escaped
the slightest hurt, but now an arm and a leg were carried
away. Then followed days and weeks of fever, of fearful
suffering. I, with several other wounded men lay in a
cottage, tended by a Sister of Mercy, who did all charity
could do to alleviate our anguish, but I cannot, I dare not
recall that dreadful time.
When I left the cottage I was a maimed and helpless
cripple; all my strength had gone from me; the days of
my youth had departed, and I was not much over twenty.
All that remained for me now was to crawl home and die
there, if only such good fortune might await me. Wearily
I dragged my crutch along a little way every day—such a
very little way. Three months ago how easily had I tra¬
versed that road, how lightly climbed those hUls; but now
a metre was to me a weary journey, for I was become as
an old man for weakness.
The country people were kind to me. " Ce pauvre
soldat," they said, looking at me with compassionate
eyes. But their pity was bitter as everything else, and
though I ate their bread and drank their water, I had no
thanks to give. The sunlight was to me become an ac¬
cursed thing, for I knew the awful crimes that were done
beneath it, and my own soul was bowed down with guilt.
(To be continued.) A. M.
We two have wandered far through foreign lauds—
Have watched the sunrise in the early dawn
Over the sombre sea, we on its breast,—
Have waited on the course of Night's fair queen,
As by the myriad stars, her handmaids fair
Attended, she her royal progress made—
Have strayed through forests deep, where gorgeous plumes
Of many-coloured birds flashed suddenly,
And strange wild flowers, and trees of giant growth,
In wild luxuriance choked the odorous air—
Have climbed the mountains, on whose summits hang
MABCH1872. M
90 The Attempt.
The everlasting snow-wreaths, unapproached—
Have listened to the roar of waterfall,
And seen the stream, loosed from its boundaries, break
With dreadful ravage, o'er the fair campaign.
We two have wandered far ; and yet our hearts.
Now we are home-returned, are satisfied.
With a content we never felt before.
Sweet is the valley of otu- highland home;
Bare are the mountains, dark the lonely tarns,
Wild the weird plover's cry o'er purple moor.
But as we here together silent rove,
And clasp each other's hand, and Kft our eyes,
And read in each the other's calm content.
In the full heart, the feeHng rises deep.
And strong, and irrepressible, " To us
There is no country dearer than our own."
NOLI-MB-T A NGERE.
r cjji'^eman's §istoriral issags.
It is a common practice for authors to publish in one
volume articles on different subjects which they have
written during a series of years; but to few, I should
imagine, can the making of such a collection have been so
pleasant a task, as the preparation of this volume of essays
must have been to Mr Freeman. For many yeai-s Mr
Freeman has been endeavouring to change and mould
public opinion on certain subjects, and almost every one
of these republished essays may be called a monument of
his success. In the notes to many of them he expresses
a little natural exultation at the way in which, since the
essay was written, his predictions have been confirmed
by the course of events, or the minds of all intelligent
men have come round to the views of which he was at
first a solitary exponent.
Of course, Mr Freeman has not brought every one round
to his way of thinking on all points. He has special
"hobbies," which he rides at a pace which few persons
probably would care to imitate; and one is sometimes in¬
clined to dissent from particular conclusions, or rather to
feel that, though he knows so much more about the subject
than we do that we cannot contradict him, yet he has not
The Attempt. 91
proved his point to our satisfaction. Still, we always feel
that he has some good grounds for his opinions, and that
everything he says deserves serious consideration.
I do not mean to attempt here any criticism of Mr Free¬
man's Essays, but merely to give those of my readers who
have not seen the book, some idea of how much instruc¬
tion and interest are to be found in it.
The last essay in the volume, on Presidential Government,
is unlike any of the others. It treats of an abstract poli¬
tical subject, and is decidedly " stiff," though most useful
in giving clear ideas as to the essential difference between
a republic and a monarchy, and between the different
kinds of each. It is, oddly enough, also unlike all the
others in showing an historical short-sightedness which
one does not expect in Mr Freeman. It sounds strangely
now to hear the constitution of the American Confederate
States mentioned among a number of constitutions which
have stood for generations, and are still standing, as if it
were as fixed, and likely to be as stable, as any one of
them. It is difficult to remember that when the essay
was written, the majority of the English nation believed
that by the secession of the Southern States from the
Union, a new nation had been formed; and those who be¬
lieved from the beginning that the North was in the right,
and must ultimately prevail, must feel sorely tempted to
point a moral from the fact that, in the only point in
which Mr Freeman followed public opinion instead of
aspiring to lead it, the course of events has proved him
in the wrong.
The other essays in the volume are all historical, and
naturally fall into two groups—those which relate to
European, and those which relate to English history.
Of the essays relating to general European history,
perhaps the most instructive is that on the Holy Roman
Empire. It was originally a review of Mr Bryce's book
on the same subject, and to those who have not read that
book, this essay will give its main results in a clear and
compendious form. Most people, at least many fairly
well-educated people, think that the " Holy Roman Em¬
pire" is a sort of state name for the German Empire;
why 80 used they do not know, unless, on reflection,
they think it has something to do with the chosen suc¬
cessor of the Emperor being called the King of the Ro¬
mans. They think that Charlemagne was an Emperor
of France (though for some mysteri(jus reason he gene-
92 The Attempt.
rally lived at Aix-la-Chapelle), whose modern siic-
cessor and representative was the Emperor Napoleon
III.; that Frederick Barbarossa was an emperor of Ger¬
many, whose modern representative is the present Em¬
peror of Austria. Or, if such ideas are less universally
entertained than they were ten years ago, it is mainly
due to the efforts of Mr Freeman. It throws a wonder¬
ful light on the history of the Middle Ages, when we
come to understand how, in those days, men held
that the elected king of the Germans was the direct
successor of the Roman Caisars, so that what we now
caU the German Empire, was considered by them the con¬
tinuation of the world-empire of Rome. And it was a
Holy Roman Empire. For the theory united the whole of
Christendom in one vast confederation, of which the spiri¬
tual head was the Roman Pontiff", the chosen chief of the
Church, and the temporal head the Roman Emperor, the
chosen chief of the nations. It was a magnificent concep¬
tion, though it was never perfectly carried out. The Pope
and the Emperor, instead of acting in concert as the two
heads, each supreme in hie own domain, of the great con¬
federation which was at once a universal Church and a
Christian State, were constantly interfering with each
other's action, and threatening, by their contention, to
rend the empire in pieces. Some of the outlying nations
t>f Christendom, such as our own country and Scandinavia,
never gave in their allegiance to the so-called universal
empire; and even those which did at one time or another
acknowledge the imperial supremacy, were at other times
rebellious and hostile. Yet, though this ideal empire
was so utterly misrepresented by any actual embodiment
of it which ever existed, the ideal itself had an influence
on men's minds to which we of a different age and a
different philosophy can hardly do justice, until we en¬
deavour to look at the history of that past time with the
fyes of the men to whom it was the present.
In the essay on The Franks and the Gauls, Mr Freeman
has an opportunity of bringing forward several of the
subjects on which he holds very strong and decided
opinions. He runs a tilt at his pet aversion " the modern
map," he deals some severe blows at the French nation in
general and at all the individual Frenchmen who come in
iiis way, and he indulges in more striking variations of
the ordinary forms of proper names than in any other of
liis essays.    This last is a subject with regard to which
1
The Attempt. 93
Mr Freeman's readers must often feel inclined to remon¬
strate with him, though he would, no doubt, assure them
that their objections arose merely from ignorance or bad
education. No one could presume to ask Mr Freeman to
alter his spelling, for spelling Avith him is a matter of prin¬
ciple, an assertion of the real truth of history against the
machinations of the French, who, he declares, owe a great
deal to the fact that " for 800 years past, they have been
incapable of spelling any single name in any foreign lan¬
guage." But surely he might give some notes for the
benefit of the generation who have been taught to know
historical characters by the old-fashioned, though doubt¬
less corrupt forms of their names.
Such names as the Merwings and the Karlings are intel¬
ligible, though uncouth. Since the last war every one
knows where Elsass and Lothringen are ; and a little reflec¬
tion discovers in Pippin of Heerstall the well-known high-
sounding PSpin (£ Hiristal. But who, without some chance
explanation in the text, could have guessed that Hlodwig
was meant for Clovis, Luttich and LOwen for Liege and
Louvain % And though it is plain who Charles the Great is,
I must confess that one at least of Mr Freeman's readers
is ignorant to this day to whom he alludes under the
name of William the Great.
Every one will heartily agree with Mr Freeman's re¬
marks on the perplexity and confusion which arise from
studying the history of the middle ages with a modern
map. For ancient liistory, the history of Rome or of
Greece, there are special maps, giving the boundaries, &c.,
of the different states at the period to which the history
refers ; but when mediaeval history is concerned, people
" sit down to read about John and Philip Augustus either
with a map of Roman Gaul or with a map of Napoleonic
France." Historical geography is a science very little
studied, by ordinary readers of history; and so many
people fancy that there is a certain definite country,
which, in the time of the Romans, was called Gaul, and
now is called France, and which was ruled over at differ¬
ent times by Clovis and his successors ; by Charlemagne
and his successors ; by the Capetian Kings, and so on
down to the late Emperor and the present Republic. Mr
Freeman shows that France, as it now exists, is a com¬
paratively modern state, that the Franks, though they
gave their name to the country of the Gauls, were and
always felt themselves to be,  German  conquerors, and
94 The Attempt.
that the kings of the Franks were always emphatically
German kings, who held what we now call France as a
subject province. Then, in this essay, and in the follow¬
ing one on The Early Sieges of Paris, Mr Freeman
traces the rise of the present French nation and kingdom,
the nucleus of which was the city of Paris, and whose
kings, the first real kings of the French, in the modern
sense of the word French, were the Capetian Counts of
Paris. It is very interesting to see how nobly Paris won
the right to represent France, as she has always done, in
a way in which no other European capital represents the
state of which it is the head, Paris has been France from
the first moment that France had a national existence :—
from the times of those early sieges when the city on the
Seine held her own against the savage Norse invaders,
and stood out as the one bulwark of western Gaul, which
the Danes could never overthrow; through the long cen¬
turies in which province after province was added to the
ever-growing kingdom of France, down to the year of
the two disastrous sieges in which Paris, in her fall and
degradation, has dragged down France along with her.
In the two following essays, Mr Freeman gives biographi¬
cal sketches of two great Emperors—grandfather and
grandson—-both bearing the same name, but in every other
respect, utterly unlike. Frederick the First, King of Italy,
King of Germany, and Emperor of the Romans—better
known to ordinary readers as the Emperor Frederick Bar-
barossa—though one of the most famous of the German
Emperors, round whom all the romance and legend of
German history clusters, and whose name " still lives in
the German heart as the impersonation of German
unity," was not superior in genius or natural gifts to
several of the Emperors who preceded and who followed
him. But he was the representative man, and above all
the representative German of his time; he possessed
the faults, but he possessed also in a high degree the
virtues of his age ; and during his whole career he steadily
and bravely followed those objects, and wisely considered
those interests, which to a German of the 12th century
seemed the highest and most important.
His grandson, Frederick II., on the contrary, can neither
be said to have belonged to any one nati(m, nor, in spirit,
to any one age of the world. He was "the child of a
German father and a Norman mother, born and brought
up in the half Greek half Saracen realm of Sicily, and the
The Attempt. '95
first patron of the new-born speech and civilisation of
Italy." Possessed of wonderful natural gifts, and of the
highest cultivation which the age afforded, he was utterly
free, both for good and for evil, from all the prejudices of
his time. He was, indeed, too unlike his age, too far
above it in many respects, too far below its ordinary
standard in others, to be able to influence it. And so it
has come to pass that the most gifted prince who ever
wore a crown, the man who was called by his own con¬
temporaries the Wonder of the World, achieved nothing,
founded nothing, and has left no memory behind him.
The essay on Charles the Bold of Burgundy bears more
traces of its original destination as a review article than
most of the essays in this volume, and is therefore neither
very clear nor very interesting to those who have not
read the book to which it refers—Mr Kirk's History of
Charles the Bold.
In the essays which relate to the early and medigeval
history of England, Mr Freeman is treading on ground
which he has emphatically made his own. It is perhaps
for this very reason, that the three essays on The
Mythical and Romantic Elements in early English History,
The Continuity of English History, and The Reign of Ed¬
ward HI., seem to contain less fresh and interesting matter
than most of the others. Even to those who have not
read Mr Freeman's History of the Norman Conquest, his
views regarding that period of our history may be said to
have permeated through a multitude of reviews and
magazine articles, whose writers have drawn their inspira¬
tion from him. The second of these three essays, however,
is one of the best written in the book, and, as one would
naturally expect in an article on one of the subjects on
which Mr Freeman holds most decided opinions, and has
most strongly influenced men's minds, it has a spirit and
a straight-onward march about it, which is wanting in
some of the others. In the essay on The Mythical and
Romantic Elements in English History, Mr Freeman
points out incidentally the distinction which undoubtedly
exists between the Legends of the Gods and the Legends
of the Heroes—a distinction which is of great importance,
and which has sometimes been too much overlooked by
such writers as Mr Cox.
Of the two essays which remain to be noticed, that on
Saint Thomas of Canterbury gives a most interesting life
of the great English statesman and churchman, Thomas
96 The Attempt.
h Beckett. For once Mr Freeman is more biographical
than historical, and in a few pages he brings Thomas
vividly before us as Chancellor, Archbishop, and Martyr.
The article makes us feel what a mine of interest lies, un¬
explored by most of us, in the old English annals, and
makes us long to get hold of the writings of those old
chroniclers, and read for ourselves the accounts they have
handed down of the men and events of their own times.
I have reserved to the last the essay on The Relations
between the Crowns of England and Scotland, but shall not
be able to say as much about it as I had meant to do ;
and it is perhaps as well that the ebullition of Scottish
patriotism should be restrained by want of space, for Mr
Freeman certaialy gives very scant measure of approbation
to our national heroes—Wallace and Bruce. On the other
hand, one is constrained to admit that the Scottish nation
have not done justice to the great qualities of such a noble
enemy as Edward I. On one point I heartily agree
with Mr Freeman, in thinking that the misapprehensions
of Scottish history of which he complains, are due quite as
much to the English as to the Scotch. If English people
hold mistaken views of Scotch history, it is not so much
owing to the skill or eloquence of Scotch writers as to
their own ignorance of Scotch matters, and to their idea
that everything Scotch must be romantic. From these two
causes arises the invariable confusion in their minds be¬
tween Highlanders and L owlanders. Nothing can be more
provoking to a genuine Lowland Scot—belonging to a
race of purer Saxon descent than most Englishmen—than
to find English people crediting his ancestors ivith all the
lawless deeds of a race of half-savage Celts, and thinking
all the while that they are paying him a compliment.
But this is by the way. With regard to Mr Freeman's
strictures on those who fought for and won the independ¬
ence of Scotland, I can only say that his facts, and his
statements of the law of the case, are probably correct—
I do not think for a moment of disputing his authority—
yet the enthusiasm which moved the whole Scottish
nation (I do not of course speak of the Highlanders) during
the war of independence, and the belief which they have
ever since held, in the justice of their cause and in the
patriotism of their leaders, are also undisputed facts,
which must be taken into consideration and accounted
for in a full and impartial discussion of the question.
Grace.
The Attempt. 97
%  Soldier's   Bcminisrnircs.
Part   III.
I HAD travelled for more than a fortnight through deso¬
late country; the villages were only roofless houses and
blackened walls, beside which the people cowered, waiting
dumbly for some new calamity. One day it seemed to me
as though the scenery were familiar. Surely I knew those
softly rounded hills that bounded the horizon, as they lay
in the purple shadows of the evening light—surely I had
seen them before. Suddenly I remembered it was beside
those hills that the battle was fought, by them that the can¬
non's roar had been re-echoed, on them that the eyes of so
many of my comrades had rested ere they closed for the
last time.
My resolution was taken; I would go there. I knew
my strength might fail, the country might be deserted
and no food to be got, I might die on the road, but what
mattered % I had loved life once, what was left me
now was of little worth, so I dragged myself on. I met
one or two peasants, they were almost starving themselves,
yet they shared with me. Poor fellows 1 they gave
terrible accounts of the ravages after the battle, and
looked moru-nfuUy on their ruined homesteads.
At last I came to the place; how distinctly remembered
was every feature of the landscape, how vividly present
to me was the peaceful scene on which we had looked
that morning. It was sadly changed. The groimd was
covered with mounds, broken bits of armour and frag¬
ments of clothes were scattered about; the air was heavy
with a pestilential smell. I flung myself down, and my
heart overflowed, as I thought how many brave young
lives had here been offered up,—to what purpose ? Only
to gain some square miles of land, when there were no
longer brave men to people it, no longer strong hands to
till it. I am neither a Protestant nor a Catholic, but I
know the doctrines they profess. I believe with them in
one God above us all, and I do most devoutly believe that
all war and bloodshed is utterly abhon-ent to Him. Yet
Christian peoples go to war, and own to no sin, and the
conquerers ofier up praises for victory to the God who
has told them that He will have mercy and justice rather
APEIL 1872. N
98 The Attempt.
than sacrifice. It is a mockery! yes, I said in my bitter¬
ness, let them do even this, let them sing joyful Te
Deums in the churches and the mighty cathedrals,
because they have ^made the bright sunshine to be as
funeral blackness to multitudes of mourning hearts,
because they have made the whole earth to ring with
one bitter cry of anguish. Let them sing praises unto
the Creator who made man after his own image, because
they have murdered their fellow creatures by the thou¬
sand ; let them give thanks unto the God of the fatherless
and the widow that they have made—He knows how
many such—to sit sobbing by their desolate hearthstones.
I lingered long. My heart rose in wild revolt against
the wickedness of my fellow-men, against the religion by
which they justified themselves, against the God who
could let such things be. When I rose to go, indignation
and wrath overpowered me, and I could only! cast myself
down once more to weep burning tears, because of the
wrong and injustice that fill the earth. Night came on,
the stars looked solemnly down on the world from their
infinite depths above. I stretched out my hands calling
unto the heavens for vengeance, then fell on my face,
helpless,—for what was my prayer where thousands
had called before, and no help had come ? Our souls are
crushed between a dead earth and a dead heaven, they
beat wildly and rebel against fate, and wrong, and
death; but fate and wrong are mightier than we, and
death comes the quicker for om: very struggles. The
stars with their everlasting laws roll on, and what are
men, and what is their sorrow, before the vast and mighty
machinery of the material universe ?
Thinking thus, I had dragged myself painfully along,
and even as I said this, I saw that I had come to the
cross by the wayside. It stood beneath*a little clump of
trees, and had been pierced by balls fired on the battle-
day. I hung upon it, and embraced it, for the truth
suddenly flashed upon my soul. This symbol of
degradation was the only symbol of victory for the world.
On it had died He who taught that right was stronger
than wrong, and that good was greater than evil; upon
it was given up the life wliich was only lived for the good
of the world, which, submitting, had been greater than
suffering, and dying, had been stronger than death. Yes,
this was the power of the spiritual over the material;
this was the keystone of the religion of sorrow, the link
The Attempt. 99
between our now suffering world and the infinite calm
of the God above.
Hitherto I had philosophised. I had held physical and
spiritual happiness as the highest good; and esteemed the
love of God and the keeping of a pure morality but as
means to this end. But now I had looked round, and
seen that happiness was an impossible thing. I knew
that misery ever brings with it evil, and I knew too that
all moral and physical laws of the world, when a man has
fallen, force him ever downward. I had called for help on
the battle-field, and none had come; but now, though I
still bore the sorrow, I was lord of it, being the stronger;
though wickedness raged in the world, I knew that the
good which had once been stronger than suffering must
in the end be victorious; though my comrades lay dead
on the field, by this cross, sign of death, I knew that life
was the stronger.
A rippling stream half hidden by the trees that hung
over it, young leaves of a bright green, the voices of birds
echoing through the land, all things rejoicing in spring¬
time—such sights I saw, such sounds I heard, as I sat
wearily down on a fallen tree by the wayside. In front
rose a hill crowned with old grey houses; round about
were the encircling mountains; and above, the blue sky.
Yes, this was the house I had left eight months ago, un¬
changed, looking as though we, its sons, had departed but
yesterday.    How changed did / return to it!
The cold air fanned my hot brow and refreshed me some¬
what, for I was worn out with the walk, but it could not
bring back to life the dead hopes of my heart. Nothing
could ever more awaken them. Was my mother still
alive, I wondered, as I sat looking up to the houses on the
hill-top. I had written to her twice, but it was impossible
for her to answer, as she did not even know where I was,
nor, since receiving my wound, had I again been able to
send her a line. I had neither pen nor paper—nor ability.
She must have given me up for dead, I thought, for peace
is made now; and, indeed, had I not been so long ill after
the visit to the battle-field, I would have been home ere
this. But it was weeks before I could leave the hut where
I was sheltered, fed, and tended by a peasant woman,
" for her son's sake,'' poor creature!
My eyes turned instinctively towards the left, where
lay a little ravine. My heart throbbed. There was the
grave of my dead hopes.    If I could but see her; if I
100 The Attempt.
could but see her once! This wish was gratified. Gaz¬
ing down the ravine, I caught a glimpse of a black dress
that fluttered in the spring breeze. Soon I saw the figure
of a young girl advancing towards me. Could this indeed
be Elise—she whom I had never seen but in white, and
bright soft colours ? Was she also to be draped in the
sad black raiment ? What was it that had banished all
the wild-rose tint from her cheek"? Could sorrow not
spare even her? Would she come as far as the fallen
tree f I wondered—would she stop and speak to me ?
My heart, despite its suffering, was not dead yet; it
bounded and fluttered as she moved slowly on. Now
she stops; she turns to go back. No ; she turns again.
Surely she sees me. She is coming my way. Yes, she
did come up; she stopped even, and spoke to me.
" Bonjour, monsieur," she said, then sadly—" You have
suffered much during this war, were you wounded in
battle?"
1 told where and how.    Her soft eyes pitied me.
"I too have suffered," she said, looking at her black
dress, then after a pause,—" You seem very tired, are you
going much farther to-day?" "No," I said, glancing up
at Mouens, " only up there." " You are of Mouens"? 1 am
glad you have not far to go, I hope you will find all your
friends well as when you left them." She hesitated, was
she even going to ask my name! But no; with another
gentle bonjour, she passed on, and I was left alone.
Indeed alone now! My loved one, my dearest, had
looked and spoken and had not even known me. I was
an outcast from the pale of human happiness, I was to
taste nought but the bitterness of human love. Mine it
was to desire and to covet, but never should the loved
form be clasped in my arms, never should I look into the
depths of those dark eyes, never feel her heart beat re¬
sponsive with mine.
And EHse—she whom I loved so much, for whom I
had gladly laboiu-ed all my days, for whose sake I had
held life itself as a very little thing; she had seen the fire
in my eyes, had heard my voice thrill and quiver, and
guessed not, knew not that my soul was altogether hers,
had forgotten even my name! Such is the world. One
gives all and receives nothing; another gets and gives
not. The smiles that to one are as water to a man that is
dying of thirst are sternly refused him, and bestowed
bountifully on those who want them not, with whom wine
Tlie Attempt. 101
and water ahke are plenty. The poor man dies of starva¬
tion, for want of the crust that the rich man throws care¬
lessly to his well fed dogs.
I climbed the hill and went slowly through the old
familiar streets; no one knew me, was I really so much
altered? I spoke to the children of a neighbour who
were playing in front of the door, they gazed with amazed
open eyes, and scarcely answered my questions.
I passed on; our house door was half open: I scarcely
dared to look in. But yes, there was my mother in a dark
corner, bending over some work. Her weary Hstless air
went to my heart; she too had found life a hard thing,
with few joys, and many, very many sorrows; to her I
might still be some comfort,
I opened the door, with a sudden whitening of her face
she looked up, I saw how care worn and aged it had
grown, then with a burst of tears she fell on my neck and
sobbed. A. M.
(Concluded.)
Oh, bonnie Spring morning, so bright and so breezy !
Oh, happy wild wind in the jubilant leaves !
Oh, glowing gold sunshine, and light dancing shadows !
Oh, sweet singing bhds in the nooks of the eaves !
Green forest paths cool, where the blue-bell and daisy
Laugh out from the moss-tufts like sprites in the grass :
Long dim woodland vistas, with floating light hazy,
Blithe troubadour bees, singing soft as they pass.
Oh, far, far away all the noise and the rolling.
The weary unrest of the city's vast life;
Thank God for the hundreds of miles of green country.
That lie between me and the roar of its strife !
Thank God that no sigh of its trouble unceasing.
No taint of its poisoned breath's smoke-stifled heat.
Ever burdens the whispering breeze that is stirring
The leaves overhead and the grass at my feet.
Still louder, sweet blackbirds and dear merry thrushes-
Not half loudly enough in my joy can I sing—
You must tell it for me, as you only can tell it:
I am here in the country—and oh, it is Spring!
Mas Alta.
102 The Attempt.
Ts it necessary to apologise, in these intellectual times,
for offering to a magazine written and conducted by ladies,
an article upon so ?z?i-intellectual a subject? I suppose it
is; and 1 would begin by offering said apology in all
humility and diffidence. Still, I am well aware that dress
is to many—may I not say to most ?—of my sex, a deeply
interesting topic, though many of those who feel it so in
their hearts would scorn to acknowledge the weakness ;
and therefore having offered the apology which I feel is
reqiiired, I go on writing the article. For myself, I am
not at all ashamed of confessing that I dote upon dress.
I am quite aware of the faults and follies engendered by
an excessive love of dress, and have as great a horror of
them as any quaker; but I do not intend to say anything
about them here, for that side of the subject is presented
to us ad nauseam in a thousand books and magazines, until
we feel inclined, out of very weariness and disgust, to run
directly contrary to the precepts so prosily set down. On
the other hand, I do not mean to dilate (attractive though
the subject be) upon dress as one of the fine arts, which
demands from the students of its higher branches a very
considerable degree of intellectual capacity. I leave that
to abler pens than mine. Nor do I venture a step into
the scarcely less attractive depths, where Sartor Resartus
has revealed to us the Philosophy of Clothes. Scarcely
did thy strong arm, 0 Professor Teufelsdrockh, suffice to
stem that mighty flood. Forbid that mine, all weak and
impractised, should brave the rush and roar thereof!_ No !
I mean but to disport myself on the banks of that mighty
river, and haply obtain here a flower of Tradition, there a
pearl of Poetry, here again a jetsam and flotsam of His¬
tory, which may show the despisers of dress that the
subject is not so all-trivial as to them it may appear.
" You mean the dassicalities of dress," says some one
looking over my shoulder as I write ; but I dislike the
word, for it irresistibly remmds one of the times we gener-
aUy think of as classical, when people must certainly have
been as free from all thought or care about their apparel,
as the books I have already referred to say we should be;
but from a reason which I have not as yet seen recom¬
mended to us in any of these books.
The Attempt. 103
" The heathen gods and goddesses
Without skirts or boddices,"
have not bequeathed us any associations with dress ; but
as we come further down the stream of Time, how many
dresses or pieces of dress, entire and fragmentary, are
inseparably intertwined with old and tender associations.
Is this not the case with the literature presented first of _
all to our youthful minds, so dear to us before we had
learned the difference between fact and fancy—the litera¬
ture which opened to us the gates of Fairyland, and ad¬
mitted us to the familiar society of knights, princesses,
and magicians'? Long years have passed since we first
made the acquaintance of that sweet maiden whose
identity is so closely connected with her dress, that she
has actually no name apart from it. Long years have
passed, and many changes have they brought to us mor¬
tals, but thou, sweet Little Red Riding-hood, art young
and fair as ever, archly smiling under the shadow of thine
immortal garment! Cinderella, too,—patient, long-suffer¬
ing Cinderella,—with her name arises before us a vision of
dress. Not only the wondrous glass slippers, wondrous
alike in material and size ; equally vivid in my memory
are her three ball-dresses, as described in the History of
Cinderella, from which I first learnt to know her. The
first white and glittering as the snow; the second all
silvery-shining, as if woven out of moonbeams; the third
golden and dazzling as the rays of the sun! What
ecstasies of admiration did they awaken in my youthful
breast, and how I longed that some fairy god-mother
would enter by the nursery-window, and enact upon me
her process of transformation !
Green, as we all know, is the fairies' own particular
colour :
" And who may dare on wold to wear
The fairies' fatal green ?"
said the " moody Elfin-King," whose greenwood solitude
was broken by Lord Richard and his fearless wife ; and I
think that among all the dresses and pieces of dress made
famous by history, poetry, and tradition, the great pro¬
portion are of this colour. Green, grass-green, did the
Queen of Faerie wear when she met with Thomas of
Ercildoune beneath the Eildon Tree; green was the robe
of Queen Guinevere as she rode to court with Lancelot
through the sweet spring woods, with the hyacinths
blossoming all around them ; and how many pictures are
104 The Attempt.
called to our minds by the name of " the Lincoln green."
Maid Marian and the jolly Friar, and the King of Archers
Robin Hood, and the English bowmen at Poitiers and
Cressy, and poor Blanche of Devan and her lover ;
" Mine eye has dried and wasted been,
But still it loves the Lincoln green."
And possibly other associations with more modern archery,
which need not be noted here.
How little thought Laura de Sade, as she donned her robe
of green velvet to go to matins at Sancta Chiara in A\ag-
non,that that drees would be remembered centuries after she
herself was dead,—centuries after the Pope and the dukes
and princes of the day were well nigh forgotten! We know
not who preached that morning or who prayed; we care not
what weighty municipal matters M'ere agitating theburghers
of Avignon, and we have forgotton what great political
event was discussed by the old men as they walked
slowly to mass; but we remember—and generations to
come shall remember—that one golden-haired girl-bride
(for she was then a bride) among the congregation, wore a
green velvet dress, sprinkled with violets; for her lover,
by name Francesco Petrarca, has told us so, and his words
are of those that cannot die.
Green is a colour shunned by the whole clan of Graham;
it is as unlucky for a Graham to -wear green as for a Bruce
to kill a spider; and this superstition arises from the ill-
luck connected with another green garment as famous as
any I have mentioned—the green coat worn by Viscount
Dundee at the battle of Killiecrankie, and pierced under
the left arm by the fatal silver bullet. Small wonder is
it, indeed, that all of his name should attach a sinister
influence to a colour reminding them of that most dis¬
astrous day, which laid low the head of their bravest and
noblest:
'' When, amidst the battle's thunder,
Shot, and steel, and scorching flame ;
In the glory of his manhood,
Passed the spirit of the Grseme !"
Returning for a moment to fairy lore, there is one of
Hans Christian Andersen's beautiful fictions which may
well be mentioned in a paper upon dress—I mean " The
Wild Swans." This story is among the very finest of
Andersen's prose poems. The eleven brothers, cruelly
transformed into swans; the tender reciprocal affection
The Attempt. 105
between them and their sister, both before and after the
charm is wrought upon them ; the joy of Elise at finding
she can restore them through long, suffering toil on her
own part; her patient work with swollen blistered fingers
at the magic shirts; her courageous endurance of mis¬
conception and persecution, rather than rehnquish her
work or speak a word' to break the spell; and her
triumphant rescue on the very scaffold, just as the
eleventh shirt is finished, and her brothers restored to
human shape ; all this, told in Andersen's own matchless
way, forms a story far too beautiful to be forgotten or laid
aside among om- childish books.
Very beautiful is the history, too, of that faded silk
dress of Enid's, which cost her so many fears at first
when she thought of appearing in it at Arthur s coiu't;
very tender and natural the feeling that made her keep it
always, though she was decked with all that was rich and
fair, and that led her to choose it for that woeful journey
with her lord ; and most pathetic and touching the words
in which she refuses to exchange it for the gorgeous robe
proffered by Earl Doorm:
" In this poor gown my dear lord found me first,
And loved me, serving in my father's hall ;
In this poor gown I rode with him to court,
And there the Queen arrayed me like the sun ;
In this poor gown he bade me clothe myself
When now we rode upon this fatal quest
Of honour, where no honour can be found ;
And this poor govni I will not cast aside
Until himself arise a living man,
And bid me cast it."
Tennyson has numerous very beautiful dress-allusions
and dress-episodes. Witness Lady Clare's change of
apparel, so characteristic of the high-minded girl who
scorned to retain even a sign of the rank and riches to
which she had no rightfid claim :—
" Pull off, pull off the brooch of gold,
And lay the diamond necklace by 
She clail herself in a russet gown.
She was no longer Lady Clare ;
She went by dale, and she went by down,
With a single rose in her hair."
And how many dress and piece of dress has Shakspeare
immortahsed! MalvoUo's yellow stockings and cross-
garters, Katharina's debateable head gear, Sir John
Falstaff's scanty supply of linen—the list might be indefi¬
nitely   prolonged.     Shakspeare   reminds  us   of   Queen
APRIL  1872.
106 The Attempt.
Elizabeth, and she reminds us of a very celebrated piece
of dress, which brought a sudden turn of fortune to its
wearer—the cloak of Sir Walter Raleigh. Somewhat
stretched and exaggerated, perhaps, was that act of
gallantry, and yet, done by Raleigh, it must have been
done in his true spirit of chivalry and loyalty; for Sir
Walter Raleigh, " courtier, scholar, soldier," poet too, and
true gentleman to boot, is remote even from the suspicion
of self-seeking or fawning toadyism. His best was ever
at his sovereign's disposal, and when the sovereign's
ingratitude and suspicion would be satisfied with nothing
but his life-blood, he laid his head on the block with a
spirit as loyal and ungrudging, as when, but a simple
squire, he had laid his cloak at the feet of Elizabeth.
But in history we have comparatively few incidents
connected with dress; it seems generally to be consi¬
dered a subject beneath the dignity of history. A mis¬
take, surely ; for how interesting to general readers, how
well remembered by youthful readers, are episodes like
those of Raleigh's cloak, or Dundee's green coat, or the
fe"w similar ones which have been preserved. Incidents like
these, or relating to kindred subjects, tend greatly to help
the memory and the imagination. But poetry, untroubled
by ideas of dignity, literally teems with records of dress.
In every style we find it introduced, from the dread and
mystery surrounding the Silver Veil of the Prophet
Mokanna, to the sparkling humour in which Lady Nairne
has given us the details of the Laird of Cockpen's famous
toilet, ending with the triumphant enquiry, "An' wha
could resist the Laird wi' a' that?" Volumes might be
filled Avith all that poets have sung on this subject—
Pope's Rape of the Lock, and some of Herrick's very
happiest efforts, and Waller's " Girdle," and Keats' ex¬
quisite description of Madeline undressing on St. Agnes'
Eve, and countless others.
I should approach too near the precincts of Professor
Teufelsdrockh did I say anything of the psychological
eftects of national dresses, like our own beloved tartans, or
of symbolical pieces of dress like the red Cap of Liberty, or
the white Cockade so often stained with brave Scotch
blood ; and therefore I shall conclude, hoping that some
of my readers may admit that a subject honoured by the
mention of so many mighty singers, is not in itself
unworthy of our notice, though it may have been made
so by the manner in which it has been treated by
Dido.
The Attempt. 107
SHE.
" Only to listen, and watch, and wait
For the welcome click of the garden gate;
For the firm, slow tread of manly feet
On the rustling crispness of d;^ang peat.
When the red, red sun is setting!
Only to hear a low-whistled tune.
That is coming nearer,—coming soon—
Coming through briars of crimson leaves.
To murmur dreamily on the eaves,
When the red, red sun is setting."
HE.
" Only to know when work is done.
And 1 turn homewards with the sun,
That every even there will be
A little face to welcome me,
Wlien the golden day is dying !
Only to see among the trees
Wliite lilies waving in the breeze.
And sleepy flowers all dipt in dew.
Of every kind, of every hue.
When the golden day is dying."
SHE.
" Only to see a long shadow fall
On the mossy bank of the garden wall.
When the land is bathed in golden air.
And God is breathing everywhere.
In depths of rainbow light !
Only to see his quiet grave smile
Light up the room a little while.
Till the sun is drowned in western waves.
And the rosy flush on sea-born caves,
Is fading into night."
HE.
" Only to see the glad surprise
That shines in her eager, happy eyes!
To watch the light that, falling there.
Kisses the head of nut-brown hair,
And kissing, softly dies !
108 The Attempt.
Only to hear the gentle voice
That makes my weary heart rejoice,
And softens all my care away
Like the last gleam of ebbing day
On the breast of western skies."
BOTH.
Only to feel that, from above.
In all our joy, in all our care.
The blessing of a Father's love
Will shine upon us everywhere."
Christie.
Charles Lamb, in one of his inimitable essays, when
speaking of some of his favourite books and their authors,
beautifully says :—" Milton almost requires a solemn ser¬
vice of music to be played before you enter upon him."
Some such thought as this might well come iato om-
minds, before taking up the poems of the saintly singer,
George Herbert.
But for the preparatory music, we should not choose
the organ-fugue or grand victorious march which might
fitly usher in the great thoughts and stately diction of
" Paradise Lost." A few sweet chants, hymn-tunes, or
anthems—the " church-music " Herbert so much loved—
would form the best prelude to the study of " The
Temple." How pure and unearthly is the atmosphere with
which this book at once surrounds you! It is so because
the poems are so thoroughly penetrated with the spirit of
their writer—a most earnest, devout, humble, and loving
spirit.
We naturally enter "The Temple" through "The
Church-Porch." In this poem (professedly didactic in its
character) it was impossible for Herbert to give the reins
to his imagination as he did in many others, but it has
its own peculiar beauties and excellences. It is full of a
ripe wisdom—the wisdom of a man who had seen much,
observed much, thought much, and who ruled his own
life by the maxims which he gave to others. And the
good counsel is given in words of such vigour, in a tone
The Attempt. 109
of Buch true manliness, that even a mean and sluggish
spirit might be stirred by some of the verses—by this for
example:—
" Lie not ; but let thy heart be true to God,
Thy mouth to it, thy actions to them both.
Cowards tell lies, and those that fear the rod,
The stormy, working soul spits lies and froth.
Dare to be true.    Nothing can need a lie :
A fault, which needs it most, grows two thereby."
There is a stronger spice of sarcasm in " The Church
Porch," than is noticeable elsewhere. Here is a biting
word for the slothful:—
" Active and stirring spirits live, alone.
Write on the others, ' Here lies such a one^ "
And to England it is said—
" The gentry bleats, as if thy native cloth
Transferred a sheepishness into thy story ;
Not that they all are so, but that the most
Are gone to grass, and in the pasture lost."
Perhaps there are no words in the poem which, from
their sweetness of sound as much as from their truth,
linger as easily in the memory as these:—
" AH worldly joys go less
To the one joy of doing kindnesses."
We may say of Herbert's poems, as Lord Bacon said of
the Psalms, that they " contain more hearse-like airs than
carols." From Izaak Walton's little memoir of him (itself
a poem fi-om its exquisite simplicity of language, happy
touches of nature, and loving reverence of tone), we learn
that Herbert " had a body apt to a consumption, and to
fevers, and other infirmities," and this weakness of health
may, in part, account for the " shadow," rather than the
" shine " of life dwelling in his thoughts.
Conscious also, as a less sensitive and less holy man
could not be, of the strange contradictions, the sins and
weaknesses of our nature, he struggled unceasingly to be
freed from them, lamenting his every shortcoming with
bitter contrition, and looking forward with earnest long¬
ing to the perfection of another life. What vehement
feeUng shows itself in the poem called " Home,"
" Come, Lord, my head doth bum, my heart is sick.
While Thou dost ever, ever stay ;
Thy long-deferrings wound me to the quick ;
My spirit gaspeth night and day.
Oh, show Thyself to me,
Or take me up to Thee ! "
110 The Attempt.
The naturalness of a Ime in the sixth stanza is almost
startling:—
" Hence, all ye clouds ! Away,
Away ! / must (jet up and see.
Oh, show Thyself to me.
Or take me up to Thee !
Surely the desire to " put on immortahty" was never
more perfectly expressed than in these verses, and those
which follow, which I have not space to quote here; and
the beautiful words of almost impatient longing came fitly
from the mouth of a poet who so well understood the
vanity of earthly pleasures, and the depth and sad variety
of this life's woes.    Of the latter he thus speaks:—
"True earnest sorrows ; rooted miseries ;
Anguish in grain ; vexations ripe and blown :
Sure-footed griefs ; solid calamities ;
Plain demonstrations, evident and clear,
-   • Fetching their proofs e'en from the very bone ;—
These are the sorrows here."
But Herbert's note of gladness is strong and clear, if
rarely heard. Forgetting for the time all sin, all doubt and
misery, he sometimes soars like a lark, pouring forth his
song in a perfect abandonment of joy. In such a mood
as this he must have written his " Antiphon."
Cho.—" Let all the world in every corner sing,—
' My God and King ! '
Vers.—" The heavens are not too high,
His praise may thither fly.
The earth is not too low.
His praises there may grow.
Cho. " Let all the world in every comer sing,
' My God, and King !'
Ver.—" The Church with psalms must shout,
No door can keep them out;
But, above all, the heart
Must bear the longest part.
Cho.—" Let all the world in every comer sing
' My God and Kmg.'"
As great, though perhaps more quiet, is the happiness
which is shown in the first verse of "A True Hymn"—
" My joy, my life, my crown !
My heart was meaning .ill the day
Somewhat it fain would say ;
And still it runneth, mutt'ring, up and down.
With only this, ' My joy, my life, my crown !'"
Herbert's great love of music crept constantly into his
poems, and often with very beautiful results. In the follow¬
ing description of suffering and its use—
" This is but tuning of my breast,
To make the music better,"
The Attempt. Ill
we at once perceive the sensitive ear to which discord is
a real pain, and harmony an intense delight.
Sighs and groans are quaintly called " these country
airs;" prayer is said to be " a kind a tune which all things
hear and fear;" and " sing " seems the natural word from
Herbert's lips rather than " rejoice." Then he complains
that his soul is
" Untuned, unstrung ;"
and what another old poet speaks of as
" Bright shoots of everlastingness ;"
he describes, in a line of beautiful vagueness, as
" The sound of glory ringing in our ears."
The taste of many readers is so much offended by the
strange fancies, odd expressions, and unexpected turns
which abound in Herbert's poems, that their enjoyment
of his book is thereby considerably lessened. It would
certainly seem as if he often allowed his imagination to
run away with him, and into very singular places he
was occasionally carried by it! There are numerous
suniles which strike one as forced and unnatural, if
not absurd ; and 'who, with any sense of the ludicrous,
could read the first stanza of " Doomsday" (solemn as
the subject is) without a smile?
" Come away
Make no delay!
Summon all the dust to rise,
Till it stir, and rub the eyes ;
While this member jogs the other,
Each one whisp'ring, ' Live you, Brother ?' "
Yet so fully assured are we of the deep reverence in
the mind of the writer, that not a line in any of his poems
gives us that painfid shock which the awkward fami¬
liarity of language in many modern hymns has often
caused us to experience.
We also naturally take into account what the poetic
taste and fashion of Herbert's day—the day, as George
Macdonald remarks, of—
" Quips and cranks and wanton wiles,"
not only allowed but encouraged. And we may surely
laugli at a friend's eccentricities, yet love and admire him
at the same moment. Our amusement at Herbert's occa¬
sional extravagances of thought and expression, need not
in the least interfere with our hearty liking for his poems.
When his wayward fancy is kept rather more in check,
112 The Attempt.
what beautiful ideas and metaphors it gives us in such
poems as " The Pulley," and " The Flower," two of the
best known and best loved of his productions.
Sometimes he suddenly altered his rhyme or measure
to suit his thoughts, as in the endings of " Home,"
" Denial," and " Grief." There may be a kind of affecta¬
tion in these tricks of art, but there is such unmistakeable
genuineuess of feeling in every poem, that no falseness of
tone is ever given by them. And if we are now and then
half-startled hj some change which we cannot altogether
admire, Herbert also gives us surprises which delight us
by their beauty. For example, the last lines of " The
Collar" come as an unexpected pleasure, giving us the
feehng of sudden " stillness after storm."
" But, as I raved, and grew more fierce and wild
At ev'ry word,
Methought I heard one calling ' Child ! '
And I replied ' My Lord.' "
And in the conclusion of " Dotage," we have again a
strong contrast, producing the same exquisite effect.
After the painful catalogue of human sorrows (a passage
already quoted), comes the mention of—
■' A court—e'en that above, so clear—
Where are no sorrows, but delights more true
Than miseries are here ! "
Sweetness, rather than dignity of expression, may per¬
haps be considered as characteristic of Herbert's poetry ;
yet surely the commencement of the poem entitled " Love"
is very fine.
" Immortal Love, Author of this great frame,
Sprung from that beauty which can never fade ;
How hath man parceU'd out Thy glorious name.
And thrown it on the dust which Tliou hast made."
For musical soimd, we might choose the little poem
called " Virtue" to quote from:—
" Sweet day ! so cool, so calm, so bright,
The bridal of the earth and sky,
The dew shall weep thy fall to-night.
For thou must die."
" Sweet spring ! full of sweet days and roses ;—
A box, where sweets compacted lie ;
My music shows ye have your closes,
And all must die."
There are many poets Avhom we may admire greatly,
without being conscious of any very warm feeling of
affection for them, but Herbert we can love as a real, a
living, and close friend. M. S. S.
The Attempt. 113
John   ipiun  of pri£slhiirs  Utijjf.
Thky shot him at his cottage door,
An' his wife was standing near.
But never a word o' grief said she,
Nor in her e'e a tear.
They tied his hands ahint his back.
An' boxmd his bonny e'en.
But her face was white, an' still, an' cauld.
As a dead man's face had been.
The heath a' purple i' the sun.
Shone redder where he lay.
When they had warked their wicked will,
An' turned to ride away.
" An' what think ye o' your guidman noo,
Guidwife ?" quoth Clavers rude,—
A flash cam i' the tearless e'e.
To the white cheek the bluid.
She walked, wi' steady step an' prood,
To where her guidman lay.
She laid on her lap the shatter'd heed.
An' she wiped the bluid away.
" Aye thocht 1 muckle of my guidman.
An' far mair think I noo.
He's died for the Lord that died for him,
God forgie them that slew!"
" 'Twere nocht but richt," quoth Clavers cruel,
" Gin ye lay by his side."
" Aye, wark ye're will," she answered him,
" Was never gladder bride."
She sat there still as the gloamin' fell.
An' they turned an' rode away.
Still, when the heath grew mirk i' nicht
On her knees the dead head lay.
But when the first star glimmered oot,
I' the welkin quiet an' blue,
Ae lang look took she o' the e'en
She loo'd, sae sichtless noo;
APEIL 1872. P
114 Tlie Attempt.
An' syne she shut the eyelids white,
An' kamed the clotted hair,
An' rowed him in his shepherd's plaid,
^Vi'8 life bluid reddened sair.
She laid him on the purple heath,
Gently as babe that slept,
Nae word said she till a' was dune,
Syne sat her doon an' wept.
Jeanee Morison.
"^hg has this iajjpnicdr
\^An Essay written for the Class of Mental Philosophy in connection with the
Edinburgh Ladies'' Educational Association."[
AVhile standing near a quarry, I am startled by a loud
report. On looking up, I see fragments of rock falling in
various directions, and a volume of smoke rising from the
shivered mass. I turn to another bystander, and ask for
an explanation of these appearances. I am told that the
rock has been blasted, in consequence of a train of gun¬
powder, laid near it, having become ignited,—(whether
accidentally or intentionally, my informant is not aware,
and it is beside my present purpose to inquire). This
explanation so far satisfies me, that I do not then think of
putting any flxrther questions. That the contact of a
spark of flame with gunpowder is followed by an explosion,
is a familiar fact of my experience; and the present
phfenomenon having been reduced to an instance of this
sequence, I cease to wonder at it as an isolated event.
For the practical purposes of life, also, the information
which I have received is sufiicient,—did I need a warning
of the danger of allowing fire and gunpowder to come
into contact, except under careftiUy prepared conditions.
But ■when I reflect on the occinrence, the rough and
ready explanation -which I have received, instead of
satisfying me, only serves to raise fresh questions in my
mind. '• Why is the contact of a spark of flame with the
substance which we call gunpowder, followed by a flash
and smoke, by noise and the violent rending asunder of
solid bodies near ? " The sequence is to me an arbitrary
one,—an isolated fact, though, as exemplified in a
plurality of instances, one much more general than the
original   subject   of  my  inquiry.    Thus unconnected as
The Attempt. 115
it is, in my mind, with any other series of phajnomena, I
do not know what to do ^vith it. To relieve the uneasi¬
ness to which this state of mind gives rise, I go to a
student of chemistry, and ask him for an explanation. He
answers me somewhat as follows :—" In the spark of flame
you have certain gases existing, by virtue of their com¬
bination, in a state of combustion. \Vlien these elements
come into contact with those others which, combined,
we call gunpowder, some are brought together by their
chemical affinity, while there is so violent a disengage¬
ment of one, (or more), that its escape gives rise to
those disturbances of the atmosphere and of the solid
rock which you describe." (I must ask indulgence, on
account of my ignorance of chemistry, for the vagueness,
and perhaps inaccuracy in detail, of what precedes.)
I ponder the reply which I have now received. I know
not yet whether it entirely brings me to what I desire,
but I feel that it has led me a considerable way farther
in that direction. It has stripped off the rude outer
husks which, under the names " flame " and " gunpowder,"
enveloped diverse elements. It has showed me that the
modes of action of these have to be separately taken
account of, and, being so taken, are found to bo unvary¬
ing and consistent, and to yield general chemical laws.
Also, the steps of the sequence have been shown to me
in their immediate and entire succession, as far as that can
be traced by human scrutiny. All this, the answer to my
first question, proceeding, as it did, merely on the rough
data of untrained observation, failed to give me. My
present informant has made me aware that the particular
relation of cause and effect existing between ignited gun¬
powder and an explosion, is but one case of the general
mode of action of certain elementary chemical substances
in their mutual relation. He has shown it to be governed
by a general law, and has assimilated it to many other
facts of experience.
" But," I ask myself, " has he done more than moye my
wonder and my sense of ignorance one stage higher ?" It
seems, to me he has not. I am baffled no less by a sense
of the inscrutableness of nature, that the subject of my
ignorant wonder is a wider circle of phienomena. While
in this frame of mind, I open a scientific work, which con¬
tains the results of the most advanced speculation of the
present time on the physical relations of the universe.    I
116 The Attempt.
read of the correlation of the physical forces—that lofty
generalization by which modern science has knit together
the phsenomena of nature, in a manner more comprehensive
than could at one time have been soberly anticipated. I
learn to think of the physical universe as composed
finally of matter and energy. I am taught that the latter,
no less than the former, is indestructible, and. while con¬
tinually changing its form, exists in a definite quantity,
which can be neither increased nor diminished. I learn
how several of the forms of energy are mutually con¬
vertible,—the one passing into the other under given
conditions, which can be determined with a considerable
degree of certainty. Applying what I have thus learned
to the present subject of my thoughts, I suppose that in
the original event I have an illustration of this great law
of nature. The application of the spark to the gunpowder
was the occasion which evolved energy in the shape of
chemical action; this passed into heat, heat into new
chemical action, and, finally, out of chemical action was
produced mechanical motion.
How does this new and extended view of physical re¬
lations afiect the problem which engages me ? I find that,
starting from a commonplace fact of my experience. I
have now reached a height whence I can discern it to be
one link in a mighty chain, or rather net-work, of causes
and effects, which, again, I perceive to present certain
well-marked features of regularity and order. I feel all
the pleasure which can result from the introduction of a
great degree of harmony and simphcity into what at first
seemed a bewildering maze of confusion and discon¬
nectedness. The words of the poet seem to me
realized:—
" Wie alles sich zum Gaiizen webt,
Eins in dem Andern wirkt und lebt!
Wie Himmelskraefte auf und nieder steigen," &c.
But still I am constrained to acknowledge that not one
whit am I nearer to what I am seeking—that no better
than at the very first do I understand why the one moment
of the event follows the other, in any of the more complex
or elementary forms in which it has been presented to
me, I ask myself more critically, What it is that I am
seeking ? *' The cause of a phenomenon," I reply,—" that
is, the ultimate cause, the cause of the cause of its cause,
such a cause as shall manifest itself, not merelv as the
The Attempt. 117
actually antecedent condition of a succession of events,
but as potentially containing in itself that succession. In
fact, I am in search of a source of power or energy in the
universe."
By this account of my own object, two lines of thought
are suggested. The one takes the shape of the question
—" Is this a just conception of causation ? Can we under¬
stand by it anything more than that mutual relation of
sequence which, with more or less of invariability between
particular kinds of events, we see to hold good among the
phenomena that come within our experience ? " To this I
must reply, that I think we may. It does not appear to me
that the whole content of the notion of a cause is drawn
out in the definition—" that ^^dthout which we do not
know something else to exist; " rather, the word seems to
express a twofold idea, one phase of which is the asser¬
tion of the production of the effect by the cause in virtue
of something inherent in itself.
The justification of this view of causation, however,
connects itself with the second line of thought, which I
now take up. It leads me to discern that the problem
before me is one, the solution of which I need not ask
from science,—for the sufficient reason that it is not really
a problem of science at all. The object of my pursuit has
led me out of the domain of science, into that of meta¬
physics. For why % The idea of a cause, in the sense in
which I have declared myself to be seeking for it, is not
one derived from experience,—and science cannot go be¬
yond experience for the materials with which it deals.
Of the origin of our judgment of causality, I can
give no better account than that it seems to be a neces¬
sary form of the consciousness of finite beings—the re¬
flection of our ownfinitude in our conception of existence.
Hence the aspect which, under the forms of intellectual
intuition called the principles of Substance and Phasno-
menon, and of Cause and Effect, the universe presents to
us, as an assemblage of individual tilings and a concate¬
nation of particular events. But the universal averment
of causation, which is developed by our experience of the
external world into the idea of the sequence of phainomena,
seems to be moulded by our internal experience of volition,
—especially of resisted volition,—into that second and
deeper idea of efficacy, of which I have spoken. Certain
it is, that only frf)m the contemplation of the pha-nomena
118 The Attempt.
of intelligence can that idea be derived. Nature of itself
oifers no suggestion of an originating power. Physical
forces seem to be nothing more than modes of motion.
Even if the dream of science were realized, and all the
various manifestations of energy in the physical world
were proved to be the shifting forms of one elemental
force, we should still be brought no nearer to the dis¬
covery of an intelligible source of power. Thus the word
explanation, in the mouth of a man of science and of a
philosopher, means two different things. It is used by
the one to express the reduction of the contingent to the
essential—of the accidental to the constant, and the re¬
ference of frequently recurring sequences, as properties, to
siibstances; by the other to signify the discernment of a
reason or intelligible ground of appearances.
Now we come to the question,—than which few can be
more difficult or momentous,—" Is there such a cause of
physical phajnomena ? Can we attain to anything which
we may accept with certainty as the ultimate and con¬
ditioning ground of the vast and complex system of
things which surrounds us—in which we ourselves are, to
a certain degree, involved as parts ? " The way in which
we answer this question must depend entirely, I believe,
on the theory of knowledge which we have adopted. Do
we hold that all knowledge is derived from experience—
that our ideas, however subsequently elaborated, have no
origin but the data of sensation and empiric self-conscious¬
ness ? we shall find it impossible to gam any rationally
reliable ground for the assertion of an intelhgent source of
existence. Do we, on the other hand, hold by the reality
of intuitive ideas in the human mind, Avliich refuse to be
explained (in their origin) by experience, and point to
a more remote soiu"ce ? then we shall be constrained, I
think, to assign to intelligence in the universe the same
supremacy which we have found it to hold in the human
microcosm. There is nothing else in the universe than
the unexampled, physically inexplicable, facts of conscious¬
ness, which can yield theleastfootinginthe attempt to reach
to a Real InteUigent First Cause of all things. If the essen¬
tial character of these is overlooked, and they are allowed
to be merely the product of experience, or the manufacture
of association, the logical result is the assertion of science
as tlie only kind of knoAvledge to which man is competent,
absolute scepticism as to aught beyond generalizations
The Attempt. 119
from observed phsenomena, and the denial of the legitimacy,
on rational grounds, even of such a question as whether
there be a Supreme First Cause.
Supposing the reality of such a First Cause admitted,
the nature of its relation to the finite existence con¬
ditioned by it, remains a farther question. Such a course
of reasoning as I have indicated, resting, as it does, on
the distinctive nature of intelligence, would naturally
lead to Theism, or the view of the finite world as the
expression of the creative thought of a Maker separate
from it, rather than to Pantheism, which, blending thought
and existence together, represents the universe as
identified with the very essence of the Divine Spirit.
Then, under the theistic conception, various theories
may be held as to the mode in which the divine energy
operates through nature. Whether each pulse of life and
motion that vibrates through the mighty frame be the
direct exertion of Supreme Power, or whether the gift of
power be possible in such degree as to make it reasonable
to speak of secondary agencies among the creatures,—
whether evolution or separate acts of creation be the law
of the divine procedure,—are questions hard and tedious to
answer, and, after all, beside that which was given as the
subject of these feeble thoughts, "Why (in the very end)
has any particular event happened? " To that,—not, as I
have said, from any evidence in the world of sense, but
from the witness that, amid the silence of nature, comes
from the human spirit,—I can but reply, " Because it is the
will of God."
As, in some amazement at finding whither I have been
led, my mind reverts to the event from which my inquiry
started, I reflect that it might have been important as
having consequences other than physical. That reminds
me of the chief interest attaching to the establishment of
the priority of intelligence in the universe—viz., that
thereby we secure the presence of rational and progressive
order, of a meaning, in the succession of events. Of this,
involving the transformation of the sequence ofphsenomena
into the adaptation of means to an end, we desire, above
all, to be made sure. If we get thought into the universe,
we bring this with it as its necessary result. And so,
resting on the intuition, however dim, of supreme intellig¬
ence as the origin of all things, we may be able, in spite of
adverse appearances, to hold fast by the belief that all
] 20 The A ttempt.
are combined towards a perfect end—bound together as
parts of a plan, which we cannot trace, only because it is
infinitely above and beyond our powers of comprehension.
Sigma.
When the little birds begin to sing
I' the dawning of the year.
When the lark mounts up, on buoyant wing,
And the black bird whistles clear;
When the httle flowers lift their heads,
When the buds begin to blow.
The primroses from mossy bed.
And the snowdrops from the snow,—
Then make my bed to the east o' the hill
Where the early sunbeams fall—
I will lie lowly—I will lie still—
God will care for us all!
The birds are glad to sing of the nest.
And the flowers are glad to grow;
I will be glad to lie and rest
Whether it shine or snow.
Youth is glad to play i' the sun.
And fight with the winter storm ;
But age is glad when the work is done.
And the hearth is bright and warm.
Youth has a thousand things to know,
The day will be gone too soon—
But age has seen all the flowers blow.
And fade in the scorching noon.
Then let them rejoice or let them weep,—
Funeral be it, or feast—
I am weary, and I will sleep.
Till the day-dawn break i' the east.
^ R.
The Attempt. 121
P f d c s t r i a n i s 111   j" o r   ^ a d i f s.
III.—Mountains.
(^Concluftion?)
The mists boil up around the glaciers ; clouds
Rise curling fast beneath me, white and sulphury.
Bteon.
While writing under our present title, we ought to have
nothing to relate about first-class mountain ascents—
according to the Alpine Club standard—nor have we.
Now and then a lady does scale Mont Blanc, Monte Rosa,
the Weisshorn, and even the Matterhorn, but she must be
regarded as exceptional, and it may be questioned whether
the risk of over-exertion is worth the pleasure of such
expeditions. Marjorie, at anyrate, never imperilled her
good health by any such strain, but looked with distant
respect on those damsels-errant who occasionally crossed
her path, and whose joy was
 " to breathe
The difficult air of the iced mountain's top,
Where the birds dare not build, nor insect's wing
Flit o'er the herbless granite." 
Those valiant climbers often bore traces of their toil:
one would be lame from frost-bite, another fabulous and
meteor-like in complexion from sun-burn; and often
they would own when asked, that though the view was
splendid at the top, it was finest a little lower down. As
to Martin, neither experience nor authority availed to
shake his profound scepticism as to the deUght of stand¬
ing on mountain tops.
" Put the real motive strongly, and I may ascend." he
would say, " we go to say we have been there." And
once when he and Marjorie were watching with telescopes
from the summit of the Brevent a party ascending Mont
Blanc, " I quite see the whole thing," he remarked ; " but
for scrupulous veracity we could safely say we had been
there. It is exactly what we have done already, only
lasting too lon^ to be pleasant." Only two mountain
ascents seemed to give him thorough satisfaction—pro¬
bably from their subhmity being flavoured with the ludi-
APRa 1872. Q
122 The Attempt.
crous: the Rhigi and Vesuvius. On the Rhigi at early
dawn, the sounds of a harsh Alp-horn make the morning-
hideous ; then out rush the mob of half-clad, blanket-
wi-apped tourist to watch the cold, slow, deliberate sun¬
rise, and thus celebrate the most comical rite of modern
Nature-worship. Of Vesuvius more anon. But there are
second class mountains which give perfectly beautiful
views, and should, if possible, be ascended. The Brevent
opposite Mont Blanc before alhided to, the Schilthorn,
and the Cramont, might be mentioned as safe mountains,
not too fatiguing, and beautiful all the way up as well as
at the summit.
It was early in the mountain season one year, and the
weather was very unsettled. Martin and Marjorie were
compelled by it again and again to retreat from excur¬
sions to Interlachen—the big umbrella, as they call it—
but in a fine interval they stopped a few days at MiiiTen,
a charming little inn above the valley of Lauterbrunnen,
and at a quarter past 5 A.M. started thence, bound for the
top of the neighbouring Schilthorn, 9300 feet high. A
ponderous peasant served as guide, and they tramped
along in high spirits through the dewy hay-fields, thence
into a fir wood where the dark trees gave the snow be¬
hind a brighter lustre. Over rough groimd and through
water courses, till they emerged on a high, lonely pasture,
dotted with a few cheese chalets, and musical Avith cattle-
bells, which tinkled from all sides, as the cows and
goats climbed up and down their steep feeding-ground.
Onwards over short dark herbage, inlaid ■wdth brilliant
dwarf flowers; latterly there seemed more flowers than
grass among the scattered rocks which became wilder and
higher as we ascended. The way led over snow, and
grew steep and slippery; like the servant of king Wen-
ceslaus, they trod in the steps of their guide, where
the snow lay dinted. The mists were now rolling wildly
up the valley, the view was becommg doubtful, and they
halted on a black projection of rock to consider the
advisability of continuing the ascent. Then out came
the sun and blazed on the thousand snow crystals that all
glittered in light, while the clear sky above was dark to
blackness.
So they plunged onwards up the snow slopes, and
very tired was Marjorie when they stood triumphantly at
the top, and richly rewarded. For below lay a sea of
clouds, the sun shining brilliantly on the upper stratum,
The Attempt. 123
and on peak beyond peak that surged out of the cloudy
billows, like islands in some mysterious ocean in a dream;
for a sudden rent would show a glimpse of green valley
far below, or a fragment of the blue-spired Tschliagel
glacier, or a group of fir trees, and then the mist waves
would roll again over all the lower ground. Alas, that at
such an elevation, in that pure atmosphere, instead ot
corresponding elevation of tastes, the lower one of eating
becomes so rampant! Bread and cheese and vin du
glacier, which they shared with their guide, absorbed all
their attention; and when they looked round them again
for the mountains, they had all vanished. " A vapour,
heavy, formless, damp, and cold," enveloped them. The
very sun seemed to have gone out.
They started again in half-an-hour in a changed
scene. It was almost dark, the horizon of white snow
was narrowed by the dense mist to a small circle, in
which the guide moved before them a dim blue figure.
Marjorie and Martin had no notion left of the way,
and might have been wandering in the realms of the
" Snow Queen," all looked so grim and wild. They
had three good glissades down the snow, putting
their feet together, and steering with their ice poles,
shooting thus down the slopes into the unknown dark¬
ness, in pleasant contrast to their toilsome joiu-ney
up. No sooner had they gained the rocks than they
breathed a freer air; day seemed to be brightening. They
chose for their dining-room a mossy, flowery bank, with
a gi'ey table rock in the middle, and there discussed an
excellent dinner, and afterwards took a good rest, and
indeed a little sleep, on the scented thyme and flowers.
There is no rest like eating and drinking, and the after¬
noon was temptingly fine, so they resolved to make a
detour on their way home, to visit a renoMmed waterfall.
For this no guide was needed, so Marjorie and Martin
walked downwards by themselves. The waterfall was
deep in a lovely fir-wood, which clothed the edge of the
steep descent into Lauterbrunnen valley. Over it hxmg
a rainbow, while a smaller fall tossed itself over the track
by which they came. The wind was sighing through the
fir branches, like Wagner's music; the light waned apace;
the whole scene was full of lovely witchery. Long they
lay spell-bound on the soft moss, when suddenly they
became aware that all the heights were lost in mist, nay
more, that the mist was marching down upon thcra like a
124 The Attempt.
wall. In a few minutes it had reached them, and all but
the nearest trees vanished in grey shadow. Hoping to
find the light better outside the wood, and anxious above
all to avoid possible precipices descending into Lauter-
brunnen Valley, they stiiick up the hill side, but soon felt
uncertain whether they were going towards Murren, or in
the opposite direction. So they plodded on a long way,
seeing only each other, and a httle round of green pasture.
" How cold it grows," said Marjorie; " but I do think
we are coming to the chalet above Murren," as they
stumbled over some loose shale. There was a glimmer
before them, and they almost ran up against the ice edge
of a glacier. It was plain to both they had reached the
Tschlingel glacier, how ever they were to get away again.
All was silent around, except the tinkle of some cattle-
bells, and these Martin proposed to follow.
" But," said Marjorie, " how will it improve our fate
to attach ourselves to a cow'? or, not even a cow, per¬
haps only a goat ? "
" We might go home with it, you see," said Martin.
" Perhaps to an empty cow-shed," said Marjorie.
" Very well, let us hope only it is not a goat."
Soon they heard the bells clinking all round them, and
Martin ran up against a real hut, with a real door, out of
which projected the head of a cow. Squeezing in between
her and several more, they found an inner door nearly
blocked up by a recumbent cow, over whose back they
scrambled into a dark little room, where two large fires
were blazing. There w^ere no windows, only chinks
among the unhewn logs of which the walls were made,
and slits in the roof, out of which some of the smoke
escaped. No floor but deep mud, no furniture but clean
cheese moulds and tubs. Over each fire bent a wild-look¬
ing herdsman, boiling a huge copper cauldron. These
spoke not a word; but one of them (and he had a tail,
which proved on fiu'ther investigation to be a one-legged
stool, permanently buckled on beliind him, so that he
could sit down anywhere on nothing), brought them two
wooden cogs full of dehcious cream, in which wooden
spoons were standing upright. Then a little conversa¬
tion was attempted, but the patois was strange. Mar¬
jorie sat on an inverted tub, with her feet in the mu-e,
nodding over the fire; and not till after a good rest did
she feel able to start with one of the herdsmen, who
engaged for a trifle to see them safe on their way to
The Attempt. 125
Miirren. The walk back through the pine wood was
gloomy enough; night helped the fog, and it took nearly
three hours to reach Miirren and its welcome little inn,
so bright and wami, though it is but a wooden box, liable
to holes through to the outer air. It creaks all over when
any one stns; but what nice dinners, what strawberries
and cream you have there; what a balcony there is, over¬
looking the opposite range of snow mountains, noble
peaks surging up through the clouds at startling heights
—in short, it is excellent head-quarters for pedestrians.
Marjorie was not over-fatigued by their adventm-e,
which, on a first-class mountain, might have been a
catastrophe.
And now let us change the scene to a steep mountain
side on a sultry afternoon; far away are the flowery
pastures, the shady woods, the pure snows. The sun
beats fiercely on the black lava over which our travellers
are climbing; it is fissured almost like a glacier, but in¬
stead of blue ice caverns, there ghmmers down below a
dull subteiTanean fire, that will glow hke a furnace when
the sunlight is gone. How hot it is ; how stifling the
sulphur fumes; how terrible the scenery; for this is
Vesuvius in erruption, and Marjorie and Martin are near
the cone of the active crater; Marjorie, who has ridden
wherever she can, and is exhausted; Martin, who has
walked all the way, and is cool. The ascent is now in
loose warm ashes, as steep as they can lie, ai^d several
excited guides push and haul the gasping Marjorie, who
was never so tired in all her life, and once even stops and
refuses to move, while sky, ashes, and guides seem whirl¬
ing round her; but who at last does find herself dragged
to the top of the cone. Meanwhile, some dozen of impish
lazzaroni dance round Martin, entreating to be allowed to
help him, assuring him he is tired, but he is not; he, and
he alone, is cool.
They sit down at last, and scrape a httle hole
in the ground, they put in eggs, and soon take them
out cooked, and eat them; Martin drives his stick into
the loose earth and pulls it out on fire; Marjorie's boots
are singeing. Meanwhile, from the two craters close
by roll up clouds of dense vapour, shining yellow and
crimson and purple in the sunset, which now and then
may be seen burnmg over the ^vide-spread sea. They
peer over the edge of the crater, but the suffocating fumes
soon drive them back, and they are deafened by the un-
126
The Attempt.
ceasing roar and rumble down below; all the senses,
sight, smell, taste, touch and hearing seem assailed at
once, and they scamper down the ashes with an ease and
celerity very unlike their toilsome ascent.
The southern night had fallen as they made their
way back, springing and climbing over the lava boulders,
by the fitful glare of a torch. There was a great
red glow in the sky, and at last they came to the
cause of it,—a place where, as far as the eye could
reach, the mountain side was scored by rivers of
slowly sliding fire. Some streams pom-ed in heavy
cataracts from far above; one oozed out of a great
glowing crack near where they stood, and carrying with
it black stones and fragments, with a perpetual moaning
sound slipped in slowly moving waves of fire downwards,
to join another, which broke in red hot firagments over a
steeper part of the hill. Even where they stood, the
cracks below their feet glowed ^vith the lower flame ; the
efiect of all that burning amid the black jagged lava rocks,
under the dark night sky, was indescribably awful, or
rather he only could describe it, who told of the city of
Dite, gleaming vermilion and flame-coloured across the
vapom'S of the marish pool.
It was a relief to get away from the fire and the smoke
to the quiet moonlight shining over the beautiful sea;
althoiigh this ascent was certainly one of the most
fortunate our travellers ever achieved. Seldom is
Vesuvius to be seen to such advantage, the eruption
being pecuKarly grand, yet not unapproachably dan¬
gerous.
And now having wandered with our travellers to
Southern Italy, it is in the nature of things that we
should say farewell to them for the present; for no
one walks in that luxurious land, who can chng on to
the outside strap of a carriage, or hire the smallest
donkey.
Vesuvius being one of those mountains that "none
but man can climb," ladies are frequently carried up
in chahs, borne by troops of scrambling lazzaroni; so
with Marjorie's successful ascent on foot, we end our
papers on Pedestrianism for Ladies.
E. J. 0.
The Attempt. 127
The day's last glory streaming
Thro' nave and chancel gleaming
Into gloom;
And the soft choir-notes, sighing,
Float into stillness, dying
At her tomb.
The dim light falleth faintly
On her, who lieth saintly.
Carved in stone,
With slender hands prayer-folded
And lips in silence moulded,
All alone.
There is no place for sorrow;
The breaking heart must borrow
Rest and peace;
For Memory's burden lightens,
And sweet hope dimly brightens.
And tears cease.
What if the storm was round her,
Now, that the calm hath found her
Hushed and low?
All the old griefs departed.
She, who was broken-hearted,
Smileth now.
Think you she still remembers %
Or, that the deadened embers
Of life's woe.
Vex now the soul immortal.
Who passed the unseen portal
Long ago?
Yet, though no sorrow lingers,
Memory, with tender fingers,
Points for aye,
To all the olden treasures
Of earth, 'mid heaven's pleasures,
Far away.
128 The Attempt.
The human love remaineth,
Though stript of all that paineth,
And most blest;
Only the perfect sweetness.
Only the full completeness,
And the rest.
YOLANDE.
OUR  LIBRARY TABLE.
Present-Day Thoughts. Memorials of St Andrews Sundays.
By the AUTHOR of Recreations of a Country Parson.
London: Longmans, Green, and Co., 1871.
This is another volume of sermons from the familiar pen;
yet a few more interesting lessons conned by the same
gentle experience which has already so often ministered
alike pleasantly and profitably to the present generation.
All potent as are the works of our old divines, as
standard rocks to which to cling in the shifting currents
of modern opinion, a good contemporary chart may con¬
tain valuable directions for steering through the ever-
forming quicksands in tae stream of time. There is a
fitness in living thoughts for dealing with those existent
conchtions of society with which it has become familiar,
and out of which it has grown, in these interesting and
thoughtful essays, that is both sound and benign, is
brought to bear on everyday thought and experience,
without directly assuming to dispose of any of the great
problems of the age. We recognise the keen observation,
the musing strain, the simple graceful style, and the wide
and tender sympathies of our old friend the Country
Parson, who, though not invariably Presbyterian, is
always Catholic. And if some of his enlightenment on
the subjects of ecclesiastics and ritual is of the present
day, the truth which he above all commends, is a beacon
for all time.
The Prize offered for the best prose article appearing
in the February Number of The Attempt, has been gained
by LuTEA Reseda, for her article "Many or Much?"
The Attempt. 129
The question—Is Prospero a hero ?—has been for so long
a time satisfactorily answered to my own mind, that I
confess to a feeling of much astonishment when I first
heard this high title not only positively denied to him,
but something very like contumely heaped on hira, by
critics who designated him a •' conjurer," a man who had
indeed much need to devote his later days to expiating
faults, which were so heinous as to be almost beyond the
reach of pardon.
This new — may I be excused for calling it rashly
arrived-at—opinion, when I first heard it, made me for a
moment feel something like indignation, as if a friend
long loved and looked up to had been traduced; but
calmer thought suggested that, instead of being satisfied
with rebutting such a charge in a few hasty words, 1 had
better try to make my own views on the subject clear,
and bring forward to the best of my abilities my reasons
for considering Prospero among the noblest of Shakes¬
peare's creations.
We see, then, in Prospero a man, noble, learned, and
with that simplicity of nature so often accompanying
great learning, which made him unsuspicious, trusting,
and loving. His fault (for my hero had a fault) was
that he retired too much from his public duties to give
himself to his private studies.
" The government I cast upon my brother ;
And to my state grew stranger, bemg transported
And rapt in secret studies."
So he says of himself, and trusting his brother with a
perfect trust, resigned too much power into his hands,
and by this mistake perverted a nature far inferior to his
own, implanting in it a love of power which led to the
crime which banished the noble Prospero from his
kingdom, and which, but for " Providence divine," would
have caused his death.
Now begins our acquaintance with this calm, dignified,
and loving man. Exposed to like dangers with himself
was his child, his daughter, not " out three years old."
The cherubim who infused in him " an undergoing spirit
to bear up against what should ensue." He is left with
her on the island. The enchanted island—mark the word,
for much hangs on it. He instructs her, he loves her, he
lives for her, as he tells her in those sweet words redolent
of a father's tenderness and pure affection—
MAY 1872. R
130 The Attempt.
" Here in this island we arrived, and here
Have I, thy schoolmaster, made thee more profit
Than other princes can, that have more time
For vainer hours, and tutors not so careful."
The result of his care, his love, his upbringing, is the
earnest, graceful, pure-minded Miranda, a " thrid of his
own life," only to be parted with when his unselfish
nature felt that it was best for her to cease from the Ufe
of solitude, and become a denizen of the living world.
Fur this beloved child alone, did his heart yearn to return
to a world where he had met with so much ingratitude and
cruelty, although he was too much of a philosopher to
lose faith in all, because he had been betrayed by some.
No bitterness mixed with his consciousness of having
been wronged ; for the " good Gonzalo, honourable man,"
who had aided him in his hour of extreme peril, he felt a
love and gratitude which shed a drop of sweetness even
on that cruel hour when he Avas torn from Hfe's best joys ;
and he dwells at least as much on this man's goodness as
on the evil nature of his deceiving brother :—
'' Some food we had, and some fresh water,
That a noble Neapolitan, Gonzalo,
Out of his charity (who being then appointed
Master of this design), did give us ; with
Rich garments, linens, stuffs, and necessaries
Which since have steaded much ; so, of his gentleness,
Knowing I loved my books he furnished me.
From my own library, with volumes that
I prized above my dukedom."
Then comes the hoiir when, by his " so potent art," he
knows that his bitterest foe and dearest friend are di-awing
near him in company, with the King of Naples and his
son Ferdinand; he raises the storm which is to place
them within his power; but when Miranda expostulates
Avith him, evidently feeling for the first time in her young
life, a fear that he could do a wrong thing, she receives
for answer the calm re-assurance—
" Be collected,
No more amazement, tell your piteous heart
There's no harm done."
And so it proves no harm is done, " on their sustaining
garments not a blemish, bxit fresher than before."
Now, does his project gather to a head. The child he
loves meets with one pure and noble as herself; the spell
is wrought which forces from his wronger the confession
and reparation—
" Thy dukedom I resign, and do entreat
Thou pardon me my wrongs."
And this confession once made, the noble character of
i
The Attempt. 131
Prospero asserts itself in searching, but forgiving words,
addressed to this guilty brother—
" Flesh and blood, •
You brother mine that entertained ambition,
Expelled remorse and nature, who with Sebastian,
Would have killed your king,
I do forgive thee, unnatural though thou art."
Now for the charge of magic I When this deeply read
and learned man was thrown on the island, which was to
be for many years his dwelling place, he found it full of
charms and incantations,—an enchanted island truly, but
with the enchantment of evil. How did he meet if?
With the enchantment of good. His first act was to free
the " delicate Ariel," that loveliest of sprites, from torments
inexpressible. His next, to endeavour by kind and gentle
measures, to redeem from evil the monster Caliban, whom
he only coerces when he fijids he cannot guide. With
Prospero magic was power, given to him as the fruit of
learning, given to him to meet and subdue the new world
in which he was placed. It was not magic, in the sense
the common term implies, used for merely selfish ends.
There is no word, no hint of compact or communication
with evil in any form, spiritual or otherwise. Witness
these words Sebastian, convicted of sin, speaks—
" The Devil speaks in him."
Prospero—" No.
For you most wicked sir, whom to call brother
Would even infect my mouth.    / do forgive
Thy rankest faults ; all of them ; and require
My dukedom of thee, which, perforce, I know
Thou must restore."
It was a power given him to use for good among powers
of evil, and was trusted to a mind sufiiciently calm, noble,
and philosophical, to use it only for right ends, and to
resign it when those ends were accomplished.
" Oh, it is glorious to have a giant's strength" when the
possessor is too high minded to "use it like a giant." The
curtain falls on Prospero with all his enemies subdued by
love and tender-hearted forgiveness of injuries. His super¬
natural power laid down humbly when no more demanded
by his circumstances or surroundings, and he himself pre¬
pared to return to his beloved Milan, there to wait the final
hour in prayer and hope, having taken no revenge on his
foes save the godlike one of working their reformation—
" Though with their high wrongs I am struck to the quick,
Yet with my nobler reason 'gainst my fury
Do I take part; the rarer action is
In virtue than in vengeance ; the>i being penitent,
The sole drift of my purpose doth extend
Not a frown further."
E. H. S.
132 The Attempt.
A Tale of the Harz Mountains.—From the German.
Part I.
At the time of the flood, when all the water in the world
had run together, climbed the hills, and flowed in wild
waves over the highest mountain peaks, there was great
confusion among the different floods ; and when our Lord
at length took pity on the poor world, made the clear
light of heaven shine throiigh the gray cknidy covering,
and commanded the waters to separate and find the way
home into their glens, neither brook nor stream would
ever have found its native bed again if hosts of good
angels had not descended upon earth, and led them
careftdly back to the right path. Wherever the long
mountain tops peeped up above the flood, the angels
alighted on them, and went slowly down the valleys,
driving the waters before them. And as they got deeper
and deeper down, they directed the course of the rivers
and streamlets, marked out the boundaries of the sea, and
enclosed the lakes in pointed rocky chains, or in green
woods and meadows. Then, with large brushes made of
the rays of the sun, they swept the mud out of the grass,
and dried the heavy foliage of the trees, working with
such zeal, that the water dust which they stirred up, hung
in the mountain clefts hke vaporous veils of mist.
Their work had gone on for some time, and was nearly
finished, when, one day, a wearied angel sat resting on
one of the highest Alpine peaks. Thence he had a wide
view towards north and south, east and west, and gazed
pensively down on the green earth, which now rose,
mnocently smiling, above the vast waters of atonement.
" How beautiful it is," he thought, " how radiant in its
purity—but will it always remain as pure ? Will all the
guilt which has been now Avashed away, not spring up
again? Will sin never again press its black finger on
the blooming countenance of the purified world ? "
A sad foreboding sighstirred thebosom of the good angel,
and he turned his dazzled eyes away from the morning
sun which rose on the horizon in blood-red flames. He
looked long towards the side where the German streams
had  gone  down.    He  saw them  gliding away in  the
The Attempt. 133
distance, the larger ones far ahead, the smaller ones
behind, and, merrily speeding after them, quite a host of
tiny brooks and rivulets. He rejoiced to see how well
they were being led, how no little spring was too small or
insignificant for an angel to go behind it, show it the
right path if it happened to waver, and lift it up when it
tumbled too heedlessly over the rocks. He saw the merry
Rhme, crowned with grapes, hastening away, and
imagined that he heard from a distance the shout of joy
with which he greeted his beloved Moselle, as she, her
locks likewise entwined with vine branches, blushingly
approached him.
Further and further the waters flowed on; their rushing
died away in the distance, and the attention of the lonely
angel on the Alpine peak was suddenly arrested by
another sound. There was a soft, sorrowful weeping and
splashing quite near him ; and, on rising and going behind
the rock whence the noise proceeded, he found a young
spring lying on the groiind, wrapped in a white veil, and
weeping bitterly. He bent down compassionately towards
it, and, raising it and throwing back the veil, discovered
that it was the little Use, for whom a green bed was
waiting far down in the Harz valleys.
" Poor child," said the angel, " have you been left all
alone up here on the rugged mountain, have the others
gone away, and has nobody thought of taking you
too?"
But rise tossed her head, and said pertly, " I am not
forgotten at all; old Weser has waited long enough, and
the Ecker and Oker ^vished to take hold of me, but I
would not go with them, no, even if I should starve to
death here! Am I to go down into the valleys, to run
through the plain hke a common brook, give water to the
cows and sheep, and wash their clumsy feet—I, the
Priacess Use 1 Look at me and see whether I am not of
noble race ? My father is a ray of light, my mother is the
pure air, my brother is a diamond, and the dewdrop in the
bed of roses is my dear little sister. The waves of the
flood have borne me aloft, I have been allowed to play
around the sno%vy peaks of the mountains, and the first
sunbeam which broke through the clouds, has interwoven
my dress with spangles. I am a princess of the first
water, and can certainly not go down into the valley,
so I hid myself up here and pretended to bo asleep, and
the old Weser, with the stupid brooks which have nothing
134 The Attempt.
better to do than to run into her, has been forced at last
to go away."
The angel shook his head sorrowfully at the long story
of little Use, and looked gravely and searchingly into her
small pale face; and, as he gazed long and steadfastly
into the open blue eyes, which were noAV sparkling with
anger, he saw dark spots moving in then- clear depths,
and perceived that a wicked spirit had taken up its abode
in her heart. The devilkin of pride had got in, had
chased out all pious thoughts, and was now looking
mockingly at the angel from the eyes of poor little Use.
But the demon of pride has tm-ned the head of many a
foolish child ere now, and the angel, recognising the
danger of the little spring, determined to rescue it at any
price.
In his deep-seeing eyes the princess was nothing but a
naughty child, so he did not address her as " Your High¬
ness " or any such thing, but simply said—" My dear Use."
" But, my dear Use," he said, " if you have staid up here
by your own choice, and have thought it beneath your
dignity to go down to the plain with the other waters,
you ought to be quite content, and I cannot understand
why you make such a fuss, and weep and complain so?"
"Ah!" sobbed the child, "Avhen the waters were gone,
dear angel, the storm-wind came to sweep round the
mountains, and when he found me here, he got quite into
a rage—he scolded and stamped and shook me, and was
going to push me down from yonder cliff into a deep
black gulf, where daylight never shines. I prayed and
wept, and clung trembling to the rocks; at last I managed
to struggle out of his powerful arms, and to hide here in
this cleft."
" And as that will not always do," said the angel, " for
the wind keeps strict order here, and has a good broom,
you must see, dear Use, that it was foohsh of you to stay
behind alone, and you will come with me at once back to
the old Weser and your young companions."
"Not for all the world," cried the little one. "I will
stay here.    I am the princess!"
" Use," said the angel, with his mild gentle voice; " my
dear little Use, I love you, and you must love me a little
bit too, and be a good child. Do you see yonder white
morning cloud sailing along in the blue sky ? I will call
to it and ask it to stop here, then we can both get on to
it.    You shall lie on its soft cushions, and I will sit beside
The Attempt. 135
you, and it will bear us swiftly down into the still valleys,
where the other brooks are flowing. There I will lay
you in your little green bed, and stay beside you, and
give you bright dreams and tell you pretty stories."
But the Princess Use was incorrigibly stubborn, she
cried always more perversely and vehemently, " No, no, I
will not go down; I don't chose to go down;" and when
the angel drew nearer, and tried, with gentle force, to
take her in his arms, she struck at him and splashed water
in his face.
The angel seated himself sadly on the ground, and the
princess obstinately crept back into her hole, delighted
with herself for having shown so much character, and for
giviag the angel, who stUl besought her to come with
him, short, snappish refusals.
But when the good angel saw that, in spite of all his
love, he had completely lost power over the little Use,
and that the devilkin of pride had taken possession of all
her faculties, he turned away, sighing, from the young
prodigal, and sought his comrades, who were still exert¬
ing themselves busily below.
Princess Use being now alone again, resolved to enjoy
her majesty as much as possible. She emerged from the
rock, seated herself on a projecting cliff, spread out her
airy garments in wide folds around her, and waited to
see whether the other mountains would not bow down
before her, and if the clouds would come and kiss her
robe. Nothing of the kind happened, however many
airs her small majesty assumed, till at last she became
tired, painfully tired of sitting so long, and sighed softly
to herself—" I could have borne a little weariness, that
is only suitable to my rank, but surely not even a princess
needs to stand so much of it."
When it became quite dark, when the sun had set, and
the roar of the approaching tempest sounded anew from
the distance, the poor little spring shed fresh tears of
apprehension, and, for as much as she prided herself on
her obduracy in not following the angel, yet the sweet
feeling of self-satisfaction could not overcome her dread
of the storm.
It grew darker and darker; heavy, benumbing vapours
rose from the abyss, hollow thunder rolled in the depths,
and Use thought she must die of fear. Her breath stood
still in the heavy atmosphere, which all at once surrounded
her.    Suddenly a pale ray of light flashed through the
136 Tlie Attempt.
darkness, and as the little spring looked np terrified, a
tall, dark man stood before her, wrapped in a wide, red
cloak, and, making her a deep reverence, addressed her
as "Most gracious Princess!" Such a salutation was
sweet music to Use; she stifled her fears of the strange,
gloomy countenance, and listened to the alluring words
which met her ear.
The dark man told her that he had been near for some
time, had overheard her conversation with the angel, and
rejoiced that she had dismissed him so scornfully. He
did not understand how anybody could wish to drag
down such a charmingly beautiful little princess to the
flat ground, and bury her in a dark valley. He spoke to
her of the glowing future which awaited her, if she
deigned to j^ermit him to serve her; he described his
cheerful country seat, situated on one of the fairest moun¬
tains in Germany; he would conduct her thither, surround
her with a dazzling court—with all the glory and splen¬
dour befitting her high rank ; she should reign there, in
joy and happiness, far, far above all the waters, great and
small, on the face of the earth.
Use's heart beat fest with joyful anticipation at all
these fine promises : and when the man, unfolding his
mantle, drew from beneath it a broad golden basin, spark¬
ling with precious jcAvels, when he placed it before her,
and invited her to place herself in it, so that he might
convey her to his beautiful Brocken, where countless
maids of honour were already preparing merry festivals
for her, all consideration, all hesitation was over with
her highness. In joyful haste she sprang into the basin
with both feet at once, so that she splashed high into
the air, and a few drops of water fell upon the hand of
the dark man, where they evaporated hissing, and a
burning pain shot through all the limbs of little Use.
Horrified, the poor child grasped the edge of the bowl,
as if about to leap out of it again, and looked timidly up
into the face of the dark man. But he only laughed,
seized the basin with his powerfid hand, ordered the
wind to blow on before, lest Use should have any fear of
being overtaken by it, and went like an arrow through
the air. And the little spring, because the pain had
passed away quickly, was quiet again, and submitted
patiently to be borne along. For she did not, of com-se,
dream that she had given herself to the Evil One, when
she entered the shining little ship so cunningly presented
The Attempt. 137
to her. Certainly she became a little frightened as they
rushed through the black night; and when the bowl
ehook with the violent motion, she trembled and crouched
on its shining bottom, drew her dress tightly round her,
and took good care that not a drop should be lost. She
knew now how much that hurt her.
The night cleared, and the moon was slowly rising,
when they at last reached the Brocken. Wild mirth,
shouting, and whistling, resounded as they approached ; a
throng of strange faces and grotesque forms floated con¬
fusedly about. But the lord of the Brocken commanded
silence, placed the basin containing Use on a large flat
stone, as if on a throne, and ordered his merry vassals
to form a wide circle, and pay homage to the water-
princess.
That was a blissful moment for Use, who, at last, felt
herself in her right place. She rose proudly ; a slender
stream of water, with grace and dignity, bowed and
saluted graciously on all sides, and hung her head half
ashamed, when a loud " Oh!" of admiration sounded
throughout the ring. Sweet, intoxicating music was
now heard, aud the enchanted little princess danced and
Elashed up and down in the bright basin; raised and
ent her curly head, and let the clear, pearly drops ripple
back into the golden vessel. The good full moon, who
shines on everything alike, be it good or evil, could not
resist putting an elegant little crown of shining silver
stars on the vain child's head, and gave a broad smile
of pleasure when the sweet little one, gratefully smihng,
nodded up to her.
But not every eye in the court of Mephistopheles
looked with rapture and admiration on the dancing little
Use. There was many a vain young witch in the com¬
pany who considered herself the most beautiful and
charming princess, and saw with bitter envy and anger
so much honour given to another. T^wo such pert young
witches approached the golden vessel, and began to mock
and insult little Use.
" She hops and Avi-igglcs, and goes on as though she
were beautiful," said one, " and yet she is so thin and
scraggy that one could blow through her. I should just
like to know how the pale beauty would conduct herself
if she had to dance with the tempest, and be swung round
and round by him as we are accustomed to do."
" Miserable," said the other, shrugging her   shoulders
MAI 1872. S
138 The Attempt.
contemptuously. " She will never in her life learn to ride
on a broomstick. But, do you hear how the kettle-drums
are beating and the cymbals sounding above ? We are
going to have a merry dance, and shake up a deep morass
for this shining Use to dwell in. Then all her glory will
be at an end; she will need to be our obedient servant,
the Princess Boilwater."
Poor Use, who had been listening to the wicked speeches
of the yoxing witches, lost all desire to dance. She sat
down in the bottom of the bowl, saw all the wild figures
betake themselves to the other side of the mountain, and
arrange themselves for dancing, and began to reflect
what the mocking words of the wicked witches could
really mean. The taunt about the wind had ofieuded her
deeply, but what caused her most anxiety was the
morass, and the Princess Boilwater. Nobody had, how¬
ever, yet called her Princess Boilwater, and she, who was
to reign up here, could not possibly be intended to wait
on the witches ! She w^as considering whether to ask the
master of the Brocken, who was just then coming towards
her, for information, but ere she had made up her mind
what to say, he stood before her, and dipped his finger
into the middle of the basin, so that Use shook with pain.
But he laughed again, and said, " The night is cool, most
gracious princess, you will freeze to death here. I have
ordered a warm swing-bed to be made ready for you at
the fireside over there. If you will turn your head
towards that side you will see how busy my head cook
is in stirring the fire, and laying pretty toys in the bed,
so that you may not weary. Come, and let me carry you
over."
Use looked towards the other side, and saw that a deep
copper kettle had been hung over a brisk fire, which
blazed up crackling from the ground; biit the old woman
who stood by it was so frightfully ugly, and the toys
which she was throwing into the kettle looked so strange^
that Use, who was now getting somewhat distrustful,
would not let herself be taken over at once, but said she
would prefer to look on a little longer. His black majesty
said that he would not mar her pleasure, but would return
to fetch her in an hour, and thereupon he went himself
and joined the dancers.
But it was poor sport for the unhappy princess to sit
there alone, and watch sometimes the wild, repulsive
groups of dancers, sometimes the fire and the caldron, into
The Attempt. 139
which the old woman was casting, as Use now clearly
saw, all sorts of disgusting animals—spiders, toads, snakes,
and lizards, bats, which she caught in the air as they flew
round the fire, and so forth.
Horror of the wicked company into which she had
fallen, overcame Use. It now dawned upon her what the
witches had meant when they laughed at her, and called
her the Princess Boilwater. In deadly fear, she wrung her
tender hands, seized her veil, and pressed it against her
pale face to stifle the cry of despau- which was about to
escape her.
" Oh!" she sighed, shedding tears, " if I had only fol¬
lowed the angel! he meant kindly towards me." And,
as she looked despairingly around, and perceived that
she was alone on the mountain side, that all the
witches and demons were either dancing or crowding
round the fire, the idea of escape flashed across her mind.
" Away, away," she whispered, " no matter where; " and
quick as thought she had mounted on the edge of the
bowl, and, holding on with both hands, looked anxiously
back to see whether anybody observed her.
But nobody heeded the little princess, only the good
old moon stood above, and looked smilingly and fixedly
at her. But the child, putting her small finger on her
mouth, looked up so tearfully and beseechingly, that the
moon could certainly not have had the heart to tell, if
any one had asked where Use had hidden herself.
So Use, finding herself unobserved, let go her hold, and
tried to glide gently and softly on to the ground ; but the
bowl was high, and the block of granite on which it stood
still higher, and, in spite of all her care, it rocked a little
as she descended. In terror lest anyone should hear, she
hopped nimbly behind some large stones. She had
modestly taken off her crown of stars and left it in the
basin. The journey to court had brought her but little en¬
joyment, and now it did not matter about being a princess,
if she could only escape quietly and unseen. Trembling,
the little spring nestled close to the stones, and entreated
them to protect her; and the old stones, who had never
before felt such a youthful heart throbbing against their
hard bosoms, were wonderfully touched, and pressed close
together round the princess, so that no eye, not even that
of the moon, could see her. Then they showed her a
little hole in the ground. She squeezed through it, and
found,  in  the  soft pillow  of earth   which covered the
140 The Attempt.
mountain ridge on that side, a long passage,  wliich  a
field mouse had probably once made.
After she had groped on for a considerable time in
darkness, the channel, which had been gradually descend¬
ing, became wider and more uneven, leading her among
loose stones and rocks, some of which gave way under
her steps and rolled dowu before her. Presently a ray of
light flashed upon her from above, and when the path,
after having gone more rapidly and roughly down-hill,
suddenly stopped altogether, the ground opened above
her, and she saw the clear heaven, and a few Httle
stars, which shed a dim light arotmd, revealing to her a
confused mass of stones and rocks, among which no road
was visible. At the same mornent, the wild nausic, the
shrieking and whistling of the dancing witches on the
Brocken sounded in her ear, and Use, who had hesitated
for an instant, doubtful whither to direct her course,
rushed, impelled by fear, over the stones, springing and
leaping in breathless haste. She did not mind though
she bounded against hard pieces of rock, knocked her
head, and tore her dress.
" Away, away," she whispered, " far away, where the
Prince of the Brocken and his wild hosts cannot spy me''
Thekla.
{To be continued.)
i^ h £ n  and  It o ic.
There was glory on the mountain,
There was shadow on the lea;
The voices of a thousand birds
Were jubilant with glee ;
The lily leant beneath the dew,
The violet took a deeper hue.
And all for him and me.
There was young green moss which clingmg spread
O'er rugged rocks and bare.
And stately trees, from milk-white boughs.
Showered blossoms on om hair ;
And the golden censers swinging
Of labm-num incense flinging
Into the dazzled air.
The Attempt. 141:
Earth never oped her eyes to gaze
Upon a fairer morn,
And never did her flower-gemmed robe
A loveKer face adorn;
We, half-dehrious with the bhss
Of wandering in a world like this,
Ne'er dreajnt of our return.
Ah me ! so young, so strong, so fair.
So long ago—and yet
I see, as if 'twere yesterday,
The very place we met.
The place we parted;—ah I kind heaven,
I would it were to mortals given,.
But sometimes to forget.
We two were promised to be wed
Upon some future day,
But long delays, they loosen love
And sour sweet souls, they say,
I know not; in our little jars
And petty mimicry of wars.
We kissed the stings away.
We lingered 'mong the fringed lanes.
We clambered up the hill,
Or, wading knee-deep through the moor,
We traced the winding rill;
Or, filled with a hushed content.
Two hearts in one thanksgiving blent.
We, wandering on, were still.
And so with jest and earnest talk
Sped on the golden day,
And 1 was wilful,—both were young,
And both would have their way ;
"^I'o think these words, begun in mirth,
To such a cruel fate gave birth,
And swept our love away.
A long, low sob came up the vale.
We started at the sound;
A cold, damp mist, with slimy folds,
Came creeping up the ground ;
The west, one black yet riven scroll
That seemed to hide some shrinking soul
Within its inky bound.
142 The Attempt.
Wo gazed along the path where late
Such loveliness had lain,
It was as if the hopeless looked
For life amid the slain;
And we, in many a tempest tried,
Broke, shipwrecked on the rock of pride;
And ever more were twain.
Few words were said, but ah! those few
Were sharp and barbed as steel,
And pierced such wounds on either side,
That ages might not heal;
And so, to save us future pain.
We both began this world again,
Although our hearts were leal.
And from the moimtain and the lea
The glory had departed.
And where the birds of morning sang,
Dark birds of omen darted;
The blossom which gave promise sweet
Swept in dead leaflets to our feet;
And I—was broken-hearted I
We walked in silence side by side,
Not linked as of yore;
He turned him to the chill night wind,
I passed within the door;
And then my pride broke down, and fain
Would I have sued his love again,
But ah! I live to tell the pain;
I never saw him more. La Maurice.
(©n the Cfojtttftliott of ilhouijht with langtta^f,
ESPECIALLY AS SHOWN IN THE QUESTION OF UNIVERSALS.
[An Essay written for the Class of Mental Philosopht/ in eonneHion with
The Edinburgh Ladies' Educationnl Association.]
I.  OP SPEECH IN GENERAL.
"Die Sprache ist der voile Athem menschlicher Seele."—Grimm.
The connection of thought with language can be treated
within the limits of a class paper only by circumscrib¬
ing the question as much as possible, by putting aside.
The Attempt. 143
for the meantime, much that properly belongs to it, by
leaving unnoticed all those questions concerning the
origin of speech, which require the joint labours of the
philologist, the ethnologist, and the physiologist, in order
to confine our attention, as much as possible, to the rela--
tions between our individual thoughts and the words in
winch we express them. Were we to enter on the
vexed question of the origin of speech, we should
speedily find it to be one of the obscurest and most
disputed problems in the whole range of science, lead¬
ing us far into the study of the comparative natures
of man and of animals. For, since man contains, sumr
med up in his nature, all the degrees of lower forms
of being, and since the impulse to utter musical sounds
expressive of emotion, is an impulse which he shares along
with other animals, we should most scientifically enter on
the discussion by carefully studying the nature of the
vocal utterances of brutes, before inquiring what has to
be added to these, in order to elevate them into human
speech. In so brief an essay it would bevain to attempt
to determine such a question.
Let us then confine our attention to speech as we have
it, to speech not as invented, but as acquired by us ready
made. At this stage of the world's history, when the
individual share of each in the formation of the common
instrument of thought, is so infuiitesmally small,—
limited, as it is, (in the vast majority of cases), to such
assistance as we may each individually lend to the lexi¬
cographers of our time, by careful precision in the right
use of words,—it seems quite allowable, in a psychological
essay on language, to start with speech as a possession of
the human race, instead of inquiring in what way the
creative imaginations of our unlettered forefathers did,
out of a very limited series of vocal signs of sensible per¬
ceptions, construct the symbols of innumerable abstract
ideas.*
Were we to begin at the very beginning, we shotdd have
to inquire into the amount of meaning which there is in
the cry of a brute, before we could so much as decide at
what point a cry becomes a word.    No easy task this,
• The case of Ethics is a parallel one, and affords a good precedent, since we
learn by experience and by education what is the difterence between right and
wrong, and are able to decide according to the contemporary standard of
their laws, long before we attempt to discuss the origin of moral consciousness.
144 The Attempt.
for who that has heard a well-educated parrot first
summon the house-dog by his name, and then when it
is responded to, give a mocking laugh at his expense,
can deny that beasts can learn to associate words with
things, and also with their own desires respecting things ?
There was some truth in Archbishop Whately's remark,
that " man is not the only animal that can make use of
language," (of one kind or another, articulate or inarti¬
culate, we suppose he meant), " to express more or less
what is passing in his mind." Who that is well
acquainted with dogs, but knows how to distinguish
between the eager bark of joy and the sharp yelp of pain,
between the angry snarl and the howl of distress or the
deep bay of suspicious apprehension % Our very names
for these various sounds mark our understanding of their
significance. The recent theory that, the wild dog being
mute, the domestic dog has learned to bark from tlie
endeavour to imitate human speech, is rendered probable
to me by those evident efforts to speak, which result
in the peculiar loud murmur, so often uttered by the more
affectionate and sagacious Scottish terriers. This canine
peculiarity may, along with others, have suggested the
doubt in Coleridge's mind, whether dogs do not possess an
analogon of words, and it certainly did not escape Scott,
(who knew most things about dogs), for he notices it in
his Guy Mannering.
Taking up human speech rather as the inheritance,
than as the construction of our race, the first thing that
strikes us is, how wonderfully well the primitive word-
builders did their work. To us the marvel is, that words
should contain as much truth about the nature and rela¬
tions of things as they do, and how often the penetrative
imagination of earlier times seized on those very characters
of things which, with painful toil, science has at last ascer¬
tained to answer to the most important facts in their
nature.
True, the skill with which language was constructed,
has not been without a baneful influence on philosophical
speculations. Men, when they began to reflect, were
so amazed at the perfection of the instrument of thought,
that they rashly concluded language to be a divine gift;
not, as ive would say, because God gave man the capacity
of inventing speech, but as though the god Hermes had
taught men, word by word, the very language of the im¬
mortals.    But, since speech was neither sent down from
The Attempt.        » 145
heaven to earth, nor yet made by philosophers, the con¬
clusion that the meaning of words contained in itself the
truth of things, was but a misleading fiillacy. Against
such theories, when maintained by a later school of thinkers,
Locke argues only the more strongly, because he lets ua
see that he felt how needful it was to deliver even his
own mind from their empire—" I endeavour, as much aa
I can, to deliver myself from those fallacies, which we are
apt to put upon ourselves by taking Avords for things.
Names made at pleasure, neither alter the nature of things,
nor make us understand them."
It seems that, without attaching undue importance to
the philosophy that lies fossilized in words, we may yet
profit by the lessons of etymology. The men who built
words for our use, were in a certain sense better off than
we are. They had indeed no books, no traditions even;
but at the same time they had no foregone conclusions,
and no errors to unlearn. Their minds were kept in a
state of wholesome activity by continual observation of
nature. Free from that second-hand knowledge which
encumbers, while it enriches and developes, our intellects,
they were less under the rule of other men's imperfectly
apprehended thoughts. They did not ask what other
people had said about a new object, they rather allowed
the delight of discovery to concentrate attention on its
promment qualities, and the laws of association to
suggest unhindered, when and where such qualities had
been seen in other things.
This, no doubt, explains how some particular and highly
characteristic peculiarity of a natural object was able so
to rivet their attention, and so to excite their imagination,
as to lead them to associate Avith the object possessing it,
the word originally framed to express the sensation excited
by such quality (see J. Mill, Analysis, p. 135.) Thus
" rose," which is referred to the same root as " red" (com¬
pare Gk. pibov, ipv&phg, with German, o^oth, Lat. rutilus),
meant "ruddy flower." The builders of language lived
with external nature, with phenomena, rather than with
the occult causes of phenomena. To use the words of
Leibnitz, " the soul of primitive man was a concentric
mirror of nature, hi the midst of whose works he lived."
In the inner consciousness of the earliest observers, the
action of things seen and felt created at once the want
of speech, and the impulse to supply that want. Bunsen
considers that the " action of mind is capable of producing
JCAT 1872. T
146 The A ttempt.
language, by a spontaneous repercussion of the perceptions
received." However this may be, certain it is that these
men possessed an activity of the appellative faculty com¬
mensurate with the task which was theirs, an activity which
has ceased to be ours, along with the necessity for its exer¬
cise. They were poets too, and, if the quick and unerring
recognition of likeness under diversity be any mark of
poetic genius, or if the ready discovery of appropriate
symbols be the jfittest work of imagination, we may well
look for genuine poetry in the most every-day words we
use, since they were made by men, whose ideas worked
with a freer swing than they do in our more sophisticated,
though better cultivated, modern minds.
Speech expresses at once more, and less, than thought.
More than thought, for it is the expression not only
of thought, but also of feelings and of emotions, too
subtle and delicate to be put into words, and which can
only be conveyed by the variations of tone and of manner.
An instance of this is, when a great orator imparts to
his hearers far more of the passion which stirs his own
soul, than his very words, if read in cold blood, could
ever express. More than thought, again, is expressed
by words, when words are ranged by a poet's fine sense
of harmony in the balanced order of rhyme and rhythm.
Take a sonnet of Keats, and translate its assertions
into plain prose, and you will feel that a subtle meaning
has departed from it, so that you can no longer, at the
poet's bidding, enter into the feelings of
'' Some watcher of the skies,"
" When a new planet swims into his ken ;"
or into those of
" Stout Cortez, when with eagle eyes
He stared at the Pacific—and all his men
Looked at each other with a wild surmise—
Silent, upon a peak in Darien."
Yet less than thought is expressed by speech; for
human words can never convey more than a part of the
speaker's mind, can never, save approximately, excite
similar ideas in another intellect, and but inadequately
serve to register our own thoughts. The more we study
language in its relation to thought, the greater does
our wonder grow, not that speech serves us so badly,
but that it serves us, imperfect as it is, one half so well
as it does, that so incomplete an expression of thought
should  yet  be  so  sufficient  an  instrument  of   reason.
The Attempt. 147
Much of the advantage of oral instruction rests upon
the confessed inadequacy of written words to rivet
attention on the main fact of the matter in hand. Spoken
emphasis may well take its place among the possible
sources of logical fallacy, for it has a signiticance beyond
italics, beyond capital letters, or any other devices ap¬
pealing to the eye only of the reader.
This insufficiency of speech as a vehicle for thought,
leads us right into the heart of our subject, for it brings
before us the reciprocal action of thought and of lan¬
guage. If words be thus inadequate, thought must suffer
not merely in its passage from one mind to another, but
also in its very birthplace within the mind of the thinker.
For if it be true that speaking is thinking aloud, it is
no less true that thinking is speakmg to oneself, and the
clearness and swiftness of thought are dependent on the
readiness with which we clothe our ideas in the right
words.
Words, by their capacity for storing up judgments at
which we have arrived, enable us to put these aside, and
thus to attend to the main line of argument. An illustration
of this function of words, and of the Avay in which, in scien¬
tific thought, this packing away of ideas is effected, either
by means of newly-coined teclmical terms, or by means
of a larger or more precise meaning attached to names
already in common use, occurred to the writer, while
waiting at a large and busy railway station. For the
continued shunting of coal and goods waggons into the
sidings, in order to leave the line clear for the through
traffic, recalled vividly the action of the mind, when
ridding itself, by means of words, of all previous ideas
not directly necessary to the precise end which it seeks
to accomplish by thought. Much of the depth and
comprehensiveness of German thought is due to the
extraordinary power of word-biiilding which their language
contains within itself. Returning to our illustration, we
may say that any sidings which shall represent German
scientific or pliilosophical tei-ms, must be long ones
indeed, and capable of accommodating very many trucks.
The endeavour to construe a page of really hard German
reasoning, teaches that thought moves freely through
those long sentences, so heavily weighted with ideas,
only because these ideas are stowed away in w(jrds so
significant, that an entire phrase of Enghsh is needed to
translate one of them.    The student can regret neither
148 The Attempt.
past exertions nor past failures, if they have taught a
practical lesson of the influence of words on thought, and
aided him to realize how potent an instrument of thought
is a well-constructed and rich vocabulary.
The above argument may easily be reversed. We may
say that no race but one whose mental faculties were
highly developed, and whose physical fibre was tough
enough to stand hard mental discipline, without paying
the penalty due to over-strained nerves, could ever have
evolved or constructed, out of its own modes of con¬
sciousness, such a language as German. Those who seek
in language for the signs of national character, may well
bid us measure the future influences of Teutonic thought
by the capabilities of the mother-speech of Germany.
Enough has been said of language as a whole. The
title of this essay indicates that its connection with
thought must be traced in the subject of universal or
general names.
Names, we are told, are marks set on things, by
aid of which we might speak of them to our neigh¬
bours, or recall the sensations which we ourselves had
experienced at sight of them. And, since objects are so
infinitely numerous, that each of them cannot receive
from us its own private and peculiar name, ft became
necessary that some device should be found, in order to
make a limited number of signs serve for an unlimited
number of objects. This was achieved by making the
greater number of such marks representative, not of
single objects, but of groups of resembling things assem¬
bled together in classes. To poverty of invention, there¬
fore, and to feebleness of retention would, if this theory
be true, be due the great discovery of general terms and
the origin of classification. Far from being true, it is
confessedly meagre and inadequate as a theory of uni-
versals. If every object had its proper name, and if we
could remember and apply these names aright, we should
still be unable, either to think of the relations of congruence
and of confliction between things, or to appreciate and
express their resemblances and differences, without words
to describe the facts which they liave in common.
True, there may be a logic of hnages,—verbal signs,
though the most perfect, are not the only possible symbols ;
but, since of such a logic we know very little, and since
we have no grounds for assuming that it can go far
towards abstract thought, we are constrained to reason
The Attempt. 149
concerning thought and language, very much as if it did
not exist at all. This much we know, that the only logic
which we can reduce to rule or system, is entirely de¬
pendent on words as the spiritual connecting links be¬
tween things.
Neither can this theory cover certain other facts of the
case, and these, facts of a totally different description. It
does not account for that eager inquisitiveness about
names, of which we are all conscious, and which we see
working in the minds of children. It does not account
for the instinctive feeling that, however closely and
repeatedly we may look at a thing, or even handle it,
we do not hiow it, in the full sense of the word, until
we hear its name. Neither will a name of our own
invention appease this curiosity. Even a child's instinct
protests bravely against a merely subjective standard of
truth in nomenclature. It seeks to know what the thing
is called by other people, and thereby manifests an evi¬
dent desire to connect its own idea of this new marvellous
something, ^\ii\\ the universal thought concerning it. So
strong an instinct, that everything has its name, if we
could but find it out, must have its roots deep down'
in our nature. It suggests man's consciousness that,
in one sense or in another, nature was made for him,
and that much of the true purpose and significance of
things lies hidden in their relation to man, and in his
need of them. For, if we reflect, we shall find that even
savage and noxious creatvn-es are not without use in the
development of man's ingenuity, since they force him to
protect himself and his flocks from their ravages; nor
"without influence on his ethical nature, by those moral
teachings which he finds in meditation on their natures
and fierce instincts. Take the lion and the adder, the
wolf and the scorpion, out of this world, and ethics and
poetry will suffer, and not suffer alone.
Since giving a name is a sort of taking possession,
may we not say that the instinct of nomenclature is an
echo in our nature of those abiding moral lessons taught,
in the Mosaic cosmogony, to those by whom it is rightly
pondered'^ May we not say that, if we take that his¬
tory rather in the order of its ideas than in the order
of time, we shall find it teach us how inorganic matter
was first created by Divine wisdom, that it might be
ready to receive living plants, how plants were next
created, to be the sustenance of animals, then animals, to
150 The Attempt.
be the food of man, so that each lower degree and form of
existence is created that it may serve the higher, through
the whole uninterrupted sequence of the universe, from
inorganic, inert matter up to highest spirits in the right
place and function of each, as related to all the others,
may best be found the end for which it is and was
created? The subjective side of this universal fact mani¬
fests itself in our instinct to name everything, an
instinct springing from man's consciousness of his lord¬
ship over nature, and pointing to that continual craving
to connect thought and things, subject and object, him¬
self and nature, which the philosopher shares Avith the
peasant. Words are at once the result of such instinct,
and the nearest approach to anything like a satisfaction
of the desire which prompts it; because, by association
with a class of objects, a verbal sign itself, whether
written or spoken, a purely objective phenomenon, becomes
representative of the universal, as it is conceived in the
mind.
Lamiched, by means of its association with a word,
on the wide stream of human consciousness, an object is
brought within the realm of the unextended, within
the compass of the universal thoughts of mankind. By
means of such association, the chasm between thought
and things is bridged over. By means of such associa¬
tion, sensible ideas are incorporated with ourselves, and
as it were enclosed, within the mould of subjective
action. On the other hand, the forms of thought are
themselves exhibited to us by means of words, since we
discover or infer their existence from their share in our
own thought concerning sensibles, and in our construc¬
tion of universal terms.
If, like the dove sent out from the ark, the spontaneous
forms of mental action, be they what they may, go forth
alone over the \\dde waste of unknown waters, in quest of
a resting-place, they also, like Noah's dove, return again
to us who sent them forth, bearing an olive token of the
real existence of a world of things, outside the ark of our
own self and of its sensations. Words are such a token;
for surely in that olive leaf there lay hid much silent
predication.
RUSTIGA.
{To he continued^)
The Attempt. 151
%  II0 r n i n g   at   0 i 11 a   |i j a I c.
From the Swedish of C. W. Bottiger.
I went one day, all 'mid the leaves' light sighing.
Along the shore, and out where Virgil lies;
And with ne'er lessening joy, saw round me lying.
Oh! such a glorious sea! such glorious skies 1
Before me rippled soft the bay's blue water.
Under the wind's light spirit, fresh and sweet.
Behind me lay earth's loveliest city-daughter.
And great Vesuvius rose up from my feet.
The song birds sang, contending for the prize,
With fullest trill, amid the fig leaves' night;
And all was health, and all was joy and Hght,
As on the first fair day in Paradise.
As by the curving bay I passed alone,
Gladdened with song, and sea, and day's sweet grace.
With book in hand sat, leaning on a stone.
One with the south's imprint upon his face.
His featiu'es changed with every hne he read.
In mimic game; I saw how wrath was speeding
Now through his brain—now was he proud, now glad,
He read, delighted—lived what he was reading.
For all that nature round was scattering.
Sunk in his book, he had nor ear nor eye;
Except that drama's passion, low or high.
He saw not, heard, nor cared for anything.
But cloud and sunshine o'er his forehead flew.
His eyes by turns were filled with tears and laughter;
He sat, one page swift turning other after:
He looked not up, and scarce his breath he drew,
"This man," thought I, "lets the hot sun lie burning
The chambers of his brain; and surely look !
A fool he must be, who, on such a morning,
Can earth and heav'n forget—all for a book!
And yet—the shining fire, the genius glowing
From out these eyes, these features' changing play!
To the book's fault, not his, the charge I lay;
Therefore the book's name doubtless is worth knowing.
Surely, of bards no lack has Italy;
From Dante down to Monti, what a troop I
Yes! 'tis o'er one of these this man doth stoop.
152 The Attempt.
But which? let's see—the greatest, certainly.
Now seem his feelings to be strong and deep,
And," thought I, " surely Dante's self reads he.
But then again, he almost seems to weep ;
Then," said I, " no ; 'tis Petrarch it must be."
So yet uncertain, on my way still further
I passed, these joyous hours still to promote;
And, between Cape Messina and Minerva,
I marked how Capri on the gulf did float.
Two headlands, beautiful alike to see!
Towards which noAv shall she steer her course to-day ?
She, wavering between them seems to stay,
As I 'twixt Dante and Petrarca be.
But now, the sun the carriers' road was burning,
To Osteria's inn; the shepherd drave
His flocks from Puzzuoli, gladly turning
To rest in Pausilippen's shady cave.
The sea lay heated in the scorching noon.
And not one flow'r could raise its languid stalk;
And beasts and plants, one after other, soon
To slumber sank; I homeward turned to walk.
But as my steps I thus retraced, that I
With all things else might their siesta share,
Where reading sat the man, in passing by
A glance I cast, to see if he were there.
The man had vanished, but the book remained,
And now to take it up I was not slow ;
Not Dante's verses,—not Petrarca's—no !
'Twas Frithioss Saga that the book contained!
]\Ias Alta.
Ji-   ^tvc   |3 0 ^ H I a r   9 ^; t u s i o n s.
I HAVE a very tender feeling towards many of the little
observances and beliefs which are generally held up
to derision under the name of popular delusions, and
would not for the world add my testimony to the over¬
whelming mass of wise writings that have been devoted
to showing us the absurdity of these beliefs.    I fear I
The Attempt. 153
must acknowledge to a very great dislike of sitting down
thirteen to table ; I am convinced that no good will ever
come of a marriage which takes place in May; and if I
am so unfortunate as to spill salt at dinner, I am restless
and uneasy until I have performed the traditional
ceremony for tiu'ning the evil consequences aside. The
mystic rites of Hallow E'en retain all their solemn import¬
ance in my eyes; and dreaming upon wedding-cake
I consider a very grave and important ceremony.
Therefore it is with no intention of running a tilt against
these time-honoured observances, that I begin to write
upon popular delusions; for there are many delusions
much more popular than these in the present hard-headed,
matter-of-fact day and generation.
There is one which at once occms to me, and which I do not
hesitate to characterise as not only a delusion, but a snare;—
and that is " love in a cottage." 0 my dear young friends!
my confiding, unsuspecting friends I who are about to begin
housekeeping upon small means, and are most rightly
and properly resolved to begin in a small way, beware of
this popular, too popular delusion! Try love in lodg¬
ings—love in a common stair—love in a two-pair back—
love in a garret—love over a fishmonger's or under a
dancing-master's—but don't, I implore you, stake your
chances of happiness upon love in a cottage ! It looks
beautiful upon paper; it sounds beautiful as Ed^vin
describes to Angelina the clustering roses, the twining
honeysuckle, the diamond panes, the rustic porch, the
tiny rooms, so vaunted by the specious house-agent.
But there are earwigs in the dining-room press, Angelina,
and black bottles in the kitchen; the rustic porch is
crumbling to decay, Edwin and the roses, honeysuckle,
and diamond panes between them make the house as
dark as a cavern. Edwin can just stand upright in the
parlour, and Angelina's piano cannot be got into tlie
cottage at alL Every chimney smokes ; none of the bells
will ring ; and though it is generally believed that " love
laughs at locksmiths," Edwin will find it no laughing
matter that the locks and bolts on every door of the
cottage are so ingeniously constructed that not a door
will remain shut for five consecutive minutes. It is
doubtless very delightful to have your cottage situated
on a level with the gardcii, and to have no doorsteps,
areas, or other similar town-trammels ; but as the season
advances,   you  are  pretty   sure   to  be impleasantly re-
MAY 1872. U
154 The Attempt.
minded that your " lodging is on the cold ground ;" for I
never yet knew a cottage that was not damp to the last
degree. The rain will wash in under the door; large
ominous wet stains will appear on the new drawing-room
paper; and when Edwin is racked by rheumatism, and
Angelina's head splitting with neuralgia, they will rue the
day that they yielded to the popular delusion of " love in
a cottage." Beware of it, my young friends, I beseech of
you : it is one of the \ery severest tests to which you
could possibly subject your mutual affection.
I fear that poets and poetry are to blame for the extra¬
ordinary tenacity of this delusion; and there can be little
doubt that they, and they alone, have created and sup¬
ported the delusion of " sweet sixteen." Sweet sixteen,
indeed! the delusion has not a leg to stand upon, save
and except the asseverations of these much-mistaken
bards. Whether it is meant that a damsel of sixteen is
sweet to other people, or that the fact of being sixteen is
sweet to herself, the idea is an utter and total delusion.
Let us look first at the supposition that " sweet sixteen "
is sweet to the surrounding world. Let lie go into the
street, reader, or into the fields, or into the nearest board¬
ing school, or wherever you please, and set apart the first
dozen young ladies who will own to being sixteen. I will
answer for it that eleven of them will either giggle or turn
fiery-red on being asked the simplest question ; that their
hands will be very red, their elbows curiously prominent;
that they will be angular all over and over; and that they
will either slouch and stoop, or else carry themselves as
stiffly and ungracefully as drill-sergeants; that their dress
will look either ridiculously childish, or absurdly womanly;
that they will stammer, blush, fidget, and tread on each
other's toes; and that, in short, their whole appearance and
manner will proclaim that they are in the most unbecom¬
ing stage of transition—of female hobbledehoyhood—and
that they are painfully conscious of it. Yes, painfully con¬
scious of it, for sweet sixteen is quite as much a delusion
to the poor girls themselves as to the outside world. I
once was sixteen myself, a considerable time ago, I admit,
but still I remember it; and oh ! how unhappy I was. I
knew I was ugly and awkward, and that my hands were
red and my neck bony. I was for ever and ever in some¬
body's way, I could not cross the room without knocking
something down, and I tore my dress, upon an average,
three  times  a   day.     A   sense  of awful  isolation,  too,
The Attempt. 155
oppressed me. I was not a child, and could not keep
company with the children, nor join in their games; but
neither was I young lady, and I felt that a great gulf
separated me from the happy beings of seventeen and
eighteen, whom I used tearfuUy to admire as I sat mend¬
ing the last-made hiatus in my unhappy dress. I remem¬
ber it all vividly, and I am not to be deluded into believing
in " sweet sixteen." No, no; my governess was much
nearer the truth when she used to comfort me at that sad
period, by observing, " Never mind, my dear, you are no
worse than other people; only, just now, you're at a very
awkioard age.''
There is a very popular delusion daily gaining ground,
which I cannot well express in a single phrase. It con¬
cerns what is popularly called " a taste for music," and
consists in the behef that it is the duty of all mankind, not
only to have a taste for music (which 1 deny), but to have
a taste for the same kind of music (which I deny emphati¬
cally). Now, in the first place, why should a taste for
music be exacted from every one, irrespective of his
natural gifts or deficiencies '? People are allowed, without
remark, to express themselves uninterested in painting
and sculpture, to confess that they cannot read poetry,
that they don't appreciate good acting; all these natural
defects are readily excused. But woe to the individual
who has the courage to confess that he has no natural
" taste for music ! " During the present prevalence of the
musical delusion, he will be considered as an outer bar¬
barian, a social Pariah, an outcast and an alien from the
world of good taste. And yet, there are many excellent
people—there are many among my own acquaintance—
who are utterly unable to distinguish one tune from
another ; but, under the influence of the strange delusion,
that it is the duty of every man and woman to acquire a
"taste for music," they dare not confess the truth; and at
every musical party, at every classical concert, you may
see their faces heroically enduring agonies of boredom,
and making a ghastly pretence of appreciation and enjoy¬
ment. It is to me an instructive but melancholy sight to
watch these victims of a popular delusion thus strugghng
against the laws of their nature, like the hapless man
whose pathetic history is recounted by Mark Twain, the
unfortunate possessed by "the dreadful insanity that
moves a man to become a musician in defiance of the will
of Providence, that ho should confine himself to sawing
156 Tlie Attempt.
wood." I need not enlarge upon the awful results to
society, when these deluded individuals attempt to be¬
come performers. I need only say, that then they take
ample vengeance for the many agonising hours they have
spent in acquiring what they call " a taste for music." As
to the second part of the delusion, that every one must
like the same kind of music, it appears to me even more
visionary than the first. 0 learned and highly cultivated
fanatics, worshippers of Beethoven, adorers of Mendels¬
sohn, idolaters of Handel, Mozart, and Bach! far be it from
us to interfere Avith your enjoyments, if you vnW allow us,
humbler disciples of Euterpe, to partake of ours in peace
and quiet. We bow with submission to your superior
judgment, we question not for a moment your infinitely
better taste ; but Ave would humbly submit that it is a
delusion and a mockery to force us to sit beside you in
mortal weariness, while a symphony in four movements
crashes on to the bitter end, to struggle vainly with our
yawns during sonatas, fugues, and impromptus, when we
might have been listening with thorough enjoyment to a
loAver, Ave admit a loiver, but more congenial style of music
somewhere else. Why should Ave be afraid to say Ave
prefer II Barbiere to Ftdelio, the Tyrolese Singers to an
organ recital, and the regimental band to a classical con¬
cert, if such is really the case'? Because this extraordi¬
nary delusion, that everybody is bound to like the same
kind of music, is every day taking deeper root in the
British mind, as many an unhappy school girl, gifted Avith
slender musical abilities, knows to her cost; Avhen, in spite
of an inner consciousness that she might perhaps achieve
Avitli credit a composition of Brinley liichards, she is com¬
pelled by her teacher to maltreat Mendelssohn, and blunder
through Beethoven.
Another very popular, nay, almost universal delusion,
occurs to me ; the idea that all gossip is a sinful and per¬
nicious thing. Surely a very mistaken, a very melancholy
idea! Scandal is a sinful thing; slander is a diabolical
thing—I tlo not think that is too strong a Avord; and
Avithout being exactly scandal or slander, there is a kind
of loAv malicious gossip Avhich may be termed simply
" evil speaking," and Avhich is Avholly reprehensible and
bad. I5ut apart from all these is a genial, kindly, bustling
sort of gossip, Avhich can do no harm, Avhich, on the con¬
trary does good, by calling forth a neighbourly Avariii-
hearled interest in the aftairs of other people; and Avhich,
The AUempL 157
to the honour of human nature, is far commoner than the
baser species which only delights to chronicle evil and
sorrow. Let me quote the words of an authoress of talent,
—" Gossip has its noble side to it. How can you love
your neignboui" as yourself, and not feel a little curiosity
as to how he feres, what he wears, where he goes, and
how he takes the great life tragi-comedy, at which you
and he are both more than spectators? Show me a
person who lives in a country village absolutely without
curiosity or interest on these subjects, and 1 will show
you a cold, fat oyster, to whom the tide-mud of propriety
is the whole existence." So surely even citizens of a
metropolis need not be ashamed that they feel interested
in the affairs of their neighbours, and that they occasionally,
nay frequently, enjoy discussing them. Depend upon it,
gossip is a good thing ; if only, like other good things, it is
partaken of in moderation. It was an immense comfort
when I stinnbled upon the above reflections, for though
utterly unable to control the impulses of my nature, so
far as to refrain from gossip, I was yet possessed by the
popular delusion that it was a sinful enjoyment, and
indulged in it with many scruples of conscience—which
are now scattered to the four winds.
There is a delusion—in every sense a popular delusion—■
which affords so keen a pleasure to its victims, and is so
thoroughly harmless to boot, that I would never say a
word as to its delusive character, did I think there was
the slightest chance of convincing anyone thereof—
at least as regards themselves. It is the fond idea
cherished by the numerous class who cannot buy new
clothes whenever they want them, that their old clothes,
when dyed, turned, re-trimmed, and otherwise re-modelled
and disguised, are believed by the world at large to bo
bran new and fashionable articles; while in reality, the
world at large, if it notices the garments at all, is not
deceived for a moment as to their identity. The curious
part of this delusion is, that although we penetrate with
the utmost ease into the secret of all the best-devised
adaptations of our neighbour's attire, it never occurs
to us that our own little subterfuges can possiljly 1)0
detected. We see quite well that Mrs Smith's Easter
bonnet is the one she bought last year for Mary's wedding,
with maize and black trimmings replacing the pink and
white ones ; we all noticed that little Fanny Smith had
fallen  heir   to  Mary's  striped   dress,   and   that   Fanny
158 The Attempt.
Brown's new silk petticoat was just her last silk dress dyed
and quilted; and yet we confidently expect that the
Smiths and Browns will never discover tliat our spring
hats have been re-trimmed for the fifth time, and that
little Maggie's grey suit has been engineered with infinite
pains out of the skirts that Kate and I wore all last
autumn. Surely this is a pleasurable and a harmless
delusion, my readers ! for the garments so constriicted
and reconsti-ucted, with care and labour, with immense
fore-thought and planning, afford gratification and pride
to their wearers immeasurably beyond any that is known
to those who, when they want a new di'ess, have nothing
to do but—order it! And so many are the beneficial
effects of this delusion—so greatly does it tend to increase
the contentment, the ingenuity, the industry, the pru¬
dence and the forethought of those who are subject to it,
that, as I have already said, I should never have hinted
that it is a delusion, did I think it possible to con\ance
any one that such is the case, with regard to their oicn
masterpieces of reconstruction. But 1 know well that
the large class to whom such plannings and piecings are
familiar, have in their own performances in this line a
faith which caimot be shaken; and I need only mention,
as one instance out of many, that I, the writer of this
article, will immediately, upon finishing it, don a garment
Avhich has been once dyed and twice turned, and walk
forth arrayed in it serenely confident that it is irrecog-
nisable by friend or foe.
This delusion does not in general affect the sterner sex,
possibly because it is infinitely more diflicult to disguise
or renovate their articles of attire ; but that it occa¬
sionally takes possession of them with extraordinary
vehemence, is proved, I think, by the following axiom
laid down by Professor Holmes in one of his delightfully
chatty " Breakfast Table " papers. It is on the subject of
hats, a point on which the masculine mind is generally
peculiarly sensitive.    Says the Professor :—
" A hat which has been popped, or exploded by being-
sat down upon, is never itself again afterwards. It is a
favourite illusion of sanguine natures to believe the con¬
trary."
Now I have experienced in my own person, and seen
among my own sex, many extraordinary instances of this
kind of delusion, but I am boimd to say that the above
example  of the  Professor's—and  observe  he culls it a
The Attempt. 159
favourite illusion—transcends anything I ever met with,
and argues an extent of delusicjii amounting nearly to
monomania. But could there be a more striking exem¬
plification that " where ignorance is bliss, 'tis folly to be
wise ?" and could any one but a confirmed misanthrope
have the cruelty to blight the happiness of one of these
" sanguine natures," by rudely proclaiming to him the
fallacy of liis hopes ?
I cannot pass without notice another delusion, which
will appear to citizens of Edinburgh absurdly strained and
improbabable, but which, nevertheless, is largely preva¬
lent in many large towns, and is all but universal in rural
districts,—I mean a dread, mistrust, and horror of law¬
yers. It is an extraordinary thing how large a class,
even of the educated population, bases its conceptions
of the legal character mainly upon second-rate novels,
and upon the traditional stage lawyer, and persists in
regarding all individuals connected with the law as a race
of monsters dead to every instinct of humanity, whose
only pleasures are distraining for rent, foreclosing mort¬
gages, and drawing up iniquitous wills. I have conversed
with many victims to this delusion, whose only idea of a
lawyer was a species of ogre, clad in rusty black, speak¬
ing with a nasal whine, and corresponding in personal
appearance to Mr Sampson Brass; this being they pic¬
tured seated in a squalid den half-full of mouldy papers,
busied in concocting schemes of villany, and entrapping
into his snares the widow and the orphan, " to grind their
bones to make his bread." In vain did I attempt to
combat these sensational ideas; in vain did I assure them
that I knew lawyers w^ho could sing a better song, tell
a better story, give a better dinner, make a better partner
in a dance, than would easily be found in any profession;
my statements were received with an incredulous stare;
and when I advanced to higher grounds, and boldly
declared that in no profession was there a higher standard,
or a higher average of honour and manliness, and that
they were the best and most effectual protectors of the
weak and helpless, I was met with utter derision. I doubt
if even the moderate assertions of equality in Shylock's
celebrated apostrophe on behalf of his countrymen, would be
assented to with regard to lawyers by the numerous class
which labours under this delusion. A lawyer from a domestic
point of view appears to them an utter anomaly; and I
have   often   been   forcibly   reminded  of   the  sensation
160 The Attempt.
excited by Sir Henry Harcourt, in Mr Trollope's novel
The Bertrams, when he went to church with his betrothed;
for, says Mr TroUope, " a solicitor-general in love is a sight
to behold." But that, of course, was an extreme case;
and really, from the astonishment I have heard some
people express at the idea of a lawyer having domestic
ties of any description, they must have had some vague
notion that lawyers came into the world about forty years
old, that they never had either fathers or mothers, and
that they lived in a ghastly seclusion from the rest of
man and woman-kind, nourished exclusively iipon parch¬
ment, wafers, and ink.
But time and space, and the patience of my readers
would fail me were I to enumerate all the popular delu¬
sions that occur to my mind; and besides those common
to a large number, nearly all of us have our own httle
cherished delusions, which we cling to with tenacious
affection ; let us not, then, be too hard upon the credulity
or infatuation of owe neighboiu's, lest we should find some
day that we ourselves have been putting our faith in
ideas quite as chimerical. Do o.
© r jj h £ u s.
Before men lived in guarded towns,
Before they forged the sword,
Lived Orpheus, singer half di\nne,
And touched the magic chord;
So all the mingled tide of life, for him would ebb and flow,
In the immemorial ages past, so long and long ago.
The nymphs of all the fountains came,
And hushed their waves to hear him ;
The shy wild forest things grew tame,
The gay birds fluttered near him;
The very trees were tlurilled with life, the flowers with
warmer glow.
In the immemorial ages past, so long and long ago.
The Powers that ruled the dreadful shades
Were tranced in blissful wonder ;
The gates of Hades heard the song.
And crashing rolled asunder.
Oh, music, in thine early dawn, so powerful wert thou
In these immemorial ages past, so long and long ago.
E. J. 0.
The Attempt. 161
On i\\t (Eonucdion ojj ihought m\\\ Jiiinpatjc,
ESPECIALLY AS SHOWN IN THE QOESTTION OF UNIVERSALS.
[An Essay written for the Class of Mental Philosophy in connection with
The Edinburgh Ladies' Educational Association.'\
II. WHAT IS A UNIVERSAL?
The subject of general terms and their signification has
two aspects, the one historical, the other philosophical.
Reversing what at first appears to be the more natural
order, we shall consider the psychology of notions before
entering on the history of the long dispute concerning
Universals. We do this, because, on this subject, the
opinions of thinkers have been so various and so con¬
flicting, that the help of recent philosophy is needed to
enable us to classify or arrange earlier speculaticms.
Much of the living interest which still belongs to the
ancient controversy concerning universals, centres round
the fact that, long after a system of philosophy has gone
out of fashion among thinkers, its theories survive, because
they are bound up vnih. the meaning of words in daily use ;
thus often teaching obsolete metaphysics to the unreflect¬
ing. Were we, then, to enter unprepared upon the discus¬
sion of this, the great central controversy of the Middle
Ages, we could not fail to be misled by the strangeness of
the terminology. Like Dante, we sliould speedily find
ourselves lost in a vast and tangled forest land, full of
fierce beasts (fit emblems of the angry zeal of polemics),
from which there would be no escape, unless, like Dante,
we invoked the aid, if not of his master Virgil, yet of those
our masters in philosophy, into the results of whose labours
we have entered.
It will be safer, before we attempt to judge the opinions
of men whose very words are so strange to us, to try and
gain a clear idea of what thinkers of our own time, and w«
ourselves, really mean, when we speak of a universal.
Text-books of logic define a universal term to be the
" verbal expression of a notion." Let us ask, \\liat df)
we mean by a noti(m ? A notion may be defined to be
the idea of a cluster of attributes which constitute tho
essence of an object. It must be borne in mind that,
although these clusters of attributes are always accom¬
panied by other individual attributes (which vary indefi¬
nitely), when we employ a general term, we are supposed
X JUNE 1872.
162 Tlie Attempt.
to fix our attention on the cluster of class-attributes, and
to leave* individual peculiarities comparatively unnoticed.
The former constitute the sharply defined and brightly
coloured foreground, the latter the vaguely tinted back¬
ground, of the mental pict^ire.
Two questions rise immediately out of the above
definition:—
1. How do we come to have notions?
2. What are those attributes which make up the
essence of a notion"]
1. We shall take up the first question as we find it in the
biography of the individual mind. Now, here the diffi¬
culty is, that we cannot divest ourselves of those notions
which are the furniture of the mind. Wo cannot think
ourselves out of a world of thouglit made up of notions,
and of their relations to each other, for notions enter not
only into oui* representations,* but into our perceptions
also. We cannot realise what a dim, blun-ed thing the
outer world would be to us, if sense-ideas and their copies
were the sole occupants of our minds. Our first mental
state is, of course, one purely subjective, in which the
sensations form part of the subject, and are, in fact, not
realised as separable from it. For it must be a state in
which " the skirts of self are truly fused," and in which
individuality has not ;ts yet begun to emerge from the
general soul of the universe. Through emotions of
pleasure and of pain, through aids to energizing, through
hindrances to action, do we begin to possess our souls.
Comparison is first made possible by the transition from
one state to another : I suffered pain, and I have ceased to
suffer ; let me compare this pair of successive states, and
analyse them into their similar and dissimilar elements.
Pain, and freedom from pain, are unlike each other, but
I myself, as present in each, am the similar element in
both. Thus, through feeling, memory, and comparison, I
pass into self-consciousness, i.e., into the recognition of a
Self as the permanent something amid a series of ever-
changing states. In thus learning to bend back thought
upon itself, so as to discriminate subject from object. Self
from sensiitions felt by Self, we begin to define and limit
the Ego, and to recognise its existence, before we have
any sense of externality proper. Self thus becomes the
first notion, because it is the earliest conception that we
* By representatioiia we mean the acts of memory and of imagination.
The Attempt. 163
arc able to construct, of a something always the same,
yet, for the time being, embedded in a mass of sensations
which contmually vary.
Let us take the case of an infant whose appetite has
been satisfied, perhaps for the first time. Its conscious¬
ness of having passed tlirough two different states, hunger
and repletion, would be the dawn of self-consciousness.
Such a notion of self would be a true and perfect universal,
for it would be compounded of the similar elements belong¬
ing to that series of ever-changing states which is the soul's
life. Without memory, the materials of such notion could
never have been presented to the mind, nor without com¬
parison could it ever have been constructed. Were the
youngest child capable of language, all his names would
at first be proper, or rather singular names, save the name
Self alone. This word, so often held to be the very type
of a singular, is thus, from its very birth, a true general
term. AH other names, as first used in the infancy
whether of the individual or of the race, are proper names ;
for they are nothing but marks set upon particular objects,
to enable us to suggest them to t)ther minds, as well as
to ourselves when we desire to recall them. Gradually
they are extended from one object to another and another,
till they serve for a group, and become class-names. On
the (jther hand, by a strange return of the circling wheel
of word-liistory, genuinely significant names, connecting,
it may be, clusters of attributes (as Margaret, Lucy, or
John), come in their turn, to be used as proper names,
perhaps by nations ignorant of their original meaning.
Let us return to the case of a being aware of Self, and
of its changing states, but as yet unconscious of externals.
Each successive state of consciimsness, as it is experienced,
lielps to develop the sense of individual existence. True,
we are as yet supposed to be conscious of Self only as of
something which passes from one state of feeling to
another. But this ccnisciousness grows in definiteness,
because each successive change exercises us in the habit
of self-recognition. Self, as the subject of sensation, is
that moment of each total state which we know best,
because we have realised it oftener than any of the vary¬
ing moments which accompany it. The next step is to
connect the bodily conditions with their accompanying
mental states, so that, when we see other beings like
ourselves, we infer that they too have souls like our own.
The impression gains strenglh among thinkers, that it is
164 The Attempt.
with such recognition of kindred organisms that a true
knowledge of the external must begin. Mr Mill asserts
that such externality as this is all that we can ever hope
to prove—an assertion not very strange to readers of
Berkeley. It is a fact that small children notice living
beings, and are engrossed by them, before they notice
things, and that their sense of their own individuality, or
of its relation to circumstances, has in it a freshness, and
a surprised sense of novelty, t(i which grown persons are
strangers. They seem, as it were, to be making acquaint¬
ance with themselves, as with a new friend.
To sum up,—a purely subjective state, in which every¬
thing were Me, could give but a very imperfect idea of
Self. Such a state would pass out of vagueness into a
true self-consciousness, only when determined by that
which is not Self. " The baby new to earth and sky," can
learn its first lesson—-"This is I," only by becoming
conscious of something which is not I, and by discriminat¬
ing between these two. The important matter for us to
keep hold of is, that Self, as the earliest notion, obeys in
its development general laws of growth, is both an a
jmori and an a posteriori cognition. What is at first a
dimly felt spontaneous sense of life is afterwards framed
and moulded by action from without, and re-action from
within. It may, doubtless, be argued that we caiuiot
explain the process of growth; it may be asked: Since
you cannot interrogate the infant of a week, what right
have you to talk of his mmd as contaiumg a imori and
a posterio7'i processes of cognition? Granted that we
cannot have historical evidence of what has actually taken
place in an infant mind, there is yet no reason why, when
we subject our fully developed notions to the after scrutiny
of psychological analysis, we should be held unjustified in
endeavouring to explain the acquisition of our earliest
notions by analogy with other kmds of development.
For instance, nature teaches us the general laws of growth
nowhere better than in plant life. We have the germ of
life in the seed, but it would for ever lie dormant were it
not acted on, and its life stirred up by the smi's heat and
by the dews of heaven. Let us compare this with the
growth of the ethical sense, of the moral consciousness,
and we shall find that it also is due both to an impulse
from within (of pain or of jileasure), and to the action of
circumstances from without, (such as intercourse witli
other persons).    Now, since there  can be no doubt that
The Attempt. 165
the feelings of duty and personal responsibility have a
large sliare in giving us the distinct consciousness of Self
as an independent being, may not an analogy which holds
good in the formation of one part, also apply to the
remainder of the notion of personal essence ? May we
not infer that our knowledge of Self, as distinct from not-
Self, is developed from a subjective germ, according to the
general laws of growth ?
We have gained the first universal notion, i.e.. Self.
From tliis notion we go on, by analogy, to infer the
existence of other animated essences.
Probably the infantile idea of these would be that they
were all one; but the growing sense of individuality
would ere long be transferred to the external world,
and the perception of diiferences would lead to the con¬
struction of other notions, while the need of marks to
discriminate these would call forth speech. An infant
summons its mother by the easiest form of utterance that
tiny lips can frame, by the simple vowel " ah." To this
sound is next added a labial movement, forming a
consonant, because it is easier to close and unclose the
lips than to control the muscles which move the jaw and
throat. In this way we get the vocal utterance " ma,"
and, since it is easier to repeat a sound once emitted, than
to frame a new and untried one, " mama" becomes the
infant's first word, uttered, in all likelihood, without any
expectation that the act will be followed by any conse¬
quence. But the mother responds by her care to supply
the wants which she knows have suggested the infant's
wail, and the child learns to associate her responsive
action with its own act. In thi^ way, its little plastic
mind, susceptible to new impressions to a degree iinkno\\'n
in after years, learns to connect the person with the
name.
As long as this word remains the child's only form ot
articulate sound, it will be bestowed indiscriminately on
every living thing. I have heard a pet dog affectionately
invoked as " Mama " by a very small philosopher, whose
sympatliies with the brute creation had greatly outstripped
his vocabulary. Gradually as the cliild learns to dis¬
criminate between his mother and the dog (I select these
two most interesting animated organisms on excellent
a posteriori gTounds), a second easy sound will be invented
to denote the latter. Our first word was due to a purely
spontaneous effort, but possibly this time influences from
166 The Attempt.
without begin to make their effects felt, so that this second
name may have a mimetic origin. Who has not heard a
dog called a " bow-wow'?" Once in possession of this
new term, it will be handed on to all other animals, i;ntil
a growing intelligence finds it to be a universal of incon¬
veniently wide application. TIitis, a cow is sometimes
called a " big bow-wow" by a much older child, if one
unacquainted with cattle, just as, M^e are told, the Maories
called a horse by the name pig, the only appellation of a
four-footed beast which their langtiage possessed.
We have spoken of the recognition of other existences
by analogy with our own, and we have noted how the
reiterated perception of such beings, in its turn, reacts
with a strengthening influence on the consciousness of our
own individuality, just as, again, the increasing clearness
with which we apprehend our self-conscious Ego, and its
relations to existence in general, furnishes us with a more
vivid and definite conception of other individual essences.
To reach, from this point, the recognition of inanimate, inert
matter, needs only a stop fin-ther in the same direction,
one which, like the former steps, has to be marked with
appropriate words, to fit each successive notion as it
emerges from the mass by individualisation, and by
aggregation of its essential attributes, into an independent
whole.
2. Our second query may be stated thus :—How are we
to know which are the essential attribiites of a notion ?
At the outset of this discussion we spoke of the notion as
a cluster of attributes ; we must now look at it under a
second aspect, as a conception which may be apphed to
any one of a group of objects. In cases where the con¬
ception fits only one object, we speak of an individual
notion; where there is a class of such objects, the con¬
ception becomes a general notion. We cannot doubt that
consciousness of a cluster of attributes is earlier in the
biography of an individual than any consciousness of re¬
semblance between the members of a group, in virtue of
their possessing similar attributes. But, nevertheless,
when we come to ask. What are the essential attributes
or essence of such or such notion ? we find that we
naturally encpiire, AAliat are the objects to which we are
in the liabit of applying the general term ? Practically,
it is by a careful comparison of objects which, in popular
usage, bear the class-name, that we usually hope to dis¬
cover   Avhich   of   the   total   number  of   their   ci)mmon
J
The Attempt. 167
qualities form the ground of their association in a class.
Such ground is, properly speaking, the essence of the
notion, and its right determination is one of the toughest
questions in pliilosophy.
" Language," says Mr Mill, " Avas not made by philoso¬
phers." and we shall find, in the course of our enquiry
into the essence of notions, that many objects are popu¬
larly included under one group which ought properly to
be classed under another. For instance, a bat was
reckoned among birds, and a whale among fishes, until
science stepped in and decided what was the essence of a
bird and of a fish ; and in every-day talk, certain actions
are often called just or generous, cowardly or base, simply
because the essence of these ethical terms is nearly as
much an open question at this day, as it was when
Socrates stood disputing in the market-place. We must,
therefore, refer to the definition of a notion by its essen¬
tial attributes, in order to find a standard by which to
limit the group; for to suppose that our spontaneous
unreflective notions are necessarily right notions, corres¬
ponding to the counter-thoughts of the Creative Mind,
would be to assume that in human speech there lies
packed up a perfect system of philosophy. Far from
this, our task rather assumes the contrary, i.e., that the
thinker has to do his best " to mend a language which
he did not make." We must, by a judicious limitation
as well as by a timely development of the extent or
content of notions, endeavour to adapt popular terms to
scientific use. We must not, on the one hand, be too
ready to disregard time-honoured usage, nor, on the
other, must we be too unwilling to admit new. Thinkers
are as much too prompt to coin new words as the
outside world is too slow to adopt them. It is part
of man's instinct of nomenclature to look with suspicion
on such usurpers as brand-new technical terms. A strange
word is most readily accepted when it is introduced as an
obsolete term, newly revived. "Conative," as used by
Sir W. Hamilton, and " connote," by Mr Mill, are cases in
point. The truth is, nobody values a name except as a
guarantee that a fact has been universally taken into the
sphere of objective things, and not merely that it has
been excogitated and has received a mark in your indi¬
vidual mind or in mine.
Nomenclature is one of the gregarious instincts of
humanity, and the presumption will always be rather in
108 Tlie Attempt.
favour of an author who knows how to clothe new
thoughts in language as familiar as that of Descartes
or of James Mill, than in favour of one who coins
new words. Language, like living things, follows
the laws of development, and is acted on by the external
influences which condition its evolution; and if we let
words take their chance with the unlettered, they will so
inevitably degenerate, that better service is rendered to
thought by those who carefully watch over the use of
current speech, than by those who invent new terms.
This enquiry into the right meaning of words is no light
task, for it leads us deep into the nature of thoughts and
of things, and on the very threshold of the discussion
stands the great question of essence, warning us to pro¬
ceed no further till it be duly solved.
Of essence, then, let us speak. When we first begin
to use language thoughtfully, we find ourselves in posses¬
sion of an assemblage of words of various kinds. Some
of these are names of natural substances or attributes,
others are names of abstract qualities, others perhaps of
articles made by man. The question arises :—Can we so
define essence as to apply the definition to the essences
of all these various terms "? Can we find a rule for deter¬
mining in all cases, which attributes are to be accounted
essential or which accidental ? No doubt the naturalist
feels that he is indeed groping after an idea which is not
of man's devising, but is something objectively real, and
that, when he seeks to determine what particular cluster
of attributes makes up the essence of a natural Kind, he is
trying to reach the pm-pose ol Creative Mind. No doubt
the etliical student knows that when Socrates asked, What
is Justice % or when Aristotle sought to define his mag-
nanimoiis man, each sought a real something, each knew
he was no more at hberty to decide off-hand what was to
be called just or magnanimous in human speech for ever¬
more, than is the naturalist free to settle that a whale is
a fish because it lives in the sea. Most people Avdll allow
tliat piscinity and justice are not mere subjective notions.
But hoAv about the essences of tables and chairs'? Here
the schoolmen would have stopped short, and would have
found their definition of essence inapplicable. For the
Realists of the middle ages taught that there were certain
second substances which inhered in every natural object,
and made it to be what it was. They called the pro¬
perties of this second substance the essence of the thing,
The Attempt. I(i9
and thought that all its other properties were only indivi¬
dual and accidental. These universal substances could
not be perceived by sense, and yet they were believed to
be so much more important and permanent than the
qualities that could be seen and handled, that the school¬
men held universal terms to belong to them only. This
definition of essence will not cover the whole ground
occupied by general terms, since it takes leave of us so soon
as we quit the region of true or natural Kinds, and begin
to ask how we are to define the essence of a thing made
by art. But a more comprehensive theory of essence may
be reached, if we reason from the conception of Self, as the
earliest, and in some sort the typical, notion. Ueberweg
tells us that " we recognise the essential first in ourselves,
immediately by feeUng, and mediately by ideas." Accord¬
ing to this view, we form a conception of Self by the
gradual appreciation of our various capacities and faculties,
as these are developed in our individual life, and still
more as they are exercised in our relations to others, in
that intercourse of society whose laws are ethics and
politics. Nor must we limit the expression " others " to
human beings. We learn something of Self from consider¬
ing it in its relations to animals, and also to the plant
world, as dependent on these for nutriment, and as bound
to them by certain obligations of protection and care, in
accordance with that first law of Eden, " Thou shalt di-ess
and keep this garden." Gradually, in this way, we reach
a developed notion of self, as a being set in a particular
position, hemmed in on every side by relations of duty
and of dependence, whether to its organism, to other
persons, or to the living world, and thus fulfilling, in the
order of things, a definite end, towards which all the
powers of our nature, mental and bodily, are means.
Now, this theory, that essence depends on place and
function in the universe, as discovered by the analogy of
ethical relations, is easily apphed not only to other human
beings, and to animal and plant life, but also to those
things made by art, which the schoolmen were forced to
leave out of their theory of essence. The place and
function of a table is to support articles laid on it; there¬
fore I may assert that a plane surface, resting on some
species of support, constitutes the essence of a table.
There is no real difference between the way in which I
fix upon these attributes as essential, and the way in
which I should determine those which are essential to the
Y JUKE 1872.
170 ■ The Attempt.
notion of a fish or of a mountain. Further, it may be
asked, How does this theory apply to such purely logical
or unscientific classes as are made by dichotomy (such as
white and not-white), or to such as are made for some
special purpose, as the farmer's division of animals into
such as are fit for food, and such as are fit for tillage or
for burden ? To this it may be replied, that when the
end in view is not to expound a purely scientific classifi¬
cation of things in their relation to the universal organism,
but only to arrange them for a special purpose in hand,
so that they may be conveniently brought before the
mind for comparison in respect of certain facts, we
hold those attributes to be essential which are of most
importance for such special ends. The sportsman and
the farmer are entitled each to his own classification of
animals, and, in accordance with it, each may select his
own series of essential attributes. The general principle
that essence is to be defined by place and function in
the order of things, will apply equally well to all such
relatively formed notions, as to those philosophical con¬
ceptions, which are founded on the essential qualities of
objects as they are in themselves, and in relation to the
universal organism as a whole, not merely to one particu¬
lar class of facts. The sportsman defines a dog as an
animal which assists the hunter. The farmer defines the
dog as an animal which guards the flock and keeps watch
in the barnyard at night. The man of science defines a
dog as an animal possessed of certain pecuKarities of
structure and habit, which determine its place in his
classification of carnivora, etc., as being, for example,
more highly organised than the class immediately below
{i.e., the seal family), and less highly organised than that
immediately above it {i.e., the feline family). Each
definition is perfect in its way, and yet they are quite
different, so that we are led to ask: How can essence be
a certain assemblage of attributes, if definition, wliich
declares it, is so variable ? To this it is replied: If
essence, in the absolute, be found by discovering the
place and function of a thing in the imiverse as a whole,
by ascertaining its position in the total series of means
and ends, and also by determining the particular end
which it serves by its existence, we may expect to find a
reciprocal dependence among all the possible relations of
every object in the world to every other, so that, if one
usch relation be rightly determined, all the others will be
The Attempt. 171
implied of necessity. Let us test this reply by reference
to our example. From those attributes of form and
structure which make up the scientific definition of a dog,
we may infer the capacity for hunting game in intelligent
co-operation with man, as well as the capacity for keeping
a flock of sheep, etc. Reversing the process of reasoning,
we may, from the definition of a dog as man's four-footed
associate in the chase, or as the guardian of his flock,
infer those very attributes of structure and development
which form the essence of the scientific notion dog. This
last is the one perfect and complete definition, because it
alone is declaratory of the essential attributes common to
all the animals contained in the class dog, and because it
rests on a true appreciation of the place filled by the
canine race in the order of nature. In every such notion
there is an a priori element, for we arrive at a knowledge of
the essence of things only through a knowledge of our own
essence. But tliis a priori element must not usurp more
than its due share in the construction of notions, for it is
impotent without the a posteriori element, without the
conditioning facts brought to bear upon it by experience.
There is, in the growth of notions, a perpetual action and
reaction between subject and object, not unlike the action
of two battledores, between which, like a shuttlecock, the
notion incessantly flies backwards and forwards. The
parallel would be an exact one, if, under the process the
shuttlecock, instead of becoming worn out, grew larger
and more developed. RUSTICA.
(To he continued.)
I.
The ship is drifting, drifting down apace,
And she sees where its evil fortunes tend ;
The equal steeds are straining in the race.
She sees the end.
n.
The poet's crown, and fame, and victory.
And lover's pledge, and hand of trusting friend,
She sees them all with calm far-gazing eye.
She sees the end.
172 The Attempt.
m.
Write not, oh Sibyl! close the fatal book.
And let the unpresaged thunder bolt descend.
Better hope's wildest ^asions than that look
That sees the end.
E. J. 0.
% ^Mm% Saur in an ^U 3^ibmrm
The party had all dispersed in quest of out-door amuse¬
ments, and I was left alone; and with a sense of relief
and hope of enjoyment, I repahed to the old library, and
shutting the door, went forward to the bay window, which
commanded a magnificent view of the surroimding
country.
The scene calmed and elevated my mind. I felt more
in unison with the great ones around me, and advancing
to the quaint carved shelves on which their works were
placed, I examined their names, and felt hmnbled that my
knowledge of them was so shght.
As my eyes traversed the shelves, I recognised Plato,
Spenser, Shakespeare, Milton, Bacon, Bunyan, Quarles,
More, George Herbert, and Izaak Walton; and remem¬
bering that I had only one hour to spend in their com¬
pany, I resolved to hear a word or two from each, and
from these flowers of inteUect to cull a small nosegay
with which to refresh myself for the time being.
I opened Shakespeare, and read the passage—
" The quality of mercy is not strained,
It droppeth as the gentle rain from heaven
Upon the place beneath; it is twice blessed ;
It blesseth him that gives and him that takes :
'Tis mightiest ia the mightiest: it becomes
The throned monarch better than his crown."
And so on. Yes, thought I, it is not the circumstances
of life that make even kings great; it is the possession of
divine qualities, royal gifts from the King of kings. I
will carry away a little of this " sweet mercy " with me.
It is the most sovereign balm for the miseries of life, this
practical application of "Be ye therefore merciful;" and ,
at the same time deal stern justice only to myself, aye,
even to the cutting off of a right hand, if needlbe.     But
The Attempt. 173
it will be difficult to exercise mercy to others and justice
only to myself. Had it been mercy only to myself and
stern justice to others, that would be much easier.
Here my eye fell on Spenser's " Fairy Queen," and his
words—" It made a sunshine in the shady place "—echoed
in my memory. Yes, that will be the result of exercising
mercy to others. I will place this next—a sweet forget-
me-not.
At this, methought I heard Francis Bacon say," Certainly
it is heaven upon earth to have one's mind move in charity,
rest in Providence, and turn upon the poles of truth." I
took up his essays and began to read—" ' What is truth ?'
said jesting Pilate, and would not wait for an answer,"
Alas for poor Pilate, he threw down the sceptre of justice,
trampled upon mercy, and turned his back upon the
Truth. No wonder, then, that his path through life was so
dark and clouded. Plato, from a much greater distance,
discerned the divine similitude, when he said—" Truth is
His body, and light His shadow."
I will strive then to follow Him who is the Light and
the Truth, and whose tender mercy is over all His works,
and my path will be plain and easy. Here now is one
who found it a pleasant way—and \vith a smile, I saw
Izaak Walton, and, opening at the beginning of his
" Complete Angler," I accompanied the trio on that sweet
May morning to the thatched house in Hodsden. The air
around was fragrant with the scent of new made hay, and
Anceps, after asking us to listen to the sweet song of birds'
exclaimed, " Lord, what music hast Thou provided for the
saints in heaven, when Thou afifordest bad men such
music upon earth." At this the travellers passed on be¬
fore me, and I remained behind to hsten, and my spirit
travelled upward to that innumerable choir, where the
various voices all blend in one grand harmony.
I thought of Bunyan's glowing description, " Now 1
saw in my dream that these men went in at the gate,
and as they went they were transfigured, and they had
raiment put on them that shone like gold. There were
also that met them with harps and crowns, the harps to
praise, and the crowns in token of honour. Then I heard
in my dream that all the bells in the city rung again for
joy, and it was said unto them, ' Enter into the joy of your
Lord.' Now, just as the gates were opened, 1 looked in
after them, and behold, the city shone like the sun, the
streets also were paved with gold, and after that they
174 The Attempt.
shut up the gates, which when I had seen, I wished my¬
self among them." As I was gazing at this glorious
scene, I heard the soimd of voices from the lawn, and
knew that the party was returning. What an interrup¬
tion ! I had no choice, however, but to leave the society
of the great and good for the small talk and fiivoKty of
the party below.
In my disappointment, I was forgetting the small
bouquet I had gathered from their rich parterres, I seized
it, remembering the words of good Sir Thomas More,
" Variety is not always interruption; that which occasion¬
ally hinders our accustomed studies may prove to the
ingenious no less profitable than their studies themselves,"
and carefully concealing my small treasure, I descended to
the party; and if I was more kind, considerate, and for¬
bearing to all that evening, more humble and watchful
over myself, I attributed this to listening to the oracles
during that solitary hour in that old library.
Elsie.
HIS SCHOOL.
It seems a remarkable omission that the centenary cele¬
bration held in honour of the greatest writer of this great
nineteenth century, and one of the noblest men of genius
who ever lived in any century, should have been left, till
now, unrecorded in the pages of a magazine professedly
literary, and conducted by members of the sex ever
supremely honoured by the great man whose name it
should be every Scotchwoman's delight to honour in
return. The name of Sir Walter Scott is indeed a talis¬
man, all-potent to thrill every feeling heart with appre¬
ciative sympathy, and bow all intelligent minds in enthu¬
siastic admiration; for, as no hero, real or imaginary,
ever existed with qualities better fitted to inspire sublime
devotion aroimd him, so no writer, ancient or modern, has
ever, alike by his personal character and mental genius,
awakened siich an overwhelming amount of entliusiastic
admiration, drawn forth such overflowing ebullitions of
sympathetic acknoAvledgment, or raised such towering
columns of invincible belief and faithful adherence.
The Attempt. 175
Notwithstanding all this loyalty to the general supre¬
macy of Sir Walter Scott, as the Grand Monarque of
modern literature, a formidable inquisition has been insti¬
tuted for the separate analysis of the various claims on
which his distinguished position as a man of letters was
founded; and the critical acumen of modern taste has
discovered such flaws in his poetry, that its right to be
considered as such has been doubted, and its author's
title to be ranked as a great poet utterly denied. On the
present occasion, therefore, it seems fitting that we who
are so deeply impressed with the value and beauty ot
those poetical compositions, than which we acknowledge
no truer, more heart-stirring music in the history of song,
should offer some vindication of their claims to such pre¬
eminence ; and that after the great Master's memory has
been crowned with the bays of the world's united elo¬
quence, our humble centenary tribute should be the
dropping of a chaplet wreathed with his own immor¬
tal flowers of poesy. Eschewing the easily gabbled lan¬
guage of vague eulogy, characteristic of those learned
critics who invariably preface their unfavourable commen¬
taries with the urgent assurance,—" Nobody can admire
Sir Walter's genius more, or like his poetry better, in a
general way, than we do ; but yet"—till we have felt
fired, with the impatience of Cleopatra, to exclaim,
" I do not like ' but yet;' it does allay
The good precedence : fie upon ' but yet:'—
' But yet' is as a gaoler to bring forth
Some monstrous malefactor ;"
we shall admit Shylock's plea of " Justice," and in that
stern vein, endeavour to prove that Sir Walter Scott
occupies a place in the foremost rank of poets, fi-om three
points of view, viz.: 1. What he did for poetry; 2. The
manner in winch he did it; and 3. The recognition
awarded to his labours by the world.
Our first step should be on some manner of under¬
standing of what is meant by the term poetry, which, at
any time difficult to define, seems especially so in these
indefinite days, when all meanings have their old corners
rubbed off and become shaded into each other with a
perplexing closeness, and we can associate no more
tangible essence with the modern poetic ideal than its
own very vagueness. We Scotch, veritable Children of
the Mist, not satisfied with mist on our mountains,
must have mist in our philosophy, mist in our politics,
176 The Attempt.
and above all, mist in our poetry. The only way of
clearing the atmosphere, and arriving at some idea of
the nature of true poetry without colKsion with warring
terms, seems to be to glance at its origin. As a necessity
of man, which is its primal characteristic. What is poetry,
and how did it originate ? It was born of a Necessity for
the Expression of the thoughts, feelings, and actions of
nations and individuals, by a genius capable of softening
and beautifying the Real by the impressive discovery of its
affinity to the Ideal. So poetry arose in the ballad, which
connects the real lives of the heroes and heroines of early
ages with a high ideal standard of chivalrous right and
tender and manly truth. We cannot doubt the soundness
and grandeur of a principle which inspired the whole
tribe of ancient bards, scalds, minne-singers, and trouba¬
dours with the theme of
" Ladye-love and war, renown and knightly worth."
So too sang Homer, the Great Father of all poetry, and
Chaucer, the no less gracious fountainhead of " the pure
well of English undefiled."
But poetry is no mere stagnant pool.
" From Helicon's harmonious springs,
A thousand rills their mazy progress take,"
till the whole world is watered by a greater number and
variety of streams of poetic thought and feeling, than
geography's division of lakes and rivers could supply us
metaphors for. So developing with man's history, and
affected by all the world's revolutions, the Progress of
Poesy becomes, in itself,'! a complicated study; and not
one short paper would suffice even to mention, much less
to examine and discuss, the varied schools whose disciples
have thronged the Temple of the Muses, and erected
monuments there. Sufficient for our present purpose
merely to refer to the influence of history upon our English
poetry, which budding in Chaucer, culminating in Shake¬
speare, soaring with Milton, degenerated with the national
step downwards in the reign of Charles II., towards the
coarseness of Dryden, the artificiality of Pope, and the
didactic prosiness of Hayley and Darwin, to bloom again,
fresh, free, natural, and luxuriant, in the heart-stirring
song of Walter Scott. Only great writers leave the broad
mark upon the history of our poetic literature which
divides it into epochs for the study of posterity. Shakes¬
peare reigned in the Drama, representative of the golden
glory of the reign of Elizabeth; and the Puritan spirit
The Attempt. Ill
found its expression in the silver-trumpeted, sublime e^iics
of Milton. The reactionary influence of the Restoration
restored the drama in a depraved form, and Dryden's
genius was desecrated through contact with an impure and
scurrilous court. The spirit of morality tried to re-assert
itself in the classical school of Johnson and his admiring
disciples; but his muse was too cumbrous for high emin¬
ence, and her wings too feeble for Pegasean flights. The
reign of Boileau and French criticism found its English
parallel in the polished diction of Pope, whose poetry,
great as it is, lost in life and energy what it gained in
exactness and finish. Yet more dispirited and enslaved,
poetry languished in a conventional prison, when her
mighty deliverer arose and freed her from her classic
chains. At the touch of the enchanter's wand, the slum¬
brous muse awoke,
" As in that elder time,
Warm, energic, chaste, sublime ! "
Only a writer of the highest genius could have efi*ected
this glorious emancipation. The wild harps of Gray and
Collins did not disturb the supremacy of the well tuned
piano of Pojie; even the elegant simplicity of Goldsmith
and the gentle sincerity of Cowper had failed to convince
a world that was " still deceived with ornament." Words¬
worth's first homely efforts on behalf of nature were
known only to the few; and Coleridge's first exquisite
lyric music served but to furnish the key-note on which
the Mighty Minstrel pitched those strains which were to
rouse the world.
" He sings, and lo, Romance
Starts from her mouldering urn,
While Chivalry's bright lance
And nodding plumes return."
This is what Sir Walter Scott did for poetry. He
reverted to its original principles, and reproduced them
to the world, adorned with the magnificent impress of his
own genius. He drank of the Castalian dews, and
refreshed the world with the same refreshment that had
served bygone ages. He revived the dead, he resuscitated
the Past, so as to throw that halo of glory upon the Present,
which in poetry, politics, religion, and national history
ever comes from the influence of the Past.
The success of the revival was complete, and this grand
passion for the Past reigned triumphant; but though in
itself an undying principle, its ostensible sovereignty has
declined with the complex influences of time.    At the
^ JUNE 1872.
178 The Attempt.
period when we are called on to judge this poetry of the
past, a new era is in progress, and in common with all
other traditions and, ancient beliefs, the time-honoured
systems of poetry are put into the crucible of public opinion,
and. the smelting tests are by no means likely to discrimi¬
nate the true ore. For we live in a hard, realistic, material
age, which, disdaining the influence of the Past upon the
Present, doubts the correctness of the connection between
Romance and Poetry, and is so imbued with the influences of
ecience, that a poet is hardly a poet unless he is a member
of the British Association, and poetry is not poetry unless
it is metaphysics. With this remarkable creed we should
have notliing to do, but that it interferes with the accept¬
ance of those principles on whicli Sir Walter Scott founded
the Gotliic or Romantic school. As it is, the lofty persist¬
ency of its disciples forces us, in self-defence, to quote a
few remarks from a lively illustrator of the characteristics
of this new psychological school which teaches the science
of internal consciousness, and calls it poetry. "Delta,"
says:—
•' Simple iitterances of feeling—with a mystical commen¬
tary on such utterance—is all that the purest disciples of
this newest of our schools aspire to. Fine images,
allegorical symbols, hieroglyphic meanings, speculative
thought, Ave have in superfluity, but no apparent aim, and
seldom any attempt at composition. Tares and wheat
are allowed to grow up together to one imweeded harvest,
and often the bugloss and the poppy scattered plentifiilly
throiighout the field, look very like flowers in their re¬
spective blue and scarlet jackets. But who would term
this either agriculture or gardening? .... Mysticism in
law is (piibbiing; mysticism in religion is the jugglery of
priestcraft; mysticism in medicine is quackery—and these
often serve their crooked purposes well. But mysticism
in poetry can have no_attainable triumph. The sole pur¬
pose of poetry is to delight and instiiict, and no one can
be either pleased or profited by what is imintelligible.
.... The poet springs to conclusions, not by the logic
of science, but by intuition; and whosoever, as a poet,
acts either the chemist, the naturalist, or the meta¬
physician, mistakes the object of his specific mission.
Philosophy and poetry, may, in most things, not be in¬
compatible; but they are essentially distinct. Metaphysical
analyses cannot be accepted as substitutes either for
apostrophes to the beautiful, or for utterances of passion.
The Attempt. 170
They are as difFereut as principles are  from products, or
as  causes from eflfects     To make such the main
staple of poetry is a vain attempt at constructing what
would be all spirit and no body—a mere twisting of the
sea sand into ropes—for even glujsts wcjuld be invisible
Avithout the semblance of corporeal form; and yet these
things are selected to form everlasting themes of ])rofit-
less speculation, to the exclusion of all pictorial effect,
and all exercise of the practical understanding."
To this trenchant criticism we have only to add a
single remark (in apt illustration of which we refer to
a spirited paper on the subject of " Little Poets " in the
December number of The Attempt), viz., that the selfish
and morbid tendencies of a poetic system of introspective
analysis, which finds in the study of one mind tlie highest
ecstasy of poetic rapture, brings the genius of poetry
into imminent danger of being prostrated by obscurity
and exaggeration in the present century, as, in the last,
by dullness and conventionality. What a relief from
such a stifling atmosphere, to turn to the poetry of Sir
Walter Scott, which has been well described in a com¬
parison with the scenery of Scotland itself, as being
" Bold and romantic as the mountains ; bright and pic¬
turesque as the floods; healthy as the brown heath;
verdant as the shaggy woods," and, may we not add,
pure as the dew, and refreshing as the mountain breeze '^
The other grand principle on which Sir Walter Scott's
poetry is founded, is equally in opposition to a cherished
belief in the present day, which fairly amounts to this,
that the uncommon is the excellent, that eccentricity is
an indispensable mark of genius, and that what the select
few understand is not only the superior, but the only kind
of true poetry. It is surely not necessary to spend time
in demolishing this narrowing theory by any lengthened
disquisition on the mission of poetry to mankind at large,
but enough simply to point to the grand truth uttered by
him who is the acknowledged Head of all poetry—" One
touch of nature makes the whole world kin." Yes. And
it is the poet's mission to make the " touch of nature " a
sensible bond of kinship. This is the grand principle of
objective poetry; and if it be put out of fashion. Homer.
Virgil, Dante, Chaucer, Shakespeare, and Milton must be
banished Avith it, as well as Sir Waltei- Scott; for the
broad, Immauizing catholic school of which Scott's poetry
was a iiolile scion, has trained the greatest poets, anj
180 The Attemvt.
won for them, and for them alone, the highest kind of
fame. Even Germany, to whose example we owe much
of the mysticism of modern poetry, passes by its great
disciple Goethe, and confers her faith, her affection, and
her representative honours on the memory of Schiller.
And it was a comparison of first-rate national merit which
suggested the complimentary interchange of titles be¬
tween the "Southern Scott" and the ''Ariosto of the
North," as the two great Italian and Scottish
" Minstrels, who called forth
A whole creation, by their magic line."
{To he continued.)
Elfie.
The sunHght falls on hoary trees.
Whose young leaves whisper in the breeze.
Falls flickering down on golden flowers,
And purple-crested violet bowers.
The ferns are waving in the air,
Waving in drops of diamond dew.
Rough bracken leaves and maiden-hair,
Under the shadoAv of the yew.
The hawthorn tree and sweet wild rose
Are living both together,
And there the fairy harebell grows
With gorse and purple heather.
The leaves are fjxlling red and gold.
Red and golden on the mere,
The sheep bell tinkles from the fold—
T'is the onlv sound I hear.
The only sound, for all is still.
So still tliat I fear to move,
Lest I disturb the Holy Will
That sends a calmness from above.
The twilight shades are creeping round,
Long shadows flicker on the ground,
And mounting upwards, nearly reach
The warm, sweet red of the oojiper beach.
A solemn silence everywhere,
Like calm intercourse with heaven,
The Attempt. 181
When a weary soul is free fi'om care.
And all her eiu forgiven.
A solemn silence everywhere,
The shades are growing dark
And then a song falls on the air.
The song of a sweet wood lark.
It rises, fresh and frill and clear,
A joyous happy song,
It echoes on the silent mere,
And chants the leaves along.
It goes away and murmurs, where
The withered aspen, lone and bare.
Weeps silently in widowhood
Upon the outskirts of the wood.
It comes again and tunes its lay
To those who answer joyously.
And lingers by the little spot
Where grows the blue forget-me-not.
A loving song for all to share
Is the song the wood lark sings,
But it is oidy to prepare*
(3ur soids for higher things.
Ah me! e'en now tie growing faint
Already it is done,
The song that's worthy of a saint
Who lives beyond the sun.
The night has come, the clear sweet night.
With its dew and silver sky.
And in the East a tiny light
Is burning tenderly.
It is so still that I can hear
The lilies floating on the mere,
When a little breeze comes stealing by
And stops to fan them lovingly.
From out the dewy silent air
A sweeter voice is singiug,f
It finds an echo everywhere
And sets the woodland ringing.
Its saddest notes are sweeter far
Than the wood lark's tender lay,
Its saddest notes—that cannot mar
Its perfect harmony.
* St. Mark 1st Chap. 3d verse,
t St. Mark, 1st Chap. 14th verse.
182 The Attempt.
It rises low, and sad, and clear.
That plaintive tender voice.
It swells in triumph on the mere.
And makes the stars rejoice.
It cheers the faded leavesUhat lie
Washed in night dew, tenderly,
And hovers near the little spot
Where grows the blue forget-me-not.
It thrills through earth, and sea, and sky,
The solemn hills make glad reply,
It comes again, and lingers near
The lilies by the moonlit mere.
But other voices, weird and loud.
Stifle its perfect strain,
Like thvmder from an angry cloud,
After the clear sweet rain.
It murmurs sweetly like a rill,
Amid the angry current's roar—
I hear it echo faintly still,
Among the lilies as before.
Then louder voices drown its lay,
And mournfully it dies away.
* * * * if *
There is no darkness or no pain.
Long shadows fade away—
The voice breaks forth to sing again,
In the light of coming day ;
It sings a glad triumphant song,
That tells of Life and Love!
Whose very sweetness must belong
To a better land above.
We do not know what it is like.
We cannot hear its sweetness,
We may not feel its pui'ity
In all its pure completeness.
Until in golden Eastern skies.
The great Archangel sings.
To see the Son of God arise
" With healing in His wings."
Christie.
The Attempt. 183
A T.VLE OF THE HaRZ MOUNTAINS.—FrOM THE GERMAN.
Part  II.
The approaching daylight gave her great uneasiness.
" The night is quiet, and will not betray me," she thought,
" but the chattering day will be sure to let out where I
am." And she slipped under the stones, and came up
only now and then to catch a mouthful of fresh air.
Between high wooded mountain ridges, a deep dark
green defile sloped gradually down to the valley ; into it
had little Use blindly fled. Innumerable stones had
crumbled down fi-om the mountain, and rolled over each
other in the bottom of the cleft. They lay there, embraced
by pine roots, and overgrown with moss, looking very
gloomy and venerable, nor did they seem at all disposed
to move out of the way of the little brook which came
springing so hastily and heedlessly against them. The
good God took pity on the poor little Use, as she darted
over the stones in her terror, and allowed the forest to
open his green doors to her, and take her under his pro¬
tection. The forest is a holy place of refuge for lost
children, who have done or thought evil in the world.
None of the small demons which are apt to enter youthful
minds can accompany them into the peaceful stillness of
the wood—the demon of pride least of all. How, indeed,
can he hold his ground against the grave, loftly king of
the forest—the pine tree, who with his sublime head turned
immovably towards heaven, stands firm and unchanging
on the spot which God has appointed for him,—a true
king by the grace of God.
The child Use did not, indeed, understand that. She
thought that the pine-roots were making hideous faces at
her, and she shuffled timidly past them, and fled deeper
and deeper on through the wood. She did not know that
the demon of pride had floated away in the tears of repent¬
ance and anguish which she had shed, any more than she
liad been aware of his entrance into her heart, but she felt
freer and safer in the green shades of the forest, behind
the golden railings wliich the sunbeams stretched slanting
over the turf. The further she went from the Brock en,
the better and more at home she felt. She thoiight the fir-
trees did not now look so darkly and reprovingly down
184 The Attempt.
upon her, and very soon grave venerable oaks spread
their powerful arms protectingly above her, and fan-
friendly beeches nodded smilingly to her from among the
dark pines, and tried to catch the sunbeams with their
long arms, and throw them at each other like golden
arrows.
rise, who, childlike, had soon forgotten her sorrows, ran
merrily splashing between them, and when, in the merry
game, a sunbeam fell on the ground, she caught it up and
held it exultingly in the air, or fastened her veil with it,
and then threw it teasingly at the flowers and grass which
stood by the wayside, looking curiously after Irer. She
was again a happy, frolicsome child, and the green wood
took quite a pleasure in the young fugitive to whom he
had given shelter. As for the stones, Avhich lay dozing on
the ground, wrapped in their soft mossy coverlets, all
their peaceful dreaming was at an end since Use sprang
dancing and sparkling over them, yet they were good
friends with her. When the clumsier ones placed them¬
selves awkw^ardly in her way, and would not let her pass,
she stroked their rough cheeks with her soft hands, and
murmured soft entreaties in their ears; and when that
would not do, she got angry, stamped impatiently with
her foot, and pushed so vigoroiisly against them that the
old fellows began to totter. Then, if they left open the
smallest possible cleft, Use rushed into it with all her
might, pushed them away from each other, and shot
wildly and impetuously on. It was really beautiful to see
how gracefully the little princess hopped from point to
point of the steepest clefts. She had pvit on for that pur¬
pose a white cap of foam, and whenever it was knocked
against a hard rock and got torn, she had always a new
one ready before the next time, white as Alpine snow, and
freshly crisped.
On the sxinny mountain slopes, where grass and moss
grew softly and luxuriantly, the large trees had sepa¬
rated from each other, in order to make room for their
little ones, who were learning to be trees. There they
sat, the children of the fir-trees, their stiff, bxishy little
frocks spread round thera on the tm-f, moving tlieir
pointed heads ponderingly, and wondering that Use
did not get tired of running and leaping. But the very
youngest little springs, who had scarcely learnt to walk,
were not so full of wisdom as the fir children. They came,
when they heard Use singing her sweet song, dropping
The Attempt. 185
down from the cracks in the mountain wall, and slunk
secretly away through the moss, always nearer and
nearer to Ilse. Use heard their soft triclding, and saw
them coming, and beckoned to them to make haste. And
when the springs saw the princess hopping over the
stones far below, they remained timidly standing, not
daring to jump down, yet unable to find any other path.
Then Ilse encoiu*aged them with her ringing voice, and
placed mossy footstools for them, over which they might
climb down to her. And the springs took courage, and
sprang quite boldly from one stool to another. Use
caught them up when they tumbled somewhat awkwardly
into her lap, took them by the hand, and said, " Come,
now you shall run with me; look how I do, and spring
with me, I will hold you, lest you should fall." And they
did as they were told, hopped, supported by the hand of
Ilse,'over the largest stones, did not hurt themselves, and
were not afraid, and learned to jump so well, that soon, if
they had put on white foam caps, they could not have
been distinguished from Ilse herself.
Meanwhile, the lord of the Brocken, who had now be¬
come aware of the flight of the princess, was very wrath¬
ful indeed. He knew perfectly well that such a clear
little fountain was no booty for him, and that the devilkin
of pride, the most secure handle by which he was enabled
to catch youthful minds, had taken his departure. How
could he then set about seizing the merry child again?
He thought of the tempest, at which the princess had
been so frightened; he called the north wind, and bade it
blow up the valley directly in the face of Ilse. " That,"
thought he; " will make her turn round, and drive her
back to the Brocken."
The north wind took great pains to execute the com¬
mands of the devil. He blustered and howled and
crashed, shook the trees till they staggered from their
very roots, and hurled their broken branches to the
ground at Use's feet. He pushed a young pine which
had not yet taken firm root, right across her path, seized
her floating veil, and was going to carry it off with him.
But the princess tore herself loose, not caring how much
of it remained in his hands. She feared nothing for her¬
self, she thought only of the distress of the poor trees,
and would gladly have helped them, had it been in her
power to do so. She threw herself, weeping, upon the
fallen fir, overflowed it with her tears, and waslied its
■^   -A- JLNE   1872.
18G The Attempt.
wounds compassionately. She rocked the little green
beeches and the twigs of oak, which the north wind tossed
into her lap, tenderly in her arms, kissed their withered
leaves, and carried them a little way along with her,
putting them at last to bed in the soft moss on the bank.
And the devil stood on the Brocken, and gnashed his
teeth with rage, when he saw that the north wind's efforts
were in vain, and that he could do nothing with little
Use. " I will send out the winter," growled he, " he will
gag her and put her in chains. The bleak, grey winter,
with his hunger and cold, his long dark nights, in which
temptation and sin are awake, has brought me many a
young soul, and will doubtless be able to manage this
slender water-princess. Bestir yourself down there, you
north wind, shake the leaves from the trees, and prepare
the way for winter,—you know that he will not come till
he can rustle with his heavy steps through the withered
leaves."
And the north wind, like an obedient servant, blew
twice as wildly and keenly through the valley. The
beeches stood trembling and shivering, and let their
yellow leaves fall on the ground, with fright; the tops of
the oaks became red with cold; at length they liltewise
strewed their last leaves from their branches, and awaited
"with dread the approaching winter. The fir tree alone
stood calm and unmoved, wearing as usual his royal dark
green mantle. The little Use at his feet could not under¬
stand what all this was coming to, and scolded quite
crossly up to the trees. " But, but, you breezy trees,
what is the matter with you? why do you throw all these
dry leaves into my face ? Have you lost all love for the
little Use, and do you mean to scratch out her eyes with
brown acorns and hard beechnuts ?" And she sprang
angrily away, shaking the dry leaves from her hair and
the glittering folds of her dress.
Meanwhile, the winter had arrived on the Brocken, and
was being clothed by the hands of his black majesty in a
thick cloak of mist. Then he moved slowly away over
the heights, and rolled heavily into the valley. At first
he did not behave so badly, and wishing to ingratiate
himself with the trees and shrubs, gave them sparkling
little coats of hoar frost, so that Use, dazzled by all this
splendour, did not know where to look. Then the snow-
flakes came giddily whirling down through the air, and
the princess thought at first that they were the clouds
The Attempt. 187
themselves who had come to visit her in the valley, wish¬
ing to renew the acquaintance begun on the Alpine
heights. But at length, when every thing, stones and
moss and shivering blades of grass, became completely
buried under the cold white covering, she began to fear
that her turn would also come.
Yet, she was so sorry for all the dear green things which
she could no longer see, and tried to wash away the
snow fi'om the stones which were within her reach, and
to set free the tender little mosses again. Suddenly, to
her horror, she felt sharp icy spikes run through her and
perceived that winter had fastened hard glittering chains
to the stones and roots of the trees past which she was
running, and that he was preparing to bind her fast with
them. He now came and seized the poor child in his
sharp icy claws. A cold shudder passed over her, and she
clung trembhng round the knotty roots of the pine tree,
and besought assistance from the lofty king of the forest.
" 0, fir tree," she cried, " let me learn, like you, to bid
defiance to winter, and remain fresh and living in his icy
arms.    How can I do so ? "
" Because I am founded upon rocks," spoke the fir tree,
" and turn my head towards heaven, the Lord has given
me power to remain green throughout all seasons. You
my little Use, come likewise from the rocks, and reflect
the light of heaven in your clear waters ; if then the true
life which God gives, is in you, the power of overcoming
winter will likewise not fail you. Therefore trust in God,
my child, and be of good courage."
" Dearest fir tree," said Use, " I will try to become
good and pious, like you; the winter shall do me no
harm."
And with ,a strong jerk, she freed herself from the icy
arms which were encircling her, struck the rough hands
which detained her dress among the stones, and shot
wildly down the valley, bursting asunder all chains and
spikes. The old winter could not keep pace with such a
spirited young rover, so he sat grumbling iu the snow,
and was forced to confess himself incapable of overtaking
her.
The next day, as the little princess was still springing
along in the joy of victory, driving before her the
splinters of ice which she had detached from the stones,
the mosses by the wayside called to her, "Use, dear
Use, help us; the snow lies so heavily on our heads, that
188 2%e Attempt.
we cannot stand upright; do help us, the winter hurts
us so." And the princess bent down compassionately
towards them, raised a corner of the heavy snowy cover¬
ing, and whispered to the mosses the wise words which
she had learnt from the fir tree: " Because you are
founded on rocks, little mosses, and the good God lets
you remain green under the heavy snow, do not forget
that divine life is in you ; try to be strong and to grow a
Httle under your wintry covering,—God will help you if
you ask him." And the mosses began forthwith to bestir
themselves, and became quite warm with the exercise,
and in a short time they called out joyfully, " Use, Use,
we can stand, we are really growing, and the snow gives
way whenever we grasp it."
Thus Use taught her playmates, the grass and moss, to
use their powers, and to brave winter. She revived the
little grasses with her fresh waters, encouraged them to
grow, and to welcome spring, when he at length came
again into the dale, swept the snow carpet away, and
drove winter back to the Brocken. The fir tree had also
thrown off his white veil, and hghted bright green tapers
on all the tips of his dark branches; the oaks and
beeches put on their green robes again, and the Httle Use
lived happily for many, many hundred years, in the still,
noble forest. Winter returned, indeed, every year, played
his terrible game with the flowers and plants, and laid
glittering traps for Use. But the active, vigorovis child
would not be caught; nimble as a lizard, she slipped
through his rough, icy fingers. The trees grew green
again every year; they were never so fi-esh nor so
beautiful as in spring, and, as if the hard struggle with
winter had invigorated her and given her new life, Use
was likewise brighter and lovelier, when the snows had
melted on the mountains, and she dashed through the
forest rushing and foaming in all her glory. Snow is
sweet milk for little mountain springs; the more eagerly
they drink of it the more splendidly they thrive.
Thekla.
{To be continued.)
The Attempt. 189
Let us look for a moment at the original meaning of this
word. It is simply " forejudging." But as it walks our
earth now-a-days, it bears token of a fallen nature on its
forehead; and by our present use thereof, we acknowledge
that all " forejudging," nay, that all our judgment is evil
and not good. We only speak of "prejudice against some
one;" the word cannot be made to smile.
Does it not prove painfully the wisdom of the warning,
" Judge not, that ye be not judged;" for He who inspired
it, knew that " the imagination of man's heart is evil con¬
tinually," and that he would "turn judgment to worm¬
wood, and leave off righteousness on the earth." Even in
our New Testament, how often the translation renders
the same Greek words, at different times by " accusation,"
"judgment," and " consideration," as if these three were
all but synonymous.
The Inquisition was a black example of " judging " and
"condemning" whoever was "accused," without giving
him a chance of any defence.
But have we not in various degrees, in all of us, rather
too much of this inquisitorial nature?   Have we not all some
need of the Psalmist's prayer—" Teach me good judgment
and knowledge, for I have behoved Thy commandments."
We may smile almost scornfully at so solemn a charge
being laid against any of us; but it is not a question of
degree now to be discussed.    Do none of us ever form, or
ever maintain what we know of old, as a prejudice ?   It is
so easy to form impressions ; but why should  " forejudg¬
ing" often be so hard!    Do we ever fully realise the
injury we do any one against whom we maintain a pre¬
judice? We will not permit ourselves to be proved wrong;
so we give him no chance to " improve on acquaintance ;"
we toill not know him, nor permit him to know us.    AVe
have fixed a type of character for him; and if he commit
actions inconsistent therewith, we are very apt to seek an
explanation in some greater fault, and in no nobler virtue.
And we can do much to induce a certain phase in some
one's character, if we always seem to expect it.   Have we
never heard sadly such expressions as these: " There is
no use trying to please him—he won't believe me! I may
as well be as bad as he thinks I am !"    Or the opposite :
" He thinks me so much better than I am, that 1 must
keep up my character with him!"    I do not say it is alto¬
gether wise or right in others to be so much affected by our
190 The Attempt.
opinions of them; but it is a fact, that we are so moved
by one another, and therefore we should act according to
human nature, and not beyond it.
We forget also the unconscious influence that constantly
radiates from us, like some magnetic power, which
must convey somewhat of the spii'it of our minds to other
minds, and thus create anew a spirit of prejudice, and
repeat our own failings in others near us. At the same
time, we forget the injury that prejudice does to ourselves.
It is no health-giving inhabitant of our heart, and it
brings -wdth it a long train of other evils. It acts often as
a cloud to keep back much of the pleasantness of our
sunlight from us; or as smoke to dim the torchlight,
thrifty nature kindleth in us, and so prevent it shining
forth, clear, and brightening those around. Truly the
advice " to think every man honest till you prove him
guilty" is much safer and wiser than its converse. From
how much freedom and happiness, from how much sim¬
plicity of soul and confiding trust of heart, do we wilfully
debar ourselves by submitting to the sway of prejudice.
And, surely, even were this earth our all, would it not be
more beautiful by far, and more satisfying, more joyful
and more ennobling, to copy in all things the life He lived
as an ensample to us ? May we live the lovely life of the
righteous, and then we may leave our " latter end" safely
unto its own time, and it will be like unto his.
Sometimes we satisfy ourselves by saying we have
grounds for our judgment. But even then, is not that
very "judgment" only another form of "prejudice?"
How often do we permit a partial truth, heard in some
casual conversation, to flash like lightning into loose
grained sand, and fuse into a solid, vitreous mass the
fragments of our precious thoughts ? We hear some one
has done something, spoken some word Ave blame; our
" prejudice" is formed " hefori'' we hear the defence we
never permit him to make. We will not open the matter
to him ; we give him no chance to right himself; we only
turn coldly away from him, and leave him perplexed and
grieved at our coldness, the more so, because often all
ignorant of its cause. It is not the spirit in which we
should act when we see our brother err.
How many misunderstandings, ay, how many sore
hearts and blighted hves would be spared, if we all sus¬
pended such judgment awhile, if we frankly " did to
others what we would wish them to do to us ;" if instead
of silently and sullenly reserving om- judgments in our
The Attempt 191
hearts, and keeping apart from the offender, we should go
forward frankly and say, " Can these things really be so ?"
How often would one word of explanation take away all
cause of anger. How often would a tear of repentance
wash away all our indignation, and melt our "fore¬
judging," transforming it into charity crystalline. Even
were no explanation forthcoming, no sorrow expressed,
the very fact of having waited thus far, would have made
us calm ; the very fact of dressing our wrongs in words
would have made them seem so small, that we should,
unconsciously, be guided towards learning how to weigh
our neighbours in the same balance as ourselves. If Ave
were only to practise this great lesson more, we could
bear faults with patience, remembering how many of our
faults others have to bear. And if we strive earnestly to
do all right things aright, we shall ever find the Hill
Difficulty in our path: then, should not common justice
as well as generous sympathy teach us, that if we cannot
make ourselves what we would wish to be, we have no
right to exact that others should, in all points, fulfil
perfectly our ideal.
I have not spoken of the greater members of this family
of "judgments," the subject is too deep for me; but if
I can startle any one into consciousness, and induce him
to throw down the wall of partition that prejudice has
cast up between him and others, I shall have done all
I wished, and more than I had hoped.
LuTEA Reseda.
^ onrttt
Her eyes will not unclose to any gaze.
Her quiet hands are folded on her breast.
Hushed is her sad heart's fathomless unrest,
Still the tired feet that trod such stony ways.
Her lips have no reply to blame or praise,
Silent from all the weariness of speech.
No pain can wake her now, no trouble reach
The long still night closing the toilsome days.
She hath no dreams to vex her slumber deep,
Nor any memories of time gone by.
Nor hope, nor dread, nor any more desire.
While passing thro' the purifying fire,
She never murmured, never questioned why.
But when death came, she smiled, and fell asleep.
Melita.
192 The Attempt.
OUR  LIBRARY TABLE.
Our Adventures in the War o/1870.   By Emma M. PeARSON,
and Louisa E. Maolaughlin.   2 vols.
We can recommend this book to any of our readers who
wish to read an interesting and true account of the work,
adventures, and trials of lady nurses in the late war. Miss
Pearson and Miss Maclaughlin, joint authoresses of the
above volumes, went out under the Red Cross, and under
the auspices of the British Society, to nurse the sick and
wounded; and, though avowedly French in their sym¬
pathies, are still quite fair to the Germans. The two
volumes are written in an unconstrained easy style; and
though here and there we come upon rather an obscure
sentence, yet the interest is well kept up throughout.
The ladies show the utter inefficiency of our British
Society, and its incapacity for supplying its nurses, and
dispensing its stores and money at the right time, and in
the right place ; and they also hint at what a good thing
the Germans made of it. There is an amusing account of
some Protestant Sisters with whom they had come in
contact, who are contrasted, not to their own advantage,
with the real Sisters; and a funny description of the
selfishness, greediness, and uselessness of the Johanniter
Ritter, or Knights of St John. The first volume is mostly
taken up with a chase after King William's head-quarters,
and it is not till near the end of it that they get into a
little Avork at Sedan. But the more interesting of the two
volumes is decidedly the second, principally a description
of their life at Orleans, which they entered when the
French retook it, and they made their head-quarters,
through the German re-occupation, tiU peace was pro¬
claimed. They ofiered their services to the Bishop of
Orleans, and were sent by him to the Sisters of St Aignan,
at the convents of St Marc and St Marie, with whom they
formed a large ambulance for French and German wounded.
Miss Pearson and Miss Maclaughlin also went out to the
villages and farm-houses round Orleans after the ^fighting,
to carry succour to the wounded, and take into Orleans
such of them as they could. Whoever reads Our Adven¬
tures in the War of 1870, cannot fail to be pleased and
interested.
Tlie Attempt.
%'u ^oTaltfr  ^colt as  a god.
HIS GENIUS.
So much having been advanced for the soundness of the
principles on which Scott wrought a noble revival in the
history of poetry, we must next consider the fitness of his
own genius for the task. A great poet must be a great
artist. Of course, with heterodoxy in everything else,
there is also heterodoxy in regard to art, but here we
venture to doubt if the incorrect creed will readily become
the popular one. On the late occasion of a celebration in
honour of our great national poet,—who, we doubt not,
would himself have repudiated such ignoble doctrine,—we
have been told that it is a task worthy the artist's skill to
represent nature in her grossest forms equally with her
highest; that there are no moral distinctions in art, and
that conventionality, in the garb of morality, cloaks art's
highest efforts. If this were true, the artist, and especially
the poetic artist, were indeed a poor slavish creature, im¬
prisoned in a miserable hut of clay, with all the glorious
revelations of nature in her most ennobling, soul-quicken¬
ing aspects, shut out from his gaze. Not so a true artist,
and not so Sir Walter Scott. His conceptions were bold
and vigorous, but pure and noble ; and the deft executions
of the hand of true genius never al)sorbed the enthusiasm
which he reserved for his grand model, nature. His
colours were nature's own; his harmonies, though not
always perfect, were original and thrilling; his delinea¬
tions, correct and glowing; his painting, spirited and
forcible ; and his most telUng effects, honestly and gener¬
ously produced, without flaw of trick or exaggeration.
As an artist, he is thus great. How is it with bardic
inspiration, that divine afflatus which is the poet's special
distinguishing gift ? Here again, some misconstruction
is liable from the circumstance of this power being asso¬
ciated, by Byron and Burns, two poets on whom it was
most prodigally bestowed, with such moral excesses, that
its grandest effusions have been made to seem those of
the passions alone. How dangerous is such a poetic creed,
the consequent establishment of a varying standard of
morality for strong and weak minds plainly shows ; how
untruthful, the absence of any incongruity between the
great and the  good in the Creator's universe yet more
^   ^ JL'LY 187-2.
/
/
194 The Attempt.
clearly demonstrates ; how fallacious, is at once evident
in our common experience of the feelings with which one
rises from the perusal of the different works of the poets
thus compared; in the one case, refreshed and strengthened,
in the other, wearied and oppressed.    The poetry—
" That bids the alternate passions fall and rise,"
" Exulting, trembling, raging, fainting,
Possest beyond the muse's painting,"
is a study to remind us that, as Pope sagely says,—
" Works may have more wit than does them good,
As bodies perish through excess of blood."
Sir Walter Scott was none the less an inspired poet
that he was a moral poet. His impulses were regulated,
and his imagination chastened, with that happy self-control
which he exercised so remarkably and beneficially that
his works, with all their originality, \dvidness, and mas¬
culine vigour, are sincere, pure, graceful, capable alike of
amusing the mind that has reached its maturity, and de¬
lighting the ingenuousness of youth. It is doubtless some
people's best acknoAvledgment of this attractive power
that Sir Walter is accused of " never being in earnest,"
and writing " merely for amusement," as if earnestness
must show itself in some form of tragic desperation, and
good wholesome instruction must be disagi'eeably adminis¬
tered to be efficacious. Our poet's works are not indeed
remarkable for that exaggerated travesty of real earnest¬
ness which fi'om intensity degenerates into immoderation
and ends in bathos, but rather for a genuine, healthful
manliness, and fresh generous enthusiasm wliich brace the
spirit as the free air of the hills braces the physical frame ;
and if they amuse, they instruct in amusing, wliich, in
poetry at least, may surely be acknowledged as an improve¬
ment upon amusement without instruction, or even instruc¬
tion without amusement. The author's skill is striking, in
thus fashioning a perfect Avhole out of disjointed fragments.
His " spirit is so finely touched, and to such fine issues,"
that the happy combination is reached naturally, and
without effort, and the various ends
"To amuse, instruct, delight
To please both grave and gay,"
BO harmoniously accomplished, that the corresponding
result is
'' By turns, we feel the glowing mind
Disturbed, delighted, raised, refined,"
TJie Attempt. 195
This is the best way of judging of Scott's inspiration.
Let his great heart speak to yours, 0 reader! in those
"thoughts that breathe, and words that burn," which
make his a " living page." The interest of the incident
and continuity in construction of Sir Walter's poems,
would make them suffer from indiscriminate quotation;
but we cannot but refer to a few passages from the
greatest of his works, in further illustration of the special
characteristics of his genius.
We think he himself was correct in ascribing the
great charm of " The Lay " to its style, as in it, a happy
blending of his manifold perfections in that particular are
most conspicuous. The beautiful verses which open each
canto are key-notes, so to speak, to the chords wliich
are capable of vibrating most powerfully in the human
bosom. Wliat patriot could desire any more ringing
response to the feeling of his soul, than
" Breathes there the man with sold bo dead
Who never to himself hath said,
This is my own, my native land !
Whose heart hath ne'er within him humed,
As home his footsteps he hath turned,
From wandering on a foreign strand ! "
For our part, we hold that such words are testimony and
safeguard sufficient against the passion of patriotism
dying out, so far as Scotchmen are concerned, notwith-
standiug the proud prophesyings of Utilitarianism and
Cosmopolitanism to the contrary.
Again, according to a master-critic's remark, how is
the sense of the beautiful in its association with true
sentiment ministered to, in the lines beginning—
" If thou would'st view fair Melrose aright,
Go visit it by the pale moonlight; "
and the supremacy of the " heaven-born passion " vindi¬
cated, when the minstrel in ^his touching self-reproof for
the insensibility of age to
smgs.
" The dearest theme
That ever warmed a minstrel's dream,"
" Love rules the court, the camp, the grove,
And men below, and saints above,
For love is heaven, and heaven is love."
It is with difficulty that we can summon patience to
follow the drift of a hypercritism which disparages
the value of the foregoing passage, because it identifies
and connects the love which rules  on earth with that
19() The Attempt.
which reigns in heaven. It is true that our heathen
forefathers called the Sabbath Sunday, after their
god Apollo, but for all that, there is nothing heathenish
either about the sun or the day; and in like manner,
Love has been represented as a "blind, rascally boy,"
without affecting its Christian character as the holy bond
of the universe. The base, earthly, counterfeit passion
which is a mere animal-like instinct in man, is not the true
love of earth any more than it is the love of heaven, and
could never have been referred to by Sir Walter in the
glowing terms of the text, as it is throughout his works
branded with the severest reprobation.
The art of contrast exercised throughout the poem is
strikingly exemplified in the well-known lines :—
" Sweet Teviot, on thy silver tide,
The glaring bale-fires blaze no more;
No longer steel-clad warriors ride
Along thy wild and willowed shore ;
Where'er thou wind'st, by dale or hill,
All, all is peaceful, all is still.
As if thy waves since tune was born,
Since first they rolled upon the Tweed,
Had only heard the shepherd's reed,
Nor started at the bugle horn."
This, as a wail of the " Last Minstrel," epitomizes the
vivid contrast which is presented between "the aged
man," shorn of all the glory of his past save the memory of
it, and the active manly life of border chivalry Avhose
scenes and actions he commemorates. The Minstrel him¬
self, as a poetic creation, is unique; the way in which his
feelings and manner are described, and his character
brought out, in the graceful interludes between the cantos,
being placed by Lord Jeffrey " ia the first rank of poetic
excellence," and acknowledged as a triumph to be ex¬
pected of painting rather than poetry. It would be idle
to attempt to analyze in a short paper the excellencies of
this exquisite poem ; but we have sought to point out the
connection in which, to our mind, it specially excels, viz.,
with reference to the feelings of the human heart.
" Marmion " possesses, in greater proportion, the quali¬
ties of a grand epic. Its vivid portraitures, its historical
connection, its heroic action, its martial tone, awaken an
interest which hurries the reader on with impatience even
of the interposition to the current of the story of those
beautiful introductory epistles, in justice to the intrinsic
merits of which wo cannot refrain Irom quoting at least
The Attempt. I'J
the   opening  lines   of that early favourite and familiar
passage:—
" No longer Autumn's glowing red
Upon our forest hOls is shed,
No more beneath the evening beam,
Fair Tweed reflects their purple gleam ;
Away hath passed the heather bell
That bloomed so rich on Neidpath Fell,
Sallow his brow, and russet bare
Are now the sister heights of Yair."
Nor when comparing the famihar picture with the yet
more familiar original, and
" Looking forth,
We view yon Empress of the North,
Sit on her hiUy throne,
can we pass, without notice, the immortal tribute paid
to her sovereignty, as Lord Marmion
" Marked the distant city glow
With gloomy splendour red;
For, on the smoke-wreaths, huge and slow,
That round her sable turrets flow.
The morning beams were shed,
And tinged them with a lustre proud,
Like that which streaks a thunder-cloud.
Such dusky grandeur clothed the height,
Where the huge castle holds its state,
And all the steep slope down.
Whose ridgy back heaves to the sky,
Piled deep and massy, close and high,
Mine own romantic town!"
But the passage in "Marmion" is undoubtedly the descrip¬
tion of Flodden Field, which, including the account of the
battle, interwoven with the tragic episode of IVIarmion's
death, and the pathetic tribute to woman's value as
the nurse of suffering well deserves Lord Jeffrey's well-
known eulogium:—
" Of all the poetical battles which have been fought, from the days of
Homer downwards, there is none, in our opinion, at all comparable, for
interest and animation, for breadth of drawing and magnificence of effect, with
this of Mr Scott's. There is a flight of five or six hundred lines in which
he never stoops his wing, nor wavers in his course ; but carries the reader
forward with a more rapid, sustained, and lofty movement, than any epic
bard that we can at present remember."
" The Lady of the Lake" is a picturesque drama, wherein
the beauty of the scenery and romance of the situations
seem appropriate to the movements of the characters, in
a way which reminds us of "As you like it," with this differ¬
ence, that Ellen's is a warlike, and Rosalind's a peaceful
Arcadia. This is the most popular of Scott's poems, and
familiar almost to every one, from the opening music of
the huntsman's horn, as
198 The Attempt.
" The stag, at eve, had drunk his fill,
Where danced the moon on Monan's rill,
And deep his midnight lair had made
In lone Glenartney's hazel shade ;
to the farewell cadences, when—
" Receding now the dying numbers ring,
Fainter and fainter down the rugged dell.
And now the mountain breezes scarcely bring
A wandering witch-note of the distant spell,
And now 'tis silent aU ! Enchantress, fare-thee-well."
The even profusion of beauties in the poem is such, that it
would be a somewhat equivocal task to select one particular
illustration of the author's skill in depicting nature fi-om
the varied descriptions of scenery with which it abounds,
making the Trosachs enchanted ground to the traveller.
" The Lay," in its poetic feeling, " Marmion," by its
energetic action, and the " Lady of the Lake," with its pic¬
turesque beauty, are acknowledged to be Scott's three
greatest poems, and of his other works, even including
the interesting " Rokeby," and the graceful " Bridal ot
Triermain," there is not here space to speak; but we can¬
not pass over that patriotic effort, " The Lord of the Isles,"
without a reference to its noble portraiture of Robert the
Bruce, even in his desolate exile, " every inch a king,"
whom—
" Such divinity doth hedge about
That treason dares not peep at what it would ;"
and the unsurpassed description of the desolate grandeur
of Loch Coriskin, Skye, where itj
" Seems that primeval earthqualie's sway.
Hath rent a strange and shatter'd way
Through the rude bosom of the hiU ;
And that each naked precipice,
Sable ravine, and dai'k abyss,
Tells of the outrage still.
So far, our remarks have only touched that form of Sir
Walter's poetry which goes by the name of the descriptive
epic, but he is equally great in another line ; for, though
Burns is undoubtedly the great master of the Scotch lyre,
Scott's songs are only second to his; as for example,—
"Rosabelle," "Young Lochinvar," "Bonnie Dundee,"
" The M'Gregor's Gathering," " Pibroch o' Donnuil Dhu,"
" Roderick Vich Alpine's Boat Song," and " Jock o' Hazel-
dean." If Sir Walter's epics, like those of Milton, are
liable to the imputation of being translatable into good
prose, his songs are capable of no such levelling transfor¬
mation. The inimitable spirit, the thrilling power, the
exquisite grace,  and the tender pathos of these noble
The Attempt. 199
lyrics are qualities untransferable, which prove their own
and their author's title to a place in the ranks of the aris¬
tocracy of poetry. And who that, along mth this, remem¬
bers the admirable mottoes which this great poetic genius
originated for many chapters of his novels, and the facility
A\dth which he produced them, can fail to acknowledge
that he Avas gifted with a ready and powerful poetic
inspii-ation? Let any doubting spirit turn to Longfellow's
perfect little poem, " The Singers," and in a sense of its
exquisite beauty overlook not its wholesome lessons,
when in rebuke of a disputed comparison of the merits of
the " youth with the golden lyre," the bard with the
" bearded face," and the " gray old man," who " sang in
cathedrals dim and vast,"—
" The great Master said, ' I see
No best in kind, but in degree ;
I gave a various gift to each,
To charm, to streugthen, and to teach.
" These are the three great chords of might.
And he whose ear is tuned aright
Will hear no discord in the three.
But the most perfect harmony.' "
(To he concluded.)
Elfie.
a i t i tt ij.
Over the God-given path of my life
Fear-sprinkled shadows and sunny lights fall;
Patient in tnistfulness onward I press,
Waiting in faith for the Heaven-sent call!
Oh, gloriously fair is this wondrous world !
And rich—golden rich are Thy blessings down poured ;
And sendest Thou gladness, or sendest Thou woe,
For each as for all Thou, art meekly adored!
But fair though the world be, it is not my home,
And rich though Thy gifts, there are richer in store.
When, Death's valley traversed, and Heaven's shelter won.
At the foot of Thy throne we shall rest evermore.
Oh weary, oh weary, my soul looketh up,
Dim through its shrouding veil woven of sin.
Waiting and watching to see the light stream
Through the pearly gates opening to welcome me in !
Melensa.
200 The Attempt.
A Tale op the Harz Mountains.—From the German.
Part III.
The green wood was proud of his amiable foster-child,
and, as she thought no longer of herself, but only of her
beloved trees and plants, and had quite forgotten that
she was a princess, all the others thought of her, and the
trees and flowers, the stones and the slender grass and
moss, honoured and worshipped her in their silent, devout
way.
Wherever the princess Use flowed through the wood,
herbs and flowers crowded round her feet, kissed the hem
of her robe and her floating veil; the tall slim blades of
grass stood whispering on the path, and waved then-
plumed hats. The musing bluebells, the loveliest of the
forest children, loved her most of all. They came quite
near lier, bent above her forehead, and regarded her
pensively with their earnest eyes like pious thoughts.
They even ventured upon the wet, slippery stones which
lay in her arms, and the little spring kissed them tenderly,
and spread a moss carpet for them, that their tiny feet
might not slip on the dangerous gi'ound. So the blue¬
bells lived a hajspy, fairy life, in peaceful companionship
with the grass and ferns, as if on an enchanted island.
And the ferns too, wherever there was room for them,
mounted on the wet stones, waving their splendid green
fans, teasing the sunbeams and preventing them from
kissing their beloved Use. But the sunbeams were fond of
the child, and came to play \\\\\\ her under the trees when¬
ever the old grey clouds on the mountains allowed them.
The clouds themselves, being too stout and helpless to
move from their places unless driven by the storm-wind
with his broom, coidd not join their bright, light-footed
proteges in their merry dances wdth Use, and sat often
for days on the top of the mountains immoveable as walls,
refusing to let the smallest possible ray of sun get out.
Besides that, they sent rain down into the valley, and
rejoiced in their hearts when they saw Use going sadly
away by herself. The sunbeams became quite wild and
impatient under the treatment of their ill-humoured
guardians. They crowded, full of indignation, behind
the backs of the old ladies, mocked them and made them
The Attempt. 201
so hot by means of their cutting sarcasms that the poor
old things could not stand it any longer, but were forced
to retreat from the places which they had chosen. Then
the passage was free again, and the sunbeams slipped
down into the wood, swung themselves in the raindrops
which were still hanging from the trees, and chased each
other along mth Use, often for a whole day at a time.
One day, as they were thus engaged, a white strawberry-
blossom approached them by stealth, and began to survey
her round little face in the shining dress of the princess,
but Use saw her, and, holding up her finger menacingly,
cried, " 0, you conceited strawberry-blossom, you are vain
of the golden button on your forehead, and you wish to
see and admire yourself here ! " The startled strawberry
flower let all her white leaves fall to the ground, and fled
hastily back Tuider the green foliage. But the sunbeams
sprang laughing after her, and sought her out under her
broad leaves, and the poor blossom was very much
ashamed of being caught. Each time that a sunbeam
looked at her, she blushed more deeply, and at last she
stood, purple-red, behind the leafy screen, and hung her
head almost to the ground with shame. The good full
moon, Use's old acquaintance, came often to visit her, and
stood above the " Ilsenstein," the most beautiful cliff in
the whole range, which the people in the valley had
named after the princess, looking kindly down on her little
favourite, who was rippling away in the shade of the moun¬
tains, and playing her pretty game with the silver stars.
The fir-tree had great trouble at first in persuading
Use to make friends with the human bemgs who lived in
the valley. The first who came were a few charcoal
burners, who built huts for themselves, felled trees, made
piles of them, and set fire to them. The little Use shed
many many tears for her beloved trees, which now lay
dying on the ground, and it pierced her heart to listen to
the wailing of the grass and flowers, when the people
made a patli through the wilderness and trod on their
heads. The smoke and flames which rose fi"om the char¬
coal-kiln reminded her of the dreadful night on the
Brocken. But the fir-tree had told her that man was the
lord of creation, whom God had made after His own
image, and that all other creatures were destined to serve
him, that every tree could only live as long as God had
appointed, and must at last fall by the hand of man, or
by the lightning of heaven, or by decay.    He told her,
^ C JULY 1872.
202 The Attenwt.
moreover, that fire was a holy power, which, when wisely
used, did much good in the world, that she would soon
learn not to be afraid of him, but go near to him, give
him her hand, and work along with him quite willingly.
The princess did not certainly look forward with much
pleasure to the time when she should work in company
with the fire, but she had great respect for the fir-tree's
judgment, and trusted implicitly in all tliat he said.
After   a   considerable   space   of time,   a  number   of
people  came   into   the   valley  with   axes   and   spears,
bringing   cattle   and    goats    with    them,    which   they
drove    into    the   green    pasture    on    the    moimtains.
A short way below the   " Ilsentein," where the valley
widens, they came close up to Use,  felled many of the
neighbouring  trees,   cut  them into boards  and  beams,
and dug out  a  large hall  for  the princess,   lining   its
Avails    Math    stones    and    turf,    and    leaving    above,
towards the valley side, a wide door, well protected with
wood.    They had likcAvise built houses for themselves
and settled there with their wives and children ; and now,
as everything was ready, they came to the princess and
requested   her   to   descend  into  the   large  hall.     She
declined, however, Tvith thanks, and tried to hop past, but
they blocked up her path with stones and earth, and
forced aside a large rock which had protected her.    So,
as she was running at full speed, there was nothing for it
but to rush through the opening into the hall, which the
men called a pond, with all her strength, spreading herself
out over the whole surface, and beating angrily in foam¬
ing waves against its walls.    After a time she became
more composed, collected her thoughts, and looked in¬
quiringly up to the fir-tree, who was standing beside the
new house.    The fir-tree  smiled  mournfully, and  said,
" Now comes Civilisation, dear Use; the peace and free¬
dom in our beautiful wood will soon be very limited."
"Civilisation!"   sighed Use,   "heaven   forbid!     Anyone
who cuts down so many of God's beloved trees, tears off
their bark, and cuts them in pieces, can surely have no
good intentions."    " Poor cliild," answered the fir-tree,
"what would  you  say if you  knew the grandchild of
Civilisation, Industry, who buries treasures, digs through
the grcnmd in search of gold, and does not spare a single
tree if it happens to be in her way.    She roots out whole
woods, and builds large stone houses with long tiresome
chimnevs.     Wherever  she   enters   there  is  an   end  to
The Attempt. 203
poetry." At this Use clasped her hands, and looked so
dismayed, that the fir-tree continued—"Do not disturb
yourself, my child, it will be long long ere Industry can
approach us. It suits her better to remain on the flat
plain, and we will ask God to protect our peaceful vale
from her. But Civilisation is a faitliful servant of God,
and brings blessings and prosperity with her wherever
she enters in peace."
Use understood all this, and soon began to have more
confideuce in human beings. She pressed against the
door of her prison, and peeped through it at the house
standing below. There she saw close below a strong,
newly made mill-wheel, and the miller's curly-headed
boy stood on the path and called " Yes, look down, little
princess, the doors will soon be opened, and the dance will
begin, and you shall swing merrily round the wheel."
•' Am I, then, to be broken on the wheejf thought Use, and
she looked down with a beating heart on the gigantic
machine. But it began to creak in every spoke, and
whispered to her, 'Do you not know us, Use ? We are wood
from your dear trees, do not be afraid, we will not hurt
you." And when the miller now came out, and prepared
to ch'aw up the bar, calling, "Now come down, little Use, you
liave been long enough in the pond, come and help us to
work," she did not feel the least shy, but ran quickly
on to the wheel, and trod nimbly and carefully, first on
one spoke, then on another, and when the wheel began to
move under her light step, she grew bolder, took wider
steps, let her veil flutter, and put on her foam-cap, and
finally shot foaming and rushing along the channel of the
mill-stream, while the wheel turned in mighty swings,
the mill beat time for it, and bright strings of pearls,
which the princess Use had lost from her wet hair,
dropped from every spoke of the mill-wheel.
The little Use was now fairly installed in the service of
man, and supplied the valley and its inhabitants with as
much water as they required for their welfare and pros¬
perity. She worked with the men in the mills and iron
works, where she formed the much-dreaded acquaintance
of the fire, and found, to her surprise, that he had quite
as much respect for her as she had for him. They did not
therefore approach each other nearer than was necessary for
the progress of their work, preferring to view each other
from a distance. Use helped the mothers and daughters
in their household wprk, washed the chikken, watered the
204 The Attempt.
flowers and vegetables, and was not ashamed to do so,
for her high rank did not suffer by the most menial
service which she performed among the children of men.
Many hundred years had again passed since Use fu-st
set foot on a mill-wheel. The monks, when Luther's
religion spread in the valley, had forsaken the old valley on
the hill, and a noble race of coimts reigned there instead.
The little Use served them and their vassals as she had
served the monks. When, however, the castle fell in ruins,
and the Stollbergs chose another residence, they took good
care that the princess Use and her beloved valley should
suffer no harm from this change. They engaged a number
of busy men to settle in the neighbourhood, and to labour
with her in bringing the noble marrow of the mountains,
the strong iron, to the day-light, and in making it available
for the use of mankind.
There Use might be seen busily working, late and early,
without seeming ever to weary, or to find her hard work
distasteful. But whoever met her in the valley, as,
beaming in all her pmity, she emerged fi-om the wood,
could not but recognise in her a princess of the purest
water, and a daughter of light.
In the course of time, as civilisation advanced, there came,
to Use's grief a broad " chaussee " creeping up the valley,
in company with the stone-cutters carrying spades and
other tools. They dug up the green soil, cut down a
number of niagnficent trees, and forced their way along
by means of sharp weapons. " I cannot stand that! I
will not suffer it!" cried Use in a great rage. " Is this tire¬
some person Avith a French name to crawl beside me like
a snail, play the governess, and call crossly to me,—' Not
so fast, llse! do not go too near the flowers, do not jump
so. Use ! see liow properly I walk along.' " And in wild
wrath the little princess pushed and foamed against the
blocks of stone which supported the high-Avay, as thougli
she would knock it down. "Use, Use !" said the fir tree,
looking reproachingly down fi-om the rocks above, " What
mad, hoydenish tricks are these % Do yoii not compre¬
hend that we must suffer anything which is for the benefit
of mankind ? We do not rejoice to see the dxisty creature
trailing her dress up the valley either, and it is more for
us than for you. For shame. Use ! just hear how the
witches up there are laughing at you."'
The proceedings on the Brocken had in fact come to an
end, since Christian people had come to dwell up there.
The Attempt. 205
and the scattered witches and demons went through the
country in various disguises, assuming the loveliest and
most alluring forms, that they might the more easily entrap
unfortmiate souls. A number of young witches who still
bore a grudge agamst Use, because she had, by her
beauty and attractions, cast them into the shade on the
Brocken, came down into the valley every summer to
watch her, and ahenate her friends from her, if they
could do nothing worse. They stood clothed as splendid
red foxgloves, in groups on the declivities of the momitains,
making signs to the ferns, and calhng the pious bluebells
to them, in order that they might explain to them how
closely related foxgloves and bluebells were. But the
bluebells saw the drop of deadly poison in the bottom of
the calixes, shook their heads, and went down to Use,
begging the ferns to spread out their broad fans before
them, so that they might not see the spiteful creatures any
nirtre. The prmcess Use looked timidly up and prayed
softly, as she went past. The faithful bluebells and ferns
were praised and caressed by her, and when she saw that
the wet stones looked up too beamingly at the witch-
floAvers, she threw her silver veil over them and bluided
them with smibeams, which she caught and threw into
theu- faces.
With the highway she preferred having as little to do
as possible. She tried, by means of bye-paths and
circuitous windmgs, to keep entirely out of eight; but
sometimes, when running in mad haste over the cliffs,
believing that she had escaped her dusty companion, she
came suddenly face to face with her, and the high-road
threw a bridge over her, forcing her to glide under it,
and pocket her wrath as best she might.
But her anger never lasted long. Lower down the
valley she now goes peacefully by the side of the high¬
road, and kisses humbly the foot of the " Ilsenstein," on
which the holy cross stands. She lives still, and goes
every day into the mills and ironworks, pursuing her
humble occupations. When, on Sunday, the mills are
stopped, and the industrious inhabitants of the glen, in
their festive garments, ascend the Castlehill to hear the
Word of God in the little church, then the silvery voice
of the little Use mingles with the chimes of the bells and
the organ peals which resound from the old castle walls,
far, far over the mountains and up the vale.
Use  has, moreover, ceased  to   fear  the   demons  and
20(1 I'lte Attempt.
witches, and even ventures at times to become the
Princess Boilwater. When summer guests vidsh to make
coffee on the mossy bench under the " Ilsenstein," she
steps fearlessly into their little kettle, and claims, as her
sole reward, that those who have had the honour to drink
coffee made by means of her services, should supply the
field mouse with a portion of sweet-cake. The field-
mouse lives in the crevices of the mossy bench, and is a
lineal descendant of that very field mouse who dug the
passage from the Broclven through which the Princess
Use fled in olden times down into the valley. The
privilege of seeing the small head and bright eyes of the
pretty little animal peep out from the mossy pillow is
certainly not granted to every coffee party, for the field-
mouse is exclusive. But whoever sees him is bound,
" upon pain of the wrath of Use," to feed him with sweet-
cake or anything else which human beings like to eat
with coffee, and mice to nibble in crevices of rocks.
The treaty was concluded on a beautiful day in
August, in the year 1871, and lies sealed under the
" Ilsenstein," and in tlie Harz memories of the coffee
party Avho fed the field-mouse on that day.
Here let us leave the bright little Use, who, charming
and beautiful as ever, still dwells in the fragrant shades
of the hazy forest, pursuing her usful career, and a
thousand times happier than if she had reigned in selfish
magnificence on the summit of the Alpine mountain.
Thekla.
#n the dlonin'cHon of 3Jhoiic(ht mitlt |^irnguac|i',
ESPECIALLY AS SHOWN IN THE QDESTION OF UNIVERSALS.
[An Essa;! tmttcn for the Class of Mental Philosophy in connection  icit/i
The Edinburgh Ladies' Educational Association.]
III. CF UNIVERSALS (HISTOEICAL SKETCH).
The history of the inquiry. What do we mean by a.
Universal 1 goes as far back as Socrates, who set himself
the task of investigating the nature of Universals and of
classification. His conclusion, that he found everywhere
a large persuasion of knowledge, with little reality to
sustain it, shows Iioav profound was his dissatisfaction witli
the popular use of terms founded on the association of one
The Attempt. 207
ulyect with another on the ground of mere superficial
likeness. When Socrates asked, What is the good? or
the just ? he did not merely inquire how a notion happened
to be applied—(he showed that such a course involves us
in contradictions)—his inquiry into the meaning of the
term Avas in fact an inquiry into the essence of the thing,
pursued in the full persuasion that, since the mind of man
was created capable of conceiving ethical notions, realities
corresponding to them must exist. But Plato is the first
great Realist. He shook himself quite free from the
applicability of notions, and declared that the reality
was an idea or eternal law of things, separate from sensible
objects. These ideas were as distinct from the Creator as
from man and ffom things ; their peculiarity was that they
were not subjective, like the abstract ideas of modern
philosophy, neither did they csnter into things, any more
than the original pattern of a design can be said to form part
of the finished work of art. Aristotle changed all these
theories, even while he adopted much of their language
and ideas.    Unlike Plato, whose Realism he opposed, he
held that the Universal must be sought for in things, and
maintained the trustworthiness of sensible phenomena.
Aristotle considered Plato's theory of Ideas to bear the
same relation to philosophy that mythology bears to
history. He protested against the idea that substance
can be separated from that of which it is the substance, or
essences of sensibles from things sensible. He placed
complete reality in tlie Singular, which results from the
combination of the Universal and the Particular. His
idea was that we find the Universal in the Particular, in
contradiction to Plato, whose chief doctrine was the entire
separation of the two.
Comhig down, with these ancient speculations in our
hand, to the Middle Ages, we find that much obscurity is
cast over the question of Universals, by the fact that
Plato, and even Aristotle, were very imperfectly known
until after the Renascence, We have to put our¬
selves into the position of a thinker of the Middle
Ages, and to ask, not what Plato and Aristotle taught,
but Avhat they were supposed to teach. Porphyry, in his
Isagoge, had asked the questions :—
1. Have genera and species a substantive existence, or
are they mere mental conceptions ?
2. Supposing them to have such existence, are they
corporeal or not ?
208 The Attempt.
3. Are they a parte rei or in re ?
Too wise to answer his own questions, he was, perhaps,
not   far-seeing   enough   to   know  what  dragon's teeth
he had sown !    So long as thinkers were employed in
completing the doctrinal system of Latin Christianity, the
question slumbered in a few minds.    It started into life
only when paganism had been fijially extinguished, and
Avhen philosophy entered into the service of the now domi¬
nant Church, to perform the task of systematizing the hetero¬
geneous mass of dogma, and of decretal by the help of the
wisdom of Plato and  the logic  of Aristotle.    Truly  a
strange task to be accomplished by such a mind as that
of the one supremely great thinker of the ninth century,
John Scotus Erigena 1    For by this time the teaching of
our Lord and of His apostles, the teaching even of Clement
and of Justin, had begun to undergo that penalty, so
strangely  attached to   success, which  every system  in
religion,   in   morals,   or   in  human  polity,   must   surely
undergo, so soon as it becomes the system adopted by the
majority—the dominant creed of the day: men had begiin
to incorporate with the new spiritual teachings of Cluis-
tianity much that was m reality the old lessons of a van-
(juished paganism, they had begun to offend against the
simplicity of the gospel by large admixtures from heath¬
enism.    Side by side with the faith in a spiritual world
had arisen, in the cloisters and in the hermitages of the
desert; a truly heathen demonology.    Room was found
for priestly incantations, and for deification of symbols, in
the most sacred rites of Christian worship, while a virtual
Polytheism was admitted under the specious veil of a
more than Athanasian orthodoxy.    Truly, Erigena's task
of verifying the assertion of St. Augustine, that Rehgion
and Philosophy are one, was not easy, if it meant that he
was to prove that the dogmatic faith of the ninth century
was to be reached by one travelling the path of Reason
and leaning on the staff of Greek Philosophy.    He began,
as became a thinker who was persuaded that truth was
indeed one, by a bold preliminary attempt to reconcile
Plato with Aristotle.    He revised the doctrine of Univer-
sals a parte rei, and yet he held that Universals were in re.
AVith this very composite philosophical creed, of which,
however. Realism was the dominant article, Erigena faced
the dogmas of the church, with all their pagan interpola¬
tions, just as he foxnid them, and strove to bridge over the
chasm  between  his   own  stand-point  and  that  of  the
The Attempt. 209
theologians of his time. Transubstantiation and predes¬
tination did cruelly exercise alike his skill in dialectics
and his metaphysical subtlety. The first of these doc¬
trines he expounded in a spiritual sense, by the aid of the
realistic doctrine of Universals. The substance, he said,
is spiritual, the accidents alone are corporeal. Here his
Platonism stood him in good stead. But in those days,
the second was yet more perilous ground, for it trenched
on the question whether, if the one key of St. Peter be
that of the kingdom of heaven, the other must not be that
of the bottomless pit. Hincmar, Bishop of Rheims, held
that such was the case, and, as became a great church¬
man, was averse to any views which involved the direct
operation of God, by irreversible decree, upon the indi¬
vidual soul of man. A poor priest, Gottschalk, had ven¬
tured to preach election, and to quote St. Augustine
against Hincmar. Erigena was called by the prelate to
his assistance. The metaphysician sided with neither
disputant, and, being denounced as a heretic, is said to
have fled to Oxford, there to meditate on the doctrine
that Truth is one.*
Deep in the teaching of Erigena, all Realist as he was,
are yet said to lie the germs of that school of thought
which was to supplant Realism. " If this be true," says
Ueberweg (GescJiichte der PMlosophie, II., p. 110), "we
must seek for such a germ of Nominahsm in the fact that
his system, through its manifold self-contradictions, invited
opposition to his own doctrine of the substantial existence
of Universals, and helped to suggest that they were sub¬
jective forms after all." But we should go beyond facts, did
we trace Nominalism in his writings. All that history
warrants our afiirming is, that Roscellin of Compiegne
first gave shape and system to ideas which may possibly
have been suggested to the scholars of Erigena by their
master's words. Roscellin maintained particulars to be
the only realities, genera and species to be merely groups
of similar objects, held together by a class-name, and bis for¬
mula was Universaliapost rem. He taught that only in names
is there anything universal. Such doctrines were, after
all, a natural reaction, certain to arise in reflective minds,
* History repeats itself ; and, although the late Bishop of Exeter did not, as
Hincmar would have done, summon Professor Maurice to his assistance in hia
controversy with Mr. Gorham, yet the voice of the philosophy of that day was
not unheard, testifying that " a larger truth can absorb two extremes, and
annihilate their respective errors."— (See lAfe and Letters of the Rev. F. W.
Robertson, p. 334.)
■^ ^ JULY 1872.
210 The Attempt.
when the theories of extreme Realism were proclaimed to
be the only foundation of orthodox belief. Nominalism,
in its nascent shape, was a species of mediasval Ration¬
alism, more favourable to intellectual progress than the
imaginative philosophy of earlier times with its mythical
second substances. And although extreme Nominalism,
when tested by time, was found inadequate to explain the
existence of notions, there can be no doubt that such men
as Roscellin struck off many heavy fetters from contem¬
porary thought, and paved the way not only for Descartes,
but also for more recent inquirers into the origin of know¬
ledge. In the eleventh century, hoAvever dangerous it was
to deny the existence of universals,for the Church had taken
second substances under her protection, and it was a habit
of the mediaeval mind to bring each new scientific hypo¬
thesis instantly to the touchstone of religious dogma.
For if individuals were the only realities, then were the
Three Persons of the Trinity three individual Substances,
nay, they were three Gods. Roscellin was accused of
Tritheiem by St. Anselm, the prophet of Realism, who
had just written a treatise of much learning, to explain
the faith of the Trinity on the hypothesis that, as all
individual men are in specie homo unus, so is each Person
in the Godhead but one God. Against the man whose
motto was Credo, id intelligam, what chance had Ros¬
cellin? Arraigned before the Council of Soissons, he
was oifered the choice of recantation or of martjTdom.
Need I tell which the philosopher chose? To use the
words in which Dean Mihnan records the parallel story of
Reginald Pecock :—" Faith makes martyrs, fanaticism
makes martyrs, logic makes none. With his temper of mind,
conclusions were not convictions." In defence of Realism,
an Anselm would have marched to the stake, but Roscellin,
though he knew his to be the better cause, preferred to
recant.
Between these two schools of thoiight a sharp contest
continued to be waged all through the Middle Ages.
After the Renascence, we find in Conceptualism a new
form of Nominahsm. On this view Universals are sub¬
jective. They are abstract ideas constructed by the
mind, and existing in it, free from all individual
characters, and containing only those qualities that are
common to the group of objects denoted. Between
Conceptualism and such moderate Nominalism as allows
names to possess meaning in virtue of the thoughts which
The Attempt. 211
they express, there is no real difference. The weak part
of the doctrine lies in the impossibility of its ever being
proved that the mind can form an abstract idea, free from
individual peculiarities. Against this vulnerable point
Berkeley directed his aim, maintaining, in opposition to
Locke, that "the universal idea means any particular
idea, considered as representative of all others of the same
sort." The proper characteristic of Nominalism, in either
form, is the thoroughgoing subjectivity of the Universal,
whether it be a word or an abstract idea. To Berkeley,
such subjectivity was made tenable by an Idealism which,
if carried out fully, annihilated it, and which could only
end in the virtual Realism of a universe of minds, whose
only external objects were the Divine Ideas.
In our own times the question of Universals is still
debated.    Mr Mill differs from Locke on the same point
as Berkeley did, denying that we can hold in our minds
an abstract idea denuded  of all individual peculiarities.
In one remarkable passage he even seems to draw near to
a modification of that very realism which, he tells us, " is
now wholly exploded."    He says, " There is a connection
between one objective truth and another, which makes it
possible for us to know objective truths which have never
been seen, in virtue of others which have." {Examination
of Hamilton, p. 461).    Again, in his adoption of the Aris¬
totelian doctrine of Kinds, he reduces man from the posi¬
tion of the orderer of classification (which Condillac would
give to him) to the position of a discoverer, yet groping
among the shadows on the walls of Plato's cave,    fetill,
Mr Mill's principle of classifying objects according to their
most important qualities, i.e., according to those which
point to a natural relationship, and lead to the greatest
number of interesting properties, leaves us asking, in what
way shall we try to connect objects naturally, and which
are the most interesting properties ?    We are not much
nearer  than  before  to any principle by which,  among
many common attributes, we may discriminate those that
are  essential.     On  the whole, Ueberweg's definition of
essential attributes (as those on which depend the exist¬
ence, the value, and the significance of an object, when its
ends are considered as determining its place in nature)
seems  the best.    Which those attributes are, inductive
logic must discover; and we look forward trustfully to
a future fusion of inductive with formal logic to provide
us with an unerring instrument for the discovery of truth.
212 The Attempt.
The study of the long dispute concerning universals
teaches many lessons. It teaches, for one thing, how, in
the progress of thought downwards through the ages,
truth never lingers long with any one party or sect.
Human schools of thought are, at best, but stepping-
stones, never resting-places, in its majestic march. The
seeker after truth is a Realist with Erigena in his struggles
with the materializing and semi-pagan tendencies of his
time; yet a Nominalist ^vdth Roscellin, in his revolt against
an authority that sought to bind philosophy to maintain
the existence of corporeal second substances, on the plea
that Christianity needed such support for its doctrines.
He may be a Conceptualist with Locke when he opposes
Nominalism with the assertion that words are general
only as the signs of general ideas. But, again, while he
is a supporter of Nominalism, in refusing, with Berkeley,
to make all philosophy rest on abstract ideas, he rejoices
to detect in the writings of Mr Mill himself certain indica¬
tions, perhaps resting on an Idealism akin to Berkeley's,
of a belief in objective reality independent of us, even if
such indications do occur in the same volume with denun¬
ciations of " ontologists who know not Bacon, and who
have neglected the warnings and the example of Locke."
RUSTICA.
(Concluded.)
Fbom the German.
" Lovely maiden," sang the Norna,
" Trust not thou the treacherous waves,
Though they look so calm and tranquil
Yet I warn thee, they are graves."
" Nay, I see my happy future
Pictured in the glowing west;
Like a golden crown, the sunbeams
On the purple waters rest."
Joy there was throughout the castle
When upon the eager tide
Came the ship that bore the maiden
O'er the seas a royal bride.
The Attempt. 213
Gaily waves the flag of England,
Midst the sails the breezes play,
While the princess smiling weaveth
Happy visions all the day.
Yet ere night before the tempest
Helplessly the vessel swings,
O'er the wade expanse of ocean,
Death has spread his gloomy wings.
Then she wrings her hands despairing,
Gazes o'er the foaming sea,
" Scarce begun, already ended
Dream of love so sweet to me.
" Bear, ye winds, a message tender.
Bear, oh waves, a message sweet.
Bear a hundred thousand greetings,—
Lay them at my bridegroom's feet.
" As the roses in the meadows.
As the stars that shine above,
Greetings many, greetings tender,
Swiftly bear to him I love."
As she spoke the storm grew fiercer.
Yawned a chasm both deep and dark.
Then the wild and angry waters
Closed o'er the ill-fated bark.
From the cliffs the king stood gazing.
Gazing o'er the foaming tide,
" Still she lingers, still no token
Of the long-expected bride."
See upon the wild waves floating.
Comes the maiden fair in death.
While the waters echo clearly
What she sang with dying breath.
" Bear, ye winds, a message tender.
Bear, oh waves, a message sweet.
Bear a hundred thousand greetings.
Lay them at my bridegroom's feet."
And the Norna's song of warning
Still is heard across the waves,
" Though they look so calm and tranquil.
Yet I warn thee, they are graves."
Veronica.
214 'The Attempt.
%  gasti[  for  Pusit.
What do we mean by a taste for music 1 Do most people
possess it ? Is it possible to have a bad taste in music ?
Such questions often occur, and may the more interest
some of us from a recent article in the Attempt, noticing
certain delusions on the subject. When, however, we
wish to consider principles of taste, we can do it best by
speaking first of Art generally, as the analogies of other
arts help our thoughts about music.
What, then, is the meaning and aim of Art? What do
we require from painting, sculpture, music, architecture,
poetry'? The answer comes in concurrent testimony from
the artists of all times and places—The revelation of the
beautiful. Art may be defined as the expression of ideal
beauty under a created form. Man is here the creator,
forcing matter to express his mind; and the artist is a
man whose ideas are pre-eminently beautiful, and who
has also an exquisite appreciation of physical or natural
beauty, or the raw material of his art.
But what is beauty 1 Is it not just what pleases 1 we
hear sometimes asked by those who would alloAv no ob¬
jective validity to our ideas of truth, or goodness, or
beauty. Beauty, indeed, ought to please, ought to give
the greatest delight, but whether it does so or no quite
depends on the person to be pleased. The beautiful and
the agreeable are not equivalent terms ; and as falsehood
dogs the steps of truth, and vice is present with us as
well as virtue, so all degrees of absence of beauty, down
to absolute ugliness, exist to mislead and to lower the
souls of men. Beauty is, indeed, one of those three mys¬
terious strands that, welded and twisted together, hard to
analyse or separate, form the ideal which has in all ages
attracted and inspired humanity. Truth, Goodness, and
Beauty, the especial province, respectively of the philoso¬
pher, the saint, and the artist, cannot be wholly separated,
for any negation of one involves imperfection and incom¬
pleteness in the others. No wonder, then, that great
artists sometimes rise a step higher in answering the
question as to the Jinal ends of art. They have declared
them to be the glory of God, and the elevation of human¬
ity. Haydn wrote on all his scores—In Nomini Domini
or Soli Deo Gloria, and at the end Xaw.s Deo. "We
elevate men by attracting them towards noble things,"
The Attempt. 215
writes a great painter. " We seek to attain the ideal or
principle of universal beauty, beyond all transitory and
passing beauties," says Michael Angelo. St Augustine
gives a noble definition of beauty, which may serve as a
guide to our thoughts, when he calls it splendor ordinis,
the splendour of order; that is proportion, symmetry,
unity, variety, harmony, grace, not merely present, but
as it were luminous, compelling admiration from all in
whose minds those qualities find an echo.
Let us descend from the abstract first principles of art,
to art as we find it here in our daily fife, in our native
land. And first, I think we may acknowledge that we
are not an artistic people. In one direction only have we
done great things, and shown that our northern imagin¬
ation can, indeed, be fired by ideal beauty, and that is in
poetry. It is curious how widely diffused a good taste
for poetry, nay, a power of writing creditable verses, is
among our Scottish people. Sometimes I have wondered
whether our progress in other arts has not been even
hindered by the power that poetry has to cast a glamour
over the most homely and humble efforts in other lines.
Something of this may be traced, I think, in Sir Walter
Scott's delight in second-rate architecture, and indiff"erent
painting; much of it, in the joy that many people have
in the bag-pipes. Are they really pleasant to any one's
ears when heard quite distinctly, apart from all associa¬
tion ? It is hard to believe it; a child fond of music said
to me the other day, when three pipers struck up together,
and we all tried to look pleased, " What is that hideous
humming?" But they are Scotch—(at least considered
so, though I believe three centuries ago they were called
distinctively English pipes), they are linked with a hundred
associations, and their wild strains coming from afar
over the hills, have a charm aU their o^vn,—poetical, I
maintain, not musical.
Scottish architecture, a once healthy daughter of French
architecture, died about the time of the Reformation.
Though the circumstances were suspicious, I will not ask
for a verdict against the said Reformation, for fear of
rousing the ire of some stern disciple of old Knox. Scot¬
tish painting is in its hopeful youth, but shows, as well as
sculpture, signs of being in a land alien to art, and needs
to draw inspiration, counsel, and delicate feeling for
beauty from foreign study. The atmosphere is utilitarian,
the common surroundings of our daily life are depressing
210 Tlie Attempt.
to the artist; whereas, in many parts of the Continent,
besides the advantages of climate, " everywhere he sees
around him rise the wondrous world of art;" and it is
difficult to describe the continual sustained exhilaration
felt in such circumstances by those who have an instinct
or a trained eye for the beautiful.
To come to our special subject. Scottish music, after
a hopeful infancy, seems to have stopped growing at the
time of the Reformation; our Scottish music, or rather
our Scottish style, is old, and has an affinity, like all
European music of that date, with the old Church tones ;
and maybe classed with the undeveloped pre-Reformation
music of other countries. The Reformation, which in Eng¬
land, and above all in Germany, gave an immense impulse
to music, did nothing and worse for us—it broke our
organs, and spoilt our choirs, and we have not yet re¬
covered from its zealous extremes.
But now music is very much studied, and, as " Dido"
reminds us, we ladies, at anyrate, seem generally ex¬
pected to have a taste for it. More people do really
seem susceptible to music, than to any other art; Mr
HuUah considers that only ten per cent, of our popu¬
lation are incapable of being trained in it; at the same
time, the average of taste in this country seems decidedly
lower in music than in painting and architecture.
People will tell you that fine music is dull, and claim
your admiration for namby-pamby httle tunes, meaning¬
less in structure), perhaps even false in grammer, saying
triumphantly,—" There is something simple and clear
and sweet, just the style of thing that I like, not your in¬
volved, incomprehensible sonatas and symphonies." But
they do not venture to turn from, say a grand portrait by
Titian, saying, " I prefer greatly this style of art, some¬
thing easy and really sweet, like this coloured print of a
smiling ballet girl, or that Queen of Sheba in bright blue,
going to Solomon in bright red, on that charming tea-tray."
" Strange," writes Mr de Quincey, of a man who declares
he prefers a simple song to some elaborate work of
Beethoven's, and defends his position, " strange that
the analogy of other arts should not show him his delu¬
sion—a song, an air, a tune, that is, a short succession
of notes revolving rapidly upon itself,—how could that
offer a field of compass sufficient for the development of
great musical effects % A hunting box, a park lodge, may
have a forest grace, and the beauty of appropriateness;
The Attempt. 217
but what if a man should match such a bauble against the
Pantheon, or against the minsters of York and Strasburg ?
Let him who finds the maximum of his musical gratification
in a song be assured by that one fact, that his sensibility
is rude and undeveloped."
These crude opinions may exist partly because music,
of course, needs more special training than the imitative
arts, which appeal more to general intelligence; and
partly because the born aristocracy of music is a very
limited class; the great majority are only susceptible of
an education in taste which in this country, as a rule, they
do not get, and therefore to them music remains a mere
physical sensation, a nice tickling of the ears, good for
idle amusement, good perhaps for rest; but so poor, so
low, so soulless an enjoyment, compared to what it
might be, were they to cultivate their powers, that those
who know something of music and love it much long to
say to them, come up higher.
Here, again, we are met by critics (I quote and abridge
from a recent work on music), who ostentatiously avow
that they don't understand high art. and are entirely
ignorant of grand critical principles; still they know what
gives them pleasure, and are not sure whether this, after
all, is not as good a test as another of artistic success.
They thus modestly veil a profound conviction, that
though not learned in the pedantry of the academies, they
have a fine natural insight into the true and the beautiful,
worth more than all teaching; in short, that the pleasure
they derive from a piece of music is the standard of its
worth. ..." But everything depends on the sort of
people to whom a piece is fit to give pleasure. The jovial
song which transports a beery clown in an ale house, may
not be very admirable in ears pohte, and there may be
hght-of-nature critics as little able as the beery clown to
appreciate one of Beethoven's sonatas or Mendelssohn's
Lieder. The incapacity which in the one case comes of
beer and dulness combined, is in the other the simpler
fruit of dulness and no beer."
Who, then, is to judge between good music and bad;
what is to guide the public taste ? To answer that ques¬
tion, we must recur to the original or acquired endowments
of different people. I, let us suppose, have a certain
sense of unity, symmetry, harmony ; a formless succession
of notes wearies me; a false accompaniment hurts my
ear.    But there are those who know by nature every note
^  E JULY !872.
218 Tke Attempt.
and every key as they hear it; can name any chord
that is sounded by an orchestra, and detect a false note
amid a crash of sound. As my ability is to theirs, so, be
sure, is my musical appreciation to theirs, which is to me
the unknown quantity. It is a rule-oi-three sum, and I
may safely work towards their standard. Such natural
endowments are, however, rare, and we come rapidly
down to the people with average musical susceptibilities,
for whom great things may be done by training. Below
them we find a residue, who seem absolutely without an
ear for music. Would that, as " Dido " recommends, they
would all acknowledge it; it is their misfortune, not their
fault. Oh that stern mothers would allow girls who never
show a preference for one thing over another, to stop
that weary practising, and turn to some pursuit where
they may excel! AVe would go a step further than
" Dido," and say that if the " slenderly endowed school¬
girl " cannot like or play Beethoven's little sonatini,—
easier to play and pleasauter to hear, we believe, than
anything Brindley Richards has written,—let her not play
at all; the root of the matter is not in her.
Natural talent, both in music and drawing, may be in¬
finitely improved by the habitual contemplation of good
models, and the converse holds good. It is, indeed,
most visionary to expect every one to like the same kind
of music; it would be equivalent to expecting every one
to have an equally good taste; but a love of classical
music does not infer distaste for any sort which is good,
characteristic, and true. A., who finds far higher beauty
in " Fidelio" than in '• Barbiere," yet appreciates the
bright tunefulness of the latter more thoroughly than B.,
who knows no more of " Fidelio" than the deaf, but enjoys,
after a fashion, the spirited rythm of Rossini. C, who
delights in classical music, is probably far more awake than
D., who cannot bear it, to the rustic characteristic melodies
of D.'s favourite Tyrolese. The root of E.'s preference of a
regimental band to an orchestral one, which is the ideal
band, is likely to be found in the liberty of walking about,
and above all, talking, without a breach of good manners,
and is, like the other instances, simply owing to caring
little instead of much for music. All those people, indeed,
probably do not care for pure music at all, only for music
with something else, and very likely it is the " something
else " which they prefer; drama, spirited words, pleasant
associations, dancing, or marching.
I
The Attempt 219
Their taste, if they have any, is undeveloped ; but what
we would venture to urge is, that should they have any
natural taste at all, and opportunity to cultivate it, let
them do so, and they will be richly repaid. A whole
world of innocent, refined, and intellectual pleasures, of
which they were unaware, will open to them; at the point
where formerly they thought the music dull, only because
they were left behind, they will very likely find the
interest most intense, the beauty most exciting. We
would not undervalue music in its very lowest forms, such
as an organ-man grinding out " Slap-bang," and, let us
hope " Ah che la Morte," more or less discordantly, in some
squalid London street. The street children dance, the
weary debased-looking men, the poor drudges of women,
pause in their toil, and listen with a brief sense of rest
and pleasure. But far purer the pleasure, far truer the
rest of the German craftman, sitting with his wife at the
little rough table under the linden trees ; the measure of
beer is before him, his beloved pipe not far off—but some¬
thing raises him beyond the mere beer and " backy"
enjoyments of many here, into a higher order of intelligence.
It is the music—the band plays maybe a little roughly,
but with feeling and mind; and it plays noble music.
How these people enjoy their familiar symphony—the
andante was so well brought out, they demand it again;
the newer overture rouses their spirits, the tender wistful
strain of Schubert refines and touches them. When they
sing, it will not be some coarse, noisy, vulgar tune, only too
well suited to the words, like most of the street songs
which dfag down the mind and taste of our people, but some
sweet " Volkslied," artistic in form, and rich in harmony.
The whole tone of the public is raised by constant oppor¬
tunities of hearing good music; and so it ought to be
with us ; if the art is to do anything for us, it must be
treated as an art, its rules observed, its standard respected.
But we are improving; most people now suspect at least
that there is a standard; and to an increasing number
amoug us, good music becomes more and more a delight
and a necessity. " In how many," says Mr Maurice, " has
it awakened the sense of an order and harmony in the
heart of things which, outwardly, were most tm-bulent
and confused; of a spirit in themselves, capable of
communicating with other spirits ; of a union intended
for us on some other ground than that of mere formal
and  visible association, yet justifying,  explaining,   and
220 The Attempt.
sustaining that. For these and other reasons, sages have
spoken of music as the most important instrument in
forming men, and in building up societies."
E. J. 0.
© H  (K n 01 a n d.
We are all proud of belonging to the nineteenth century,
which has done and witnessed so much that is remarkable.
We appreciate to the full all the great discoveries that have
been made; and pay our tribute of admiration to the
noble lives, the worthy thoughts, of its most honoured
sons. Only here and there a few are found to whisper
that something is gone—something which had its own
value and its own charm. We have no time now for
" ease with dignity," for contemplation—scarcely for
memory; we live fast, and we hve almost entirely in the
present. The age is like a hot noon-tide, in whose
intense and brilliant sunshine we lose all thought of the
dewy freshness of morning, or the cool evening shadows.
Some periods seem to glide naturally and easily into the
times that come after, but surely our day of railways,
of science, of searching enquiry and pitiless publicity, is
separated by a great gulf from all that has gone before.
While I was travelling of late, however, through some
of the midland counties of England, many things made
me feel that this forcible separation of the past and pre¬
sent is far from complete. The spirit of the past yet
lingers under the grey chm-ch tower, by the sign of the
village inn that creaks and swings on the great elm
tree, in the fields, picturesquely innocent of high farm¬
ing. But, alas! even as I wTite, the change has begun;
and whatever may be the justice of the cause, or the ulti¬
mate result of the movement, no one, I think, but must
regret to see that some of these sweet rural spots have
gained the notoriety of a place in the Illustrated News,
and that their names are in the mouths of agitators.
We were staying in the neighbourhood of Oakham, the
county town of little Rutlandshire. A very sleepy town
it is, a town where it seems "always afternoon," where
you see on an average about three people passing along
the streets, where we tried in vain at the principal book-
The Attempt. 221
seller's to get a copy of Tennyson's "Idylls," but were
assured by the woman of the shop that she "had had one
at Christmas!" Here are the remains of an old castle,
built by Walkeline de Ferrars about a hundred years after
the Norman Conquest, a most interesting building, show¬
ing how the round Norman arches were just then giving
way to what the policeman who showed us over it called
" i/early i/english." It is now used as the Town Hall.
Inside, the walls are lined with horse shoes! Horse shoes
great and small, horse shoes of iron, and horse shoes of
gold, horse shoes old and new, from the great iron one,
about four feet long, given by Queen Elizabeth, to the smart
little gilt and coronetted affair, placed there last year by
Lord Huntley—such a collection can certainly be seen no¬
where else. And what is the meaning of all this ? Once
Tipon a time, says tradition. Queen Elizabeth, with a goodly
retinue, was riding through the green fields of Rutland,
when her horse cast a shoe. Far and near they sought
for a smith, but one could nowhere be found, till she, her
patience exhausted, began to rate the lords who were
with her, and vowed that henceforth every peer of the
realm who passed through Oakham should leave a horse¬
shoe behind him, to amend the scarcity. I suppose that
this story is " ben trovato ;" but no other origin of the
custom is forthcoming, and it is certain that Queen
Elizabeth's shoe is the oldest that adorns the walls. It is
certain, also, that the custom is most rigorously carried
out, and should an unwary peer come no further than the
station, he is forthwith pounced upon by the town-clerk,
and expected to leave a sum sufficient to provide the
horse-shoe, and something over.
Our next move was into Gloucestershire, where the
country looked very charming in its early spring dress,
though, if you ascend the high grounds to the Cotswold
Hills, you find yourself in a very different region, bleak
and bare, a land of stone walls, large square fields, and stiff
fir plantations. But what can be more lovely than the
rich vale of the Severn, bounded by lines of low blue hills,
stretching away on one side towards the Forest of Dean,
and forming a back-ground to all the pretty way-side
pictures which you meet at every turn. Here stands an
Elizabethan manor-house mantled with ivy and shaded by
two or three tall elms, a moat, and hard by, all but under
the same roof, the tiniest of churches, low-roofed, with a
modest belfry; all so old and grey, and moss-grown.    I
222 The Attempt.
never discovered the name of this place ; it is now a farm
house, but it is a genuine bit of Old England. Milton may
have seen it, and indeed everything here suggests lines
from his Allegro, and from others of the descriptive poets.
How they loved the spring-time, those old writers,—such
a spring as we see around us here, all sunny and genial,
when—
" The fields breathe sweet, the daisies kiss our feet ;"
the apple-trees in sheltered nooks are beginning to
blossom, there is a wealth of wild flowers everywhere,
and great bunches of mistletoe hanging vnih. strange and
fantastic growth from the trees in the park contrast well
with the fresh and varied green of the early foliage.
Round us are the " hamlets brown, and dim-discovered
spires," that Collins speaks of; and should the air be
suddenly filled with a musical peal from the bells of a
village church, it would leave nothing to be desired.
There, too, are the " russet lawns and fallows grey ;" there
the " shallow brooks," (but I must observe in passing,
that I cannot admire the same brooks, and think it
decidedly a disadvantage to the country to possess streams
which cannot make up their minds which way to run.)
There, too, is the " cottage chimney " that
" Smokes
From between two aged oaks."
And what a picturesque cottage it is; a framework of
black wooden beams filled in with plaster, with beautifully
neat thatch, and the quaintest corners ; and a little bow-
window, that looks like a glass bee-hive. These cottages,
of which we saw many, are very fascinating; and we
were sorry to hear they are no longer built, owing to the
scarcity of timber.
How much might be said of Gloucester Cathedral, if
one had the skill to jout one's impressions into words. It
is in itself quite an epitome of architecture, beginning
with the wonderful crypt, so immensely massive, one feels
as if it could scarcely have been built, but must be heAvn
out of solid rock. The first stone was laid in 1089 ; at the
same time was built the nave, with its Norman columns,
and heavy roimd arches ; and this part of the cathedral
was consecrated in 1100. Certainly the Normans were a
wonderful people; fresh from their httle duchy of Nor¬
mandy, and still having by no means entirely conquered
their new possessions, they were, at the end of twenty-
three years, everywhere beginning to raise churches, and
The Attempt. 223
to leave memorials of their presence, more enduring, F
suppose, than those of any other nation, the Romans
always excepted. An interval of more than a hundred
years separates the nave from its southern aisles, where
the ornamentation is very much richer, and more elaborate;
and not till 1457 was the building crowned by its central
tower, and the beautiful Lady Chapel added at the east end.
The cathedral is particularly rich in stained glass;
here and there a fragment from some early window flashes
out upon one like a gem, then there are some heavy and
gaudy, belonging to the days of bad taste, and many
exquisite modern windows, with pure transparent tints.
One of the small side chapels, which has lately been
restored, is painted in fresco by Mr Gambier Parry,
who painted the roof of Ely Cathedral, and has also built
and decorated a very beautiful church at his home at
Heynsham, near Gloucester. This chapel is dedicated to
St Andrew ; the finish and expression of the saint's figure
are most admirable. I was struck by the way in which one
apparent difficulty had been turned into a beauty. One
of the flying buttresses of the main building is carried
across the entrance to the chapel, so that as you stand
within, you see an apparently meaningless bar slanting
upwards. On this the artist has illuminated the appro¬
priate verse : " The path of the just is as a shining hght,
that shineth more and more unto the perfect day."
The course of our wanderings next brought us to Ciren-
cester, which, with great pride and some difficulty, I
learned to call Cisseter. We were much attracted by
this old town, which is the centre of a very pleasant
society, cliiefly drawn there by its hunting facilities. It
is, in fact, a kind of quieter Melton. And here I must
certainly say something about the " sport of kings,"
which ought, indeed, tp have a foremost place in my
sketches, if I wished to convey a due idea of its import¬
ance. It is the subject in every one's thoughts, on every
one's lips. If you are not interested, woe be to you! you
are more to be pitied than an unmusical person in a
society of ardent amateurs. But then you have the
remedy in your hands; get interested; and it is soon
done ; if even you are not one of the happy fraternity
who foUow the chase on horseback, it is quite impossible
not to be keenly impressed by the spirit, the gaiety of
the whole thing.
A meet which I saw from Cirencester was, in some
respects, unique.    The Duke of Beaufort's hounds were
224 The Attempt.
to meet about three miles from the town, at a spot
"Called the Ten Rides, in Lord Bathurst's beautiful place,
Oakley Park. Four noble avenues met in a large open
circle, and there were six lesser rides through the tall
trees, each vista leading the eye to some object, a church
spire, perhaps, or a gateway, which worthily closed in the
view. Hither from all sides came carriages, ladies beau¬
tifully mounted and faultlessly turned out, men in pink,
and men in black, besides a sprinkling of other sorts.
Anything so picturesque as the different groups emerging
from the shade of the trees and joining the gay throng in
the centre, could not easily be met with; indeed, as some
one remarked, it was more like a picture of a royal hunt
in the forest of Fontaiuebleau, than what one generally
sees in this country. At length a sort of subdued excite¬
ment told that the hounds were in sight. There were the
pretty creatures, sure enough; and with them Lord Wor¬
cester, who hunts the hounds himself, and quite a large
party of whips and attendants, all in the dark green plush
coats and caps worn by the servants of the Beaufort Hunt.
The gentlemen wear dark blue coats with yellow collars,
which is not so gay as the scarlet; but I thought the
dress of the servants particularly smart and neat. And
noAV they turn to go, and in a very few minutes the spot
is left deserted, we only linger on in hopes of seeing some¬
thing more. For, be it known, this meet, though so pretty
to see, is not considered good for sport, and the day is
generally spent in riding round and round through the
miles of woodlands, and often people lose sight of the
hounds almost immediately in the thick covert, and never
find them again. We were not disappointed however ; ere
long a fox was viewed crossing one of the avenues, and soon
the whole hunt came tearing back in full pursuit. And here
my story must end, like an overture without any opera to
follow, for our own proceedings came to an unexpected con¬
clusion. The horse in our waggonette, an old hunter, was
quite maddened by these exciting sights and sounds, he
began to kick, and with two little bounds, which really
seemed as if they were done in play, the trace snapped in
two. So we had to get it patched up as best we might,
and drive quietly home. It is perhaps fortunate that I
should be spared the temptation of describing a run,
which no inexperienced pen should attempt, but if any
want to be fired with enthusiasm while sitting quietly in
their chairs, let me refer them to TTie Brookes of Bridlemere,
and to other hunting descriptions by the same master-
hand. Enna.
I
The Attempt. 225
,^ir mailer  ^cott as  a |3oft.
HIS FAME.
Under this head we have first to notice, briefly, the
acknowledgment won by Scott's poetry from his con¬
temporaries. The arch-critic Jeffrey's dictum we have
already quoted; and of his brother poets, Campbell was
so inspired by these poems, that he was unable to refi'ain
from repeating them in the street, with the hurried stamp
and emphatic shake of the head which strong pithy
poetry excites, so that the whole firaternity of coachmen
on the North Bridge knew him as he passed; Wordsworth
congratulates Scott on having " attained his end, though
it is not the end which he would have him propose to
himself;" Ellis places "Marmion," nrespective of its author,
on the very top-shelf of English poetry ; Southey contri¬
butes similar expressions of opinion ; and Byron acknow¬
ledges, " Sir AValter reigned before me, the Napoleon
of the realms of rhyme," and hopes that his own claims
will not be set up to rival Scott's, " as I like the man, and
admire his works to what Mr Braham calls entusymusyr
It is unnecessary to dwell upon the estimation in which
Scott's poetical fame is held by the literary men of our
own time, with all the expressions of last year's centenary
celebration fresh in mind,—Gladstone and Tennyson
placing him " above the fluctuations of time, in the band
of the Immortals ; " and Dean Stanley proclaiming, that
in his poems, we see, for the first time, the spirit of
Homer revived in a form and with a freshness unseen
amongst men since the death of Homer, or whomsoever
Homer represented, adding, by way of proof, that it had
been said in his hearing, by a great judge of ancient
scholarship, that nothing, since the time of Homer, has
ever been wi'itten so Homeric, as those well-known lines
that have made the house of Buccleuch for ever immortal
in English literature,—
" Nine-and-twenty knights of fame
Hung their shields in Branksome Hall."
As regards general popularity, no further proof is needed
than that Scott's poems are so placed in the ranks of
Enghsh classics as to form standard text-books in our
schools; and their influence throughout society, whether
felt or not, recognised or not, is all-potent and universal.
^   ^ AUGUST  1872.
226 The Attempt.
An amusing instance of this transpired at the centenary
celebrations, where every diiferent meeting put in some
separate claim for a special proprietorship in Scott,
founded indiscriminately on allusions in his poems and
novels, as well as his personal connections, city vyeing
with city, county with county, country with country, till
Sir Walter's title to fame seemed to rest on his being
" the glory of the civilised world!" In closing this
branch of the subject, we would suggest to our readers to
consider how the many thousands of pilgrims who come
from all lands to visit the shrines of his genius in the
enchanted Borderland, the Highland fairyland, the
romantic solitudes of Argyleshu-e, and our " own romantic
town" itself, with his four great poems for their guide¬
books,—how these deluded enthusiasts would answer, in
the event of the greatness of that poetry being questioned
in their presence ?
We have now more immediately to deal A\ath the faults
of Scott's compositions as urged by the critics, though, to
those who find them to be merely " s^jirited rhymes," we
can have little to say, further than that they miss some
of the noblest and sweetest influences of poetry, which,
when really appreciated, awaken a rare enthusiasm for
the inspiration of their author. He has faults, we acknow¬
ledge. There are specks in the sun. Homer occasionally
nods, Shakespeare has his forty winks, and, as Byron
writes to Murray,—
" No poetry is generally good—only by fits and starts—and you are lucky
to get a sparkle here and there. You might as well want a midnight all stars,
as rhyme all perfect."
The formidable exception which has been taken to our
poet's carelessness of diction, inequality of execution, and
the general objectionableness of his measure, seems to us
considerably exaggerated in its real importance, from the
mere fact that no poetry is more easily committed to
memory than Scott's, or with such enduring effect, which
surely argues an appropriateness of expression to the
meaning, to say nothing of originality of thought and
brilliancy of idea sought to be expressed in " sound that
seems an echo of the sense." An anecdote quoted in the
"Life," with reference to this point, is equally conclusive:—
" M. Falconet, the celebrated sculptor, in lecturing at Rome, shortly after
completing the model of his equestrian statue of Czar Peter, now at Peters¬
burg, took for bis subject the celebrated horse of Marcus Aurelius in the
capitol, and pointed out as many faults in it as ever jockey did in an animal
he was about to purchase.    But something came over liim, vain as he was,
The Attempt. 227
when about to conclude the harangue. He took a long pinch of snuff, and
eyeing his own faultless model, exclaimed with a sigh. ' Cependant, Messieurs,
ilfaut avouer que cette vilaine bete-la est vivante et que la mienne est niorte.' "
Similar must be the experience of those whose eyes,
only open to classic forms of beauty, are blinded to that
expression which comes nearer the heart; and who, in their
eager search for critical inaccuracies in Scott's poetry,
undervalue his sterling poetic qualities, his brilliancy of
imagination, gracefulness of fancy, and tenderness of
feeling; his insight into human nature, and dramatic
power in presenting character, his unequalled eye for the
pictm-esque, liis felicitous description, his graphic narra¬
tion, his poetic force, fervour, and fire which kindle such
a kindred inspiration in the hearts of his readers as
responds to the force of his own eloquence when he
pleads the love of nature herself, versus his friend Erskine's
systematic cultivation of exotic poetry,—
"On the wildhiU
Let the wild heath-beU flourish still,
CherLsh the tulip, prune the vine.
But freely let the woodbine twine,
And leave untrimmed the eglantine."
Sir Walter's claims to a high rank among poets are,
however, mainly resisted by professedly friendly critics,
on the plea that his fame rests on those immortal prose
productions which have the advantage of being the fruit
of his matured mind, while his poetical career, ending as it
did at the age of forty-three, represents the dreams of his
youth. At that crisis, his poetical reputation was such
that none but his most intimate friends thought of identi¬
fying Walter Scott the poet with the " Great Unknown;"
and posterity has a more perplexing task than his
contemporaries in having to judge of these two claims
together. We may easily compare him with otlier poets,
but he has given us his most gigantic rival in himself,
illustrating the shrewd remark of a contemporary, that
he was like the elephant who was the greatest elephant
in all the world, except himself. The possible combina¬
tion of the twofold qualifications of poet and novel-writer
is instanced by George Eliot, George Macdonald, and
Bulwer Lytton in our own day; but so far from there
being any irreconcileability so far as Scott is concerned,
a perfect unity distinguishes the manifold coruscations of
his genius. Lord Cockburn says of his novels that they
were rather the outpourings of old thoughts than new in¬
ventions, and certainly Walter Scott's qualifications as a
228 llie Attempt.
poet made Walter Scott a great novelist. Only a great
poet could have originated those glorious creations, which,
poetizing the prose-form in which they appeared, emanated
from the same poet-mind which animates all his works,
as it did his life and character.
For this brings us to the final point in our case, viz.,
the inherent poetry of Scott's nature, which has been
doubted, because he happened to associate with his poetic
gifts a small share of common sense. His connection
Avith trade, if proving a business turn of mind, unusual with
the poet, in its success, equally proved a becoming amount
of poetic heedlessness in its failure. The aim of his life
in regard to family distinction has been censured as great
weakness, but it was rather an amiable ambition, with
nothing mean, sordid, or selfish aboiit it, by which he hoped
to benefit others i-ather than himself, with such a refer¬
ence to the past and the future as gave it the semblance
of a poet's dream, rather than a worldly man's covetous-
ness. In his modest yielding of the bays to Byron, when
that brilliant luminary blazed out upon the literary
horizon, we recognize no want of attachment to his calling,
but merely another instance of that stern self-control
which bent his impulses to suit his practical view of dealing
with existing circumstances. That something was missed
out of his life when he thus forsook the muse, we may
believe, from the touching farewell lines addressed to his
minstrel harp,—
" Much have I owed thy strains on life's long way,
Through secret woes, the world has never known,
When on the weary night dawned wearier day,
And bitter was the grief devoured alone.
That I o'erlive such woes, Enchantress ! is thine own."
Poetry was, indeed, the true solace of his life, m itself
a beautiful poem, a grand epic, and, alas! a sad tragedy.
Nurtured amid the scenes of Border chivalry which he
afterwards commemorated, his early youth imbibed that
love of the wonderful, the romantic, and the adventurous,
which, fosteredby the companionship of Percy's " Reliques,"
the " Castle of Otranto," and Arthur's Seat, moulded his
poet-character. In his early attachment, he found what
he thought the realization of his poetic ideal, and he loved
with all the ardour of a poet's fancy; but, when dis¬
appointment came with its crushing blow, instead of wail¬
ing and despairing after the Byronic model, he followed
the nobler advice of the truly poetic line:—
" To bear is to conquer our fate;"
I
The Attempt. 229
and from that time forward, digging in the treasures
of his mind, found some recompense for the sorrows of
his heart. And yet how constant he was to these early
impressions is proved, not only by repeated portraitures
of the lady of his love (of which Margaret of Brank-
some is one of the sweetest and most winsome ever
drawn by poet's pen), but from the allusions of his diary
in his later years, and the fact of his having, within the
last ten years of his life, when a grey-haired man, tran¬
scribed from memory a copy of early known verses whose
authoress was no other than his own first love. After
the brilliant career and tremendous misfortunes of this
great man are alike past, can we wonder to find him in
the tAvilight of his life longing to return to the poetry of
his youth, which even could associate the beauties of classic
Italy with such a touching memento of the past, as—
" It's up the craggy mountain and down the mossy glen,
We canna gang a-milking for Charlie and his men."
Can we wonder that the strong poet-yearning to return
to lay his bones in the sepulchre of his fathers wrought
its own fulfilment, and that the torpor of hopeless illness
should, on the banks of Tweed, be overcome by the
patriot feeling which, recognising familiar landmarks, and
murmuring—" Gala Water, surely—Buckholm—Torwood-
lee!"—found its triumphant expression in a scream of
dehght at the sight of those familiar towers, the return
to which was endearingly commemorated in the satisfied
repetition—" My ain house, my ain house; I have seen
much, but nothing like my ain house."
So this grand genius passed away, this child of fame,
this antiquary, this man of the world died, as a poet, in a
hushed silence of nature and a world of mourners. So,
too, he was fittingly laid to rest in a minstrel's tomb,
where his requiem is sung in the sighing of the breeze
through the branches of his friendly trees and the soft
murmur of his beloved Tweed; for, in the sweet solitudes
of Dryburgh, the musing pilgrim is reminded of his own
beautiful lines:—
" Call it not vain ; they do not err,
Who say, that when the poet dies,
Mute nature mourns her worshipper,
And celebrates his obsequies ;
Who say, tall cliff and cavern lone,
For the departed Bard make moan ;
That mountains weep in crystal rill :
That flowers in tears of balm distil;
230 The A ttem.pt.
Through his loved groves that breezes sigh,
And oaks, in deeper groan, reply ;
And rivers teach their rushing wave
To murmur dirges round his grave."
Such is the tribute of nature. That of mankind is an
immortality of fame such as will outhve those noble ruins
whose hoary age looks down as if in mockery of the short¬
lived span of the career of genius.
" The last of all the bards was he,
Who sang of Border chivalry;''
and, as standing over his grave, it may be said that, if to
flood the world with noble thought, and leave it better
than he found it ; if to ally genius with sincerity,
morality, chivalry; if, to use a great poetic faculty for
the benefit of humanity at large, and, on dying, leave not
a line that he might wish to blot; if to win the respect
and interest of the world for the scenery, national history,
character, and even prejudices of his native country; if
to surround a womanly ideal with the most tender de¬
votion of chivalrous belief, because—
"Faith in womankind
Beat vvdth his blood, and trust in all things high
Came easy to him;"
if to do those works and wear that character be the
work and character of a great poet, then Sir Walter
Scott was a great poet—-without the passionate fer¬
vour of Burns and Byron, the serene, contemplative
humour of Wordsworth, or the idyllic sweetness of Tenny¬
son, his genius -was Homeric in its action, and Shakes¬
pearian in its spirit, so that his place in poetry seems to
us correctly indicated in the foUoAving final apostrophe:—
" Brother of Homer, and of him
On Avon's banks, by twilight dim,
Who dreamt immortal dreams, and took
From nature's hand her storied book,
Earth hath not seen, time may not see,
Till ends his mai-ch, such other three."
Elpib.
^\tt^\\\% and lilalunj.
Calm through the long night
Still my darling lay ;
Drowned was the trouble
Of the weary day.
The Attempt. 231
Cold the tears lay on her cheek,
Like a child's, so soft and meek,
So she lay and slept, my darling.
After I was gone.
Sweet through the long night
Shone her loving eyes,
Waiting to greet me,
Till the day should rise.
All around her was asleep,
On the land, and o'er the deep;
Yet, she waited, oh my darling,
Waking tUl the dawn.
Softly the long night
Fell upon the sea.
Softly her last words
Spoke my love to me,—
" I shall dream of you, my own,
Through the night so cold and lone."
So she fell asleep, my darling.
And the days go on.
0. M.
dfat (^rifiitds  and  J^rquaintanrcs.
" There is a dull sameness in the characters of all cats.
Their worthless affections are bestowed upon places
rather than upon persons, and they show little or no
intelligence, except for the art of stealing." This is the
kind of language one is accustomed to hear from the
hps of those who have no true fondness for the feline
race. But are not indifference and dislike as often blind
to talents and excellences, as love is to faults and im¬
perfections ? and if so, surely we, the cat-admirers, have
some right to be heard in defence of our frequently
abused friends.
I may say that exceptionally good opportunities
have been aftbrded me for the study of the habits and
eccentricities, the virtues and failings of cats. Our old
parsonage home in Cheshire was once called " the cats'
paradise," because of the care and attention bestowed
upon the numerous Toms and Tabbies which were
born and reared and led happy, peaceful lives beneath
232 The Attempt.
our roof. " Some cats are kicked up, ours are brought up,"
I once heard a friend remark, and certainly this might
have been said of all the cats nurtured by us.
They were far too much respected to be merely
addressed as " Puss." I have noticed that strangers
seemed surprised to see a cat appear when " Edward" has
been called ; that they looked startled when " Mrs Jona¬
than's" kittens were referred to; and that they smiled
somewhat derisively when two other cats were introduced
as " Alice Maud Mary," and " Mr John Bright." But we
seldom gave these names thoughtlessly, or, as our
enemies might express it, " there was method in our
madness."
Some names were given after certain peculiarities of
appearance and character had been observed. Thus
one cat was called " Greedy Jem," because of his
insatiable appetite; another, " Patience," owing to her
meek and subdued expression of countenance, and a
third, " Cinderella," from her unwashen look. Being great
admirers of the works of Charles Dickens, we have had
Mrs Lirriper, Pickwick, Snodgrass, and Winkle among
our cat names; and I may mention that Sam Weller, a
kitten of tender age, is at the present moment an inmate
of our house.
We have also had a " Hodge" to keep Dr Johnson's
pet in remembrance. How delightful, as a bit of grave
nonsense, is the story told of this creature. It is related
that upon one occasion the doctor was somewhat thought¬
lessly praising another cat in the presence of the favourite,
when observing his " countenance to fall," he added, "But
Hodge is a very fine cat, sir, a very fine cat."
My list of names would be scarcely perfect without the
mention of Thomas Goodchild, who earned for himself
both respect and affection, by his rare amiability and
uniform steadiness of conduct.
Finding that three meals a day were certain to be
provided for them, our cats wasely troubled their heads
little about such low pursuits as the catching of rats and
mice, but gave themselves up to much sleep and quiet
thought. Understanding, however, the importance of
healthy exercise, they often took strolls in the garden,
or extended then- walks to the neighbouring woods and
fields, where they could study in peace the habits of birds
and rabbits. Occasionally, also, they enjoyed an in-door
game.    From end to end of the house there ran a long
The Attempt. 233
passage, which was divided near the kitchen by a door
covered with green baize. When this stood open, our cats
evidently regarded it as their gymnasium, and as placed
there solely for their use and benefit. They scrambled
up and down it, swung from the top, and performed other
feats -ttdth surprising agility and much delight. Of
course the green baize suffered, but that could not be
helped.
I strongly deny the truth of the opinion already
alluded to, that there is no variety in the characters of
cats. Only six months ago we possessed two cats who
were as opposite in nature as—well, suppose we say Tom
Sayers and William Wilberforce. They were exactly the
same age, and had had precisely the same advantage
of training, yet Kitty was gentle, lady-like, aftectionate,
and in every way estimable, while Mrs Jonathan was
vulgar, bad-tempered, lazy, heartless, and hypocritical.
Kitty's sweet and loving disposition shone so brightly in
her face, that a discerning visitor, after a single glance
at her, remarked, " What a kind expression that cat has !"
and cruelty and meanness were no less clearly written on
Mrs Jonathan's plain features. Whether it was jealousy
caused by Kitty's superior beauty or not, I cannot tell,
but Mrs Jonathan's spite against her innocent and peace-
lo^vang companion knew no bounds.
I have several times witnessed this scene:—Kitty enters
the room, soon followed by Mrs Jonathan, who chooses
a place on the hearth-rug rather near her. Kitty looks
uneasy in mind, but seems unable to move. Mrs J. now
edges along gradually, Avinking and blinking all the
time as if half asleep, until Kitty's side is reached.
Kitty is still rooted to the spot by fear and horror.
And now mark the utter baseness of Mrs J.'s character.
She gently washes the face of Kitty, who submits to this
act of her treacherous enemy with shut eyes and scared
expression. Then follow Mrs J.'s furious attack and Kitty's
piteous screams.    I rush to the rescue.    Scene closes.
In the same deceitful way Mrs Jonathan would jump
on my knee, apparently in the most afFectionate of moods,
and after purring for some time in order to disarm all sus¬
picion, she would give me a sudden bite or scratch, and
then dart off to escape the expected and richly deserved
chastisement. Now, Kitty never gave a scratch in her
life, even under the severest provocation, except, of
course, in the defence of her kittens.
2   Gt AUGUST 1872.
234 Tlie Attempt.
But the difference between the two cats was, perhaps,
most noticeable when each had a family to look after.
Two baskets, lined with hay and flannel, were provided
as the respective nurseries, but, upon one of these occasions,
Mrs Jonathan's apartment was discovered to be empty,
for, the kittens having been deserted by their unnatural
parent, Kitty had, in her pitying motherly kindness,
carried them off to her basket, and was bringing them up
with her own little family. In strong contrast to such
noble benevolence appeared the conduct of Mrs Jonathan,
who has been known to make a fierce attack upon Kitty's
kittens if they happened to be left unprotected for a few
moments.
And yet, I believe, we all had a certain fondness for the
malevolent creature, which was, perhaps, simply owing
to the fact that we saw her, spoke to her, stroked her
almost every day for seven years. If there is truth in the
ugly old proverb, " familiarity breeds contempt," may it
not also be said that familiarity breeds affection'? We
noticed that Kitty's children were far more amiable than
those of Mrs Jonathan, but certainly the cat-mother's dis¬
position is not always thus seen in her jDrogeny. I heard
lately of a bad-tempered, but liighly intellectual Scotch
cat, who had a kind-hearted but almost idiotic son.
Unlike either Kitty or Mrs Jonathan in character was
Scamp, a cat whose acquaintance I made a few years ago
at the house of one of my friends. Very beautiful she
w^as both in colour and form, and extremely graceful in
all her movements. But there was a Avild, almost fierce
look in her brilliant eyes which spoke of the tiger in its
natural state—the untamed monarch of the jungle, not the
despondent, sleepy-looking animal we study in a menagerie.
I liked Scamp, but she received my friendly overtures
with a coldness which at last grew into positive hatred.
That she had affection I knew, and it vexed me not a little
to see it freely bestowed upon some who did not take
half the pains I did to please her. But there Avas all the
waywardness and caprice of a spoilt beauty about her—
and the jealousy also, for she showed the utmost rage if
another creature was petted in her presence by any one
for whom she cared. It was a singular proof of her un¬
reasonable likes and dislikes that, although both the
daughters of the family were equally fond of and kind to
her, she would bite and scratch one when out of temper,
but invariably softened her paws for the other.
The Attempt. 235
We sometimes see how the sprightly changeful manner
and fascinating prettiness of some wilful girl may be
transformed into gentler ways and calm matronly beauty
—beauty which is yet occasionally disturbed by flashes of
the old wild nature. Some such change as this I observed
in Scamp, when, after some time, I again visited my
friend's home. (It is really remarkable to notice how
maternal cares and anxieties at once alter the faces of
even the most uninteresting cats). I made no second
attempt to win Scamp's regard, for it is unpleasant and
humiliating to have one's affection thrown back upon
one's self even by a cat, but this time it was she who
made the advances, and we soon became most excellent
friends.
" Cats unintelligent I" I deny this also, though I admit
the superiority of dog wisdom.
T was one day sitting in the" cottage of a poor rheu¬
matic woman, who was quite unable to rise from her chair
without help, when I heard, as I thought, a sudden knock
at the door, but before I had time to call out " come in !"
it opened, and greatly to my astonishment there appeared
a cat, clinging cleverly to the outside handle. This wise
animal having discovered that her poor mistress was
unable to let ]ier in, always entered by springing up
against the latch in such a manner as to press it down,
and then in she swung triumphantly, as I had the pleasure
of observing. I wish I could add that she always had
the politeness to shut the door afterwards on cold days,
but of this I heard nothing,
" Music hath charms" for some cats, but torments for
others. I have known a cat who would perch herself
upon the piano the moment it was opened, and listen to
singing and playing with the most lively pleasure.
Others, at the sounding of the first chord, will retreat to
the door, and if not permitted to leave the room, im¬
mediately begin an accompaniment of most inharmonious
cries.
It occurs to me that it may be useful to some people
to know, that in London there are doctors who devote
their attention exclusively to cats. One of these men was
called in to see two pets, who were suffering under a
severe attack of influenza. A proper medicine was ad¬
ministered, but before this was done they were tied up in
two bags, their heads only remaining visible, which, of
course, rendered a scratching resistance impossible.    In
236 The Attempt.
the corner of the card left by the doctor at our friend's
house were the words, " Patients attended at their own
homes."
Let it not be suspected that I have secret Darwinian
sympathies, when I say that I am continually observing
resemblances between the faces and ways of cats, and
these of human beings. I have no wish to dwell upon my
own particular fancies, but everyone can see how perfectly
well suited a reckless frolicsome kitten and a happy
blithe young child are to each other, both living
" As if life's business were a summer mood ;"
both
" Over wealthy in the treasure,
Of their own exceeding pleasure! "
And the cat who moves her tail about to afford her kitten
ecstasies of delight, and allows herself to be maltreated
with positive pride and pleasure, bears no mere imaginary
likeness to the human mother, who permits baby-fingers
to tear down her hair and thrust themselves into her
mouth and eyes with such remarkable equanimity.
I believe some of our friends and acquaintances look
upon us as cat-crazy, but supported by each other's sym¬
pathy, we are not ashamed of this family weakness, if a
weakness it be. Our most extravagant thoughts and
words concerning our favourites, have never, I fancy,
reached the height of affectionate respect shown in the
following speculative remarks made by " the learned and
ingenious Montaigne." "When my cat and I entertain
each other with mutual apish tricks, as playing with a
garter, who knows but that I make my cat more sport
than she makes me ? Shall I conclude her to be simple,
that has her time to begin or refuse to play as freely as
I myself have ? Nay, who knows but that it is a defect
of my not understanding her language (for, doubtless,
cats talk and reason with one another) that we agree no
better? And who knows but that she pities me for
being no wiser than to play with her, and laughs and
censures my folly for making sport for her when we two
play together?" I
" Thus," says Izaak Walton, who quotes the passage
with evident delight, " thus freely speaks Montaigne con¬
cerning cats."
M. S. S.
The Attempt. 2:57
%, ^Xxvm^tx'^ 4irst |httpri?ssion5 of (Bdinburcjlt.
My earliest longings have been at last gratified. I have
seen in reality those places made so familiar to the
imagination by the pen of the great novelist, and have
stood upon the very spots that have witnessed the most
eventful deeds of Scottish history.
The ideas entertained with regard to Scotland, by one
whose sole acquaintance with that laud of legendary
interest had been derived partly from its history, full of
romantic adventure, but in greater measure from the
Waverley Novels, were, it may be imagined, of a some¬
what elevated nature; they were not, however, doomed
to experience the fate of most exalted expectations,—dis¬
illusion and disenchantment.
Crossing the Border, we felt as if we "were leaving
behind us the prosaic domains of the present, with its
busy factories and smoking chimneys, and entering upon
the sacred land of the past; such names as Berwick and
Dunbar arousing in the memory tales of Border fights,
and the patriotic heroes whose names are associated
with them. Alas for romance ! if we will dream now-a-
days, our dreams must needs be short-lived.
"O, Caledonia ! stem and wild,
Meet nurse for a poetic child,"
do we not carry our chimneys, or rather, do not our
chimneys carry us into the very heart of thy time-
hallowed scenes ? and our knights of the round table, do
they not appear to us in the guise of railway directors,
their quest no longer " the rosy flash of the Holy Grail,"
but " the yellow lustre of sordid gold " ? Pounds, shilliugs,
and pence,—let us confront the fact as best we may—are
the death blow to sentiment; and there are few regions
of historical or natural interest that do not now suffer
from the destructive invasions of modern science.
The light of day had now faded into a dim twilight,
which invested all we saw with a gloomy and mysterious
impressiveness, and which greatly heightened the interest
of this historical region, from the fact that we could see
very little, but imagine a great deal. Proceeding fur¬
ther, we caught a faint glimpse of the sea, with the
white waves breaking against the dark rocks, and in
the  gloom  we   pictured  to   our  fancy  many a  ruined
238 The Attempt.
Border castle frowning from the cliffs in lofty solitude.
At length the warning resonance of our " steam eagle," as
Mrs Browning would call it, aroused us from our dreams,
whether of an imaginative or a shimbering nature, and
the glimmering of lights in tall, high-storied houses,
announced that we were entering Edinburgh. Passing
Arthur's Seat, rising in wild and lonely grandeur above
the bustling city, we found omrselves at last upon the
soil, for whose independence a Wallace and a Bruce
had struggled with such heroic and patriotic ardour; and
in a city, around which there hangs such a dark interest,
as the scene of one of the most mysterious and tragic
dramas ever played out in history, and to which the eyes
of historians have been turned with speculative interest
and differing opinions ever since Mary Stuart held her
court here, and by her unfortunate charms earned the
fame of a Helen or a Cleopatra.
On the way from the station, the effect of the peculiarly
high houses, lighted in every storey, was at once novel and
brilliant, presenting the appearance of an illumination.
It is the custom of families in Edinburgh fi-equently to
live on flats, something after the manner of pigeons in a
cote, but unluckily, the unfortunate inhabitants of the top
storey cannot avail themselves of a pigeon's speedy
method of exit.
When Princes Street broke upon oiu- view, the brilliancy
of the scene was quite dazzling, with its blaze of lights,—
their reflection half-revealing the surrounding beauties of
the place from out of the obscurity of night. It is seldom
that an after siglit equals the first view of a place, when
it bursts upon us with unexpected novelty—for it is almost
certain to be precisely the contrary to what we antici¬
pated—and our imagination colours it with a kind of in¬
terest that too frequently wears off upon closer acquaint¬
ance. Although, when seeing Princes Street by daylight, I
was enabled to gain a better and more detailed knowledge
of its beauties, yet it hardly came iip to my ideal so much
as upon that first rapid coup dtceil; when we felt, rather
tlian distinctly saw, the great Castle rock lowering over
us like a vast, shadowy phantom, "\\'ith lights like a crown
of stars gleaming from its lofty summit; while all around,
that, in the glare of day-light, might appear too harshly
modern to harmonize with the spirit of the place, was
softened in the magic light.
The light of morning reA'ealed  the Castle   eminence
The Attempt. idd
rising in  rugged  grandeur before  our windows, its war¬
like towers frowning sternly over the modern city, and
contrasting   strangely  with   its   aspect of   peace   and
prosperity, each presenting types of two very opposite
times,  indeed, Edinburgh manifests these contrasts every¬
where, retaining as she does so many arcliitectural relics
of past ages, while modern taste has revived the classic
stylo in many of her pubHc buildings, thus uniting the
typical architecture of many ages and different nations.
Princes Street, for example, resembles  a succession  of
historical dissolving-views.    Beginning at the west end,
a fine Gothic church first strikes the eye.     Farther, a
giant rock rears its dark form, a fortress crowning its
precipitous  heights,  with   sentinels   in  their   Highland
uniforms, lending a picturesque air of nationahty, pacing
the   battlements—a   monument   of   sterner   and   more
troubled times than these, telling a dark history of its own
in strife and bloodshed, and in the memories of the illus¬
trious prisoners who pined in its dungeons.    The moat at
the base of the rock, now no longer used as a means of
defence, but converted into a garden filled with trees and
shrubs, presents a perfect picture of our own times, when
the peaceful arts are  cultivated, undisturbed by the rude
hand of strife.    Indeed, upon a day of public promenade,
when the military band plays here, the contrast between
this pleasure ground, crowded with a gay throng, and the
glim old castle above, produces an effect both striking
and suggestive, the whole scene being one of which a
philosopher or a poet would make the most as a fit theme
for moralising.     Beyond, the Royal Institution and the
National Gallery,  with the Calton Hill, surmounted by
the columns of an unfinished monument in the background,
add a classical appearance to the series of pictures; while
the row of hotels and shops on the left, the passers-by
attired in the unpicturesque costume of the day—not in
tartan  and kilts—and the   cabs  and  omnibuses,   speak
only too forcibly of the present.
Sir Walter Scott's Monument also forms a striking
feature in the grand, long vista of Princes Street, present¬
ing in its graceful and harmonious outlines a pleasing
change from monuments of the tea-urn style, obelisks and
towering columns, the surmounting statues of which,
instead of being the central point of interest, are almost
lost in the clouds. But the design of this is the most
beautiful and appropriate that could have been chosen to
240 The Attempt.
commemorate one whose genius was so combined with the
romantic spirit, of which Gotliic architecture has been
considered a type. How small the figure of the man
looks in comparison to the magnificent superstructure
raised above his head ; yet, how could a memorial, how¬
ever vast and splendid, measure the mental greatness of
one whose works will outlive all such monuments.
From the comparatively small size of Edinburgh, the
public buildings are grouped in closer relation to each
other than is usual in larger towns, contributing greatly
to its general completeness and imposing effect; and
there can be but few cities in the world where nature
lends such generous assistance to the eff'orts of human
art,—the combination of the two producing a magnificence
of result scarcely to be surpassed. For nature here reigns
"with a glory undiminished by the hand of cultivation, or
the sordid touch of the speculating builder, in the wild,
native sublimity of rock, crag, hill, and rugged steep ; and
under the shadow of Arthur's Seat you might almost
forget, in the midst of that solitary A^'ilderness of boulder
and cairn, what a turbid stream of human life is flo-wing
unceasingly so close at hand. But if the contemplation
of life is preferred, instead of barren desolation, and
" Tovver'd cities please us then,
And the busy hum of men,"
the stranger can have no better opportiuiity of viewing
Edinburgh than from the heights of Arthur's Seat, and
Sahsbury Crags, or from the Castle or the Calton Hill,
where the city nestles beneath the shadoAv of these guardian
hills. The Castle, particularly, commands a wonderfully
extensive and comprehensive view, being situated in the
centre of Edinburgh, between the Old and the New Town.
Looking down from either side of the courtyard, the scene
presents pictures of two phases of hmnan life, diametrically
opposed to each other in external appearance, the one, as
in the Grassmai-ket and its neighbourhood, revealing its
worst features of squalid poverty, dirt, and misery to the
gaze with unvarnished significance; the other presenting
its best features most prominently, and concealing the
worst under an external aspect of brightness and beauty.
Beyond, the eye still ranges over a wide expanse of
biiildings, with spire and tower rising everj^where out of
the sea of roofs, all softened and subdued into harmonious
outline by the light gossamer veil of grey mist and smoke
that shrouds all northern cities, and gives them a certain
The Attempt. 241
mystic, shadowy beauty of their own (but for our climate,
we might not have been enriched with the genius of a
Turner), when the harshest looking objects, melting under
the soft influence of the haze, are blended into vague
forms of aerial lightness; while spire and furnace, alike
spiritualised, loom like phantoms out of their misty sur¬
roundings. And, finally, the sight loses itself in penetrat¬
ing into the broad expanse of the Frith of Forth, stretch¬
ing out into the boundless reach of ocean, or in roving
over hill and headland melting away in the purple dis¬
tance. But, for the sake of truth, it must be confessed
that the atmospheric influences before alluded to very
frequently condense themselves into a heavy fog, so that
a complete view of Edinburgh is a rich and rare enjoyment.
Nothing that I saw made a greater impression upon my
mind than the first view of Holyrood, obtained from the
Calton HUl one dark and foggy day, when, looming out
in the mist, it seemed to be no thing of the present, but
rather a ghostly fabric of the past emerging out of the
shadowy mists of Auld Lang Syne, only to melt away again
and vanish into gloom. The ruined chapel, the antique
portal and towers, so historically familiar, so darkly and
sternly characteristic of their times, seemed haunted by
recollections of dark interest, and associated with the
memory of one,
" She, the bright sun of all her sex,"
whose life was a tragic problem which shall not be solved
till chivalry, with its warm impulses, and history, with its
cold scenting, shall h^ve ceased their struggles here, and
when,
" In presence of the countless hosts
That have been, are, and are to be,"
the story, not of Mary Stuart only, but of the universe,
shall be told and understood. This palace is the very
realisation of gloom ; the gloom of history pervades it, the
gloom of nature surrounds it, for it stands in silent loneli¬
ness, overshadowed by the desolate heights of Arthur's
Seat, apart from the noise and confusion of the hurrying
world, the tomb of Scotland's buried kingdom, a monu¬
ment of the days gone by.
Where a large mass of humanity congregates to¬
gether, there must inevitably be a corresponding accu¬
mulation of evil, and Edinburgh is no exception to
the rule. Although she is rich in charities, and vigorous
efforts are made to improve the moral and physical con-
■^  H ADGU8T 1872.
242 The Attempt.
dition of her poor, yet idleness and intemperance, with all
their concomitant evils, lie like a serpent amid the flowers,
and mar the perfection of this beautiful city. But even
this melancholy side of human life here possesses many
features of interest, for its quarters are situated in the
most ancient and historical part of the town, where are still
to be found numerous records of domestic life in the earlier
centuries, in many of the dwelling-houses, quaintly and
picturesquely gabled, some still retaining over the door¬
way the arms and coronet of some Scottish noble. For
though a policeman may now be looked upon here in the
light of a guardian angel, yet this was once the richest
and most fashionable part of Edinburgh, and what are
now dens of wretchedness, were once palaces of the
groat.
The title of the Modern Athens, by which Edinburgh is so
frequently designated, seems equally applicable to its
intellectual and learned character, as to its natural resem¬
blance. The facilities for instruction here afforded place
the highest education within the reach of more than the
privileged few who can afford to pay highly for it; thus
opening the doors of knowledge to aU classes of both
sexes. Here, also, the question of woman's education, or
woman's rights or wrongs—whichever they are, for they
all seem to have got inextricably mixed together—is
agitated in a most lively manner, and the members of
the fair sex seem to enjoy many of the same privileges
and advantages of education which those of the opposite,
—in many cases may they not be called the opposing
sex?—have hitherto almost entirely monopolised; and the
former have proved themselves worthy of better things
than what they consider mere domestic drudgery and
insignificance. But yet it is not astonishing that
the chivalry of the students of the Edinburgh Univer¬
sity should fail, when put to a test so unlocked for, and
for which there is scarcely a provision in their code; and
that instead of the cry " place aux dames! " a resistance
should be offered to this feminine invasion of grounds,
such as the dissecting room, of which they had possessed
the exclusive enjoyment.
The University is a fine classic-looking building, but
lacks that time-hallowed air of scholastic dignity and
gravity which (although completely defied by the stu¬
dents) one is accustomed to associate Avith collegiate
buildings, as exemplified in the ancient and monastical-
The Attempt. 243
looking courts and cloisters of the greater number of the
colleges of the two leading English universities.
The High School is a characteristically learned-looking
edifice, its Grecian style of architecture associating itself
with the idea of classic learning.
A stricter religious spirit undoubtedly pervades Edin¬
burgh than London, especially in the observance of Sun¬
day, but it is not carried to such an almost Jewish
extreme of punctiliousness as formerly, when to whistle
an air on Sunday was almost considered a crime ; and
we found that our landlady had no objection to supply
us with our meals as usual, Sunday here, although it
may appear to a foreigner a " sad day," is nevertheless
pre-eminently a day of rest, mth every shop closed, and
scarcely a single vehicle to be seen in the streets ; more¬
over, it is anything but a " sad " sight to see all classes—
the working man with his wife and bairns in their holiday
attire, although it does sit somewhat uncomfortably upon
them, and the richer classes, with their wives and
daughters lending brightness to the scene, together
wending their way to their respective places of worship.
And although the droning of chants in the open air may
flavour somewhat too strongly of the days of Puritanism
to be agreeable to some, yet surely it is better to listen to
what, to employ the harshest term, might come under
the denomination of canting, than profane swearing in
the streets.
The greater number, and the most important, of the
churches here are naturally Presbyterian, though there
are places of worship for those of every form of opinion.
Although the Presbyterian service might reasonably be
called cold and unimpressive by those accustomed to a
more ornate ritual, yet there is something pure and
almost subUme in its conception—in that naked appeal
to the spiritual and metaphysical element within us, that
would fain disregard all assistance offered through the
senses, A suggestive service it may be called, for, with¬
out exciting the feelings through the medium of aught
that speaks to the eye or the ear, it just touches the
chords of the inmost depths of the heart, leaving each one,
according to his or her respective individuality, to catch
the strain and
" The confesHions of its secret thought,
The joy, the triumph, the lament.
The exultation and the pain."
244 The Attempt.
Though the rich roll of an organ, "winding through
pillared nave and aisle up to the arched roof, may thrill
and inspire the soul with lofty feelings by its mingled
sweetness and grandeur, yet there is something exquisitely
simple and sweet in a body of modulated human voices,
unsustained by any instrument, floating heavenwards,
when the sound of the words is lost in a vague murmur,
dying and swelling like a breeze—like the melody of an
^olian harp touched by the breath of the wind. It
would be impossible for the more impulsive, impres¬
sionable, and passionate Southerner to accept the
doctrines of rehgion in the same way as the more reflec¬
tive, cool, and phlegmatic Northerner, for people interpret
them differently according to their nature, customs, and
associations ; and the Presbyterian form of worship seems
the reflection of the Scottish nature exemplified.
To conclude, in summing up this account of my first im¬
pressions of Edinburgh, I can only remark that they were
of such a nature, that I feel sure no second sight or experi¬
ence could disenchant me. BARBARA.
©hu   Wi\ixit   lose.
A.D.  1715.
The white rose blows athwart the window here,
The throbbing wind comes softly from the west,
The sunset fades into an opal sphere,
And all things li\'ing welcome night and rest.
I lean from out my window : to the North
I look, and dream, and drink the sweet night dew,
And think of him, this day gone riding forth
To battle, with the loyal and the true.
I gave my love a White Rose for a pledge
Of truth and fealty to his king and me.
And watched him, leaning from my window ledge.
As he rode forth across the sunny lea.
My love, my love, gone from my sight to-day;
What if he come to me ho more again ?
Fearless, I bade him God-speed on his way.
And now could Aveep my heart away in pain.
The Attempt: 245
Ah, faithless heart, no longer doubt and fear,
My AVhite Rose, as an amulet of strength,
Such as I plucked, and gave it to him here.
Will bring him back again to me, at length.
No more, no more:—far in the stormy North
He lay, as evening deepened into night.
Dying : and at moon-rise his soul went forth,
There on the red field of his latest fight.
Fast to his lips a withered rose was prest,
Memorial of his love, and loyal faith.
Remembered duty, ere that final rest.
And carried with him to the gates of death.
Oh, sad White Rose, for ever faded now.
And rooted from thine ancient pride of place,
So many a head for thy defence laid low,
So many a heart bled for thy kingly race.
Forgotten, though thy fair leaves once were red,
Red with the blood of thy most true and brave ;
No more remembered than the noble dead.
Who found for thy sake a forgotten grave.
YOLANDE.
louj Kt KtxA from ligom to ^urhon.
•We passed part of the summer and autumn of 186— in
the little town of Bagnferes de Bigorre, in the Pyrenees,
and meeting some friends who were anxious to join a
party and make an excursion to Bagneres de Luchon, it
was left to my uncle and brother, the only gentlemen of
the company, to make the necessary arrangements.
At the time of which I speak, there was no railway even
to Pau, and the transit to the different watering places in
the Pyrenees was both more difficult and more expensive
than it is now; being either accomplished by diligence or
posting, both of which methods of conveyance lose in
various discomforts what they gain in romance.
Our party consisted of my uncle and mother, my brother,
who was about eighteen years of age, tAvo sisters and
246 The Attempt.
myself, all younger; three timid and elderly ladies, and a
young lady considerably older than ourselves.
It was beautiful weather, about the middle of September,
the intense heat of a PjTenean summer was somewhat
tempered by pleasant autumnal breezes, and we had
anticipated such pleasure from our contemplated trip, that
the young ones especially were in a high state of expecta¬
tion. Accordingly, the day before the one fixed on to start,
my uncle and Charlie set off to go the round of the differ¬
ent stables, and choose the fleetest looking horses and
most substantial carriages for our journey, or rather, I
should say, the least broken-down-looking of both.
Each had a most profound faith in his own powers of
oratory in a foreign language, a faith in which we could
not conscientiously join, and when any more than ordinary
difficulty arose, and our offers of help were indignantly
rejected, they eked out the poverty of their words by a
number of extraorchnary gestures, calculated, in my opinion,
and I think also in that of their hearers, rather to obscure
their meaning than otherwise. My sisters' and my own
home-taught French was not much better than theirs
when we first came to the Continent, but by dint of
study and conversation we flattered ourselves that we
were at least intelhgible; but as a rule, on such occa¬
sions, men will not accept woman's help until they find
they absolutely cannot get on without it; so, as I said
before, our two cavaliers set off" alone to complete our
arrangements.
They returned in about an hour and a half, looking
rather dejected and crest-fallen, and were met by a chorus
of questions as to whether we had been too late in apply¬
ing ; were all the carriages engaged, or were they de¬
manding an exorbitant price ?
Rather reluctantly, after many preambles and a great
dealaboutthe "confounded patois these 'voituriers' spoke,"
the truth came out that they had neither understood
themselves what was said nor had they succeeded in con¬
veying the very faintest meaning of what they wished;
so, very laudably repressing a little excusable feminine
triumph, my eldest sister and I put on our hats and ac¬
companied them in the capacity of interpreters.
We had a good deal of bargaining to do, and after
agreeing to give the man a sum exactly one-half of what
he originally demanded, we were assured with great
volubility that his carriage and horses were the very best
The Attempt. 247
in all Bagneres ; the others were—well, it was'nt for him
to say what they were—but he had never failed to give
satisfaction, and so monsieur and madame would find.
He promised that if we were wilhng to start between five
and six o'clock in the morning, that we should be at
Bagneres de Luchon, parole cChonneur, by eight that even¬
ing; that was allowing two hours' rest in the middle
of the day, and if he did'nt keep his word—eh Men!
monsieur could keep the money.
At five o'clock next morning the carriages were at the
door, and after a hurried scramble of a breakfast, we
deposited ourselves and our belongings in them. I can¬
not say that, judging from the appearance of the steeds,
one would have concluded they were fast goers, nor
should we have much relished driving at home in such a
turn-out, for the dust of many journeys had coated the
panels with a sort of a dull grey, and the harness was
very freely supplemented with rope ; the driver gleefully
produced a coil of the same from below the seat, telling
us complacently to set our minds at rest, for if we did by
any possibility come to grief, behold, he had wherewith
to repair all damages !
Unpromising as some of the details appeared, we were
determined to make the best of everything. On a lovely
morning, to young eyes everything takes a rosy tint, and in
high delight we took our places, the drivers cracked their
great long whips like so many pistols going off, gee-hee'd,
yelled, and sacre'd their horses, and with that noisy
clatter, without which no French postilion ever made his
entry uito, or exit from a town, off we set.
It was a glorious morning. The air was just sufS-
ently keen to raise one's spirits to a delightful pitch, the
dew was sparkling on every hedge, the rosy tint had not
yet died off the snow-covered mountains, and as the fresh
morning breeze blew back the hair from om* faces, we
laughed and chattered and formed a hundred excursions
and plans for our stay at Luchon.
We " honjoured " all the peasants going to their morn¬
ing labour, and looked derisively at the lazy motion of
the charettes drawn by dull-eyed, slow-footed oxen, with
their long white coverings; looks which were some¬
times returned by their drivers with a sneer, intimating
that we should not long continue our present delightful
pace. And we did not. In about one hour and a-half's time
there  was a  considerable difference in the speed; the
248 The Attempt.
driver being gently remonstrated with by my imcle with
a "Pourquoi allez vous—so slow—so lente," appealed to our
feelings, " Would these ladies like to see the poor beasts
forced up a hill like that ? " pointing to an almost imper¬
ceptible rising ground half a kilometre off. From the
subsequent pace, I think the whole road to Paillole must
have been one long hill, though we failed to discover it as
such, but further remonstrance was useless after our
driver telling us that after a rest, " the best horses in
Bagn^res " would be as fresh as ever, but they had gone
about forty kilometres the day before
In short, we had been " done." No sacre'ing, which
together with the whip, in justice to our Jehu, I must say
he did not spare, would force our pair to go beyond a
foot-pace, and the other carriage, the horses of which,
though breathing very hard and considerably exhausted,
were not in such a wretched plight as ours, kept near to
cheer us.
The fear was coming home to us that it would be very
late indeed before we reached Luchon; and although the
scenery began to be much finer, and we ought to have
been in the height of enjoyment, our spirits of the morn¬
ing had somewhat evaporated; still we fixed our hopes
upon getting a change of horses at Paillole. At last
we reached the village, hours after we ought to have
done so, and were struck at the desolate aspect it
presented. Not a person did we see but one or two old
women and children, and on driving up to the little inn-
door were met by a half-witted ostler, who, on enquiry,
informed us there was a fair at a village some distance off,
to which nearly every one had gone, and worst of all,
had taken the only pair of horses with them. We
angrily appealed to our driver as to what was to be done.
It was he who brought us into this dilemma, and he it was
who must rescue us from it, and although many hard
words were addressed to him (a few of the hardest, for¬
tunately, he did not understand, as my uncle was wasting
them in English on the air), he never once lost his
good humour, but scratching his head, at length found
there a brilliant idea, for, clapping his hands together, he
exclaimed—-" I have it, we wiil have a pair of cows put
before the horses to pull them up the steep !"
After considerable delay, four aged cows were hunted
up somewhere in the village, and chartered for our service,
and our  cavalcade set   forth.    A  few  dry jokes  were
The Attempt. 249
attempted, but as they were very grimly responded to by
the elder members of the party, we occupied ourselves in
admiring the scenery around us. The ascent of the Col
d' Aspin is carried through forests of splendid fir trees,
whose dense growth and dark luxuriance give rather a
sombre aspect to the scene; but every here and there,
through breaks in the trees, or where the road zigzagged
more abruptly, Ave caught glimpses of unrivalled beauty ;
the Pic du Midi towering above the range of mountaius
on one hand, and the magnificent snow-covered peak of
the Maladetta towards the Spanish side. Pine forests
are certainly most beautiful, but their beauty becomes
somewhat monotonous, when one is subject, in the course
of an hour, to twenty delays of a different nature, and
when, instead of being at the summit of the Col in about
an hour and a-half from the time we left Paillole, the
afternoon Avas far advanced, and we had not half com¬
pleted oiu* upAvard journey. Suddenly we came to a
etand-still—the charioteer in front Avas ejaculating madly—
one of his horses had fallen. There was no help for it,—
all the baggage was piled on the box and back of our
can-iage, half of the party set out to Avalk to Arrean,
Avhere we noAV knew Ave must pass the night, and the
empty carriage, Avdth the disabled horses and their bovine
leaders, we left to return to Paillole how and Avhen they
might. We uttered no remonstrance in the meantime ;
our Avrath Avoiild be none the less for being nursed a
Avhile. It Avas tAvilight long before we completed the
ascent. I, for one, thought the descent Avould never be
accomplished, for Ave seemed to do nothing but turn
corners, and after Ave saAv the lights of the little toAvn
twinkling just beloAv us, and thoughts of welcome food
and rest cheered our flagging spirits, Ave lost sight of
them for more than an hour, and Avhen next seen they
seemed further off than ever.
It was dark night before we reached our destination.
The walking party had arrived, and though somewhat
fatigued with going across country in order to shorten
the way, and lengthening it considerably by the process,
they were recovering a little at the prospect of supper,
which they had ordered.
I shall never forget hoAvI enjoyed that supper! Nectar
and ambrosia could never have tasted as did that ham
and eggs; the very appearance of the room Avliere Ave
nartook of it is photographed on  my memory.    It Avas a
'^    ■' AUGUST  1872.
250 The Attempt.
long, low, dirty room, with common deal tables and
benches running down one side from end to end, a pre¬
vailing smell of stale tobacco and garlic hung in the
atmosphere, and the company collected round the upper
end of the table was a very heterogeneous one. Peasants
in bloiises and sabots, and two or three greasy, long¬
haired, beer-drinking German students, one or two
unmistakeable " commis-voyageurs," the pomade on
whose hair blended aromatically with the already odorous
air, and one smart-looking young Englishman, e^ddently
the hero of the company, who was keeping the others in
peals of laughter.
Notwithstanding the noise, and the dirt, and the con¬
fusion, we made a hearty meal, and then my uncle sent
for the driver to come in, to hear our opinion of his
conduct, and acquaint us with his arrangements for the
morrow. He came in wiping his mouth on his sleeve—
the very impersonation of contentment.
My uncle had been prevailed on to allow some one else
to speak for him; reluctantly yielding only on the condi¬
tion that he chose what was to be said, and insisting it
was to be translated verbatim. Knowing he coi;ld scarcely
order one of the elderly ladies to be his mouthpiece,
he selected me (as being taller and older-looking than
my sisters) to conduct the case. " Tell him he's a great
blackguard! " were the first words offered me for trans¬
lation. " And ask him what he means by his outrageous
conduct."
I confess I felt a little taken aback by the strength of
the language, especially as it was to be delivered before
a considerable audience; and secondly, I was not at all
sure what the French for "blackguard" was, so, after
mildly suggesting that he had put us to great incon¬
venience, I ventured rather timidly to call him a " coquin."
Here 1 abruptly paused, having accidentally met the
disapproving glance of one of the demure old ladies.
" Don't you know what blackguard is ? Say a cheat, a
swindler, an anything! " exclaimed my irascible uncle.
The subject of these remarks did not seem at all over¬
awed by them, and after a few more sentences of feeble
threatenings of other proceedings, and forcing him to pay
our hotel bill, etc.—during the utterance of which I became
covered with confusion, as the noise at the upper end of
the table had ceased, and every ear was bent to listen to
our altercation, I retired from the combat, not certauily
The Attempt. 251
with flying colours. My uncle had, meanwhile, been
working himself up to a great pitch of fury, and judging
by the very faint impression I was maldng on the criminal
before me, he asserted I was not saying what he had
told me, as assuredly I was not, considering the
language in which he was indulging ; so, taking the
law into his own hands, he burst forth into such a
torrent of abuse in mingled French and English, as
only an Englishman indulges in on the Continent, and
which would have been rather satisfactory had it done
any good, but falling upon heedless ears, 1 know not to
what extent it might have gone, had not the young
Englishman at this crisis stept forward and offered his
assistance in smoothing any little difficulty.
The presence of a sympathising fellow-countrjonan,
more than anything else, soothed the troubled waters,
and after we had explained the case to him, he turned,
and in a few sharp sentences informed our imperturbable
conductor that he could be dismissed without a farthing,
which fact did not seem at all to disturb his serenity, \^'e
were very tired, and exchanging good nights, we sepa¬
rated, retiring to our several apartments.
(To he continued^
La Maurice.
Ji Itt £ S.
The sun in our horizon lies yet low.
Its light streams level on our tangled path.
And all obstructions, that may rise therein
Cast such a long thick shadow round our steps,
We call it night, and stray amid the thorns,
And sit us down, and chafe, and weep, and wail,
And doubly blind our eyes, and shut our ears.
When both would serve us most to guide us right.
We name these troubles, trials, griefs, or pains.
Oh, not till we have found the path once more
That leads us past the shadow, do we find
The substance is a golden column, reared
In the full radiance of the morning light,
And on it writ, in words with precious gems,
A message, and a meaning deep as life.
252 The Attempt.
The words we read, the meaning oft we miss.
Full many rise, to guide our wandering feet
Back to " the Way," until our waking mind
Peers through the dim-stained glass of flesh it wears,
And meets their meaning.    Ah then I looking back
The path we came, we see their sunlit forms
Gleaming their rays of love, as thick as stars.
And their reflected light shines eastward back.
To clear the shadows of the coming ones.
As the moon lights us when the sun is hid.
And Patience with Experience flows from each,
Hope, I'aith, and Love, through all, and knowledge grows
To temper our weak souls, that they may learn
To bear the full light of the perfect Day,
When that clear Sun high in our zenith shines
Above us—in us, changeless—shadowless.
LuTEA Reseda.
From the German of Katiie Vosa.
A YOUNG girl went one day once into a forest. She was
very very sad, for some one had died whom she had
dearly loved.
The forest was still calm and peaceful, for it was early
in the morning, and, moreover, Sunday morning,
on which all nature rests from labour. The maiden
went slowly along, with drooping head and down¬
cast eyes, and so it was that slie saw nothing of
the splendour of the wood around, which shone in all the
brilliancy of summer. The tall trees wore their thick
foliage of tlie freshest green, on the ground grew luxuri¬
ant ferns and mosses, out of whose protecting embrace
the tiny wood-flowers raised shyly their little heads.
Birds and beetles rejoiced in the glittering rays of the
morning sim, Avhile the sparkling fountain sped in busy
haste to meet the rushing brook.
The young maiden had no eyes for all this, but the
inhabitants of the wood saw her as she passed mourn¬
fully on, and they pitied her ; and the trees and flowers,
the grasshoppers and birds, and the clear running spring
The Attempt. 253
said to each other, ''What ails the poor child? come,
let us console her, she is very sad to-day. Once she
looked joyfully around with her bright eyes, sang her
little song, and took pleasure in everything here. But
now she is mournful, let us comfort her in her sorrow."
Many friends at home had tried to comfort the poor
young girl, she had listened to them in silence, and re¬
mained sorrowful as before. To-day her grief had given
her no peace, and had driven her out into the wood, and
she was now wandering half unconscious along the old fami¬
liar path, which led to her favourite spot, where, in former
times, she had so often and so happily lingered. It was
a meadow in the midst of the forest, thickly surrounded
by old, lofty trees, which, with their dark fohage,
sheltered her from sun, rain, and wind. The meadow
was of the freshest green, strewn with varicjus flowers,
a rich, brightly glittering, coloured carpet, and here the
hastening fountain reached the little stream which flowed
quietly along, pursuing its Avay further and further on
by the edge of the forest.
Under an ancient oak tree stood a bench of branches
simply twisted together, thither the young girl went,
and sat down in the cool leafy shade. She clasped her
hands, let her head fall upon her bosom, and thought,
" Would that I could lie down and die, life is nothing to
me now, I can never, never be happy again."
"I will slug to her my most beautiful song, and bring
joy and comfort into her troubled heart," spoke tlie little
bird in the branches of the old oak. And it sang, with its
clear, soft>voice, a stmg of praises about the love of God,
who takes the smallest creature imder His protection; it
sang of forest life; of the awakening spring after a long
winter; of the warm sunshine and reft-eshing rain; of the
shady shelter of the trees, and of God's goodness and
truth. The song rang so clearly and melodiously through
the wood, that the maiden raised her head involuntarily,
to listen to the sweet tones.
Then the old oak rustled, shook its mighty crown,
its branches and its leaves, and spoke, "I have stood
hero in the forest for many long years, and I have
seen and experienced many things. When I was
young and weak, the storms sometimes threatened to
break me; the cold winter rcjbbed me of my leaves, I
stretched my naked branches into the icy air, trembling
with cold, I sobbed and groaned in the wind, I thought
254 The Attempt.
that I was about to die. Then the snow came, and
lay warmly and protectingly on my bare branches,
so that they sparkled like diamonds, and glittered in the
bright sunshine. Afterwards spring lent me a new
young leafy dress still more beautiful than the former
one. Then I thanked God, and was glad that He had
held His hand over me ; and when winter came again, I
was no longer sad, for I knew that the hand of God
shields and protects, that a new spring follows winter,
that where there is light, there must be shadow,—I
learned to trust and to stand fast in affliction."
Here the old oak was silent. The maiden bowed her
head again, a feeling of shame came over her. Then her
eye fell upon a simple little daisy, which was blossoming
at her feet in the grass ; she had nearly trodden upon it;
and it began thus, " Do not hurt us! AVhat have we
flowers done to thee, that thou shouldest take no notice
of us, and almost tread upon us % Once thou lovedst us,
ard gathered many a bouquet, and took delight in us.
We hve our life here in the wood, we enjoy the blue
heaven above us, the warm sun, the refreshing dew.
V/herefore dost thou close thy heart to all, and think
only of thyself, whilst here, in eternal harmony, one lives
only for another? The streamlet gives us our nourish¬
ing drink, the trees spread their shade above us. We
invite the bees and beetles to our banquet; all deliglit in
the sunshine, the fragrance of the wood, the singing of
the birds."
The little brook said, " Always onward, always further
on, from the fountain to the stream, from the stream to
the river, from the river into the raging sea. From the
cool shade of the woods, through meadows and corn fields,
past villages, through the barren heath, through large
cities, without rest, without stay. My beginning is
small, nay, invisible; I increase as I go on, and my end is
mighty. Count the drops of the ocean—thou canst not—
what is a single drop to the whole ? What is a single
human being to the whole universe ? Everything
struggles onwards, and there is no end upon earth; strive
Ihou also, forget thy grief, think of the end, live for
others."
As the maiden hearkened to the murmuring voice of
the brook, she looked into the pure clear water, and
beheld there the mirrored image of the forest, the high
tops of the trees, whose crowns were gently moved by
Tlie Attempt. 255
the wind, and the blue sky above, on which the little
clouds were sailing. The branches of the trees on the
shore hung down into the water. A few single leaves
were floating gently along, on one of them sat a little
brown beetle, quite still in the warm sunshine.
" Forest life and sunshine, fragrance and the song of
the birds, the blue heaven, and the green meadows in
their flowery dress, do we need more to be happy ? These
are there for the enjoyment of all, forego gloomy sadness,
trust thyself to the true hand of God. Gently and safely
he will lead thee. Thou shalt have confidence where
thou now doubtest and art afraid, and peace until the end."
Thus hummed the little beetle. The maiden Avept, but
her tears were without bitterness. She was still sorrow¬
ful, but life was no longer a burden to her; she perceived
that many things still remained for her, and that she had
still much to do.
She arose to go home, she had treasured up in her
heart what the forest had said to her of the love and truth
of God, of His love which never becomes weary in healing
where we wound, in truth where we are untrue, in forbear¬
ance and patience where we forget Him I
Thekla.
OUR LIBRARY TABLE.
The Life of Thomas Cooper.    Written by HlMSELF.
London: Hodder & Stoughton.
This is a curious and interesting book, being the autobio¬
graphy of a curious and interesting man. Racy in style,
replete with stirring incident, and above all, holding up to
view and recounting the struggles of a nature of no ordi¬
nary calibre. Tlie Life of Thomas Cooper is fitted to
arouse an interest which many a romance is incapable of
exciting.
Few men have appeared in a greater variety of charac¬
ters than this Thomas Cooper. In his day, shoemaker,
schoolmaster, self-taught linguist and mathematician,
musical enthusiast, Methodist preacher, newspaper re¬
porter and editor, Chartist demagogue, political prisoner,
250 Tlie Attempt.
poet, novelist, religious sceptic, and lecttxrer on subjects
too various for enumeration here; he has now, for some
sixteen years, set himself to a truly noble life-work—that
of " preaching the faith which once he destroyed." Aware
how much in bygone days he did to injure the cause of Chris¬
tianity by the propagation of theories antagonistic to its
doctrines, he now constitutes himself the champion of the
true faith, and has,—besides delivering in all parts of Great
Britain addresses on the Evidences of Christianity,—pub¬
lished a book on tlie same subject, entitled The Bridge of
History over the Gulf of Time.
The passages in Cooper's life, in which are described the
fierce, and too often lawless, struggles of the Chartists for
what they considered their i-ights, are full of interest, even
for those of iis to whom the word " Chartism " comes only
as an echo from tlie unfamiliar past; nor can we refrain
fi-om sympathising in some measure in tlie evident relish
with which the now sober veteran of sixty-seven years
relates some of the escapades of this strange chapter of
his history.
The chief blemish of the book lies, perhaps, in the too
apparent spirit of egotism and vanity pervading its pages,
but, by its very openness, provoking rather a smile than
any harsher criticism; yet, in spite of this, we venture to
affirm that one cannot lay down The Life of Thomas Cooper
without feeling that one has made the acquaintance of a
manly, generous, and noble nature.
Real Folks.    By Mrs WHITNEY.    Samson & Low.
This is an American book, as fresh, and real, and homely
as its title. Full of notable sayings and quaint ideas,
it should certainly be in every young girl's library.
The Soul and Money.   By Jeremias Gotthelp.   Translated
by GUARTERIOK  VeRE.
This is a religious story of Swiss peasant life. Much of
it is pleasantly readable and lifelike, and it has the merit
of simplicity, but the talc is spun out somewhat beyond
its capacity.
The Attempt. 257
^ir Wi'xWii  Scott's  Jrosi;.
Those of our readers who have followed " Elfie " with
interest, as she unfolded to us in the last three numbers of
our Magazine the beauties of Scott as a poet, will, perhaps,
listen to a few words from me on his merits as a prose
writer.
Sir Walter Scott has deservedly gained tlie laurels
from all novelists of the nineteenth century. We may,
in truth, substantiate the opinion Sandford gives of
him, that "he was the greatest novelist any age or
kingdom ever produced." But Scotland has always been
remarkable for the high literary attainments gained by
her children ; even in semi-barbarous times she cultivated
the muses with success. Thomas the Rhymer was
perhaps the first great Scotch poet, and he preceded by
a hundred years any English poet whose works are extant.
John Barbour, the author of the Bruce, was no unworthy
contemporary of the great Chaucer; also, about the same
time flourished Andrew of Wyntown, a rhyming chronicler.
James I., who reigned early in the fifteenth century, has
left in his " Quair,"' or book, a beautiful specimen of his
poetical talents. Further down we come to Henryson, Dun-
bar, Douglas, Kennedy, Lindsay, Alexander, Ramsay, Thom¬
son, Beattie, Burns, Scott, Hogg, Campbell, and countless
others. In history, Scotland has a bright galaxy, Buchanan,
Burnet, Hume, Henry, Ferguson, Stuart, Laing. Besides
many philosophical and metaphysical writers, her novelists
rank high, when the names of Moore, Smollett, Mackenzie,
Gait, and last, not least, but greatest, Sir Walter Scott
are of the number. Holding such a high position as
Scotland does, and always has done, in literature, we havo
not much cause to wonder that Sir Walter Scott gained
such a glorious name, for, living in such a country and in
the very bosom of learning, the wonder would rather be
if such a man had not appeared. Perhaps his prose
Avritings are of a higher order than his poetry, though
that is 80 sweet and exquisitely plaintive, it would make
a man a great man, if it had no prose to form a substantial
background, or rather foundation, to his name and credit.
If (me man had written the Lady of the Lake, in which Scott's
poetical genius seems to have reached the acme of its
power, and another Kenilworth, or Peveril of the Peak, they
258 The Attempt.
would both have left a name—illustrious, famous—but,
when the two were produced by one brain, they claim
almost a double amount of admiration, added to their
individual merit, which the world in general would be
too short-sighted to appreciate.
But, as we have said, it is with Scott's prose works that
we have at present to do.
In the memoirs of Sir W. Scott, by Lockhart, we are
told that when Sir Walter, in the presence of George IV.,
denied being the author of Waverley, the king said he was
glad to hear it, for it was a higher boast to have two such
brilliant writers as the authors of Marmion and Waverley,
than one capable of producing both. Waverley was the
first of his novels which appeared, and was sufficiently
interesting to make the world long for something more
from the same pen; then Guy Mannering, the Antiqvxxry,
The Black Dioarf, and Old Mortality quickly followed. At
that time Scott had an object in writing speedily for the
press. Ivanhoe was the next, and one of the finest. The
extreme simplicity and sweetness of Rowena, with all the
sterling qualities which make ■womanhood what it is, form
a rich contrast to the nobility and high courageous spirit
of the beautiful Jewess, and make the reader long for two
Ivanlioes instead of one; for the happiness of Rowena can
hardly be thoroughly sympathised with, when it tolled the
death knell to that of Rebecca. At the same time, there is
this comfort to be drawn from the very sadness of Re¬
becca's lot, in the proof it affords of how a woman's spirit,
when called thoroughly into action, can rise in spite of
the most cruel blow into an atmosphere clearer and
purer than that ■which contented it before, because the
ordeal through which it passes, instead of crushing it when
it is denied fulfilment, refines and ennobles it to higher
ends and greater aims than the mere fact of an answering
love. I do not mean by this to depreciate love; it is,
we all know, the most beautiful part of life, but love lends
a patience, an endurance, a higher degree of object to the
mind when it is unfulfilled, if the spirit be strong enough
to live in a liealthy atmosphere again, than if the colour
that love had given it had never been. Certainly the
hues will not be so bright or so pleasing to the eye, but
the intense whiteness of self will have been lost in the
rainbow tints of pure disinterestedness. Such a spirit
was Rehecca\s, fully exemplified in that one scene where she
kneels, in all the pride of her eastern beauty, before the
The Attempt. 259
wife of her life's hero, and gives in all humility her dia¬
mond jewels to Rowena. A great deal more might be
said of this charming book besides the actual tale; aU
the historical account of Richard Goeur-de-Lion, and the
persecutions of the Jews, but in a cursory notice of such
a great author, much must necessarily be passed over that
is intensely interesting.
Kenilworth is a picture of Elizabeth and her court.
Besides the actual history and wonderful insight into the
character of the age. Sir Walter Scott excites an extra¬
ordinary interest in the reader, even in these some¬
what hlase days, when he tells Leicester's character so
vividly, the sad story of Amy Robsart, and all the pride
and vanity of poor " Queen Bess." In the beginning of
Kenilworth there is a lovely poem called Cumnor Hall,
written by Mickle, and found in Evan's ancient ballads,
and a very favourite one with Scott. The exquisite
pathos in lines such as these—
" Then Earl, why didst thou leave the beds,
Where roses and where lilies vie,
To seek a primrose whose pale shades
Must sicken, when those gauds are by ?
or again, such as these—
How far less blest am I than them,
Daily to pine and waste with care ;
Like the poor plant that from its stem
Divided feels the chUling air,"
make this  ballad  a fitting preface for such  a  tale  as
Kenilworth.
Rob Roy ranks high among Scott's novels ; the daring
adventure of Macgregor, and all the hazards of Frank
Oshaldistone, tempered with the half-savage life of his
cousins—the Osbaldistones of the Hall, the mysterious
behaviom- and spirit of Diana Vernon, and the marvellous
achievements of the masculine Helen—together form a
tale of no common interest. After this novel, so full of
exciting midnight rides through forests infested with
danger, v^^onderful attacks of daring robbers, and escapes
unparalleled in history or romance, with the mysterious
concealment of Di Vemoris father, and the sum up of the
whole strain of excitement, it is somewhat refreshing to
turn to the mournful, solemn story of the Bride of Lam-
mermuir.
AH ^ the soiTows of Lucy Ashton and her essentially
feminine character; her true, noble, womanly, love for
the Master of Ravenswood, aTid the deep, mj^stic, solemnity
260 The Attempt.
of the Mermaid's Fountain are very interesting and
touching. Shadowy forebodings warn the lovers, in
their first blush of happiness, not to seek it too greedily
here, for that here is not love's rest. The end of
this tale is happy if there is little comfort in it before,
when Luc]/ Ashton lies in the arms of death, and Ravens-
wood, likewise dead, lives with his love in brighter
lands, where all is sunshine with no Bucklaw to over¬
shadow it.
Then we have the Fair Maid of Perth, not immoderately
solemn or excitingly tragic, with its village history of
Catherine, the glover's daughter, and the brawny honest
Smith. While it is by no means tame or dull when
Conachar and his battle, and the Duke of Rothsay and his
effeminate father, Robert III., appear.
It would be absurd, in these few thoughts on such
a great writer, to attempt to mention the plots and
histories contained in 'all his books; but surely it is a
kind of novel reading to study which will give food to the
mind, and raise the tone, and quicken the taste for deeper
literature. A man or woman cannot read one of Sir W.
Scott's novels without learning a good many things, and
though some of the minute workings out may be a little
wearisome, and the long arguments tedious, yet how
much more healthy are its effects than those of the
sensational 3 vol. novels, of the present day; novels
with no knowledge of life or history, and merely the
products of a heated imagination. Sir A. Phillips says,
—" To provide books for female reading, novels were
contrived; and owing to women having leisure they
were multiplied, and since 1780 have so grown in
number as almost to supersede all other books." If this
be true, " 0 woman what have you done!" If it be
women who brought novels into existence, it is women's
work to raise their standard and ennoble their aim.
This may be done by writing and studying a higher class
of novels than those in general about us.
I have not space to mention all the other books Sir W.
Scott has left us as a legacy. But surely most of my
readers have read them often, and know their beauties
for themselves. Who has not studied with delight the
Abbot and the Monastery, wdth the vivid pictures of monas¬
tic life, and the tales of the Avenels, together ■wdth the
sweet Spirit or White Lady of Avenel, and Halbert and
Edward   Glendinning,   with   the   absurd   Fiercie   Shaffon ?
The Attempt. 261
Likewise  The Fortunes of Nigel,  Quentin Durward, Heart
of Mid-Lothian, Robert of Paris, etc.
But if there be any among my readers who have not
read them, let us advise them to do so at once, for in their
depths lie gold unalloyed, hidden beauties of untold
value. " Scott," says Colher " was eminently a painter in
w^ords. The picturesque was his forte. Witness the magni¬
ficent descriptions of natural scenery—sunsets, stormy sea,
deep woodland glades—with which many of his chapters
open. But his portraitures surpass his landscapes. For
variety and true painting of character, he was undoubtedly
the Shakspere of our English prose. What a crowd of
names, ' famihar as household words,' come rushing on us
as we think of the gallery of portraits his magical pencil
has left for our endless delight and study! There is
scarcely a class of old Scottish life without its type in this
collection." Laura N. Smith.
ilhc ^truggUs of a (l{lta}?n'on(|.
PART I.—THE ARCHERY MEETING.
I WONDER why it is that I, one of the most hair-brained
creatures living, am so constantly selected to fill the
responsible office of a chaperone % It is a thing I have
pondered and pondered over, and cannot understand.
There never is a ball, a croquet party, an archery meet¬
ing, a pic-nic, a social gathering of any description within
ten miles of Barden, but I am besieged for a week before
the event by the mothers and daughters of the vicinity.
" Dear Mrs Somers. I have such confidence in leaving my
girls in your care." " Dear Mrs Somers, I hope will
do me this great kindness, for there is no other lady in the
neighbourhood whom I consider so excellent a chaperone ! "
—that is what the mammas say, though I am not yet thirty,
and though half the girls who are placed under my care look
more dignified and matronly than I do. " 0, Mrs Somers,
do take us! it is such fun to go with you! you never
come away early; you don't mind the heat, or the cold,
or the distance; you're not afraid of driving home in the
dark; do, do take us just this once !"—that is what the
girls say, and who could say "no " to them? certainly not
262 he Attempt.
myself. Jack says the mammas act upon the principle,
" set a thief to catch a thief; " that they know a reformed
flirt makes the best chaperone, and that they have heard
tales about the Edinburgh balls a few years ago,—but of
course that is quite absurd, as absurd as the reason he
assigns for the girls wishing to go \vith me, that they do
8o on the chance of his going too ! But whatever may
be the reason, the fact remains the same, and few matrons
of my standing have done as much in the chaperone way
as I have.
Generally speaking, I am very fond of the work, and I
am very proud when I feel, as I generally do, that my
party is the centre of attraction ; and as Minnie (you re¬
member my sister Minnie, I hope ?) is generally with me,
I can leave my girls with her for a few minutes while I
have tea, or supper, or any other little relaxation, and
that saves me the fatigue of mounting guard without
intermission. But sometimes, I must confess, very pro¬
voking things do happen, and I am constrained to heave
a sigh over my unavailing efforts to keep things right.
When Ada Fielding went with me to the Sutton cricket-
match in a sharp easterly day last year, and when neither
entreaties, nor commands, nor a gentle degree of force
would induce her to put on a shawl, because of the two 1
had brought, one was scarlet, and the other crimson, and
they both " killed " her pink bonnet, and made her com¬
plexion muddy; and when she caught a shocking cold,
and when Mrs Fielding went about saying to everybody,
" how she wished dear Mrs Somers had taken better care
of Ada at that cricket-match "—then, I confess, I was
what Jack called " riled," and not so sorry as I should
have been for Ada's sore throat and cough, poor thing!
And it was almost as bad at the militia ball this spring,
when Jenny Lawrence would dance waltz after waltz with
that disreputable ^lorsey cousin of hers, whom old Mr
Lawrence won't allow to be in or near his house. In vain I
introduced all the best dancers and talkers in the room to
Jenny ; in vain I sent her to supper with Jack, and to
the ice-room with my brother Davie; in five minutes she
Avas waltzing with her cousin again, and there has been
war between her and her father ever since, and old Mr
Lawrence crosses the road when he sees me coming.
Happily these things are the exception; and, as a rule, I
am very fond of chaperoning.
But  I  began this with   the intention  of telling you
The Attempt. 263
about our archery meeting this summer, and what an
amount of trouble I had there with my young lady
charges. As usual, I had a very large i:>arty, Ada
Fielding (for Mrs Fielding very soon forgot all about Ada's
cold, or perhaps Ada confessed the facts of the case),
the two pretty Miss Wyvills, quiet, easily managed
girls, the two Miss Harringtons, piquante, lively, and
dashing, and the two, whom my story principally concerns,
Sophia Irwin and Carrie Carleton. Sophia was a sister of
that Dr IrAvin whom I told you about in the history of
my sister Minnie, and who was with us again upon this
occasion; and Carrie Carleton was a grandneice of old Dr
Carleton of Sutton, who had taken my brother Davie into
partnership. The Wyvills Avere coiisins of my brother-in-
law, Harry Wyvill, and they were put in my charge on
this occasion, as Minnie was too fully occupied with what
Harry most unpaternally called " that inevitable baby,"
to attend the archery meeting and ball. Harry was with
us, and Davie, and my husband, who is an enthusiastic
archer, for one day left his patients to take care of them¬
selves, and accompanied us to the scene of action. It was
a great triiimph to cany off Jack for a whole day, and as
I reviewed, from the elevation of the door-step, the party
assembled at the garden gate, I felt that it would create
no small sensation on the field, and the chaperone's heart
beat high. At that moment, too, there darted into my
brain a scheme, an arrangement so feasible, so natural, so
advantageous to all parties concerned, that it awoke within
me, not only the chaperone, but the matchmaker; and I
darted forward to arrange the division of the party in
accordance with my sudden and brilliant inspiration.
We all started in excellent spirits, which increased
rather than difhinished as we neared the archery ground.
The weather was beautiful, and as yet none of the party
was troubled by any " secret sorrow" or annoyance.
Ada Fielding had a pretty blue shawl, which exactly
matched the feather in her hat, so my mind was easy
about her; no one had tight boots,—Jack made it his
business to ascertain that, and our party were all on the
best of terms. And when we alighted at the archery
field, my delight knew no bounds when I saw the indi¬
viduals included in my before-mentioned brilliant scheme,
arrange themselves, without any strategy' on my part,
exactly as I wished them to go. To let you into the
secret, kind reader, I had long wished that it would occur
264 The Attempt.
to my brother Davie to marry Sophia Irwin. She was a
thoroughly " nice," good girl, ladylike, handsome, and
accomplished; and though so sedate and demure as
sometimes to be almost stiff, I thought there was enough
quicksilver in Davie's disposition to make it very desirable
that his wife should possess some extra discretion. Then
the Irwins were very well off, and I don't deny that I
gave considerable weight to that argument; and then it
was time for Davie to marry—a bachelor doctor never
gets on in his profession; and altogether my only difficulty
was that the marriage would leave Dr Irwin sohtary,
until that morning, standing on the door-step, an
excellent solution presented itself to my mind. Dr Irwin
was such a very grave and learned personage, that the
idea of Ms marrying had never occurred to me, until I
suddenly saw him with an air of the profoundest interest,
greasing the tips of Carrie Carleton'sarchery gloves, and I at
once resolved that Dr Irwin should marry Carrie Carleton.
Carrie was very pretty, very poor, and when old Dr Carleton
died, would be quite alone in the world; while it was well
known that all the old doctor had to leave, would go to
his own daughters in America, and governessing would
probably be poor Carrie's fate. She Avas a little butterfly
of a creature, with the sweetest of tempers, and the
liveliest of dispositions, ahvays laughing, and ready for
any kind of fun, but quite unfit, poor child, to struggle
with hardships and poverty ; and could there be a better
arrangement than that she should marry Dr Irwin, a
steady responsible man a dozen years her senior, who
could so well protect and care for her, shield her fi-om all
care and hardship, and surround her with the comfort and
luxury which seemed pretty Carrie's rightful portion ?
Surely the idea was an excellent one ; and as I have
already said, I was delighted on arriving at the archery
ground to see Sophia Irwin and Davie go off together to
the first target, while Dr Irwin gravely followed, laden
with Carrie's bow, arrows, and etceteras, as well as his
own, and Carrie trotted beside him, chattering like a little
magpie.
Harry Wyvilland his cousins were at the second target,
the Irwins, Carrie Carleton, Davie, Blanche Harrington,
Jack, and myself were at the first, along with our old
friends. Sir William and Lady EUesmere, and Ada Field¬
ing's brother. Ada herself and Rose Harrington were
spectators merely, but of course kept near us most of the
The Attempt. 265
time. The meeting was a very large and brilliant one,
and the shooting remarkably good; and I am sm-e every
one who was there that day joined in declaring that (ex¬
cept perhaps a review), there is no prettier sight than an
archery meeting on a fine day. I was especially happy.
Jack was making a capital score, I myself was as usual
wonderfully lucky; Davie and Sophia conversed inces¬
santly, and though they both looked very sombre, I have
often seen an " affair " take that phase when it began to
grow serious. Dr Irwin devoted himself to little Carrie
with an amount of gallantry which I never thought he
possessed; and the other members of the party all seemed
to enjoy themselves. The Wyvills were exceedingly
admired, but they had very little to say; and the great
attraction of my party centred in the Harringtons, who
were sparkling with excitement and pleasure, and looked
very well in their white and green archery dresses. Ada
Fielding, who was to be married in autumn, and whose
jiancS was absent, at first assumed a distraite and pensive
manner, and stationed herself on the outskirts of the party
in an attitude of gentle melancholy; but this kind of
amusement soon palls upon one when it fails to create a
sensation, and after half-a-dozen ends, Ada was laughmg
and talking as merrily as if Captain Grey had been on
Sutton Meadows instead of on the overland route. And
so, during the greater part of that afternoon, I was a
happy chaperone.
The first of my charges who began to give me anxiety
was Rose Harrington, who was not very strong. Lun¬
cheon in the tent, with speeches to follow, was in that
warm weather rather an exhaustive than a refreshing
process ; and when we all returned to the targets for the
short-distance shooting, several of the ladies, Rose among
them, began to look very tired. I implored her to go to
the room we had taken at the inn and lie down, and I
was supported by the professional authority - of Jack,
Da^-ie, and Dr Irwin; but this was far too dull a proceed¬
ing for Miss Rose's taste, and by the time the shooting was
over, I saw she was tired to death,—and the ball was still
to come. Then Carrie Carleton's spirits suddenly failed.
She detached herself from Dr Irwin, became very silent,
and I actually thought I saw tears in her eyes. Dr Irwin
appeared puzzled, and every now and then tried to re¬
establish conversation with her, but Carrie answered at
cross purposes.   Davie and Sophia were more confidential
-     ^ SKPTEMBEK   1872.
266 The Attempt.
than ever, but had by this time become so portentously
gloomy, that I was not comfortable about them either.
Ada Fielding was relapsing into sentiment, and though
the Wyvills and Blanche Harrington were still all that
I could wish, I was very glad whdn the archery was over,
the prizes distributed, and we withdrew to the inn to take
tea, rest, and dress for the ball. We had taken three
rooms to dress in: one was appropriated to the gentlemen,
one small one I selected for myself, and took Rose Har¬
rington and Carrie Carleton with me, that I might see
that they rested; while the third room was a very large
one, and easily accommodated all the other girls. Poor
Rose, the moment the door was shut, flung herself on the
bed, utterly exhausted; but as it was only six o'clock,
and the ball did not begin till ten, I thought she might
still have a chance of appearing at it; so I made her get
up and take off" her dress and her boots, loosen her hair,
bathe her head and face with cold water, and lie down
again, and try to go to sleep—Avhicli she did in five
minutes. Carrie and I arranged ourselves at opposite
ends of a large sofa, and for more than two hours, the
anxieties of the chaperone and the fatigues of the clia'pero-
nees were alike forgotten in the arms of Morpheus.
I was aroused by what I at first thought was a thunder¬
storm, but which proved to be Jack thumping upon the
wall of the next room.
" Jeanie, are you going to sleep there all night ? Tea
will be ready immediately, and so shall we ; make haste
and come into the coffee-room." I sprang up and
hastened across the passage to warn the other girls of
the flight of time, and found them all resting and much
refreshed. They detained me a few moments to advise
them on various details of their evening dress, and as 1
found Blanche Harrington had, like her sister, taken off
her morning attire, I told her I should send tea to her
room, and that Rose would come across and take it with
her, while the rest of the party were in the coffee room.
On going back to tell Rose and Carrie of this arrange¬
ment, I was struck by the remarkable improvement in
Rose's appearance since she had lain down, and compli¬
menting her upon it, I sent her off to the other room to
keep her sister company. Carrie and I smoothed our
hair, and hurried out, just as all the rest of the party
emerged from their rooms. I was very much puzzled by the
look of dismay on Dr Irwin's face when he saw Carrie and
The Attempt. 267
me come out and shut the door; and I could not under¬
stand why he so immediately and anxiously inquired,
" Where are the Miss Harringtons I" nor why, upon
hearing that they were taking tea together in No. 13, he
should look so full of blank dismay and extreme disgust.
However, I dismissed the subject from my mind for the
time ; and though Dr Irwin did not recover his spirits,
those of the rest of the party were sufficiently high to
make our tea table a very merry one. Dressing was the
next business, and a tremendous struggle it was,
especially for me, who had to fly from one room to
another, arranging Rose Harrington's flowers, extemporis¬
ing a tucker for Lucy Wyvill, who had forgotten hers,
helping Blanche Harrington to don a very complex
panier, deciding whether a pink rose or a white camellia
best suited Ada Fielding's complexion, completing my
own toilet by fits and starts, and invariably being
intercepted in my passage from one room to another by
Jack, who had lost his studs, torn his gloves, and couldn't
tie his tie. But at last all Avas happily accomplished, and
we made a bold dart across the High Street, and entered
the assembly rooms, where the music was just beginning.
But for the account of all that happened at the ball, I
must begin a new chapter. DlDO.
{To be continued.)
® It £    ^ t a r S.
FROM THE GERMAN.
A GREAT mighty journey made the hot sun
Round the huge world.
'* May we not travel with thee," said the stars.
Round the huge world ? "
But the sun scolded them.    "Bide here," she cries,
" I should burn out your little gold eyes
By my fierce journey all round the world."
To the fair moon the little pet stars
Hied in the night.
" 0 thou who reign'st," they sigh, " 'midst fleecy clouds.
Bright in the night.
Do let us go with thee, for thy mild beam
Will never put out our eyes' golden gleam!"
So they went with her—friends of the night.
268 The Attempt.
We bid ye welcome, fair moon and stars,
In the dark night.
All my sad heart's secrets to ye are known
In the dark night.
Come, kindle in me your heavenly light,
That I with fancies,—pure, joyous, and bright,—
May rest in sweet blissful dreams of the night.
ALVDGE.
Jouj m mwi from |lir|cirnj to ^uchon,
(Part II.)
The auberge at Arrean was little more than a small ram-
blmg house; it contained very few bedrooms, but a number
of long, narrow, ghostly-looking passages, along several
of which my sisters and I had to go to reach the little
double-bedded room we were to share. What a wretched
cavern it looked when we at last closed the door, and
peered around to view its dimensions. The beds were
built into the walls, which sloped down to the floor at one
side, while at the foot of one bed there was a low myste-
terious-looking door. Being the least nervous of the
three, I was selected to open the door and ascertain to
what it led, for our minds were stored with legends of
sliding panels and trap doors, and pictures of Spanish
cavaliers conceahng springs wliich, when touched, con¬
veyed whole chambers and their inhabitants into undis-
coverable dungeons. After hstening awhile to some
muffled stamping of feet and heavy breathing, which
sounded not far off", I, with both my sisters trembling at
my back, ventured to open the door, and, candle in hand,
to peer down into the darkness. A hot, stifling air met
my face, and the before-mentioned noise became louder.
And, after starting back to collect my forces, I looked
down again to see the indistinct forma of several horses
through the rafters of the stable roof. Our fear of noc¬
turnal visitors was for the moment set at rest, though
the vicinity was anything but pleasant, as in the casual
glimpse I obtained of the rafters, I saw they 'R'ere a black
seething mass of those lively insects which prev^iil in
most towns on the Continent, and whose attachment to
the human face is indisputable.
Having half di-essed,   the  better  to   withstand their
The Attempt. 269
attacks, and placed some chairs against our door, we laid
ourselves down to sleep, which, despite some drawbacks, we
did soundly, until some hours after midnight, when I was
suddenl}' awakened by the \dolent beating of my heart,
and became aware that some noise had startled me. I sat
up trembling, held my breath, and listened. Oh, the length
of these minutes!
A horrid stillness pervaded the inn. I could not bear
the notion that 1 was the only living creature waking,
and was vainly trying to persuade myself it might have
been a dream (or, alas for romance, the effects of the
ham and eggs), when I saw a light flash through the
room, and heard stealthy steps in the courtyard beneath
the "svindow. I thought of the stable—it might be the
groom amongst the horses, but in that case the light
could not have flashed through the window, and I was
trying to think of another reason to account for it, when ^
I heard a step cautiously ascending the stair.
I shook my sister till she woke; hurriedly told her the
fright I had received besought her to keep quiet, at the
same time entreating her to tell me what she should do if
a sliding panel opened, and bandits, their faces covered
with crape—for I expected nothing less—appeared. We
sat up and distinctly heard the steps approaching, pausing
every few seconds, while now the light appeared at the
chink under the door. At length they paused at our door,
and we heard the dreadful thing kneel down and deposit
something (probably his dagger or bludgeon) on the floor,
evidently waiting to hear if we were asleep.
We nearly died of fright duruig that moment. Should
we cry out " murder!" or speak to each other in audible
tones to let him know we were awake, and could defend
ourselves ? We did neither. We clasped each other
tightly, and so awaited our fate. In a minute or two the
midnight wanderer slowly withdrew, but ere he had gone
a few paces, we heard him stop once more.
I jumped out of bed, waked my eldest sister, who heard
us impatiently, and sleepily replied, as she turned on her
pillow,—" Of course, you stupid cliildren, it is Boots, who
always goes round that way, leaving every one's boots at
the doors ; if you don't believe it, open the door and see
for yourselves." Glad to believe anything, no matter
how the truth demolished the romance, we were satisfied
without ocular demonstration, and retiring to bed once
more, fell fast asleep.
270 The Attempt.
The ftites evidently were not propitious, for we could make
no comfortable arrangement for our continued journey next
day. We wished, could we have managed it, all to travel
together, and so we sent messengers through the little
town to see if no possible vehicle was to be had. But as
the only one in the whole place was in a most dilapidated
condition, and the only available horse was one which had
never been in harness (those we had seen in the stable
were the relay for the daily diligence), we were
reluctantly obliged to allow as many as could go, to pro¬
ceed in the carriage we had,'so as to engage rooms for the
whole party at Bagneres de Luchon, and the rest of us
would trust to the chance of getting seats in the diligence,
which was expected to pass through Arrean some time in
the forenoon.
The five who remained behind were my uncle, my
brother, my mother, my youngest sister and I, and we
tried to wile away the intervening weary hours by
wandering through the dark streets, going in a melancholy
manner to contemplate the old church of the Templars,
and dismally bewailing the complete demolition of the
castles in the air we had built about our long-spoken-of
journey.
When it came to be two hours past the regular time of
the arrival of the diligence, and when the host of the inn
shook his head, and opined that in consequence of the fair
of the day before, probably all the seats Avould be taken, my
uncle^ who prided himself on his driving powers, insisted
on the old vehicle being dragged out, and the horse tried
in it. My mother, with a pale face, ventured,—" John, my
dear, you would surely never risk our lives! " but a
rather contemptuous—"I should think I could diive
that beast," checked, if not her fear, at least her remon¬
strances, and we walked along the road, while the ostler
followed, leading the animal in question. Leading him
slowly and rather timorously, for the creature, frightened
at the unwonted sound of wheels behind it, jumped and
backed, and flung out with its hind legs, and showed a
strong inclination to go anywhere but straight forward.
The female portion of us were secretly congratulaticg
ourselves that we should not be asked to sit behind it,
after this exhibition, but my uncle vowed "it would go quite
quietly with a good tight rope, and a taste of the whip,
once it was clear of the town," Avhen it took inatters into
its own hands, by bolting from the groom, dashing into a
The Attempt. 271
hedge with such vehemence, that it left the most part of
the crazy machiiie behind it, and set off, dragging one of
the shafts along the road.
Every resource seemed to fail us, and great was our
delight, on our return to the inn, to see the diligence
approach. Fortunately there was exactly the number of
seats wanted, but imfortunately we could not be all
accommodated together. Uncle and Charlie, who were
greatly addicted to smoking, mounted to the banquette,
and making themselves extremely comfortable amongst
the luggage and under the hood which covered the top-
heavy, unwieldy machine, divided their time between
sandwich-eating and sleeping. My sister, being very
small, was provided Avith an infinitesimal portion of space
in the coupe, tightly wedged in between an enormously
stout old French bourgeois and his still stouter wife. This
couple filled the coupS very comfortably themselves, so I
did not envy her position, especially as she had no
prospect of changing it for a good many hours. My
mother and I shared the interior (which was seated for
four) wath a young French gentleman and his wife.
They had only been married a fortnight, the lady frankly
informed us,—were on their wedding trip, and her husband
was secretary to one of the Imperial hoiisehold.
The bride and I sat on one side, opposite to me was the
husband, and mamma sat in the other corner,—and so we
resumed our ill-starred journey. It had been a fine
morning, and we quite envied our friends the lovely drive
they must have had in the open carriage, amid such ex¬
quisite scenery, which I have no time to describe here,
for an account of which I refer my readers to Murray's
Handbook of France; but towards afternoon, dark and
heavy clouds had come up fi;-om the west, a thick gloom
hung over the Maladetta, and long before we had reached
the summit of the Col de Peyresom-de, to the very top of
which there is a good but hollow and steep carriage-road,
the fog, which had been breaking itself in a thousand
graceful and fantastic shapes round the pine-clad moun¬
tains, had rolled down toward us, and we were enveloped
in mists.
It was dark as midnight and raining hard before we
began to descend the equally steep and precipitous road on
the other side of the mountains. We went down at a snail's
pace, dragging the heavy " mechanisme " attached to all
French vehicles; the monster diligence swaying to and fro
272 The Attempt.
as we tm-ned the abrupt corners, the light in front by the
driver's seat bhnking through the intense darkness, and
casting ghostly shadows on the mist creeping up the
rocky sides of the hill, for the road in some parts was
most precipitous, and a false step on the part of the horses
or a corner missed by the driver, would have dashed us
over the cliff in a moment.
We ceased keeping up the desultory conversation
common amongst travellers. We looked out into the
blackness and thought of our friends round a cheerful fire
in the hotel in Luchon far below. We heartily wished
ourselves anywhere but where Ave were, horrid memories
of dreadful accidents came crowding into our minds. Still
we tried to speak cheerfully to one another, the cheering
strain generally ending, however, in a fervent, " I wish we
had arrived!"
The conductor, who was a person of a most restless
temperament and morbid imagination, kept jumping off
and on the step behind, remarking what a fearful night it
was; how that there were signs of an early winter, as
there had been a gTcat bear hmit three days before, and
two bears had been slaughtered at a particular spot we
should reach in a few minutes ; how that the great fierce
Pyrenean dogs were let loose at nights amongst the flocks
on the momitain's side, armed with their u'on-spiked
collars, to defend the sheep from the wolves which came
down from the snow regions and committed fearful
ravages.
Thenhe wouldleave us to digest this pleasing intelligence,
and go to have a gossip and cigarette with the driver.
Presently there was a noise—a stoppage—some swearing,
and our heads were suddenly thrust from door and win¬
dows to ascertain the cause. Merely a trifle! One of
our horses had fallen; some ropes repaired the damage to
the harness ; the animal was declared to be not much
the worse, and on we went more slowly than ever. Oh
how devoutly I wished the night was over; how fervently
I hoped my sister was asleep in the coupe, and not endur¬
ing the terrors we were suffering. My only satisfaction
was watching the tiny ray of light from the lamp in front,
when suddenly it went out, and amidst a chorus of oaths
from the driver and conductor, we once more came to a
halt, A few moments of suspense, and one of the men
came to tell us they had nothing to replenish their lamp,
not having calculated on being so long on the road; it
The Attempt. 273
was so dark they could hardly see a yard before them;
the driver was to lead the horses down the steepest part
of the road which we had just entered on ; he would not
hide from us that there was some danger, but if any of us
were very much alarmed, he would advise us to dismount
and walk behind the diligence.
Of course we descended, extricated my poor Kttlo
terrified sister from her living tomb between the stolid
couple, who would not have moved, I think, had we been
rushing on to certain death; and, in spite of darkness,
rain, and wind, we stumbled out on the road. My un(;le
and Charhe, totally discrediting all idea of danger, sleepily
declined to leave the comfort of the banquette.
We all kept together, scarcely daring to speak, except
to convey whispered warnings not to venture too near
the edge of the cliff, and keeping the dim outline of the
lumbering diligence before us, . we followed carefully.
We had proceeded about a quarter of a mile, and were
about a hundred yards from the vehicle, when a hoarse
barking was heard not far behind, and the voice of the
conductor shouting to us " to be quick, for the dogs were
on us !" Run we did. We stumbled in pell-mell, my
.sister regaining her place in a half fainting condition, and
being, as she afterwards informed us, restored by the
woman on one side having, by almost superhuman efforts,
dived into her pocket, and produced therefrom a scent
bottle which she applied to her nose, while her husband
performed the same office with his snuff box. We were
no sooner safe inside than the dogs sprang upon the
wheel, barking furiously, and only desisted after repeated
lashes of the driver's whip.
The Frenchman's young wife, after invoking nearly
every saint in the calendar, went into violent hysterics;
her husband first coaxed, then he scolded her, but to no
effect. " She "wished she had been left at home, and what
would her mother say hearing of her death, and how awful
to be killed in this way, and how fervently she wished
she was safe in Paris at her own home " (and I am not ^ure
that her husband did not for one moment, at least,
cordially echo her wish), and finally she nearly choked
me by throwing her arm tightly round my neck.
_ I endeavoured to pacify her by assurances of safety I
did not feel.    I had now no doubt that sooner or later
we should be dashed to some fearful depth below, and I
thought I should like to hold mamma's hand in our hour
•2 M
274 The Attempt.
of danger. I put out my hand in the darkness, and gi-asping
one which I concluded to be hers, I commenced stroking
it softly, and I was startled by a great voice sayuig—
"Mademoiselle, c'estlamain dema femme que je cherche."
I dropped the hand as if I had been shot; dark though
it was, I blushed scarlet for fully ten minutes, till the ludi¬
crous sense of the mistake so overcame me, that I shook
with silent laughter.
At last we found om-selves advancing at a quicker pace;
the descent grew less steep; we could see the lights
twinkhng in the valley below, and about midnight we
drove into the courtyard of the hotel, to find all our
friends gone to bed, concluding that we had remained
another night at Arrean. It was some time before we
recovered fi-om our fears, and a long time before we could
look back with any degree of pleasiu'e to our excursion,
which had for its beginning such a very unpleasant
journey. La Maurice.
''^QViit   d c  ^ u 11 f/
BABY-spring, with laughing smile,
Tripping daintily awhile,
Singing to the rosy flowers.
Weeping to the flying hom-s,
Brmgiug happiness on earth
With the freshness of thy birth,
Hear'st thou not a tiny song
That the west wind bears along
From thy sister on the hill ?
When the noisy birds are stfll
And the twilight, soft and sweet,
Fades before night's gloomy feet,
Hark to the warning,
" II vient tout de suite."
n.
Summer of the tulip-eyed.
On whose breast the spring has died,-
Died with roses in her hand
By the hedge and meadow land,—
The Attempt. 275
Hear'st thou not a tender song
That the south wind bears along,
In the happy mellow blaze
Of thy simlight's golden rays,
Or in the darker shades of night
By the silver pale moonlight'?
Recollect that song shall bo
Ever hovering near to thee.
Sometimes weeping, always sweet,
Whispering softly—•
*' II vient tout de suite."
m.
Crimson autumn! lovelier far
Than spring and summer ever arc.
With the multitudinous shades
That sweep across the summer glades.
Claret-brown and golden-blue
Deepening into purple hue,
When western shadows steal away
The brilliant colours of the day ;
Rosy clouds that ever die
Upon the bosom of the sky;
Flowers that long ago have borne
The scent of newly ripened corn,
That long ago have given birth
To mellow fruit upon the earth,—
Seest thou not that ghostly fog
Rising upwards from the bog,
Then, moiuiting on the eastern breeze,
Whispers a warning to the trees '?
Why does it beat with chilly feet'?
Comes it to tell us—
"II vient tout de suite?"
Grey old winter I with thy dress
Of cold, white, marble-loveliness.
All thy rosy hours have fled
To the tombs of buried dead;
They were bright and glad, but noxv
There are wrinkles on thy brow,
And icy tears in thy pale eyes,
And muttered groans, and weary sighs :
276 Tlie Attempt.
While, hark ! the warning cometh still
From stream and forest, vale and hill,
Cometh singing soft and low
Through drifting heaps of hoary snow.
That solemn warning of defeat,
That, muttering, says—
" II vient tout de suite." .
La Morale.
Oh soon shall we who still exist
Within the veil of human life.
See, dawning through its human mist,
The final end of joy and strife.
Oh spring! Oh hfe I Oh happy heart I
Be happy while you may,
For bitter tears \vill soon succeed
The sunshine of to-day.
When spring and summer both have gone
To tell their weary tale to heaven,
And middle age is creeping on,
With many sins to be forgiven;
Though still we live, and still we have
No mighty cross to take,
No great and holy work to do
Or suffer for His sake,
There still will be our inward life
To perfect and complete,
Ere we may dare to lay it down
In triumph at His feet.
And when Life's little day is past,
And Death's cool night is come,
We shall rest with Him at last
In His Eternal Home.
Naomi S. Smith,
From the German of Kathe Voss.
The dcAv was lying on the flowers and plants; they drank
it gladly, for it was hot summer, and the blue heaven was
dartmg forth its ghttering rays.    The clear drops were
J
The Attempt. 211
glistening like diamonds on the grass, the flowers raised
their heads, refreshed and invigorated, to listen to the
morning song of the birds. Nature was celebrating her
happy awakening in a spacious garden, the early morn¬
ing hour kept every disturbance at a distance, no foot
had trodden as yet the long alleys and shady avenues.
Through the green trees glanced the bright walls of a
summer-house, it was overgrown with climbing roses, the
sweet blossoms filled the air with fragrance. The sun
shone bright and brighter over the garden, his rays
fell through the thick foliage of the trees, the roses bowed
in reply to his cheerful morning salutation.
" Sunshine is life!" spoke the rose, who had just
opened her caHx, in all her grace and beauty. The dark
green leaves which surrounded her concealed the thorns
of her stem, and enhanced the delicate beauty of the
flowers, whose lily-white leaves were tinted in the
middle with pale red. " Sunshine is life!" chimed the
rose into the song of the birds.
" Child," spoke the elder tree from the midst of the
shrubs (he was an old elder tree, with knotty branches,
who had seen many a spring and many a winter storm),
" thou art not acquainted with life. To-day, indeed,
there is sunshine, but yet a little while, and the clouds
will veil it; they are now gliding gently along the sky,
they will become thicker and darker, and then the rain
will pour down; he indeed refreshes and restores to life,
when he is gentle, but if he become violent, and enter
into partnership with the storm, he Avill bring us ruin.
No blossom, no flower can resist both—life brings not
sunshine alone."
The young rose smiled, she believed not a w^ord of
what the elder tree had said. " He is old and peevish,"
she said to herself, " he is whimsical, who would believe
him ? I know better, the present is mine, and pleasure
and life, who can rob me of them % "
A butterfly came flying up to her, a delicate, airy thing,
his wings shone brightly and gaily, he alighted on the rose,
and they played and basked in the bright simlight, full of
wanton pleasure. The rose gave forth her sweetest
fragrance ; they sang together, " Simshine is Life."
It was evening. The sim had left the garden, a few
purple clouds appeared through his last rays, in the faint
golden light. The dew was again lying on the flowers,
and again they were enjoying themselves after the heat
278 The Attempt.
of the day. The birds were singing no longer, they had
gone to rest, but here and there one fluttered towards his
little nest. The rose, which, in the morning, had scarcely
opened, was now blooming in full beauty.
Through the long avenues of the garden a gentleman
and a young girl were strolling towards the summer-house,
the cool of the evening had enticed them into the open
air. The young girl, who was scarce more than a child,
was of slight, delicate form, a graceful lovely creature.
Her strong resemblance to her companion, a tall, gi-ave
man, of middle age, left no doubt that they were father
and daughter. They approached the summer-house, and
the place where the rose was blooming. The eyes of the
young girl rested full of admiration on the precious
flower.
" Oh ! pray, papa, wait one moment, it is too magnifi¬
cent, I must have it." A small, white hand parts the
green leaves, slender fingers surround the stem, it is over
with the flower.
" You should have left it. Alma, it will soon be quite
gone," said the young girl's grave companion.
" Naughty flower, it has pricked me, I will take away
all these ugly thorns, and then one can see nothing more
beautiful."
The blood dropped from the little finger, but the slight
pain was soon forgotten. The rose Avas stuck into the
waist-band of the light, airy summer-dress, and now it was
hard to say which of the two looked most like life and
sunshine.—the flower in all its glory, or the almost childish
form of the girl who had broken it. A smile lingered on
her pretty features, like a summer morning, in her deep
blue eyes, faith and innocence, peace and truth were
mirrored. A grave, intellectual light was diffused over
her countenance ; the bright bloom of her cheek, and the
clear brilliancy of her eye enlivened her noble features,
and, at the same time, filled the onlooker with anxiety,
the whole appearance of the maiden seemed unfitted to
endure the burden and cares of life ; the little foot scarcely
touched the ground, and the fairy form seemed, as it were,
to hover by the side of her companion along the shady
walks of the garden. The last rays of the setting sun fell
through the branches of the trees upon her, and upon the
blooming rose which she carried in lier waist-band ; both
were flowering in youth and beauty, two lovely sisters,
beaming like sunshiuo, full of joy and life.
The Attempt. 279
Such, probably, were the thoughts of her companion,
as he looked down upon her. His features resembled hers,
but were more decided and strongly marked; his stature
was tall and powerful, his blue eyes had the same deep,
thoughtful expression as hers, as he said, looking affec¬
tionately upon her,—" Let us go in, the dew is beginning
to fall; you are lightly clad, Alma, and the coolness may
hurt you."
The bright dress shone a little longer among the dark
foilage, then disappeared.
The sea is calm and peaceful,  a broad  mirror-bright
surface, clear as crystal, unfathomable as the mysteries of
God.    No breath of air brings coolness, no light breeze
ruffles the smooth surface of the. sea.    The wonders of
the deep are revealed to the searching eye ;  gardens and
forests, strange plants and fabulous flowers form fantastic
groups.     Between them lies,   apparently immovable,  a
large fish, awaiting a suitable moment, in which, intent
on prey, he may dart forth and swallow his unconscious
booty.    Likewise, whole processions of smaller fish appear
inquisitively on the surface, and disappear the next instant
in the depths beloAv.    The spacious blue canopy of heaven
finds its shining image mirrored in the still surface of the
water.    The ship moved so slowly forward that it almost
seemed as though it lay quite still.    The sails hung loosely
down, the sailors stood in idle groups together, the passen¬
gers had assembled upon deck, watching anxiously to see
whether they could discover no little cloud in the sky, no
breath of air which might bring the prospect of a change.
Impatience was written on every countenance,  they had
gazed so often into the distance, and made so often the
monotonous journey   on  deck   from  helm  to  bowsprit.
"Will this last much longer?" they asked each other.
Nothing moved, the sky remained cloudless, the sea hke
a glass.
One stood alone, and looked back into the distance,
a young man of engaging, attractive exterior; he might
have been called handsome, had it not been that his
whole appearance was somewhat too feminine, too weak.
He sees not the broad mirror of water, not the clear,
cloudless heaven, his eye seems to pierce the far distance,
and what he there sees, makes him happy ; the brightness
of his eyes, the heightened colour of his cheeks betray it.
The   other passengers    see  nothing but  sea  and  sky.
280 The Attempt.
imagination and remembrance cause the young man to
forget the present. He sees before him the slender form
of a lovely girl in a light summer dress, in whose girdle
a freshly blown rose is fastened. Gravely and earnestly
she looks up to him and listens to his words, the chang¬
ing colour of her cheeks betrays her emotion. " If you
will trust me. Alma," he says gently and caressingly,
" and will not forget me, when I am gone beyond the sea,
this thought will be my only happiness. I will work and
strive, fight and labour, I will not rest till I have attained
the wish of my heart. I have no other thought, no other
wish upon earth. Years many pass away, I may have
many difficulties to overcome, will you then, Alma, promise
never to doubt me, always to believe in me f
"I will, Edmund, for I cannot do otherwise, but you
shall go hence free and 'unfettered. If your heart should
one day lead you back to me, I will hail that moment
as the happiest one of my life. But should time ever
efface my image, or some one else."—
" Never, never. Alma ! grieve me not with such doubts,
to you, you alone my heart belongs ; Alma, if you love
me, really love me, you must trust everything to me I
Give me the rose as a farewell gift, it shall lead me into
the distance,—the rose, so freshly and beautifully blown,
your image! I will bear it on my heart, it shall be
my companion till I one day return."
Still the young man gazes dreamily into the distance.
His hand has, mechanically, so to speak, drawn forth
a pocket-book, he opens it, a withered rose lies within it.
The leaves are rolled together, the colour is brownish, it
is without form or beauty, and yet it seems to fill him
with ecstasy. He closes the book again, after he has
looked upon it for a while ; " Life is love, love is Kfe," he
says, and the next moment the pocket-book rests again
on his heart.
In a brilliantly lighted room stood a lady before a
mirror arranging her dress. All the surroundings, the
arrangement of the apartment, from the soft, flowery
carpet, which hushed every sound, to the brilliantly
shining lustre on the roof, betokened luxury and wealth.
The windows were open, the soft summer breeze played
with the white window curtains. The lady was clad iu
silk and lace. Splendid attire, pearls and diamonds
glittered upon her.    But her youth was gone ; the hard
Ike Aitempt. 281
featm-es, the cold eye, which is frequently seen among
the children of fortune, who find then* treasure only upon
earth, made no pleasant impression, and appeared even
more strikingly in contrast \\i\h the magnificence of her
dress. She had made several vain attempts to fasten a
veil to her dress, when the noise of the heavy doors
opening behind her drew her attention. She looked
impatiently round, a gentleman entered the room.
'* You are come at last, Edmund, the guests will be here
immediately, you must be ready to receive them."
With these words the lady turned towards the gentle¬
man who had just entered. His features still bore their
former expression of weakness and indecision, although
he was much graver and older by ten years. He looked
up with an air of indifference and weariness.
" Ah, yes, pardon me, I forgot."
" Edmund, you might fetch me the little diamond pin
with the star; this veil must be properly fastened, and
the pin suits my head-dress admirably."
" Willingly, if I can find it."
He passed through several brilliantly lighted rooms,
which vied with each other in elegance and splendour.
Costly pictures decked the walls—marble statues stood
in niches and corners—rare plants and flowers in vases of
porcelain difiused sweet fragrance around. He passed
carelessly on till he reached a small chamber, which,
simpler in its arrangement than the others, contained
chiefly books and papers, A writing-table and desk stood
in it; he opened the drawers, looked throi;gh them, the
pin was not there. After a long, vain search, he opened
the writing-table. At this moment a silli dress rustled on
the carpet. " You are very slow, Edmund; let me look
myself." The jewelled fingers of -the lady searched
through all the drawers in vain, the pin was not there.
•' At last!—What is that ? " In a small inner drawer,
carefully laid aside, was a pocket-book. It seemed old
and worn out; as she contemplated it, half contemp¬
tuously, half curiously, an old, withered rose fell out of it.
" What is the use of the old thing, Edmund, that you keep
it so carefully ? Ah, at last here is the pin in this little
crevice; you are very careless, my friend, about such
costly things."
While one hand grasps the lost pin, the other still holds
the withered rose. Poor flower! you are scarcely to be
recognised,—so crushed, so shrivelled, so small and wan I
sr.riiMBEK 1872. 1^
282 Tlie Attempt.
The lady next went to the window; her cold eye rested
for an instant on the little relic, then she crushed the dry
leaves in her hand, and threw them out of the window.
" Come, Edmund, to the drawing-room," she said, turn¬
ing towards him, " we must make haste."
He passed his hand over his eyes, as if something there
gave him pain. A gentle sigh escaped his Kps. Perhaps
he remembered the moment in which the flower came into
his possession, in which he vowed to preserve it faith¬
fully—to bring it back again to her who was the sole
object of his wishes. Did he remember the slight girlish
form who had so trustingly promised to confide in him"?
How did everything turn out so differently ? He did not
know, but certainly the fault was not his ; could he dic¬
tate to circumstances which were so much more powerful
than he % Could he prevent misfortune from overtaking
him, his undertakings from being wrecked? Had not
Alma herself said to him that he was free, quite free %
And could he have doomed her—her whose health was
BO delicate, to the life of labour and hardship which would
have awaited her by his side ?
Then he had met his present wife, who, rich and inde¬
pendent, had shoAvn her preference for him, was that his
fault, and could he thrust a blessing from him which all
at once relieved him of every care and anxiety, and pre¬
pared a certain future for him I He had certainly done
his best when he wrote to Alma and placed the decision
in her hands, and she had answered him, saying, that she
wished him all happiness in his marriage, and that her
gr'eatest happiness would always be to hear that he was
well and happy.
He had then learnt that she was ill, and later, that she
was anxiously so; but she had always been delicate, and
had been frequently ill before, so there was nothing in
that to alarm hun; it was to be expected that this would
occui' from time to time. As for himself so many differ¬
ent things had occupied him—the life which he now led
was so full of vai-iety, pleasure, and excitement, that he
very seldom thought of the past. Certainly, all these
pleasures lost their charm in the course of time, and the
caprices and whims of his wife were sometimes very
troublesome. Strangely enough, in such moments the
■\'ision of Alma in all her loveliness came before him, and
whatever efforts he made to drown it and forget it, again
and again it appeared before his eyes.    He passed then
The Attempt. 283
his hand across his forehead to drive it away, as in this
moment, which, by reason of the diamond which he had
chosen, awakened the recollection of past times. Hitherto
he had never had the resolution to destroy the withered
rose, nor to let it go from him; to-day another hand,
not his, had done so. " Life is to dream, life is a dream,"
he whispered to himself, whilst outside the night wind
dispersed the scattered rose leaves.
A weeping ash spreads its gi-een leafy mantle widely
around, gravely and sadly its branches droop. The other
trees around raise their leafy crowns towards the sky, the
ash tree bends towards the ground, its leaves touch the
damp soil.
Protectingly, as it were, it surrounds a simple grave,
which has no other ornament than a rose bush, whose
blossoms are partly opened, partly still in bud. They
are of the most delicate white, only in the middle tinged
Avith soft red. When the evening wind rustles through
the branches of the ash tree, it moves the flowers of the
rose bush, and their leaves fall on the grave of their early
faded sister.
The gi-ave bears the name of Alma. Under it is written
•—" Life brings death, death brings life."
Thekla.
The inferiority of English hymn literature to that of
Germany, has often been remarked upon and accounted
for in various ways, and yet, in looking over such a collec¬
tion of our sacred songs as Sir Roundell Palmer gives in
his " Book of Praise," it is probable that few readers
would thhik of complaining either of the smalhiess of their
number, or the poverty of their style.
Most of our best known hymns were produced in the
eighteenth century, but there are some of an earlier
date, which cannot be passed over in silence. The prayer
for mercy, beginning—
" O Lord, turn not Thy face away,"
was written about the year 1562, but it has since been
altered by various hands.     To the same century pro-
284 The'Attempt.
bably belongs also a hymn entitled originally, " A Song,
made by F. B. P., to the tune of Diana," (" Jerusalem, my
happy home,") which has been frequently imitated and
added to by later writers. It was at one time printed in
the ballad style by a Scotchman, and became extremely
popular among his countrymen. Another fine old hymn
on the same subject,—" Sweet place, sweet place alone !"
is by Samuel Grossman, and is dated 1664. Many who
would tiuTi away from Martin's " Plains of Heaven," and
be tempted to ridicule the very original descriptions of
the other world, given in such books as " Heaven our
Home," could read these unpretending verses with
pleasure.
Very unlike any simple " Jerusalem " hymns, are the
sacred poems of George Herbert, the saintly " coimtry
parson." Just before his death, he gave his little book to a
friend, humbly asking that it should be made public if his
" dear brother Farrer" could think it might " tm-n to
the advantage of any dejected poor soul;" " if not" he
added, " let him burn it, for I and it are less than the
least of God's mercies." We find the oddest conceits
and fancies strangely intermingled with beautiful thoughts
throughout the work, but, as " brother Farrer " said, there
is " the picture of a divine soul in every page of it," and
siich poems as " The Flower," " Simday," '' Home," and
" Sin," are surely not unworthy of veiy high praise.
Herbert's quaintness of style is rivalled by that of Francis
Quarles, author of " Emblems," divine and moral, and
yet, in the following verses (taken from his hynm on
Job xiii., 24), there is nothing but the greatest sim¬
plicity to be found,—
" Thou art my life; if thou but turn away,
My life's a thousand deaths: thou art my way;
Without thee, Lord, I travel not, but stray.
My light thou art ; without thy glorious sight,
Mine eyes are darkened with perpetual night.
My God, thou art my way, my life, my light.
« « * *
Thou art the pilgrim's path, the blind man's eye,
The dead man's life: on thee my hopes rely;
If thou remove, I err, I grope, I die.
Disclose thy sunbeams, close thy wings, and stay;
See, see how 1 am blind and dead, and stray,
O thou that art my light, my life, my way."
There is much that is beautiful in the little poem on
The Attempt. 285
Psalm Ixix. 15, but to quote from it would be impossible,
it must be read as a whole.
Milton's grand " Hymn on the Nativity " stands alone
among the sacred songs of this country. It cannot be
compared with other hymns, nor be subjected to the same
kind of criticism, but it need not be the less valued on
this accoimt.
Some hymns are best suited for private reading, others
are for more general use. To the latter class belong
Bishop Kew's morning and evening hymns, which have
indeed become " familiar in our mouths as household
words."
But it was not tUl the next century that England
could be said to possess a " People's Hymn Book." Dr
Watts' hymns appeared in 1709, and began at once to
have a rapid sale.    The mere mention of such lines as—
" When I survey the wondrous cross,"
" There is a land of pure delight,"
" How bright those glorious spirits shine,"
" Jesus shall reign where'er the sun."
would suffice to convince any one of the popularity of
some of his productions. It must, however, be confessed
that the taste of this eminent non-conformist was by no
means perfect. He himself said, when speaking of his
hymns, " Some of the beauties of poesy are neglected,
and some wilfuUy defaced, but a more exalted turn of
thought or language should darken or disturb the devo¬
tions of the weakest souls." It never occurred to the
excellent doctor that this very "defacement" might
occasionally prove a stumbling block to those who
happened to be troubled with a sense of the ludicrous.
AVho would care to join in the singing of such a stanza
as this,—
" So Samson, when his hair was lost,'
Met the Philistines to his cost;
Shook his vain limbs with sad surprise,
Made feeble fight, and lost his eyes."
But one can easily forgive blemishes where there is much
to admire and be thankful for, and in this ago of better
taste, strange compositions may be met with in hymn-
books for the poor, which are utterly devoid of both
rhyme and reason, and which Dr Watts would certainly
have read with indignation. Why, with so many beauti-
fid hymns and  tunes   to   choose   from,   any   clergyman
286 The Attempt.
should encourage his people to sing miserable choruses,
set, not unfrequently, to popular negro melodies, it is
difficult to say.
Some of Dr Doddridge's hymns are not less well
known and loved than are those of Dr Watts.
" Hark, the glad sound! the Saviour comes ! "
and,
" Lord of the Sabbath hear our vows,"
may be given as examples of his contributions to our
sacred poetry,
Addison's beautiful paraphrases of Psalms xix. and xxiii.
may be mentioned as hymns, because they are not, like
those dear to all Scotch hearts, David's words put into
simple verse, but rather poems founded upon a Scripture
theme. Both first appeared in " The Spectator," as did
also Addison's two hymns, beginning,
" When all Thy mercies, O my God,"
and,
" When rising from the bed of death,' 'etc.
Towards the end of the century, the Olney Hymns
appeared, the joint work of Cowper and his friend, John
Newton. It is needless to say how truly many of them
may be called a nation's favourites. The majority were
from Newton's pen.    Two of his best are perhaps,
" How blest the name of Jesus sounds,"
and,
" Quiet, Lord, my froward heart."
But it is to Cowper, poet as well as saint, that we owe
the most valuable part of the book. All his varying
moods, his hours of dark melancholy, his hours of peace
and hope, are pictured for us in his hymns, and this is
what makes the words come home to us.
Not many years after the appearance of the Olney
Hymns, another book of the same kind was pubhshed,
intended " for the use of the people called Methodists."
Those who have read John Wesley's amusingly honest
preface, know all that can be said in favour of this collec¬
tion. But he did not give it more praise than it deserved.
Its hold upon the affections of his followers is as firm as
it Avas fifty years ago. The Wesleyan loves his hymn-
book as many a Churchman loves his prayer-book. At
public and private worship, at class-meetuigs, at " watch-
night" gatherings, at funerals, the hymns written aud
collected by Wesley are still sung by those to whom they
The Attempt. 287
were dedicated. And here it may be remarked, that all
who know anything of the tastes and feelings of the
EngKsh poor, cannot fail to have noticed their great fond¬
ness for such hymns as Toplady's " Rock of Ages," and
Charles Wesley's " Jesus, lover of my soul." The little
Sunday scholar learns them willingly ; the " Methodist "
collier sings them in his dark work-cell, while his wife at
home hushes her babies to sleep with the same familiar
words; the sick love to hear and repeat them, and even
the dying will often have some simple verse on their
lips.
No writer of the present century has yet made a richer
contribution to our hymnology than is contained in
Keble's " Christian Year." His hymns can never, for
obvious reasons, be enshrined in the hearts of the poor as
Cowper's and Wesley's are, but they have been studied
in private by himdreds of thoughtful readers, and have
created a widely spread feeling of love and veneration
for the author's name.
Not less dear to English hymn lovers is the memory
of Francis Lyte. His evening hymn, the last he wrote,
is surely one of the most beautiful of English sacred
songs.
James Montgomery's hymn on prayer, and the one
which begins " For ever with the Lord," are as popular
as any of his productions, but none of them have the
sweetness of Lyte's, nor perhaps the earnestness which
touches many a heart in such a hymn as Milman's, " 0
help us Lord, each hour of need."
The Hst of living hymn-writers is a long one. The
names of Bonar, A. L. Waring, Charlotte Elliott, Dean
Alford, H. L. L., and C. F, Alexander are in it, and
are already very familiar to most readers of hymns.
In these troublous times, when the Chiirch is torn to
pieces by controversy of every kind, we can still turn
to our collections of sacred poems, and find nothing but
an atmosphere of peace and unity there. We can read
the productions of writers who held very opposite vicAvs,
and yet never be reminded of either Calvinism or Armi-
nianism, of Dissent or of High or Low or Broad Church.
This is no now thought, but it is one which it is pleasant
to borrow and repeat.
M. S. S.
288 The Attempt.
OUR LIBRARY TABLE.
"THE SILENT PARTNER."
American books are taking a mucli larger place than
formerly in our daily literature; and under the title of The
Silent Partner, Mrs Plielps has given us a volume which
she very appropriately bids us, in the words of Bacon,
" weigh and consider." The story is one of American
foctory life, and is written ^vith the author's usual vigour
and pathos. Its main object is to show how wide is the
gulf between the two extremes of society,—the Mells and
Mudges at one end, with large families, consumptive
wives, flooded cellars, and no drains ; and the Maverick
Hayles at the other, careless, luxurious, and, for this is
the sting, owners of the undrained houses aforesaid. It
does not need a Carlyle to show that the outcome of such
a state of things must necessarily be terrible. A French
Revolution, a Commune, the Dames de la Halle formerly,
the petroleuse of our own time: nay, more insidious, but
if possible more venomous a Nemesis comes in an Inter¬
national Association, full of bitterness and unreason,
overlaying the grain of reason that gives them the power
of truth, when they cry that these things ought not so to
be. It would be well for the Hayles of all countries, if
they would hearken to the key-note struck by the deft
fingers of an author, instead of delaying, in their blind
ease, till a louder and harsher chord shall arouse them.
One endless difficulty must occur, however, to most
readers of The Silent Partner. We are not all Miss Kelsos,
free and wealthy, with the means as well as the will to
build a beautiful bridge over, at least, our own corner of
the gulf; audit is no discredit to the poor if they respond
most readily to those who can practically prove their
goodwill. What is to be done by those, the large
majority, who would gladly contribute their mite of help,
but have ties on time and purse that they cannot dis¬
regard ? Anyone who could find a satisfactory solution
to tins problem, would merit the thanks of both classes
alike.
One word more as to the writing of this book. The
episode of little Bub Mell is hardly inferior to Dickens in
originality and power, and remains in the memory with
a clearness which testifies to its wonderful truthfulness.
I
The Attempt. 289
^\\t ^tru()riUs of a CflLiyfrone.
PART n.—THE B.VLL.
Jack took me to a comfortable seat near the centre of
the room, and the labours of the evening then began.
When I say the labours of the evening, I am thinking of
the part I myself had to play. I am afraid people, young
people especially, very seldom consider all that their elders
(and betters) suffer in their behalf in the quality of
chaperones. I am a born chaperone, everybody tells me,
and as I have already said, I delight in my work; but I
cannot deny that it is hard work. Yes, my dear young
friends, I often think to myself, as I sit watching the whirl
of the waltz, or the labrynths of the lancers,—yes, my dear
girls, make the most of your time, frisk and frolic while
you may, the time mil come when you, too, will be
chaperones, and then you will know what it is ; in the
meantime, I need not tell you—" where ignorance is bliss,
'tis folly to be wise."
But upon the occasion of this archery ball, many of the
difficulties which often beset the path of a cliaperone were
removed. I had five able-bodied men attached to my
party, so there was no fear that any of my young ladies
would be entirely partnerless or supperless ; then most of
my charges were unusually good-looking, and all of them
attractive, so they were tolerably certain to dance and
enjoy themselves ; and finally, though the Harringtons re¬
quired to be well looked aftei-, and Ada Fielding was a born
flirt, they were all reasonably good and obedient girls, and
I felt I need not fear a repetition of the agonies I had en¬
dured with Jenny Lawrence. So that my mind was really
very easy, and for the first five or six dances I enjoyed
myself immensely, chatting to the benevolent elderly
gentlemen who peramlmlated tlie room laden with small-
talk, taking notes of the dresses, and enjoying Strauss's
waltzes; then a few of the usual little contretemps began to
occur. Lucy Wyvill tore her dress, and looked ready to
cry about her draggle-tailed appearance ; Sophy Irwin
complained of a headache, and refused to waltz; Rose
Harrington disappeared in the conservatory with a
heavy dragoon, and her partners all came asking me—■
"Can you tell me where to find Miss Harrington?" (A
nice question for a chaperone to answer in the negative!)
*    ^ OCTOBEK 1872,
290 The Attempt.
Blanche danced five consecutive dances with a very inelig¬
ible briefless barrister; Ada Fielding was quoting Moore to
a poetic looking individual who capped her quotations from
Byron,—^but Ada was engaged, and the consequences were
on her own head. Gertrude Wyvill was a great comfort
to me, and Lucy soon forgot her torn dress ; but the most
disconcerting part of my duties arose fi'om Dr Irwin's
extraordinary conduct to poor little Carrie Carleton.
After paying her the most marked attention the whole of
the day, he now avoided her in a way that was almost
rude ; and once, when the poor child addressed a remark
to him, he answered in a gruff monosyllable, and turned
on his heel. Carrie did not seem to take it to heart, and
she danced every dance, but she looked surprised at his
rudeness, and / was dreadfully mortified that my scheme
was turning out so ill.
The twelth dance on the card was a country dance, and
I had promised Jack that, if all my young ladies had
partners, I would dance it with him. One by one they
were all claimed, until only Carrie Carleton was left, with
Dr Irwin standing with his back to her, in an attitude of
deep abstraction. Davie came up at this moment, exclaim¬
ing—"Not engaged Miss Carleton; may I have the
pleasure I" I thought it was all right, but poor Carrie
turned crimson with confusion from Davie to me.
" Oh! Dr Cunningham, I am so sorry, I am engaged to
Dr Irwin for this, he asked me this morning to keep
the country dance for him; but I'm sure he has forgotten,
or something—do you think, Mrs Somers, I might —
I was fairly puzzled, but Davie interposed. " Just let
me settle it, Jeanie. Irwin, I say, Irwin !" and he tapped
him on the shoulder, " Are you engaged to Miss Carleton
for this?"
" To—Miss—Carleton," said Dr Irwin slowly, turning
round, " Ah, to be sure, the country dance. I believe I
did say something, but it's of no consequence. Miss
Carleton wiU have a better partner in you."
" Then you resign your claun upon Miss Carleton ? "
said Davie, with a tone and glance which I did not then
understand.
" I resign all claim upon Miss Carleton," returned Dr
Irwin, with an equally (to me) unintelligible emphasis and
glance; and slightly shrugging his shoulders, he walked
away, while Davie led Carrie forward, and Jack and I
followed.    In another moment we Avere all involved in
The Attempt. 291
the intricacies of the country dance, and I had completely
forgotten chaperonage and its attendant cares in the
intense enjoyment of the exercise, and felt as if I were
back in the Edinburgh Assembly Rooms, living over again
what a very clever writer characterises as " the only
violently happy bit of Hfe."
" Come and have some supper, Jeanie," said Jack,
when dancers and musicians alike exhausted, the stewards
of the ball gave the signal to stop, " come and have some
supper. Never mind the girls, they're all engaged for this
dance. I know—come along—you always used to go to
supper with me, you know ; do you remember the 20th of
December % no, of course you don't; but come Avith me
just now, all the same, to show you bear me no malice."
That was an irresistible argument, as J ack knew; for it
was on the 20th of December that the Cliristmas party
took place (which I told you about in my sister Minnie's
history), when Jack took me down to supper, and broke
out into such dreadful nonsense, and spilt a plateful of
soup all over my nice new blue dress, and thrust a ring
on to my finger by main force, vnthout leave asked or ob¬
tained ; and then w^e went upstairs again, and danced in
the most furious manner to the very end of the card,
utterly regardless of all my other partners, who must
have obtained some inkhng of the state of the case, for
they, to a man, refrained from interfering. So when ad¬
jured by the memory of the 20th December, of course I
could not refuse ; and Jack and I went and had supper,
and laughed, and talked, and made ourselves so agreeable
over it, that I am sure no one would ever have guessed
us to be man and ^vife of eight years' standing; and the
time passed so rapidly that, when I saw them hang out
"No. 15 waltz" from the gallery, I was quite terrified,
and cried " 0 Jack! my girls ! take me back to them!" in
such a piteous tone that he rose at once.
"Let us go back through the conservatory," he said. "It's
the shortest way, and the prettiest, and I should not be
much surprised if some of the girls were there." " Neither
should I," I said in conscience-stricken tones, and we
entered the conservatoiy. It was a very large and beau¬
tiful one, and that night was most artistically lighted
with coloured lamps, and had small bowers arranged here
and there. Now, however, these were empty; even Rose
Harrington and her heavy dragoon had left, attracted by
the strains of the " Blue Danube " which came sighing
292 The Attempt.
through the leaves, softened by the distance; and we
seemed the sole tenants of the conservatory, until at the
last turn in the winding path through the branches, a soft,
but most expressive whistle issued from my husband's
lips, and we came suddenly upon my brother Davie and
Carrie Carleton,
Of course, the mere fact of finding them sitting together
in the conservatory Avas nothing; but it was evident to
me from the expression of Jack's countenance, that he had
seen something more; and besides, two more tell-tale
faces than Davie's and Carrie's I have seldom beheld.
Davie evidently felt himself in a corner, for he took the
bull by the horns,—that is to say, he took Carrie by the
hand, and advanced boldly. "Jeanie," said he, "here is
a new sister for you."
I forgot my plans, I forgot the Irwins and their
fortunes, I forgot prudential considerations of every kind,
I saw nothing but Carrie's sweet, frightened child-face,
and I caught her in my arms.
" You dear darling little pet!" said I, and squeezed her
till I wonder she didn't scream. Jack and Davie shook
hands with much solemnity, and then there was a pause.
I recovered myself first. " But Davie!" I cried, " What
will Miss Irwin say"? and what does Dr Irwin mean ? and
what is it all about ? " as my schemes, and the events of
the day, and Dr Irwin's mysterious conduct, words, and
looks began to come back to me.
" As to Miss Irwin, my dear Jeanie," said Davie, " I do
not know wliy she should say anything, and I do not ex¬
pect she will say anything; as to Dr Irwin, I don't know
what he means, and I don't care ; as to what it is all
about, I am going to marry Carrie Carleton, and am much
obliged to you for forgetting, for the last half-hour, that
you were her chaperone."
Now that was very rude of Davie, and I drew myself
up accordingly. " VYe are going home after this dance.
Jack, dear, will you find the other girls, and tell them so.
Davie, please give me your arm ; come Carrie, dear," and
I got hold of her hand, and squeezed it surreptitiously,
lest she should think I was really angry.
Of course, there was no more confidential conversation
till we were on our way home, an hour afterwards, for it
took a considerable time to collect my forces ; and after
the heavy dragoon and the briefless barrister had been
captured,   and  Rose   and  Blanche   Harrington   secured,
The Attempt. 293
Ada Fielding and her Byronic friend were long amissing'
but at last we were safely under Aveigh. Harry Wyvill
and his cousins went home to Barden Hall together; the
Harringtons and Fieldings, whose houses were close to¬
gether, w^ent next; and then Davie, who was to have
driven Dr Irwin in his gig, and spent the night with us at
Barden, came up to me. " Jeanie, do wrap up warm, and
drive home with me in the gig, there's a dear; I've a
great deal to say to you, and 1 can't drive home alone
with Irwin. He'll be quite pleased to go in the carriage
with Jack and the girls, and I have explained it to Jack."
Now I was dying to have a tete-a-tete with Davie, and,
moreover, have an especial fondness for driving in the
dark in a gig; so I agreed at once, though I fear it was
conducting myself very unlike a matron of my years and
position. Jack drove off in the carriage with the Irwins
and Can-ie (who was our guest just now at Barden),
and ill two minutes more, enveloped in at least a dozen
different wraps, I was seated with Davie in the gig,
driving swiftly along the moonlit road, and soon leaving
the carriage far behind.
" Well, Jeanie," said Davie, when we were fairly off, " I
scarcely know how to begin.    Last night was the first of
it all, when Irwin and I were smoking in your garden.    I
don't know how we got to it exactly, but we began to
talk about settling down and marrying, and so on, and I
asked him why he didn't marry, and he laughed and said,
" All  in   good  time,"   or  something  like  that,   and  by
degrees it all came out that he meant  to  propose to
Carrie before he left Barden.    By George, I could have
knocked him down when I saw what he meant; but, after
all, you know, he had as much right to ask her as I had.
And BO, Jeanie, after liis showing mo his hand like tliat, h
felt sort of bound in honcjur to let him play it out.    Be¬
sides, I knew if Cari'ie was the girl I took her for, she
would not throw me over just because Irwin was a better
match.    I never spoke out to her till to-night, you know,
Jeanie, but we understood each other pretty well for all
that.    So all  day at the archery I held ofi",  and gave
Irwui a fair chance,—and I wouldn't go through it again
for  a  thousand  poimds  down.    And  poor little Carrie
thought she had offended  me, and by  the  end of the
shooting she was about as miserable as I was; and so it
went on till that blessed country danoe.    You heard what
Irwin said, Jeanie?    ^^'ell, notlihig could be plainer than
294 The Attempt.
that, so I said to myself, I'll go in and win; and you forgot
your charge for three mortal dances, like a brick as you
are, Jeanie, and so it's all right, and there's an end of it."
"But what is the matter Avith Dr Irwin?" said I.
" From the moment that Carrie and I came out of the
dressing-room at the inn, he behaved like a bear, and he
is generally polite to a degree. What could have changed
him so suddenly ? "
" Oh, I don't know," said Davie, evidently supremely
indifferent on this point. " Some absurd fancy or other;
he's as fidgetty and particular as an old woman; he was
born to be an old baclielor, if ever man was. I must have
a talk with him, though, and put things right, for he's
a first-rate fellow, old Irwin, though I was beginning to
hate him uncommonly to-day."
"And what about his sister, Davie?" I asked, as the
breakdown of my plan suddenly occurred to me again.
" You were paying her devoted attention all the morning,
but it seemed to have a depressing effect upon you both."
"Ah, yes," returned Davie; "poor Sophy, I did my
best to cheer her up, but I was as low myself; I doubt if
I succeeded. Sophy's been engaged for three or four
years now to a fellow as poor as Job, and as proud as
Lucifer, and he won't marry tiU he makes a fortune,
though she has enough to keep them twenty times over,
but he won't be dependent on his wife. He's a great
friend of mine, and Sophy knows that, and we were talk¬
ing about his prospects. He's tremendously clever, but
it seems to be the sort of cleverness that does not pay.
He's writing a book just now, but I doubt the chances are
ten to one against its turning up trumps. So poor Sophy
is rather dull about it. Carrie will cheer her up better
than I can. I say, Jeanie, isnt Carrie a dear little
thing % "
Of course I readily assented to this proposition, which
was only the first of a long string of similar remarks,
more or less unconnected, which Davie poured forth with
rapidly increasing fervour, and which lasted until we
passed the gate of Barden Hall, and neared our own
house.
" Well, Jeanie," said Davie, as he sprang down and
lifted me out of the gig, " Good night. I shall be off on
my rounds before any of you are up, and I must call
on old Dr Carleton, too; but I shall be back about six.
Did Harry tell you he and Minnie want us all to dine at
The Attempt. 295
the Hall to-morrow ? so if you will take me in to-morrow
night as well, I shall be much obliged. Run in now,
quick, or you'll catch cold, and Jack will take my head
off."
And so ended my matchmaking! But still I cannot
say I felt at all depressed as I reviewed the events of the
day and evening. Dr Irwin's curious conduct was the
most unsatisfactory part of it; but, after all, what did it
matter ? and having come to that conclusion, I fell sound
asleep. DiDO.
(To be continued.)
% W\i of Indian %\lt.
It was the hot weather of 1871. That brief sentence to
one who has experienced eastern heat conveys an im¬
mense deal, while those who only know our temperate
clime can hardly imagine a state of things so unlike their
own experiences. Let them picture to themselves the
darkened house, every aperture tightly closed from 6
A.M. till about 8 P.M., in the hope of excluding the burning
air ; outside, a sun whose rays are death to the heedless
European, who should be mad enough to neglect due
coverings for his head; glare, dust, and discomfort every¬
where reigning supreme. Under such circumstances,
though exertion seems almost impossible, a little excite¬
ment is hailed as a relief from the weary monotony of
one's existence, and we were scarcely sorry when rumours
of disaffection among the natives became our ordinary
topic of conversation. The city of Amritsar, about forty
miles distant from us, contains a large and rather
ruffianly population, and being the centre of the Sikh
religion, is the natural hot-bed of rebellion against the
profane slayers and consumers of the sacred ox. Gradu¬
ally these rumours spread, a Sikh regiment quartered in
our station was regarded with suspicious eyes, and when
a telegram announced that several Mahommedans, butchers
by trade, had been murdered in one night at Amritsar, we
began to ask ourselves what would happen next. What
did happen was the assassination of a judge at Lahore by
a native fanatic, followed by a similar crime in Calcutta.
Gradually people began to speak of the Kookas in con-
296 The Attempt.
nection with the matter, and while sundry English magis¬
trates carried revolvers to Court with them, the police made
active, but not very successful, endeavours to capture the
murderers, and the detachment of troops in the Amritsar
fort was strengthened. Residents who had been in India
during the mutiny say that the state of the Punjaub at the
time of which I write, and at present, reminds them pain¬
fully of the ominous mutterings that preceded that terrible
outburst. So strongly were many of them convinced that
mischief was brewing, that one officer who had command
of our station for a short time took measures to provide
against a possible rising, arranging a place of reftige for
ladies, and telling off" those under him to certain posts.
Possibly some of those who, from their comfortable arm
chairs, pronounce sentence on the officials who subse¬
quently crushed the evil before any mischief could ensue,
might feel somewhat differently were they to live for a
few months in the atmosphere of uncertainty that sur¬
rounded us. It may be as well to explain that the
Kookas, originally a purely religious sect, have become,
as invariably happens, a political as well as a fanatical
body. They were founded some years ago, and were at
the outset a species of reformed Sikh, professing to return
to the purest and simplest conditions of that religion.
The beneficial nature of their precepts obtained them a
certain amount of approval from us, though even then
officials were found keen-sighted enough to recognise that
their creed contained the elements of future danger.
Their present leader or Guru, Ram Singh, who is, if I
remember right, a smith by trade, is a clever, unscrupul¬
ous, and ambitious man, wise enough to keep on good
terms with us as far as he can, while secretly plotting our
downfall. That he would never succeed in his object is
sure, but he might, and probably will, give an infinity of
trouble. He has his Soohahs, who answer to a Fenian
centre, in excellent order, and the speed with which his
commands are transmitted over the country is only
equalled by the readiness with which they are obeyed,
the religious outcry against the eaters of beef being used
to excite the populace who might not always care to join
in the political jjart of his programme. The sect has
increased immensely of late years, and musters now a
considerable force, and though, after the manner of
natives, they have quarrelled with the high caste Sikhs
who were their original supporters, these again cannot
The Attempt. 297
but agree with the Kookas in condemning our profana¬
tion of their sacred animaL
Time passed on, some of the murderers were hanged,
and  the  Kookas   retahated by murdering  a  native in
another part   of the   district who  had  given  evidence
against them during the trial; the feehng of uneasiness
increased, and the commissioners, or highest officials in
the neighbourhood, more than once expressed very de¬
cided opinions as to the unsettled condition of the native
population.    I may mention in passing, that at Kangra,
about ninety miles from our station, there exists an old
fort, which, though perfectly useless from a military point
of view, is always held by a few Europeans, as there is a
tradition, superstitiously believed in by the natives, that
could they obtain possession of it, our reign would termi¬
nate, the holders of Kangra being the masters of the
Punjab.    In December, almost the -whole of the troops
went to Delhi for a camp of exercise, leaving only one
regiment and a battery of artillery behind; this was an
opportunity ready made for the Kookas, and though Ram
Singh, being wise enough to understand something of the
risk, hesitated to seize it, one of his Soobahs, a hot and
rebellious spirit, insisted on making some attempt.   Their
scheme was to attack a native village, and revenge them¬
selves on a Su'dar there, who had assisted in captm-ing
one of the Amritsar murderers, and then to seize some
arms in the native state of Puttiala, proceed to Kangra,
take possession of the fort, and organise a general rising.
Ram Singh to save his own credit, gave information, too
late to be of any use, and there ensued the rising at
Malair  Kotla,   which   gave   occasion  for  one  of those
blunders for which the English are celebrated.    That it
was thought necessary to despatch troops from Delhi by
special train during the night proved that the authorities
considered it as well to be prepared; but before  their
amval at their old stations, the immediate matter had
been settled by the prompt action of the deputy commis¬
sioner  and  commissioner, Mr  Cowan  and  Mr  Douglas
Forsyth.    By the aid of the Maharajah of Puttiala, a
considerable  number  of the  rebels were  captured and
summarily tried, those who were taken red-handed, and
who had committed murder (having partially succeeded
in their attack on the village), being blown from the gims
on the spot.    Their gleam of success had  roused  the
country, and immense numbers were mustering with a
O p
OCTOBER   1872.
298 The Attempt.
view to joining the original insurgents. Had they suc¬
ceeded in doing so, there would in all probability have
been bloodshed, as they were in sufficient force to attempt
a rescue, and there were then no troops, with the excep¬
tion of a small guard of natives, either to take charge of
the prisoners or protect the European residents, of whom
there were several. It seemed clear, therefore, that such
prompt measures were needful, and they were justified
by the result in the eyes of the majority. The news of
the executions spread like wildfire, and panic succeeded
to exultation among the Kookas. Hurrying back to their
homes and concealing their weapons, every outward trace
of their intentions vanished, and to all appearance nothing
could be more harmless and innocent than the Zemindar
working quietly in his little field. Such being the case,
it was our turn to blunder; first an official censure was
pronounced on Mr Cowan, then the Maharajah was made
to feel that instead of gratifying, he had displeased the
Government; and finally, Mr Cowan was dismissed the
service, and Mr Forsyth removed with a rebuke. It is
true that Mr Cowan exceeded his actual powers, acting
on his own responsibility in what he considered a crisis,
whereas Mr Forsyth only used the authority legally
entrusted to him. Nevertheless, though Mr Cowan may
have merited a private rebuke, the folly of publicly dis¬
claiming the acts of two men who have manifestly
succeeded in staving off what might have been a serious
rising, is inconceivable.
Not only do Ibe Kookas themselves look upon the action
of the Government as a kind of triumph and encourage¬
ment for them, but the well-disposed natives view it as a
perfectly suicidal proceeding; wliile the Maharajah, hitherto
a staunch friend of the British, has been slighted, and
placed in an undignified position, which an Eastern is cer¬
tain to resent. Prince though he be, he shares the
national capacity for what may be politely called diplo¬
matic language; but his last attempt is a transparent
failure, and it is easy to read " between the lines" his
real feeling as to the nature of the rising, and the mea¬
sures taken by the authorities. Most probably, as the
Courant lately observed, the lesson will not be lost on
those who serve in India, and the day may come when
Englishmen will act with an eye to their own official
prospects rather than to the general welfare.
Indian government works with a kind of double action,
The Attempt 299
official and unofficial, and the capture of Ram Singh was
a specimen of the latter mode of doing business. Mr
Forsyth was given to understand that it would be desir¬
able to detain him quietly; so, having sent for himibr
the purpose of conferring on the whole affiiir, he ord^%d
a guard of Ghoorkas to form outside the tent. They
were slow in coming, and Mr Forsyth, Avho had already
extracted enough condemnatoiy evidence from his visitor,
was obliged to protract the conversation to his utmost.
At last the officer in command looked in to say that all
was ready, and Ram Singh received the formal dismissal
that -tei'minates an Indian visit; his face brightened
visibly, and he evidently thought himself well out of a
scrape as he made his salaam ; but his feelings must have
undergone a painful change when he walked out into the
very arms of the guard, and found himself carried off by
train before his followers had even heard of his capture,
eo that a rescue was impossible.
So far, I have repeated the current talk of the time, biit
I wish I could depict the ludicrous aspect of some of the
incidents that came under my own observation. I have
mentioned that at the time of the camp of exercise, one
regiment and a battery were left in a station that lay be¬
tween Amritsar and Puttiala; there I was residing, my
husband being absent at Delhi, while next door to me lived
anothei lady in the same state of temporary widowhood.
One morning during the cold weather, when a large pic¬
nic party was expected to come off at the house of a
neighbouring official, she was busy over her household
duties when the gentleman in question galloped up to her
door. He Avas no doubt an excellent individual, but for
that day at least seemed entirely devoid of common sense,
for, in a frantic state of excitement, with a native sowar
at his heels, he tore about the station, scattering panic
wherever he went. He refused to dismount, but requested
my neighbour to come to the door, when, in a few breath¬
less but patronising sentences, he made her understand
that something had happened, that she should not be
alarmed, and should encourage people to go to the pic¬
nic, but that the —th had gone out, and that he was on
his way to give further orders. Much bewildered, as he
declined to be more explicit, she came over to me to ask
if I had heard anything or seen the troops go, and quite
uncertain as to whether our little friend Avas romancing,
or  whether  there  was really  any danger,   I  being  as
300 The Attempt.
ignorant as she, set out to see if I could glean any infor¬
mation at the house of one of the officers whose wife I
knew. On my way there, I saw signs enough that some¬
thing was going on,—knots of officers talking in the com¬
pounds, and a general appearance of bustle, very unusual
in our sleepy station. As I tm-ned into my friend's
garden, her husband in uniform clashed out, and I found
lier with an uneasy countenance busily employed in pack¬
ing food and necessaries for camp. While the servants
were present we said nothing, as we should have been
loth to allow them to think that we were alarmed, but as
soon as we were alone, I gleaned what information I
could, and by waylaying one or two other friends, gathered
news of the rising at Malair Kotla. We spent the rest of
the day in watching the proceedings of the unfortunate
battery who received orders and counter-orders at inter¬
vals till they must have been heartily tired of their work.
First they were paraded to go, and the preparations were
hastily made for a start; then they were counter-ordered,
but no sooner were the horses unharnessed and things
settled than down came another telegram; and finally, at
five in the evening, they set off to proceed by a forced march
to Loodiana in the disturbed district. In the meantime,
our friend of the morning having transacted a great deal
of riding and talk, returned to play the part of host at
the pic-nic, it not having occurred to anybody but himself
that a " roAV " so many miles off should spoil a day's plea¬
sure, and though others knew that he had little or nothing
to do with the matter, no doubt he imagined that he had
been performing important service. It is curious to see
the different phases of character that are developed under
any httle excitement of the kind; and while I have no
doubt we should all have been terrified had we been
nearer the scene of the Kooka exploits, as it was, we
could not but be amused by the comicality of the thing,
the utter vagueness of the statements we heard, the mys¬
terious wisdom of some, and the profound secrecy affected
by others were intensely absurd; one gentleman carried
the latter idea so far, that he declined to divulge the name
of Malair Kotla, having overlooked the fact, that by that
time it was in the newspapers.
Such is one of the many "bits" that might be culled from
Indian life, and though possibly less interesting to those
who read of it than to the actors therein, it has at least the
advantage of novelty. Elsie Strivelyne.
The Attempt. 301
A YOUNG hot morning in its youth
Marching into noon,
With burning breezes that in sooth
Are coming very soon.
Shadows on the green sward playing,
Shadows that are lightly straying,
For they make no long delaying
In the morning sun.
They must wait till day-declining
When he is, without repining,
In the west-land deeply shining,
And his work is done.
I met a stranger on the lea,
And with these words he questioned me :—
" Who shall be bom this joyous morn
With the sunHght falling there ?
WTio shall die when the roses lie
Asleep in the dreamy air % "
" Many a tender baby heart
Shall begin to beat to-day,
And many a soul shall go apart
To a great eternity."
" But where will the birds and insects be
When their sweet day-life is over;
Will they drown themselves in the star-lit sea,
Or sleep in the crimson clover?"
" I do not know of insect graves,
Or of birds in a star-lit sea ;
Perhaps they sleep below the waves,
When tired and sad they be."
" Why is the world so glad to-day,
With its balmy, rosy weather ?
Why are the children all at play
Upon the billside heather'/"
302 The Attempt.
" God gave the world that it should be
No resting-place for misery ;
But when Ave pick the fairest flower.
He sends the warning of a shower."
" And will a shower fall to-day
To fill some heart with misery ? "
" Ah. me, indeed, I cannot tell,
But if He sends it, it is well I"
" Hear the lowing of the herds
Upon the lowland lying ;
I see some happy sparrow birds
Above the high-land flying,
And on the peat beneath your feet
Another sparrow dying.
Now, tell me wherefore, tell me why,
Its httle brothers sing,
When it is doomed in pain to die,
Poor harmless little thing % "
I said—" Indeed I do not know
Why it is doomed to die,
'Twere better not to leave it so,
But end its misery."
" Nay, kill it not," the stranger said,
And tears were in his eyes,
" There is no sin iipon its head,
'Tis but a sacrifice."
" A sacrifice! " he muttering said.
And stooped to touch the tiny head,
" Oh! sparrow-bird, I see thee lie
And pant in thy death-agony.
Oh! sparrow-bird, what hast thou done
To bear such bitter pain ?
I've seen thee singing in the sun,
As thou never wilt again.
Oh! sparrow-bird, the world is gay
With the sun and pretty flowers,
It never has a word to say
To any pain of ours."
I
The Attempt. 303
" Stranger," I answered, " kill the bird,
'Twere worthier of thee !"
But I do not think he ever heard,
For he never answered me.
We waited there, and merrily
The summer bells rang out,
The river murmured distantly,
We heard the children shout.
We heard the bleating of the sheep
Upon the breezy hill,
The echoes that for ever keep
Their own unbounded will.
And then the stranger, rising, said,
" We need no longer stay,
My little sparrow lieth dead
For ever and for aye."
'' For ever and for aye, my friend,
'Tis a sorry thing to see
That painful struggle for an end,
That ends eternally."
We turned and wandered down the hill,
Our hearts were very sad,
And by the tiny mountain rill
We met a Httle lad.
He dabbled in that pretty stream,
He picked its border flowers ;
We stood and watched him in a dream,
That hid the flying hours.
For his was innocence and love
That cherished all it saw,
Nor asked or questioned from above
The wisdom of its law.
" My boy," I heard the stranger say,
" Suppose a sparrow fell,
And panting at your feet it lay
In pain ineffable ;
Why should its flnal moments be
' Of such remorseless agony 1"
304 The Attempt.
" The God who made it live
Could also make it die,
I don't think He would give
It sorrow needlessly V
Simple childish words they were,
And yet they seemed to me
To shed a calm upon the air,
With their fidelity.
We turned, and left the little boy
Upon the breezy hill.
To gather lilies and enjoy
The ripple of the rill.
But when we parted on that day,
And parted there to meet no more,
We learnt a lesson, strange to say,
We never knew before.
A tender evening, on whose breast
Lying far away,
In crimson beauty of the west,
Dies the happy day.
Shadows on the green sward creeping.
Shadows long, and still, and sleeping.
For they are their vigil keeping
All the lonely night.
Not till earthly suns are bending
To the goal their final ending.
Will our shadows, heaven-ascending,
Find eternal hght. Naomi S. Smith.
Pem^rg and  Jtssoctaiion.
&
Memory is that faculty by which we can recall to our
minds thoughts which we have had, sensations which we
have experienced, events which we have gone through,
at some former period of our lives.
All huma.n memory is  imperfect; for   we   can  never
reproduce the whole of our past experience, there are
The Attempt. 305
always some portions of it which we cannot recall; and
again, what we do recollect is often given to us by
memory quite incorrectly; we never remember anything
exactly as it happens.
In the struggle which our memory is constantly making
against the difficulty of fuUj^ and exactly reproducing
the past, it is much assisted by that principle which
is called the Association of Ideas. By this expression
is meant the prhiciple according to which any idea
when presented to the mind has a tendency to call
up either (1) ideas resembling it, or (2) ideas that have
previously existed along with it. For mstance, we
pass some one in the street, and immediately find that
having seen him, we are reminded of some friend whom
perhaps we have not seen, nor even thought of, for a
long time. This may be either because the person whom
we met resembles our friend, or because the last time we
saw the friend, this person was with him. In the first
instance, it would be a case of Association resulting from
resemblance; in the second, a case of Association resulting
from contiguity—that is, the two objects which are con¬
nected by the tie of Association having been previously
present to our minds in tlie same place or at the same time.
With regard to the first class of Association, it has been
thought by several writers, that the Association caused by
resemblance, might be so explained as to show it to be
only one particular case of Associatitm resulting from con¬
tiguity in time or place. According to this view, Avhen one
object, e.g., a face, reminds us of another, it is because
there is in the two faces one feature which is the same,
and this feature, when seen by us in the second face, calls
up to our minds, by the law of Association, all the features
with which it was associated in the first face ; and in this
way the whole of the first ftice is brought to our recollec¬
tion. This explanation may account for some likenesses,
but it seems to me a very rough and unsatisfactory way
of explaining all. Most of those classes of Association
which would generally be classed under the head of
resemblance, seem to me to differ in kind from those
which come under the head of contiguity in time or space;
for, in the first case, the connecting links have to do with
what one may call the idea of an object—the plan on
which it is made—while in the second case, the links have
to do with its outward circumstances.
But this discussion is rather beside the subject of the
^   ^ OCTOBER   1S72.
306 The Attempt.
present paper, which has to do with the facts rather than
with the theory of Association.
Innumerable instances might be given of the way in
which memory is influenced by the associations which
arise from objects having been present to oiu* minds at
the same time or in the same place. Every one knows
how, on revisiting a place where we have not been for
some time, events and chcumstances which seemed to
have altogether faded from the memory are recaUed to it
by the sight of the scenes wdth which they have once been
associated. Music, too, has a very powerful influence in
recalling to the mind events and persons apparently long
since forgotten. But I think that this effect is produced even
more vividly, though not so frequently, by a once familiar
scent. The odour of a particular flower, or of a particular
perfume, will sometimes bring back so vividly the past
time with which it was once connected, that the present
is altogether forgotten, and we seem for the moment to
be actually living in the past. It seems strange that
this should be the case, for the sense of smell is surely,
if one may use the expression, almost the least intellectual
of all the senses ; but I think the explanation of the fact
is this. The impressions made on our other senses, and
the associations connected with them, are dulled by fre¬
quent repetition. We are constantly aware of things
we see, hear, and toiich, and very frequently of things
which we taste; but we very seldom, in comparison, are
conscious of smelling things, and so, when we perceive a
scent, because it is a rare kind of sensation it is also a
strong one; and becaxise we have so seldom perceived it,
it has not got mixed up with a number of different
associations, and so it brings its own special set of
associations more clearly and vividly before the mind.
Every kind of " memoria technica" depends for its
usefulness on the influence of Association on the memory.
It is precisely because dates and numbers of all kinds
have no associations belonging to them, that they are so
difficult to remember, and the principle of a "memoria
technica " is to associate with a number some idea, which,
on the other hand, links itself to the historical event to
which the date or number refers. Veiy ingenious, and
often very absurd, are the devices which are employed in
order to associate the link-word with the number on the
one hand, and the fact on the other; but the plan rests
on a true principle, and should not be despised, if, indeed.
The Attempt. 307
it is necessary to remember dates at all, which may per¬
haps be disputed.
It is almost entirely by the help of Association, too, that
we are able to learn anything " by heart." This is not
the case with children, in whom the more mechanical side
of the faculty of memory is very strongly developed, and
who can learn to repeat anything equally well whether
they imderstand it or not. But any grown-up person
finds it almost impossible to repeat words by heart, unless
he imderstands them; that is to say, unless there is some
rational principle of Association between the consecutive
words, which will bring them into his mind one after the
other.
It is not only in the working of the human intellect that
the influence of Association on memory can be observed;
we may notice it in all the more intelligent animals. It
is by means of this principle that it is possible to train
animals at all. A cat steals the milk, and is beaten ; con¬
stant repetition of the offence and the punishment will
form such an inseparable association in the cat's mind be¬
tween the two, that she will cease to steal, from di'cad of
the inevitable beating.
In the same way a dog is taught to fetch and carry, or
to perform tricks, by being rewarded whenever he does
what he is told, so that he associates the reward insepar¬
ably with the performance of the trick, and in time the
principle of habit comes into play, and he performs the
trick whether he is rewarded or not.
The influence of Association on the memory of horses
sometimes produces very troublesome eifects; they will
sometimes insist, for instance, on turning up a particular
road, because they did so before, years ago, perhaps, and
found at tlie end of it an unusually comfortable stable, or
something else equally pleasing to the equine mind, which
has become inseparably associated with the turn of the
road. It is remarkable how in this way a horse will re¬
member a road or a turning which his more intelligent
master has quite forgotten; the reason probably is, that the
master has so much more to think of; the horse receives
so few impressions into his mind, that the few he does
receive are more lasting.
In thinking of this subject as illustrated in the minds
and ways of animals, we observe, that while such
mechanical principles as those of Habit and Association,
are quite sufficient to account for everything that passes
308 The Attempt.
in the mind of a horse or a dog, they are entirely inade¬
quate to explain many of the mental processes of human
beings ; and with regard to the principle of Association
itself, that we see working in the minds of animals only
that more mechanical side of it, depending on contiguity
in time or place, which is easily observed and simply ex¬
plained ; while the other side of Association, that with
which the association depending on resemblance is con¬
nected, and of which one may say that its links are forged
by thought and not by circumstance, is seen working in
the human mind alone.
Grace.
^\\t   d} 0 n u £ tt 1   ^ i tt 4 0 IP.
Felice, sister, raise me.
Let me look forth once more.
Oh, narrow is the window.
And iron-barred the door.
But sister, I'll be free, perhaps,
Before the night is o'er.
I see the quiet cloister,
The darker for the snow.
On window ledges drifting,
And through the arches low ;
How white is all the cloistered square,
How calm they sleep below.
The cold wind stirs the Cyprus,
Our lonely Cyprus tall;
I hear the breeze in leafless trees,
Beyond that weary wall,
Sweep o'er the plain my memory sees,
So well I know it aU.
In spring 'twas sweet to wander
Among the grassy ways ;
In summer it was beautiful
To see them bind the maize ;
In autumn came the vintage time,—
Oh golden autumn days!
The Attempt. 309
But now the vines are withered,
The waters cannot flow.
And hushed is all the singing,
There's no more life and glow.
Only gathering dusk of winter,
And silence of the snow.
'Tis well the year is dying
In bitter snow and frost,
All summer blooms are faded,
All summer joys are lost;
And J go with the summer,
So let my hands be crossed.
And let the priests sing requiem,
And let the gi-eat bell toll,
That over wood and field and plain
Afar the sound may roll.
And some who hear may mourufully.
Pray for a parting soul.
E. J. O.
% 4^ui ll^ntaiili.'i on some of ^haksuijaiie'.^ §£iloc«.
So much has been said and written on Shakespeare's men
and Shakespeare's women, so much critical acumen has
been brought to bear on every minute detail of his plays,
that it seems almost presumptuous of me to add my small
remarks on so great a subject. But Shakespeare is free
and generous like nature; like her he offers an inexhaust-
able field of observation, to which the most humble
admirer may resort, and carry away new delights. This
thought strengthens me in making the bold attempt to
bring once more under the notice of my readers, a few of
Shakespeare's heroes.
The question is often asked—Has Shakespeare given
us any heroes, equal in beauty and perfection oi character
to his best heroines % Whereupon visions of Portia,
Beatrice, Cordelia, Queen Katherine, Imogene, Hermione
and others, pass through our minds in quick succession, and
we answer—No. It is, perhaps, natural that this should
be our spontaneous answer, for   Shakespeare has, mere
310 The Attempt.
than all other writers, given a liigh place to women. The
noblest ideals of our sex are to be found m his works.
He has more often made the interest of his plays to centre
in the virtue, strength, and constancy of his heroines
than of his heroes, and he places them in positions the
most fitted to call out all that is admirable in then*
characters; and, moreover, he endows them Avitli mental
powers equal to those of his most able men. Having
done all this, it is, as I say, natural that on first hearing
the question asked, we should answer in the negative.
Reflection, however, will, I think, modify our answer.
When we consider the difference of the qualities we most
admire in men, the difference of the circumstances in
which they are placed, and of the temptations to which
they are exposed, we find it hard to say there are 710 men
in Shakespeare equal to his most perfect heroines.
With so \vide a field before me as that of all Shake¬
speare's men, there is some difficulty in making a selection;
but I shall first ask the attention of my readers for a few
characters holding a secondary place in the di-ama, and
then go on to a consideration of a few of the principal
characters. Of the first class, I select Horatio, Antonio,
and Kent.
First, as to Horatio. It seems strange, perhaps, that,
in the greatest (may I say ?) of Shakespeare's tragedies, we
should turn from that wonderful character who occupies
the foremost place to one in a secondary position ; but
the thoughtful, philosophical, deeply-interesting Hamlet,
with his perplexing doubts, his yearning after truth, and
yet his indecision in action, is a man who, though enlisting
our deepest sympathy, cannot be held up as a character
matured and perfected to so high a degree as some others.
His extreme conscientiousness, verging on a state of morbid
depression, his sensitive, poetical nature, and, above all,
his constant affection for his father—equal in tenderness
to that of the most loving daughter—all bespeak for him
our sympathy, our love, in perhaps a greater degree than
any other man in Shakespeare's works; but for a hero, I
think we must turn to others cast in a stronger mould.
We hear little comparatively of Horatio, but in him we
see the true, the steady friend of Hamlet—one who, in his
unlikeness, suppHed the wants of his nature. Every one
must remark how entirely Shakespeare follows natvu'e,
in giving to Hamlet a friend whose strength supplied his
weakness, Avhose calm  mind was such  as  the  dreamy
The Attempt. • 311
Prince would choose as his counsellor, and on whose
steady affection he could rely throughout all the miscon¬
ceptions and difficulties to which he was exposed. But
Horatio's character can only be rightly described in the
very words of his friend ;—
" Since my dear soul was mistress of her choice,
And could of men distinguish her election,
She hath sealed thee for herself ; for thou hast been
As one, in suffering all, that suffers nothing ;
A man that fortune's buffets and rewards
Has ta'en with equal thanks ! and blessed are those,
Whose blood and judgment are so well co-mingled.
That they are not a pipe for fortune's finger
To sound what stop she please : Give me that man
That is not passion's slave, and I wiU wear him
In my heart's core, ay, in my heart of hearts,
As 1 do thee."
Then, agaui, in the last scene, we have a touch that
brings out the unselfish devotion of Horatio's character.
Seeing his friend falsely murdered, dying at his feet, a
longing comes over him not to be parted from him even
in  death,  and he  would  fain  drink  the  last drops  of
poisoned wine, and not live to mourn alone.    But these
few sad words of entreaty from the dying Hamlet, show
him that he has yet a duty to perform on earth, a work to
do for his friend,
•'Horatio, what a wounded name,
Things standing thus unknown, shall live behind me !
If thou didst ever hold me in thy heart.
Absent thee from felicity a while,
And in this harsh world draw thy breath in pain
To tell my story."
No need for more: the friend who had ever comforted him
in life, will live to defend his memory. Horatio does not
spend time in long eulogiums over the dead body—it
would not be Horatio if he did; but his few words speak
his love,
" Now cracks a noble heart ; good night, sweet prince :
And flights of angels wing thee to thy rest."
Now, turn with me for a few moments to the MercJiant of
Venice, and look at Antonio. Perhaps it is scarcely right
to place Antonio in our list of secondary characters, but
though truly the hero of the play, he does not exactly
hold that position in the usual sense of the word; that is
to say, he is not the lover, but the friend of the lover, and
what a friend ! No need to recall the story to the minds
of my readers, in which it must have found a place from
their earhest childhood.    In Antonio we have a man intent
312 The Attempt.
on doing good, hating all crooked ways, and above all, the
money-lending trade, as followed by the Jews in Venice.
Indeed, so much does he wish to put down this practice
which tempts men to their ruin, that he " lends out money
gratis"—hence the abhorrence in which he is held by
Shylock. It is necessary for us fully to understand
Antonio's rooted hatred of the trade, and to look at the
matter from his stand-point, in order to see how great
was his friendship, in bidding Bassanio go try what money
could be borrowed in his name, for the sake of enabling
his friend to become one of the suitors of the beautiful
Portia, whose hand was only to be bestowed on him who
should choose the caskets aright. In the cause of friend¬
ship, he does not scorn to ask the despised Shylock for
the needed sum. Then, when untoward circumstances
have bereft him of all on which he counted most securely,
when his " ventures have failed," and " not one vessel
'scaped the dreadful touch of merchant-marring rocks," we
see him standing calmly in the open court, ready to fulfil
the cruel bond of the Jew. Not one word of entreaty, not
one murmur escapes him, when he sees his enemy prepar¬
ing the deadly weapon—the Christian merchant is ready
for death.    Listen to his manly farewell to his fi'iend ;—
" I am armed and well pregared,
Give me your hand, Bassanio ; fare you weU !
Grieve not that I am fallen to this for you;
Commend me to your honourable wife :
Tell her the process of Antonio's end ;
Say, how I loved you.    Speak me fair in death ;
And, when the tale is told, bid her be judge,
Whether Bassanio had not once a love.
Repent not you that you shall lose your friend,
And he repents not, that he pays your debt ;
For if the Jew do cut but deep enough,
I'll pay it instantly with all my heart."
Not one word of reproach to any one, not one useless
lament for the past; he has done his duty, he has served
liis friend.
In these two characters, Horatio and Bassanio, we see
friendship carried, indeed, to heroism, in all that it is ready
to do and to bear; but I think we have even a higher type
of friendship in the staunch and loyal Kent. Horatio Avas
respected and loved by Hamlet, and Antonio was well-
nigh worshipped by the grateful Bassanio, whereas the
noble Kent worked for, watched over, and loved the man
who, with words of contumely, had ordered him for ever
The Attempt. 313
from his presence. It is a comparatively simple matter
for men to sacrifice themselves for those who return the
affection lavished on them, but it needs must be a more
than ordinary love which survives harsh cold treatment,
and which, through a long course of misunderstandings
and injustice, loves on to the end. Such love is surely of the
nature of that divine love, which will one day vanquish
all enemies ! The love of Kent for his royal erring master,
is in degree of this kind.
My readers Tvall all remember the treatment with which
the Earl of Kent met, when he dared to speak to King
Lear on behalf of his yoimgest, and tiU lately, most loved
daughter, Cordelia. She, in the truth of her nature, would
not vie with her fawning, false-hearted sisters, in empty
protestations of affection for her father; and her simple
words of love and duty so enrage the King, that she is
ordered from his sight, portionless as the poorest of his
subjects, while her share of the kingdom goes to enrich
the elder sisters. No voice is raised in her defence, no
one dares to tell the King that he is doing evil, save the
manly Kent, whom no fear of personal loss can keep silent.
He -will speak, he will tell his royal master of the exceed¬
ing wickedness of his doings,
" Revoke thy gift,"
he says,
" Or, while I can vent clamour from my throat,
I'll tell thee thou dost evil."
Such plain speaking enrages the poor old man, who has
yet to learn to distinguish false friends from true. In
bitter anger he thus dismisses his faithful attendant—
" Hear me, recreant!
On thine allegiance hear me !
Five days we do allot thee, for provision
To shield thee from diseases of the world ;
And, on the sixth, to turn thy hated back
Upon our kingdom ; if on the tenth day following,
Thy banished trunk be found in our dominions,
The moment is thy death :    Away ! By Jupiter,
This shall not be revoked."
But Kent's true heart is not to be so alienated from his
King. In disguise he follows him in all his wanderings.
When the Avretched elder daughters first tm-n coldly, on
him, and then proceed by every means in their power to
abuse, maltreat, insult, and finally drive from tbeir very
doors, the father who has given them all  his substance,
^   ^ OCTOBEK  1872.
31-1 The Attempt.
turning him out in the cold blast on to the open heath, it
is the banished Kent who guides his " sad steps " to what
poor shelter a miserable hovel may afford his white hairs.
Forgetful of all former insults, he watches and guards the
weary King. It is only the grateful loving heart of Cor¬
delia, who, seeing through all disguises, recognises the
noble friend, exclaiming—
" Oh, thou good Kent, how shall I live and work
To match thy goodness ? "
" To be acknowledged, Madam, is o'erpaid,"
is the manly reply of this true hero.
On passing to the consideration of a few characters
holding more prominent positions than those yet named,
I feel much tempted to dwell on the often misunderstood
character of Othello, but, perhaps I am scarcely justified
in ranking him among Shakespeare's most perfect heroes.
Yet he is of the true heroic type, though his hot Moorish
nature leads hun further than we more cold-blooded
Scotch people can qiute sympathise with, but not even we
can deny that he was " great of heart." Beautiful and
tender as is the character of the innocent Desdemona,
we cannot but remember the little weakness of her
nature, (though which of us dare say that we should
not have been weak in her circimistances ?) still, I say, we
cannot but remember the slight weakness which leads her
mto one or two errors, and which, when seized on by that
" demi-devil" lago. are siifficient to enrage the impetuous
Moor, and to lead him on to the only termination he
believed possible. " Naught," as he says, " did he do in
hate, but all in honour."
Still, I do not wish to insist that the brave Othello is of
so high a nature as those whom I am about to name; the
first of whom is King Henry V., the Christian Warrior.
The amusements and companions of the boyish days of
Henry V. were not exactly those of a hero, but as Reid
has well pointed out, the mirth of the tavern and the
exploits on the high road were a better education for a
manly youth, than could have been obtained in the stiff
and narrow-minded court, where his nature would have been
warped in its stifling atmosphere, and his noblest aspira¬
tions quenched in obsequious flattery. Though Prince
Harry loved a joke, and could laugh with the merriest, his
natiu-e never grew coarse by association with minds of a,
lower grade.    Beneath all the boyish pranks of the Prince
I
The Attempt. 315
of Wales, there beat a heart noble and true, which in good
time would develop a character full of manly grace and
Kingly dignity. No sooner does the death of his father,
Hem-y IV., set him on the throne of England and so
invest him with heavy responsibilities than the thought¬
ful side of his character shows itself. The well known
description of him at this time given by the Archbishop of
Canterbmy bears witness to this, beginning—
" Hear him but reason in divinity,
And, all admiring, with an inward wish,
You would desire the king were made a prelate," etc.
Turning to the great event of his reign, his war with
France, we see in what a truly Christian spirit he under¬
takes it, or rather hesitates to undertake it, till he has
consulted the Archbishop on the rights of the case. But
for the salique law, the crown of France were his as
successor to Edward III.; still he would rather forego his
claims, than let any personal desire of fame and power
hurry him into a war which might prove injm-ious to his
people, whom he loved so well, and whose interest she
identified with his own. With most earnest words he
implores the Archbishop to take heed how he " awakes
the sleeping sword of war," that not on§ drop of his sub¬
jects' blood may be spilt in an unrighteous cause.
A midst all the preparations for the Battle of Agincourt,
the King does not forget to ask a blessing on his great
undertaking. Withdrawing himself from the busy camp
for a few moments, listen to his prayer (the prayer of a
Roman Catholic, but most beautiful) :—
"O, God of battles ! steel my soldiers' hearts !
Possess them not with fear ; take from them now
The sense of reckoning if the opposed numbers
Pluck their hearts from them !—!•• ot to-day, O Lord,
0 not to-day ; think not upon the fault
My father made in compassing the crown !
1 Richard's body have interred anew ;
And on it have bestowed more contrite tears.
Than from it issued forced drops of blood.
Five hundred poor I have in yearly pay,
Who twice a day their withered hands hold up
Toward heaven to pardon blood ; and I have built
Two chantries, where the sad and solemn priests
StiU sing for Richard's soul.    More wUl 1 do :
Though all that I can do is nothing worth ;
Since that my ]:)enitence comes, after all,
Imploring pardon."
With unflagging spirits he cheers his soldiers on the eve
of battle.    On hearing Westmoreland exclaim—
316 Tke Attempt.
" O, that we now had here
But one ten thousand of those men in England
That do no work to day ! "
his manly voice reproaches such a wish—
" What's he that wishes so ?
My cousin VVestmoreland ?    No, my fair cousin ;
If we are marked to die, we are enough
To do our country loss ; and if to live,
The fewer men, the greater share of honour."
I could go on for ever quoting the words of this noble
warrior, but doubtless my readers Avill remember many
for themselves. AVe see in him a man great as a warrior,
great as a king, and great as a lover. For I hold he was
great as a lover. Who would wish to be more honestly
wooed, than as King Henry wooed the gentle Princess
Katherine of France ?
We must now look back into the olden days, and see
a hero such as we shall never see again—the noble Brutus.
In order the better to understand his character, we
should look at his early life, with which Shakespeare has
not so much to do. The youth of Marcus Brutus Avas
spent in the pursuit of such knowledge as should fit him
to be a just and wise leader of men ; and his inclinations
were trained in the path of virtue—stern, self-denying
virtue, as it was' understood by the Eomans during the
century preceding the Christian era. The first instance
we have of Brutus sacrificing all personal considerations
for the sense of what he considered to be his duty,
occurred in 49 B.C., when in the civil war between Csesar
and Pompey, he joins himself to the latter, his personal
enemy, on whose side he sees the "better reason,"
and fights against his fiiend. WTien we remember
that at the early age of eight years, Brutus was made
fatherless through the perfidy of Pompey, we may
well marvel at the perfect justice Avliich ruled all his
actions; and though such entire freedom ii'om personal
bias be unattainable by us, it is good to offer our humble
meed of admiration to one, to whom no sacrifice for the
sake of right seemed impossible. The ruling principle of
his life was love for his country; to this predominating
passion his affection (and he had deep affections, for
everything and every person) must yield. Before Chris¬
tianity had leavened the world, and taught it that men of
all nations are brothers, and that the individual must pot
be ruthlessly sacrificed for an abstract idea, the love of
country, or it might be of the Commonwealth, was the deity
The Attempt. 317
worshipped by the best men of the time.    To preserve the
Commonwealth, at all costs, was, to a truly noble Roman, a
religious duty.    Siich Brutus felt it to be, and such was
the spur which urged him on to play the important part
he did in the putting to death of Caesar.    In Ceesar he
saw the tyrant (a  generous,  loving tyrant indeed, biit
nevertheless a tyrant), one who, if not checked in time,
might go fi'om step to step, till he reached a throne, and
the Commonwealth of Rome be destroyed for ever.    By
the gentle use he made of his power, Cassar had gained so
great an influence over the hearts of the Roman citizens,
that they had become as wax in his hands, to be moulded to
whatever shape he pleased, and it was only a few of the
most thoughtful who could see afar off" to what this might
lead.    Foremost  among  those few was  Brutus.    Many
and fierce were the struggles which he encountered in his
own mind before he could determine on the one decisive act,
which, while saving his country from a tyrant, would cost
him his friend.    We see him leaving his bed in the dead
of night, and wandering sadly about, as thoughts, too agi¬
tating to admit of sleep, occupy his mind.    The possibility
that the liberty of Rome may be lost through some weak¬
ness of his, hangs on his mind with intolerable weight; yet
to see no way of saving it but by slaying his friend, all
imprcpared for attack, is terrible. Such a state of indecision
cannot, however, be his for any length of time.    Conscious
of the rectitude of his purpose, he is not deterred from
duty by any personal considerations.    As in his early days
he aided a hated enemy in a good cause, so now in later
life, he determines to frustrate a dear friend in a bad
cause.    The greatest proof we have  of the purity  of
Brutus' purpose in the putting to death of Ceesar, is to be
found in   the fact  of the friendship   which   existed be¬
tween them.     Many men could have  killed an  enemy,
but  few could have deprived themselves  of one whom
they loved as Brutus did Caasar, for the sake of "the
general good."    Very sadly must Caesar's " Et tu Brute "
have fallen on the ears of Brutus, as, with his dagger, he
stabbed the great Caesar.
I need not quote here the grand funeral speech spoken
by Brutus, Avhich so beautifully explains the reasons
which led him to act as he did ; for it is one of the many
passages from our poet which all the world can quote,
though, like everything that is perfect in beauty, it can
never become wearisome by repetition.
Tlie Attempt. 318
Brutus, with that strict sense of justice which marked
each act of his life, permitted Antony also to address the
people on the day of Caesar's fimeral, though he knew he
had that to say which would move the hearts of the un¬
reflecting mob, and so revive their love for Csesar as to
lead them to revolt against their true friend and liberator.
Such was the case. Many of those for whom Brutus had
sacrificed himself, turn against him, whereupon he, seeing
that his work is ended, runs on his sword and dies. Then,
over the dead body of Brutus, tardy justice is done liim
by Mark Antony, whose words are, at least, a tribute to
his memory such as can never be forgotten:—
" This was the noblest Roman of them aU ;
All the conspirators, save only he
Did that they did in envy of great Caesar ;
He only, in a general honest thought,
And common good to all, made one of them.
His life was gentle, and the elements
So mixed in him, that nature might stand up
And say to all the world,—This was a man."
If my readers will refer to the May number of this
magazine, they will find some discriminating remarks on
the character of Prospero, who, of all Shakespeare's heroes,
is perhaps the one most beautifully portrayed. With this
mere mention of Prospero, I must draw my remarks on
Shakespeare's heroes to a close. No doubt there are
many characters which I have not mentioned, which some
of my readers may be inclined to put first on their list of
heroes, but those I have named, are, I think, suflicient
to check a too hurried answer to our question. With
Horatio, Antonio, and Kent, Henry V., Brutus, and Pros¬
pero in our thoughts, surely wo shall find it hard to
say that none of Shakespeare's heroes are equal (I do
not say superior) to his most perfect heroines'!
Des Eaux.
%\\ Jncidi^nt flf tin* Wiiiw
1870.
" On the arrival of Colonel von Henning at Vaux, the usual proclamation
was issued relative to the mhabitants surrendering arms. They were all
thrown into a barn, over which was placed a guard. There came to him to day
oue of the villagers, an old soldier of the First Empire, one who had fought at
the battles of Austerlitz and Jena.
' Mon Colonel," were the old man's opening words, ' I have a little dagger
that, according to your orders, I have surrendered ; it is very dear to me, and
has become aa a companion to me ; may I have it back ?'
' Where is it ?' asked Colonel von Henning.
The Attempt. 319
' It lies with many others in a barn,'
'Come ^\^th me,' replied the other, in the best French he could muster.
He rose from his chair, and walked with the old relic of French glory through
the village to the barn, and with his own hands picked out from the rusty
pile the much prized dagger, and restored it."
From " What 1 saw of the Wars'"
By Hon. C.  Allansoh Wynn.
It is an ancient soldier
Of the day of Austerlitz ;
Now on his brow full heavily
His country's sorrow sits.
For he hath seen the glories
Of the old Imperial time,
A\lien the eagles led to victory
'Neath many a foreign clime.
" My Colonel," saith the veteran,
" My years are nigh four score,
But still I prize each relic
That speaks of days of yore.
'Tis but a little weapon
That Hes 'mid yonder heap.
But when they took it from me,
I well-nigh turned to weep.
" All of my former comrades
Are gone from out my sight;
Ah ! could we now have muster'd,
We might have changed the fight.
For who or what could check us
In those gallant days we knew,
When each man marched to conquer,
And every heart was true ?
" But now 'tis past—'tis vanished—
AU save that blade of steel;
And when I grasp its handle.
Something I seem to feel
Of the old fiery ardour,
And the determined will,
That swept like flame o'er Europe,
And sought new conquests still.
" Now years have changed the story—
Another sight they show ;
'Tis yours to ride victorious,
AVhile we lie crushed below.
320 The Attempt.
Undone is all our labour—
Our very fights grow pale—
Our blood, our lives, our sufferings—
Were all of no avail I
" Nay, pardon me, my Colonel,
An old man's lengthy tale.
And grant me this petition,
Ere yet your patience fail.
Look kindly in your triumph
Upon a soldier's pride.
And bid them give my dagger
Again to arm my side."
The gentle Prussian Colonel
Loves well a worthy foe;
He feels such pitying sympathy
As generous spirits know.
So, making friendly answer.
He bade him lead the way.
By street well-nigh deserted,
To where the weapons lay.
'Mid rifles, swords, and daggers,
They searched the rusty pile;
The old man flushed and eager.
The chief with kindly smile,
Until the veteran pointed
Unto the time-worn blade
That bore for him the story
Whose light should never fade.
The Colonel, stooping, raised it—
Himself would he restore
Unto those trembling fingers
The trusty steel once more.
" Take it," he said; " this warfare
Hath borne us fir apart,
But well I know, and honour
A soldier's faithful heart."
Dim smoke-wi'eaths spread their shadow
O'er each contending host;
In the red glare of conquest
All milder tints are lost.
But, like a glow-worm's shining,
W^ith softened eyes we read,
How the simple grace of kindness
May do a worthy deed. Enna.
Tlie Attempt. 321
€n tlu Itaturc of goi*ti{[ Jmuginatiou;
OR THE IMAGINATIVE FACULTY ILLUSTRATED BY THE POETS.
All men have some imagination; but all have not
poetical imagination. In what, then, consists the essence
of this latter, and in what does it differ from the imagina¬
tive faculty common to the human understanding ?
By imagination we mean the power whereby the mind
represents before itself, as an internal vision, that of
which it has previously been conscious, either in a former
act of representation, or through the senses. There must
be also a further comparing and elaborating action, tend¬
ing to reproduce, in new combinations, the materials
whicli the memory furnishes to the mind. In this action
lies what is commonly called the productive, plastic, or
creative power of the imagination. But we have not yet
come to the essence of the poetic imagination, as an
example will show. Having passed through Queen Street
this morning, I can produce its unlovely lines in my mind
with tolerable accuracy, but this is not poetical,—not even
if I figure to myself George Street piled on the top of it.
Even the usual illustration of the combining power—the
centaur—seems to trot but prosily through the books of
definition; and if we descend to the new idea given us,
in a pantomime, for instance, or in feats of jugglery, we
may see all sorts of absurd combinations, from which we
turn with the instinctive dislike aroused by a senseless
apparent violation of law, and which show no particle of
the quality we seek. Returning to the image of the centaur,
let us see whether, after all, he can guide us into the right
way. A man with the body of a horse, an impossible figure
—we may say—perhaps an unmeaning term. But let us
go back in thought to the ancient days when first the
conception arose, when first the pride and power of the
horse were subdued to the purposes of man ; and the
horsemen one with their steeds, impressed upon a feebler
race a feeling of awe and amazement, as of a marvellous
union of skill and strength, conferring power half divine.
Time rolls on, and the hero ideal, honoured in those days,
is degraded, in the light of Christianity, to a type of
brutal force; and Dante sees the swift centaurs careering
round the infernal river where the violent are punished ;
and Chiron lias to part his tangled beard with his arrow
^    ^ Kr.VrMEFR 1872.
322 The Attempt.
point before the half forgotten human words can issue
from his overgrown lips. Then, again, in modern times,
De Guerin, in loving harmony \nth. the old Greek
mind, recurs to the centaur as an ideal manifestation of
strong, free, intelligent, physical life, and causes him
to say,—
" Wandering along at my own will, like the rivers, feeling wherever T went
the presence of Cybele ; whether in the bed of the valleys, or on the height of
the mountains, I bounded whither I would, like a bhnd and chainless life, etc,"
In all this we may trace, besides a concrete emblem of the
subjugation of the horse, something of the triumph of
natural physical strength which was part of the old Greek
creed, also of the contempt shown by the ascetic spirit of
the middle ages for such triumph : there is meaning, rela¬
tion, and order in the idea ; and there is an iutei-pretation
of something both in nature and morals which does not
lie on the surface; something also of mystery, which leads
beyond the region of the mere understanding, towards in¬
definite possibilities. In fact, wc come in sight of the
distinctive quality we seek.
For we come in sight of Beauty, which contains some¬
thing of all these qualities, besides an inexplicable magic
which captivates the feelings with spontaneous power;
and in this consists the essence of poetical imagination,—
that it should act in relation to beauty, that the inward
vision should be keen to perceive and recognise beauty,
and the elaborative power clear sighted to choose it,
to elicit it and follow it till an ideal is reached, which tlie
artist has to realise in form according to his instrument,
as poem, picture, sculpture, or music.
1 should define the poetical imagination to be imagina¬
tion fired by ideal beauty.
I mean here, beauty in the widest sense in Avhich the
word can be employed; including, therefore, grandeur,
grotesqueness (which seems a kind of humourous or
significant disproportion), and even terror, for they are like
the occasional discords, needful to a succession of full
harmonies. But real ugliness has, I think, no place in
poetry. The dramatist may be permitted to draw a repul¬
sive character, but so fir as he is repulsive he is unpoetical.
Not that an occasional lapse into prose may not be advis¬
able sometimes in a poem or drama and enhance by con¬
trast the beauty of the whole.
Having found our definition, let us pass on to three
further questions, namely. How does this poetical imagiua-
The Attempt. 323
tion manifest itself, or what is the work (jf the poet ?
Then, what are the qualities necessary to the active
exercise of this gift ?    And finally, What is its source ?
First, then, What is the Avork of the poet ? The poet
should, above all, be the revealer of hidden beauty, and
the interpreter of ideal beauty. Looking beyond the
mere appearances to the significance and heart of things,
he should kindle in other minds, something of the light
which shines for him, and thus raise the thoughts and
soothe the cares of those who enjoy but a loAver portion
of his gift. He should interpret the thought which
underlies the world of nature, and reveal the essential
truth and beauty which can be traced amid the varying
aspects of human life. The simplest idea, if good and
pure, is not too simple to win a grace from the touch of
poetry,—the most com^^lex thinking becomes the clearer
and the nobler with its aid; "the solitary Highland
lass," reaping and singing, stands forth a radiant image
for ever, when Wordsworth has wondered if she sang of
"Old far-off unhappy things,
Aiid battles long ago,"
and the deep questions of metaphysics seem profounder,
yet clearer, when flashed out in the incisive brilliancy of
the verse of " In Memoriam."
We may observe as to the interpretation of the world
of nature, that there are different ways of viewing this
world we live in. To some how barren it seems of all but
the most utilitarian suggestions, while to others it seems
full of beautiful secrets and half guessed relations to our¬
selves, and to unknown mysteries beyond. To quote but
one instance,—the fragile endurance and gaity that belong
to the first spring flowers, is thus given us by Shakespeare;
" Daffodils
That come before the Swallow dares, and take
The winds of March with beauty."
When we consider human life, as dealt with by the
poets, one thought strikes us on the threshold. While
beauty, and therefore poetry, appeals directly to the
feelings (though poetry cannot be of the highest order,
unless it have an intellectual side also), the feelings in
turn enliven the imagination, so that the language of
strong emotion has generally a touch of poetry in it. It
rises above the ordinary level to a certain appropriateness,
force, and clearness; or, in other words, to a certain degree
624: The Attempt.
of beauty. There is a whole school of poetry which
founds its claim on appeals to the passions. It is, perhaps,
the most popular, because the most easily understood of
all; but it is observable that the pathos of the great
masters—and there is no pathos so profound—is generally,
more or lees, fused with the intellect, or consists of a
brief expression, passing on quickly to some grander,
deeper view, than the passion of the moment, however
intense. Poetry merely of the affections, is usually of the
subjective kind, but gives much pleasui'e, because its
interpretation is wide, if not deep, and so little imagina¬
tion is needed to enter into it. To take a good example.
Longfellow describing a childless house, tells of the
" nursery windows wide open to the air," of the " New¬
foundland house dog waiting by the door" for his little
playmates, and adds—
"The bgy that walked beside me,
He did not understand,
Hott' closer in mine—ah ! closer
I pressed his warm soft hand."
This puts an obvious idea into tender and truthful
words: it may be felt by nearly all readers, and is, there¬
fore, in the best sense of the word, popular. Let us look
at another poem, which, I think, suggests that death is
not after all an utterly harsh and alien fact, but is in a
certain harmony with creation, as we now perceive it. 1
mean Coleridge's :—
" Where is the grave of Sir Arthur O'Kellyn,
Where may the grave of that good knight be ?
By the side of a spring on the breast of Helvell3Ti,
Under the leaves of a young birch tree," &c. &c.
We have first the calm image of repose on the breast of
Helvellyn. To no unsympathizing nature is that grave
confided; for it, too, changes, as if in harmony with the
changing, perishing, yet hopeful condition of humanity.
The strong oak, after its centuries of storm and sunshme,
" is gone," but the " yomig birch tree" comes with new
life and grace to decorate the forgotten grave: all renews
itself, and Spring comes to all at last. Then at the close,
the monosyllables fall on the ear with grave sweet
emphasis, like old church music—
"His soul is with the Samts, we trust."
There is a deeper suggestion here, than in the preceding
poem, of the underlying problems of life. Here again is
an idea which may often have been vaguely conceived,
The Attempt 325
but which has now, through Wordsworth's power of inter¬
pretation, become to all his readers a luminous and noble
thought.
" Thou takest not away, O Death,
Thou strikest—absence perisheth,
Indifference is no more."
While speaking of the poet's vocation, I may allude to a
prevalent, and I should like to say pestilent, heresy which
we sometimes meet with, viz., that art is essentially sport.
Art is play—its fxmction is to please, to amuse. Art,
perhaps, gives more pleasure than anything liere below,
and no doubt has for its sphere the sentiment or feelings;
but in the derivation of the word amusement, a mere
negation of the presence of the muses, lies a refutation of
this idea, which mistakes the whole theory of art, and
also confounds the pleasure found in the pursuit of a
worthy object, with pleasure as a pursuit. Poets who
hold such a theory must indeed give the world
"Adjusted concords—soft enow
To hear the wine-cups passing thro',
And not too grave to spoil the show."
But the true aim of art is, as we have found, the interpre¬
tation or manifestation of beauty; and masterpieces in art
are the product of severe, determined toil, not un-
frequently of blighted lives and heavy sorroAvs.
We now come to the second question, namely, \Vhat
qualities are necessary to the active exercise of the
poetic imagination? I should say ordinary imaginative
powers intensified; or first, a strong plastic or combining
faculty, which we may call inventive genius. Secondly,
an iwfense power of vision or conception. A third requisite
quality is mastery of the requu-ed instrument; or for
poetry—felicity of language.
And first, of inventive genius. Books carefully lay
down that the inventive imagination creates nothing, but
only combines ; but we may remark, granting it to be so,
how unimportant is the limitation. Inventive genius
certainly causes things to appear in the world that had
no previous existence, and may surely justly be called
creative. From various chemical combinations of a few
unpromising elementary bodies, are evolved the glories of
the mat(;rial universe; and as carbon and oxygen to the
diamond, so are often the underlying suggestions to the
splendid products of the imagination. Music, for in¬
stance,   strictly  speaking,  is but  a  combination of the
326 The Attempt.
wandering vibrations that have no significance for us
till the thought of the musician has moulded them into
a new revelation of the beautiful. And so in poetry, the
electric spark of genius transforms the rough material
that is everywhere about in the world, into the priceless
jewels which form tlie riches of the intellect of all gene¬
rations. In the greater poets, we may remark how
wonderfully sustained is this inventive power. Spenser
creates for liimself a world all his own, of exquisite beauty
and purity, and Shakespeare gives us, out of the ful¬
ness of liis imagination, a condensed typical history of
humanity. Ariosto wandering in his enclianted forests,
Milton brooding over his theological imagery, and Chaucer
riding mth his joyous companions, are all high examples
of the free, unflagging, bright inventiveness of genius.
The second requisite—intensity of inward vision—must
now be noticed. In reading any attempt at detailed
description, metaphor, or imagery, if the Avriter's imagina¬
tion is weak, we may soon detect a kind of vague blurred
effect, often an actual confusion, which tells us the idea
was iudistmctly seen by the inward eye. Sometimes,
indeed, vivid mental pictures may be found with a low
degree of the poetic faculty; the mind may be filled \nth.
its own conceptions—set a-blaze with them, and yet
unable to render them for want of genius, or talent for
description. But the power of vision of the great poets
is of a higher order. They are there, where their fancy has
brought them : not only can they describe what they see,
but they can flash a dazzlmg light into the very heart of
the subject, and in a brief sentence give us its essence and
innermost being. Chief in this power I think is Dante.
You can never doubt of the truth of his weary journey;
he shrinks from no detail that can make it plam to you;
and yet nothing is more wonderful than the brevity witli
which a whole picture is conveyed to the mind. It may
be of the utmost terror, as of the fire vermilion minarets
of the city of Dite, glowing in the black abyss; or of the
most exquisite beauty, as of the angelic splendour
broadening over the fair forest in the earthly Paradise.
Tennyson also seems specially gifted in this Avay—as
when he describes a sunset over the sea—
" He saw them headland after headland flame,
Far on into the rich heart of the West."
Or speaking of a lake storm—
The Attempt. 327
" In the noon of mist and driving rain,
When the lake whitened and the pine wood roared,
And the caimed mountain was a shadow."
Or of an inaccessible mountain—
" There rose a hill that none but man could climb,
Scarr'd with a hundred wintry water courses ;
Storm at the top, and when we gained it, storm
Round us, and death."
But we must hasten to glance at the third requisite—
namely. Felicity of language. This may be a lower gift,
though more undefinable and unaccountable ; for composi¬
tion may be clear, cultivated, and faultless, and yet utterly
devoid of that peculiar charm which attends even the
careless work of more gifted persons. Why does Burns
say a thing so exquisitely, that many another peasant has
said before him in a clumsy and unimportant manner %
What gave Byron his wonderful mastery of language,
even when he had little thought to express ; and Keats
that magic melody, that makes one hardly know whether
one is listenmg to poetry or to miisic % Mr Arnold
suggests that this is the special gift of the Keltic imagina¬
tion ; but this w^ould only apply to the English language,
and seems a hardly adequate theory for one of the strongest
proofs of the saying,—" Poeta nascitur, non fit."
As this quality seems the chief beauty of Keats' poetry,
we can look at it there apart from other beauties. For
instance, in the hymn to Pan,   the following lines—
" Strange ministrant of undescribfed sounds
That come a-swooning over hollow grounds,
And wither drearily on barren moors ;
Dread opener of the mysterious doors,
Leading to universal knowledge—"
What a wonderful modulation into a ncAV key begins
with " Dread opener," &c., It is simply and indescribably
delicious. In speaking of Bacchus and his crew, how the'^
bustle and reckless gaity ring through the verse I
" Like to a moving vintage, down they came,
Crowned with yomig leaves, and faces all on flame—
All madly dancing thro' the pleasant valley,
To scare thee, melancholy."
His ode to the nightingale, when he tells of the song
" That ofttimes hath
Charmed magic casements, opening on the foam
Of perilous seas in faery lands forlorn,"
may well bring tears to the eyes, not from the thought
or the images, but from the perfect loveliness of the
language.
328 Tlie Attempt.
A very few words must be given before concluding
this paper, to, perhaps the deepest question involved in
all aesthetic theories. Whence is derived our notion of
ideal beauty?— has it any objective validity? Is the
source of the poetic imagination within the mind alone,
or is it an inspiration from without? What one person
asserts about beauty, may another with equal authority
contradict ? No doubt, this last theory, with all its con¬
sequences, is held by some. They consider that beauty
is a mere matter of opinion, based on the laws of
association; that tastes may be allowed to differ, and
that there is no real standard by which they can be
corrected. And, certainly, looking superficially at the
different tastes of different nations, and at the pre¬
posterous inventions that are in turn approved by the
caprices of fashion, there seems something to be said for
this view. But a little attention enables one to perceive
that certain standards of beauty have met with general
acceptation; dullness may ignore, fashion may obscure
them for a time, but they soon recover their empire.
Moreover, the intuitive love of such accepted (or classical)
standards, soon shows itself in those persons who after¬
wards become good poets or artists; showing that
appreciation varies with the faculty of the observer.
Education in art matters also leads in the direction of the
classical standards, though here the proof is less evident,
from the greater interference of the laws of association.
Not, indeed, that any standard indicates a finality in
art, or a boundary to the beautiful, which opens to the
soul one of the aspects of the infinite. For, deep m the
nature of the poetic imagination, lies disatisfaction with
even its most successful efforts. It ever aspires to
an unattainable ideal that for ever eludes its grasp;
seeking beyond all known and realized loveliness, some
absolute beauty, not seen, but dimly guessed, and yet felt
to be true. Therefore, I beHeve that the mind is formed
by the idea of beauty in which it partici2:)ates more or less,
even, as in other matters, the mind is formed by the sense-
experience which it gradually accumulates through per¬
ceptions of the external universe. The poets have
generally held this theory, and they should know best.
In the Greek myth, memory was indeed the mother of
the muses, but their father was Jove Omnipotent.
And downwards in the course of time, everywhere and
in all countries, poets are almost unanimous in assigning
The Attempt. 329
to some idea and inspiration outside, and beyond them¬
selves, the best they had to offer. The gift, the genius,
the inspiration, the muse—under names manifold one idea
is suggested, namely; that beyond the ^ fading beauty
that our senses can apprehend, there blazes the eternal
Idea of a beauty of which it is only an emanation; that the
instinctive efforts of the poet to shake off what is tran¬
sient and imperfect, are not restlessness born of delusion
but the cravings of an awakened soul for a glorious reality,
of which they are at once the earnest and the evidence.
E. J. 0.
A LEGEND OF  BOSS-SHIRE.
The sun was shining on field and brae.
The Conan ran sparkling to meet the sea,
And the reapers among the yellow corn
Were singing their songs of careless glee.
When a voice came ringing from out the stream,
That thrilled as no voice of mortal can ;
And these are the boding words it spoke ;
" The hour is come, hut not the man."
The song died away on every lip,
And each sun-browned cheek grew deadly pale,
For the reapers had heard the boding words,
And too well they new the Kelpie's wail.
The voice swept by on the autumn breeze,
And the reapers had turned to their work again,
When, lo ! all covered with dust and foam,
A horseman came spurring across the plain.
He drew not bridle, he spared not spur.
Till he came to where swiftly the broad stream ran :
" 0, see ! he is making for yon fause ford ;*
Quick ! quick! or the Kelpie will have his man,"
* NoU.—A so-called " fause ford" {Anr/Ucd, false ford) lies across the Conan,
"in  the form of a rippling bar, which, indicating apparently, though very
falsely, little depth of water, is flanked by a deep black pool above and below."
See Hugh Miller's My Schools and Schoolitiasters.
^   T NOVBMBKR  1872.
330 The Attempt.
The reapers they cast down sickle and sheaf,
And swiftly they sped to the water-side.
" 0, sir, keep back, for the ford is fause,
And the Kelpie sits watching beneath the tide."
" Would you mock me with Kes and with childish tales
Let me go ! for my message brooks no delay ;
I can swim the ford, if I cannot ride,
And I fear not your Kelpie.    Begone, I say !"
But if he was walful to meet his doom.
They were e'en as wUful he should not go ;
So they gathered around his foaming horse,
And they drew him down from the saddle-bow.
In vain he struggled within then* grasp,
They were more than a match for such as he ;
So they led him away from the water's edge—
And the Conan ran raging to meet the sea.
They led him on through the yellow corn,
To the chapel that stood beneath the brae,
And they kept him there with bolt and bar,
Till the Kelpie's hour should pass away.
The hour was past, and the reapers hied
To the chapel to set their captive free.
For now he was safe to go his way—
But the Conan ran laughing to meet the sea.
They drew the bolts, and they called aloud,
" Now, sir, come forth, for the danger's o'er;"
But the only thing that made reply
Was the echo ringing from roof to floor.
Then louder they called, " Come forth ! come forth !
For the greedy Kelpie has watched his hour ;"
But the only thing that made reply.
Was the scared owl hooting from out the tower.
Then each man looked in his neighbour's face—
" We must in and see what this may mean;
The bolts are strong, and the windows high.
And had he fled we had surely seen."
The Attempt. 331
But when they stood on the chapel floor.
Each man grew silent and held his breath.
For there, with his face in the moss-grown font.
Lay the horseman, cold and stiif in death.
The water reached not the carved device
That round the edge of the basin ran ;
But there, e'er the fatal hour had passed.
The Kelpie had found and slain his Man.
Meigeag Bheag.
-<»t3i^k*>f>-
PAET III.—The Dinner at the Hall.
As Davie had said, he started on his rounds before any
of us were up next morning; and Jack went off upon his,
immediately after breakfast,   accompanied by Dr Irwin,
who had resumed his usual quiet courtesy of manner,
though several shades graver and more abstracted even
than was his wont.    Carry and Sophy did not appear till
after the gentlemen had left.   Their rooms opened into
each other, and I had reason to believe that, after the
manner of young ladies, they had conversed, after their
return from the ball, much longer than was at all necessary
for the hair-brushing which they made their excuse.    As
I expected, Carrie's engageanent was no secret; and indeed
there was no reason why it should be, for old Dr Carleton
arrived to hmch, radiant with smiles, and bringing his
full consent.    Davie had been a great  favourite of his
from the first.    So Carrie spent a very idle day, poor
little puss! in a  sort of soft flutter of excitement and
happiness, which Sophy and I found very infectious; and
when it was time to dress for dinner at the Hall, we were
all rather ashamed  to  think how little we  had done,
except in the way of conversation.    This party at the
Hall  had   been   convoked  for  the   express  purpose  of
" talking over"  the archery meeting;   the  Harringtons
and Fieldings were to be there, and the number was made
up by some  gentlemen Harry had invited at the ball,
among whom were Rose Harrington's heavy dragoon, and
Blanche's briefless barrister.    I had sent a note to Minnie
in the course of the day, to tell her of Davie's engagement,
so  she  gave  Carrie  a  most  sisterly welcome,  warmly
332 The Attempt.
echoed by Harry Wyvill. The intelligence rapidly spread
through the party, and when Davie arrived, a little late,
he had to run a gauntlet of universal congratulation. I
think he and Carrie were both very thankfid to the baby,
who was, of course, exhibited before dinner, for setting up
a series of piercmg shrieks, and diverting the public at¬
tention ; and by the time it was discovered that the un¬
happy child was impaled upon a largo pin stuck through
its multitudinous garments, dinner was announced, and
conversation had become general.
I never dine at the Hall without thinking of the party
there which I told you about, before Minnie's marriage,
when Miss Caroline Tyrrel, now Lady EUesmere, began
to cast the glamour over Hany Wyvill, which, for a time,
diverted him from his allegiance to Minnie; and I was
looking from Minnie to her husband, and thinking how
much good that time of trial did them both, and how
thoroughly happy they are now, and how heartily
thankful we all should bo to Lady EUesmere for behaving
as she did, and then marrying poor, meek, httle Sir WilHam
just at the right time,—when I heard some one mention
her name, and I started from my fit of abstraction.
Dinner was over now, and the servants had left the room.
Young Fielding was speaking. "Lady Ellesmere is
still the beauty of the county," said he, "but I suspect
her reign is nearly over.    She looked just a shade older
last night—the beginning of the end. Two seasons
more, and she inust give place to a successor."
"No, no," said Harry, "no, Fielding, you don't know
Lady Ellesmere; she is not so easily beaten. She will
hold her own, as you say. for two seasons more, by her
own natural beauty, and then"—
"Well?" said one or two voices, for Harry hesitated.
"And then she will reign for five seasons more, at least,
by the aids of art. Lady Ellesmere will not stick at
trifles."
" That was what you meant, Wyvill?" said Mr Hartley
of Hartley Manor. He spoke very bitterly, but I could
excuse him. His father had been Lady EUesmere's
guardian, and he had known her well.
" And where's the harm ? " broke in Rose Harrington,
before Harry Wyvill could answer. " Why should she
not have the aid of art f I don't see why we should not
make the best of ourselves."
" Rose, Rose !" said I, but Rose was not easily daunted.
The Attempt. 333
" I don't indeed; and, if I were Lady Ellesmere, I
would never give in so long as art could do anything for
me. And without being Lady Ellesmere, I give you all
fair warning, that I shall do my best."
" Stop! stop! Miss Rose," cried Harry, amidst the
laughter of the company, " don't reveal the secrets of the
toilet table in such a promiscuous manner; at least have
the prudence to wait till we turn the bachelors out of the
room, always excepting Davie Cunningham, who has com¬
mitted himself beyond recall."
"Nonsense," returned Rose, who was in her wildest
mood to-night. " I'll teU no secrets but my own, and I've
not much to tell; it's the general practice that I uphold—
of helping out Nature's weak points with a judicious de¬
gree of art. I assm-e you I intend to do it wherever I can.
I've lots of hair just now," and Miss Rose shook her luxu¬
riant brown tresses, " but when it comes out, I'll buy false
plaits ; and when I lose my teeth I'll get new ones; and
I'll pad my dresses, and I'll rouge, and make no secret
about it."
" So you say just now," said Jack, "but when you do
make these little changes. Miss Rose, you won't be so
ready to own to them."
" Oh yes, I will, Dr Somers," said the incorrigible Rose,
" and just to prove it, I'll tell you something before all
this respected company,—I was rouged at the ball last
night, and Carrie Carleton was so shocked, I thought she'd
never speak to me again."
" What !" shouted Dr Irwin, with a start that knocked
all his glasses off the table, " YOU, Miss Harrington I" and
he grew so pale, I thought he was going to faint.
"I, and no other," repUed Rose undauntedly. " I was
looking like a ghost, and I had brought the rouge with
me in case I should want it; so I seized the opportunity
when you went to tell the other girls that tea was ready,
Mrs Somers, for I knew you wouldn't let me put it on.
So I jumped up and put it on, and Carrie Carleton was so
shocked, that she nearly cried; didn't you, Carrie ? but
you're a good little thing; you told no tales."
Gertrude and Lucy Wyvill were looking dreadfully
shocked, and Sophy Irwin very indignant; and it was a
relief to us all when Minnie rose. I saw now the secret
of Rose Harrington's suddenly improved appearance the
night before; and Dr Irwin's extreme agitation showed
me that the key to his curious behaviour at the ball was
334 The Attempt.
to be found somewhere in this episode of the rouge, though
as yet I had not discovered it. There was a considerable
degree of restraint and awkwardness when we ladies
reached the drawing-room. The Wyvills and Sophy
Irwin turned the cold shoulder determinedly upon Rose,
and her sister Blanche began to reproach her most vehe¬
mently, though it was evident that the confession, and
not the crime, was the cause of Blanche's displeasure.
Rose lost her temper, and I feared we were about to have
a scene; so throwing myself into the breach, I took pos¬
session of the culprit, and carried her off to the inner
drawing-room, protesting that I as her chaperone was the
right and proper person to lecture her; while Minnie ably
seconded my efforts to preserve the peace, by devoting
herself for the time to the indignant Blanche.
Rose, who was extremely good-natured, recovered her¬
self at once when removed from the fire of Blanche's
reproaches ; but she was in a thoroughly mad-cap mood,
and would not be serious for a moment; and at last, in
the middle of a very neatly turned sentence of mine,
upon the impropriety of falsities such as rouge, she sprang
up, exclaiming—" There's Mrs Wyvill going to see if
baby's asleep ! I must have another look at him!" and
off she flew, leaving the peroration of my lecture just ris¬
ing to my lips.
I gathered my draperies round me with much dignity,
and was rising to join the other girls, when Dr Irwin
entered, and came at once towards me.
" Mrs Somers," he said " I am so glad to find you alone;
I am most anxious that you should explain to Miss Carle-
ton the reason of my extraordinary conduct last night,
and offer her my apologies for my—^my utter imbecility
and blindness." "Now for it!" thought I, and seated
myself again with a murmur of assent; and then, as
always happens in real Kfe, the romance of the interview
was broken in upon by the prosaic and practical, which,
in this case, took the shape of Harry Wyvill's two gigantic
footmen, bearing the tea-pot and tea-tray. I helped
myself and the Doctor too, to save time, my hands trem-
ling with excitement, and then, as the servants withdrew,
I looked up eagerly, and Dr Irwin proceeded.
" I daresay, Mrs Somers, you can guess my purpose in
coming to Warwickshire just now, I had formed the
hope—Miss Carleton—I see you understand. Yesterday
all I saw of her confirmed m}^ admiration, my—my affec-
The Attempt. 335
tion ; she was more winning, more engaging than ever;
and, Mrs Somers, it was her extreme simplicity, her
child-like character, that charmed me more than any¬
thing else."
I bowed my head, for the Doctor paused as if for assent;
but he seemed not to notice it.
" Mrs Somers, I scarcely know how to proceed. My
conduct appears inexcusable to myself, and yet, if I
listened, it was involuntary. Your room at the inn
adjoined ours."
I started as if I had been shot,—I saw it all now.
" I assure you, Mrs Somers, it was completely involun¬
tary ; I was leaning against the partition-wall, and
distinctly heard a voice say,—' Rouge? Yes, of course it
is, I use it often, I must put it on to-night,' or words like
those. Another voice, which I could scarcely hear,
seemed to remonstrate, but the first speaker insisted.
I was shocked ! Mrs Somers, I was horrified ! I am not a
fashionable man, as you know; I know little of fashionable
customs, and a woman who paints her face is to me,—
but I need not dwell on that. Then the voice was a
little, just a little, like Miss Carleton's, you knoAV she and
Miss Ilarrington both speak with a slight lisp,—but that
seemed to me monstrous. But when, a few moments
afterwards, we loft our room, and Miss Fielding, and
Sophy, and the Miss Wyvills came fi-om the opposite
door, and then you and Miss Carleton, alone, from the
room adjoining ours,—ijien, Mrs Somers, my heart sank ;
then I asked you where were the Miss Harringtons—"
" I remember, I remember," cried I, and I pointed to the
opposite room.
" Yes," continued the Doctor, " and there seemed to me
no room for doubt. You are so pale, Mrs Somers, forgive
me for thinking of that explanation ; I saw it could not be
you, and Miss Carleton's complexion is so brilliant, in
short, Mrs Somers, I believed that her's was the voice I
had overheard, and my disenchantment was complete.
Miss Harrington's words this evening revealed my mis¬
take. I feel that I owe Miss Carleton an apology for
my rudeness to her yesterday evening; for my imbecility
in believing what I did, upon any evidence, however
strong, no apology can be sufficient."
There was a long silence, the Doctor's voice had
trembled as he finished his story, and I believe I was
crying.
336 The Attempt.
" But, Mrs Somers," said he, suddenly rousing himself,
and trying to speak cheerfully, " since I heard Miss
Harrington's explanation, I feel a very different man.
Before that I felt that if Miss Carleton were artificial and
false, as I believed her, I could never have faith again in
man or woman, scarcely in child either, I think. But now
I see I was not mistaken in her, she is as pure and simple
as I believed her to be. Though my hojye is destroyed, my
faith remains, and my reverence for her, and for her sex
through her. And, after all, Mrs Somers, I spoke the truth
last night when I was so rude about that country dance. She
will have a better partner in Cunningham than she would
have in me for the country-dance of matrimony; and
now I am going to congratulate them both; but you will
give her my message, Mrs Somers ? Thank you for that
and your kind interest in me," and with a squeeze of the
hand, which made it very difficult for me to restrain a cry
of agony, the good Doctor left the room.
For the second time I was rising to return to the
others, when I was startled by the sound of a suppressed
sob, and to my amazement, crouched behind an ottoman
near the door, was a confused heap of rose-coloured tarla¬
tan and brown curls, which proved to be Rose Harrington,
in floods of tears.
" I came back just as you were taking tea," sobbed
Rose, with her head on my lap, while I smoothed the
brown curls, and patted the tear-stained cheeks—no
rouge on them to-night,—" and J didn't know how to
go away again, and besides, I wanted to hear about
it, and I didn't remember it was wrong to listen till I
heard what he said."
" But why are you crying so. Rose ? " said I, " Avhat is
the matter with you, dear ? " as a fresh burst of sobs
stopped Rose's utterance.
" Because I see the harm of it now!" cried the girl,
tlirowing hei- arms round me, " of rouge and filse hair, and
all these hateful things ! I see the falseness, and the shame,
and the horridness of it all now! 0 ! Mrs Somers, Blanche
and I have never had anybody to tell us what is right. If
mamma had lived, I think we 'd have been different. But
I never thought about it till I heard Dr Irwin to-night;
and 0! hoAv dreadful it was to hear him speak in that
voice, about " a woman who paints her face." And what
must Mrs Wy^nll and all the rest of them think of me
after Avliat I said to-night ? Oh! what shall I do ? " and
the sobs burst forth again.
The Attempt. 337
"My dear Rose," said I, profoundly touched, "my
poor dear girl, I am glad and thankful to hear you speak
like this. My dear, it is hard for you just now, but you
may put it all right before long, if you really are in
earnest, and I am sure you are. And Rose, nobody can take
your mother's place, my poor child I but what I can do to
help you and Blanche, I idll; and when you are in any
difficulty, come to me. And now dry your eyes, and come
back with me to the others, and we'll make a beginning
at once." For I was anxious, as soon as possible, to efface
the impression which I knew Rose's talk after dinner had
made on those of the party whose opinion was worth
most.
" Ladies and gentlemen," said I, trying to look jocular as
I led Rose into the other room, "Miss Harrington wishes you
all to knoAV that she is convinced she was much mistaken
in the views she expressed to-night upon art. She
greatly regrets the use she made of art on a recent occa¬
sion, and is resolved never to have recourse to it again."
" Yes," said Rose, bravely lifting her tear-stained face,
"I'm awfully sorry and ashamed for what I did and what
I said, and I'll never do it again, nor anything of the sort;
and I hope you'll all try to forget it, and if Mrs Somers
will help me, I hope—I'll try—I'll know better"—and
Rose's speech broke down, but her retreat was covered by
the applause and congratulations of the whole company.
How kind they all were, to be sure! ]\Iinnie kissed her,
and the Wyvills and Sophy Irwin were the first to press
round her, and all the others joined in applauding her
resolution. I never saw Jack look so pleased, and I was
particularly glad to see a little sisterly hand-shake and
whisper between Rose and Blanche, whose eyes were full
of tears. I was a sad hypocrite for the rest of the
evening ; for, of course, every one attributed the change
in Rose to my persuasive eloquence, and it was impossible
to reveal the truth. So I had to receive, as best I could,
all sorts of pretty compliments on my success as a
reformer,—Dr Irwin, dear good man, being warmer than
any one in his expressions of admiration and delight.
Rose Harrington kept her resolution. She had in her
the makings of a noble woman, and a noble woman she
has become. Blanche is much improved, but she wants
strength of character, and is as much below her sister
now as she was above her in Rose's " fast" days.
The book that Sophy Irwin's lover was engaged upon.
9    TJ
KOVEMBEE  1872.
338 The Attempt.
did "turn up trumps" after all; they were married a
month after Carrie Carleton and Davie, and are equally
happy—I cannot say more.
l)r Irwin is still a bachelor: but I have the very best
authority for confiding to my readers that he will not
long remain so; that his intended bride lives not a
himdred miles from Barden, and that her Christian name
is—Rose. Dido.
i^hil ^on^ of tlxs: Jtratc.
FROM THE SPANISH OP ESPEONCEDA.
With ten good cannon for her crew,
And a wind in all her sails that blew,
Over the water gallantly flew
A bark so swiftly bounding ;
A pirate vessel she was, and o'er
All seas she sailed on, from shore to shore,
Well known for her deeds was the name she bore,
" The Terrible," dread resounding !
The moonbeams are smiling upon the sea.
The breeze in the canvas is blowing free,
And o'er the still water, in gentle glee,
Wavelets of silver raises;
On the stern does the pirate-captain stand,
And he merrily sings as he flies past the land,
With Asia and Europe on either hand.
While Stamboul before his face is.
" Speed fearlessly on, my bark,
That neither rival vessel,
Nor stoiTQ, nor angry tide.
With thee may hope to wrestle ;
Nor turn thee from the course I mark,
Nor quell thy vaunted pride.
Twenty prizes have we taken
From the English, who despa'u';
At my feet a hundred nations
Low have laid their standards fair.
For my bark is all my treasure.
Freedom, my divinity;
All my law's the wild wind's pleasure.
And my only home's the sea!
The Attempt. 339
Blind kings, on yonder shore,
Ferocious wars are waging.
For another span of earth
In battle fierce engaging;
But as for me, what want I more
Than this free ocean's mirth ?
There's no land, wherever be it.
And no banner blazoned bright,
But hag felt my right hand's power.
And has* quailed beneath my might.
For my bark is all my treasiu*e,
Freedom my divinity;
All my law's the wild Avind's pleasure,
And my only home 's the sea!
At cry of ' Ship ahead!'
Ah I 'tis a sight worth seeing—
Our tacking and our veering
To keep our foes fi'om fleeing;
For oh, I am the Sea-King dread—
My wrath is Avorthy fearing!
Of our prize, so richly laden.
Equal, I the spoils diAdde;
All I ask is you bright maiden
Passing fair, to be my bride.
For my bark is all my treasure,
Freedom, my divinity;
All my laAv 's the Avild wind's pleasure.
And my only home 's the sea.
I am condemned to die ?
I laugh! could I forsake it,
The life of chance I chose ?
Ah! that same man Avho 'd take it.
From his own yard I'd hang him high—
Aye ! him and all my foes !
Even if I fall, yet, tell me.
What is life % once it I gave
Up as lost, Avhcn slav'ry's fetters
Resisted, stout and bra\'e.
For my bark's my only treasure,
Freedom, my divinity;
All my law "s the Avild Avind's pleasure,
And my only home 's the sea!
340 The Attempt.
To me, the north winds loud
Make sweetest music cheery,—
The straining cable's creaking,—
The black sea's roaring dreary,—
The fluttering of the sails, wind-bowed,—
My cannons' thundering speaking.
And amid the angry tumult.
And the mad waves' echoing cry.
Deep and soundly do I slumber,
Soothed by ocean's lullaby.
For my bark 's my only treasure.
Freedom, my divinity ;
All my law's the wild wind's pleasure.
And my only home 's the sea I
Mas Alta.
The question—Has Shakespeare given us any heroes
equal in beauty and perfection of character to his best
heroines ? has been asked among us, and answered to the
satisfaction of many in the afhrmative ; but as, like all
literary questions, it will bear a good deal of discussion,
and as some may be inclined to demur to that conclusion,
perhaps our readers may endure, without impatience, an
attempt to show cause for an opposite opinion. That is,
that a higher moral standard is attained by his finest
female characters than by even his noblest men ; especially
his ladies shine in the rendering of good for evil, and the
overcoming of evil by good; and by a moral elevation
that no circumstances can lower, no attacks from without
tarnish.
Let us glance at the chief plays of character, as dis¬
tinguished from those whose form is more poetical and
remote, beginning with " Measure for Measure," and we
find, as the central conception of the play, a woman who
unites the greatest tenderness and affection with a
simple heroism of integrity,—a purity so perfect, and so
high a moral nature, that the possibility of deflecting from
a noble standard seems ignored by her. Compare "Isa¬
bella" Avith Thackeray's perfectly virtuous woman, " Lady
CastJemaine,"hard, narrow, and rigid, who "never resents,
nor relents, nor repents" to appreciate the tender beauty
The Attempt. 341
of the former. Beatrice, in " Much Ado about Nothing,"
is perhaps fairly matched by Benedict, still she maintains
throughout a sort of superiority to her lover, whose
chivalry is awakened by her self-forgetful championship
of her cousin. Portia, in the "Merchant of Venice," so sweet
and stately, so learned and so full of graceful humility,
reigns easily a queen among the more unimportant or
mixed characters around and beneath her; for Antonio,
though flawless, is but subordinate and passive; and his
generous spendthrift friend, Bassanio, is "more than
mated," as Jessica says, by his charming wife. Rosalind,
in " As You Like It," is the focus and point of perfection
of the play; its mingling of free wild-wood gaiety and
courtly grace is summed up and typified in her person.
And in the " Winter's Tale," we have Hermione, the
ideal queen and companion, whose whole story is the
conquest of evil by patient affection and goodness. Passing
over the historical plays, where the women generally have
subordinate parts, till we come to " Katherine of Arragon,"
the real queen, the moral superiority of the heroine over
all the actors in that drama is undisputed, absolute, and
supreme. Then comes the lady, in "Cymbeline," sweet
Imogen, with her shy, reserved tenderness, her mingled
grief and patience, her dainty household ways,—she is
another of those heroines who conquer evil by good, as
St Margaret trod down the dragon sent to devour her.
Cordelia, one of those quiet, deep-feeling women who
cannot protest much, especially when feeling i^^cutely,
is also, I believe, the finest cliaracter in that play; more
beautifully forgiving far deeper injuries than even honest
Kent, that type of rugged fidelity, one of the worthiest
men in all the range of Shakespeare. There is something
slight and feeble about Oplieha ; perhaps because contact
with a stronger woman of a nobler nature would have
given Hamlet that trust in others and strength of
purpose he lacked. Then, lastly, there is Desdemona,
the pure, beautiful image flitting across the darkness
of that evil plot, culminating in the tragedy of wliich
she was the most sweet and innocent victim. She
and her husband are both noble characters, but she, how
far the nobler! trusting and loving him stfll, though
his conduct was so much against him, while he alLnvs
himself to distrust her utterly on the first suspicious
appearance. Her marriage with Othello, without her
father's consent, is quoted against her ; but it  should be
342 The A ttempt.
remembered that it was often the very finest spirits that
revolted against the marriages of mere convenience then
prevailing in Italy. The scene in which in positive terror
she comes for a moment before the storm of Othello's
unreasoning passion, and prevaricates about the handker¬
chief, is, I think, one of the most pathetic of the play—
giving a touch of human weakness to the otherwise
perfect victim, and the intensest sympathy in her
sufferings. Few characters so appeal to masculine
chivalry, and many men besides Wordsworth have chosen
as their ideal heroine
" The gentle lady wedded to the Moor."
We count over these jewels to remind ourselves of
them, not to praise them with inadequate words ; what¬
ever answer may be given to our especial question, we
may assume it is admitted that Shakespeare's ideal of
women was a very high one; and we may ask if there
w^as any outer influence besides the esteem for women
that belongs to, in general, a noble nature, to account for
it ? For in the old Itahan literature from which he drew
many plots, the ladies were decidedly more charming
than virtuous ; and after his time, the women of the plays
of the Restoration were altogether bad. In the days of
Pope they were sneered at as inferior, yet amusing
animals, full of grotesque follies, but mostly " with no
character at all; " and it is only in modern literature
that they have in a degree recovered that station to which
they were exalted in the Elizabethan era. ■ Without
being ttmciful, we may conceive two cu-cumstances of his
time that influenced Shakespeare in this matter. First,
mediajval chivalry, and secondly, the high culture of the
representative women of the day.
We may say broadly, that before Christianity, one half
of the human race was condemned by the injustice of the
other to slavery. But when the world became Christian,
that religion secured the purity and elevation of woman,
who appeared invested with a new dignity. In the ear¬
liest biographies and romances of Christendom, Tlie Lives
of the Saints, the men and women very fairly divide the
honours between them, but this equality was then quite
a new thing. Then came chivalry, confirming the empire
of women, an empire exercised by vntue, meekness, and
innocence, over the wild but brave men Avho were the
fathers of our modern civilisation. Let me quote a
mediasval knight's remarks on women :—" All virtue lies
The Attempt. 343
in women, and the health of the world. God has created
nothing so good as a woman. He who can tell where the
sunshine ends, may proclaim also the end of their praise.
They are pure, and good, and fair; they impart "worthi¬
ness to men. Nothing is so like the angels as their form,
and even the mind of an angel dwells in woman."
In Shakespeare's time, the influence of chivalry had not
died away, while the standard of culture was higher than
in the Middle Ages. Ladies, if educated at all, were
thoroughly well educated; and such women as the
Countess of Pembroke, Lady Carew, and many others,
must have shown very fairly what the female mind was
capable of, and may well have suggested the cultured
Portia, and the bright-witted Rosalind. Still, making all
'allowance for circumstances, there seems a great residuum
due to Shakespeare himself, and we may congratulate
ourselves fairly that the man with perhaps the deepest
insight into character who ever lived, has assigned to
women so high a place.
And whom shaU we find in the plays I have not yet
glanced at worthy to rank with our heroines'? Not
Hamlet, for with all his wonderful fascination and intellec¬
tual jjower, he was morally weak. Not the haughty Corio-
lanus. Not Brutus, a noble and interesting character,
but of the relative nobility of heathendom ; we may not
like Dante, assign to him a place in the "piw basso
Inferno " among the betrayers of trust, we may think of
him as one upright according to his lights; but there can,
we think, be no comparison between his character and
the absolute loveliness of those we have been considering.
For is it not, even by the ancient standard, marred by a
touch of treachery ? Granting he was right as a citizen,
—granting it was better Ceasar should die, it was not for
him, who through friendship won the nearest access to
his person,—it was not for him to aim the dagger that
elicited the reproach that goes echoing down aU history
linked \vith the name of Brutus,
But may not a rival be found for these ladies in that
princely gentleman,—that winning scape-grace,—that
splendid knight and king, Henry V. ? one of the noblest
characters that ever shone in the imagination of
a poet, or crossed the stage of history. And if he
is not worthy to stand in the very first rank with the
noblest of our heroines, it is because of the wildness of his
youth, which he acknowledges in the play, as did the real
344 The Attempt.
Henry in earnest, something of its shadow haunting even
his death-bed when he called out,—" Avaunt foul spirit, I
am my master's, not yours!"—it is because of the sternness
of his later years, the probable consequence of that
wildness, which makes him in the play so severe to his
old comrades,—wliich urged the Henry of history to
many an act of fierce retributive justice,—which made him
project the destruction of all the vines of France, to pre¬
vent drunkenness ! It may be said that women, with their
guarded youth, ought to be free from the temptations which
beset a young heir-apparent. Philippa, Henry's sister,
seems to have been a flawless Henry, and it may be partly
owing to such circumstances that women do often seem
to attain and preserve a loftier ideal than men in the
life of the Avorld, as well as, what we are endeavouring to
maintain, in the pages of Shakespeare. As the modern
writer, De ia Motte Fouqufe, does unquestionably give that
moral supremacy to the heroines of his romances, I shall
conclude these few remarks on a very wide subject by a
quotation from his story, Minstrel Love.
" I have watched thoughtful children lost in their mimic games, wherein the
boys are knights or monks, and the girls nuns or empresses. Seldom do boys
retain their purity amid the tumults of the world, it is impossible they should
in this our fallen position ; but women, yes, to them it is possible, and they may
remain messengers of heaven, even as the angels are. Look upon Alearda !
She knows not what she has done, she knows not what is yet reserved for her
to do ; nevertheless, her whole life is as the fulfilment of a heavenly mission to
wake and cherish the flowers of paradise on earth."
E. J. 0.
0 n %.
I.
Softly the winds came sighing, sighing.
Darkly the shadows were lying, lying;
Came fainter and fainter the fleeting breath,
Flowed faster and faster the stream of death.
n.
A sound as of mourners weeping, weeping,
A pale face calmly sleeping, sleeping;
And the soft winds bear upon their wings
A parted soul to the King of Kings.
The Attempt. 345
m.
The dawn is slowly brealving, breaking,
But for her there is no waking, waking ;
She hath soared to her home of love and rest,
And is leaning her head on her Saviour's breast.
rv.
With joy the heavens are ringing, ringing.
With angel-voices singing, singing ;
From her prison home of earthly clay,
W^e've brought a ransomed soul to-day.
La Maurice.
Witi ^undai|.<).
Wet Sundays! As I write, I see the shudder with which
many of the inhabitants of dear old Scotland greet our
day of rest, when its sky is darkened with heavy clouds
w^hich discharge themselves in deluges of rain, as though
all the reservoirs of the other planets had burst their
bounds.
The strong portion of the community array themselves
from top to toe in waterproof, and, armed with umbrellas,
make their way to church; such independent beings can
stand a wet Sunday with tolerable equanimity. My pre¬
sent remarks refer chiefly to those weaker members of
society who cannot prudently face the inclement weather,
and who, not wishing selfishly to break in upon the holi¬
day of cabmen and their weary horses, are, perforce, con¬
fined to their homes.
To many of these ^ wet Sunday is a real misfortune;
they lounge, they droop, they pine, and at length, per¬
haps, find temporary relief in sleep, but in sleep, which
not being the result of wholesome fatigue, only makes
them feverish and discontented when they wake, and robs
them of their legitimate rest at night. It is not that they
have no interest in serious matters,—far from it, were they
in their accustomed places in church, they would join
heartily in the prayer and praise, and afterwards listen
with attention to the discourse delivered by their excellent
clergyman.     Thoughtless  people,   heedless   of   religion,
"    -^ NOVESIBER  1S72.
346 The Attempt.
would probably find their wet Sunday less dull, novels
and billiards might get them through the day without a
yawn. Those I speak of are steady, well-meaning persons,
who have a considerable interest in those affairs specially
termed religion. Such being the case, it seems strange at
first sight that a day set apart for the observance of this
very religion should seem to them dreary, even if passed
in the seclusion of their own homes. The reason, how¬
ever, is not fixr to seek, they simply overdo the whole
thing, f )rgetting that, being weak creatures, their minds
kept always on one subject grow weary, as their bodies
bent always in one attitude become faint.
We can most of us remember Sundays when either
stormy weather, or some slight illness, has kept us the
whole day in our homes; but how many can look back
Avith pleasure on those days as times of rest and leisure,
times given us, as it Avere, specially for progression, for
self-improvement ?
These Avet Sunday prisoners probably begin their day
pretty cheerily ; if in a toAvn or its neighbourhood, they
first watch their more favoured brethren passing their
door on their churchward Avay,—an innocent little amuse¬
ment this Avhich most permit themselves, though some
rigid Calvinists limit themselves to a peep through the
Venetian blinds. This OA^er, they poke the fire, and sit
doAvn to read Avith pleasure and comfort some chapters
from the Bible, and a sermon, Avhich, if one of the more
modern school, ought to interest them considerably. So
far the day has gone Avell. and they soon hear the
measured tramp which, telling of the " scaling " of the
churches, again summons them to the Avindows. But Avhen
the bells once more call their companions to church, leav¬
ing them again to the solitude of their hearth, they begin
to feel a little Aveary,—the freshness of the morning has
past, and they Avonder what, in all the world, they are to
do Avith themselves ? It seems to me that the ansAver,
directed alike by reason and religious principle, is, vary
your occupations. Don't dishonour Sunday by hanging
lieaA^y weights on its hours Avhich otherwise would fly
pleasantly by, bearing us upAvards on their wings.
Reading is an almost endless resource, if properly
varied. The sermons of to-day are very different from
those to be found in the dark-covered volumes in most
old libraries ; and opening up, as they do, many interest¬
ing inquiries, trying to solve many perplexing doubts, and
The A ttempt. 347
to calm many anxious minds, they afford us occupation
for hours of solitude. But the earnest reader will probably
not wish to reserve all such books for Sunday, nor, on the
other hand, to reserve Sunday entirely for such books.
The subjects with which they deal are precisely those
which must always be present with us, interweaving
themselves with our week-day occupations, leavening our
wliole lives. This bemg so, it is neither necessary nor
desirable to force the mind to dwell on the exact letter of
religion for many hours together; its spirit may be f )und
breathing through the words of our great poets, philoso¬
phers, essayists, and philanthropists. With the works of
such at hand, surely wet Sundays are robbed of half their
horror.
If reading at length proves wearisome, are there not
some small acts of kindness to be done fcjr some one ? Is
there no sick or fiir-distant friend whose eyes would
brighten, and whose heart be cheered by the sight of our
handwriting ? Will not a quiet Sunday hour be well be¬
stowed in sharing some bit of good news, or some pleasant
thought with a friend who, in the bustle of the working
days, is apt to be put off with a few hurried lines, if not
entirely forgotten %
Then, when evening comes, and the drawn curtains
shut out the dismal scene of flooded streets, and the
candles are lighted, and the fire blazes cheerily on the
hearth, it is pleasant to open the piano or harmonium,
and to join in singing praises to Him who has given us a
day of rest, to be to us a delight and not a penance.
What authority have we from Scrijjture for making
Sunday dull ? None. The Sabbath, indeed, is given us
by God, but the dull Sabbath is given us by man,—it is of
purely human origin. But, some may say, we do not
make it dull though we limit our reading and other occu¬
pations more than you may think necessary. Then I can
only ask, why do I see and hear of so many sleepy people
on Sundays ? Why is so much gossip and idle conversa¬
tion indulged in on Sunday, if it is not the effect of a too
great restriction of our Sunday liberty ?
Our Sundays here, we are sometimes told, are foretastes
of our life hereafter, but the Sundays of many of us, at
least our wet Sundays, cannot be typical of that glorious
life to come. If heaven is to be one long Sunday, such
as some make it here, can we sincerely say we wish to go
there ?    But we trust it is not so, that heaven is no place
348 ■ The Attempt.
of mere negative pain, where departed spirits are kept
safe, it is true, from even potential evil, but denied actual
pleasure. If the life to come is to be a life of progression,
if we are to be admitted, in some measure, into the secrets
of creation, of the ruling of the universe; if we are to
make progress in science as well as in holiness, or rather
if the dark earthly lines of demarcation are to be with¬
drawn, and all is to be blended in one perfect existence,
then surely our Sundays here may be days of improve¬
ment in mind as well as in spirit 1 Not that the day
given us for rest of both mind and body should be devoted
to hard mental toil, for which we have six other days, but
a part of its leisure hours may be well bestowed in inquir¬
ing into the wonders and beauties which surround us on
every hand, and in listening to the interpretation of them
offered to us by science.
The too strict definition of what should be done on
Sundays, and what restricted to week days, has done
much harm to spiritual growth. It has fostered the
belief that religion is a thing apart from every-day life, to
be cultivated on Sunday, biit which may be dismissed
from om- minds to a great extent during the week. It has
excited an almost superstitious reverence for Sunday
observances as though they were some charm which, in it¬
self, would guard us from evil. In all classes of society
its subtle poison has done its work, but it is in the more
uneducated classes that its effect is most deadly. The
ignorant mind is ever eager to grasp at outward forms
which can be seen and touched by the senses, hence its
ready belief in charms and aU kinds of quackery. To
such, a church with its forms, a Sunday with its laws, are
apt to become in themselves, religion, which, if paid certain
attention to, will exonerate them from whatever sins
they choose to indulge in diu-ing the week.
How different is all this from the life-giving rehgion of
many persons on whom the stricter sects look somewhat
askance. To them all hfe is religion, every occupation,
every duty, every joy is religion. The one great and all-
important qiiestion Avith them is how to do cheerfully,
and, as far as in them lies, thoroughly the will of God.
They tell us truly
" In social hours who Christ would see.
Must tiu-n all tasks to charity."
Feeling as they do the ever present need of breathing
the Divine atmosphere, they cannot see how one day can
The Attempt. 349
be so marked above all other days. As a day of rest on
which opportunity is afforded of testifying publicly to the
Divine origm of their religion, they accept their Sunday
thankfully; but as the one on which the forms of religion
are by their weight to endanger its spirit, they can never
recognise it.
Many of those who speak at times in set phrases of the
joys of heaven, show, by their ordinary words and actions,
that they are looking forward with no heartfelt pleasure
to entering on them. They seem to shrink from death in
a manner quite shocking to others, whose freedom of
religious opinion has caused them to be regarded as
" black sheep," but who are journeying on with tranquil
steps, ready to enter at once on a higher existence when
their master sees fit to call them.
To them, heaven is indeed a home, being close around
them even in this life, and no far-off splendid region of
chilly grandeur.
I may seem to have wandered from my starting-point
of wet Sundays, but not so far, I think, as the influence o
these days extends. An occasional wet Sunday may come
and go, bearing apparently little impress on our characters,
but who can say how much our progress may be helped as
hindered by the ■^ay in which we spend on earth our wet
Sundays ?
Des Eaux.
ihe Jartitifln of tlu l^oiiltl.
FEOM THE GERMAN OP SCHILLER.
" Take hence the earth!" cried Jove, from his high throne,
" Ye mortals, 'tis bequeathed from sire to son,
To you, from me, 'tis given, an everlasting loan,
But share it fair and brother-like each one."
Then hasteneth, who hath hands, with busy speed
Both young and old to part the fertile soil,
The ploughman grasps the earth's upspringing seed,
The huntsman lays for timid deer the toil.
350 The Attempt.
The merchant takes whate'er his barn can hold,
The abbot chooses costly last'year's wine,
The monarch bars the city gates for gold,
And speaketh from his throne, " The tithe is mine."
Too late, when the dividing long was done,
From distant realms the poet, hastening, came ;
But oh, where'er he looked, o'er all things one by one.
Each from a master had received its name.
" Alas I shall I alone of all remain
Forgotten, Jove, thine own and faithful son!"
Thus sounded far and wide the poet's sad refrain,
He threw himself before the Kuler prone.
" If thou wert tarrying in the land of art,"
Replied the God, " complain not thus to me.
Where wert thou then, when man the earth did part ?"
" I was," replied the poet, " close by thee."
Mine eye was fastened on thy glorious coimtenance,
Mine ear drank in thy heavenly harmony.
Forgive that, blinded by thy dazzling glance.
My spirit lost the great cosmogony."
" Wliat then ?" spoke Jove, " the earth is given away,
The harvest, hunt and market no more mine ;
Wilt thou with me in heaven's high glory stay,
So living thou wilt, 'tis thine."
Thekla.
OUR LIBRARY TABLE.
Thoughts for the Times.    By the Rev. H. R. Haweis, M.A.
H. S. King & Co., 65 Cornhill.
This book has, we think, eminently the merit of keeping the
promise given in its title page, it does contain " thoughts for
the times," answering thoughts to those earnest questions
which many in this present day are constantly putting to
themselves, or to any in  whom they place  confidence
The Attempt. 351
enough to believe that they will not give them a mere
commonplace conventional answer, that they will not be
irritated by the expression of difficulties and doubts which
arise in anxious natures, and which are often evidences
of a wish, surely heaven-born, to arrive at truth.
These fourteen discourses embrace a wide field. The
subjects treated of range from the highest to the
simplest—from " The Idea of God," " The Character of
Christianity," The Trinity, Original Sin, and Predesti¬
nation, to "The Lord's Day," "Preaching," the employ¬
ment of women, and the much discussed question of the
suitableness of the elements of pleasure being mixed up
with a religious life, whether addressed to the senses, the
sentiments, or the intellect, as large assemblies, music,
the drama, sports, etc. On these points he takes a clear
far-seeing view, considering that these natural inchnations
are given for good, and when rightly used, are beneficial.
And it is surely good for the young to have their minds
cleared from the morbid sense of wrong-doing whenever
they indulge in some kind of enjoyment natural to their
age, for this often ends either in blunting the sense of
right, or in a withdrawal, which fosters spiritual pride,
and often ends in Asceticism, or in narrowness of mind.
But the book will speak for itself Some may, proving
wise, differ with it on many points; but all candid readers
must find good tuition to the thoughts of this and indeed
for all time.
Letters and Journals of the Earl of Elgin.     Edited by
T. Walroxd.    Murray.
Of far more interest to the general reader than most
political biographies, the book being in great part made
up of Lord Elgin's own graphic and interesting letters
home, from the distant lands where the work of his life
chiefly lay ; and many of the events -with which he was
concerned being of a most exciting nature. One cannot
fail to be struck by the immense personal responsibility of
our Governor-General and plenipotentiaries at a distance
—on their almost unaided decisions depending at times
the fate of the millions of the races Great Britain
influences so powerfully in the far west or remote east.
The book, besides, gives the picture of a statesman of
uncommon ability and most winning character, who was
352 The Attempt.
singularly free from the smallest touch of self-interest or
ambition, and who gave his labour and his life for his
country as truly as any soldier who dies on a battle-field.
In connection with this biography, we may mention the
third  volume   of the  Viscomte   de   Beauvoir's amusing
" Travels round the World," called " Peldn, Yeddo, et San
Francisco," and about to be translated into English like
the others.    The author gives most lively descriptions of
his  adventures  in  these   strange  countries of arrested
civilization ; China presenting all the darker shades,—the
carelessness  of human life, the complete absence of all
noble feeling in high or low, the frightful effects of over
population shown by the wholesale destruction of infant
life, and the hideous misery of the lowest classes ;   Japan,
with many points of resemblance, showing the  brighter
side of that strangely isolated national life.     There the
country seems very pretty and nice on a small scale, so
are the elfin-hke people, with their confiding, innocent,
childish characters ; so is their neat, but slight and toy¬
like workmanship; so are  their tea-houses and fanciful
gardens, with tiny waterfalls and dwarfed shrubs.     But
those who wish to see Japan before it is like other places
must make haste; no people now show a greater eager¬
ness to be like the rest of the world.     They are getting
up European manufactures, and a steam fleet;   having
adopted French uniforms, they have discarded them for
Prussian, on hearing of the results of the late war;   and
the   railway   has   been   opened   between   Yeddo    and
Yokohama.
The Attempt. 353
While you and I together,
In the outcast weather.
Toss and howl and spin.
—Christma Rosetti.
I AM to tell you a story, and one suited to the winter
time, one to make the warm, bright hearth seem the safer
and gayer by contrast; something desolate and stormy,
perhaps with a ghost in it! Strange that the ghost
question is yet an open one, and that, for all the world is
so old and e perienced, there are believers in them still.
I have generally observed myself that when the story is
well accredited, the ghost is uncertain or otherwise explic¬
able ; when, on the other hand, the ghost is unmistakeable.
the story is apt to be doubtful. There is the merest
suspicion or flavour of a ghost in mine, so it quite bears
out my theory.
Several years ago, my brother Martin and myself were
travelling together on foot in an out-of-the-way part of
the Grisons. To this day the neighbourhood is little
visited, and the Alpine Club seems not to have noticed it;
perhaps because the scenery, though fine, is not first-class
for Switzerland. We were attended and guided by a
stalwart, pleasant Cliamouniard, Manuel by name, who
had accompanied us for some time, and to whom we
looked up with great respect, calling him, between our¬
selves, Mr Greatheart, and considering that he stood in
the relation of that hero to us innocent pilgrims.
It was autumn, the season was nearly over, and the
weather broken ; we were tramping slowly over the snow
towards the end of our day's work, the evening was
closing early, the wind was beginning to moan, and the
sky was all one dirty grey cloud, giving a ghastly effect
to the snowy landscape, where the light seemed to come
from beneath, instead of from above. There was a
muddy, icy torrent, between two wide-sloping banks,
then came a dreary expanse of snow, and a peak or two
looking unnaturally near,—no beauty or splendour, only
an overwhelming, immense dreariness.
Two little black specks beside the track at last re¬
solved themselves into a man and a boy, who were
setting up  a  rough wooden  cross.     Hereabouts,  they
*     * DECBMBEK 1872.
354 The Attempt.
told us, a man was thought to to have wandered from
the path, and his body had been found in a enow-drift
below, a fortnight before. They had ascertained from
his papers that he was a Comasque pedlar; he had
probably got bewildered in a snow-storm on his way
to the Gast Haus, two miles further on, where we in¬
tended to sleep; they had buried him in the church¬
yard of the village at the foot of the pass, and were
putting his initials on this lonely little memorial to mark
the spot where he perished. " And you had better get on
to the Gast Ilaus," added the man, " this is a bad place in
bad weather, and a storm that will not mend soon is
coming."
Manuel, too, hurried us on somewhat nervously, having
no notion, he said, of being surprised by darkness on an
unknown path, and in half-an-hour we had reached the
lonely little grey stone house that received the few
"wanderers to this out-of-the-way district. There were
other travellers there that night, but I was too tired to
consort with them, and soon we slept the sleep of pedes¬
trians.
We woke in the morning to the dismal fact of a
thoroughly bad day, a down-pour of mingled rain and
snow, and though we contrived to spend it with tolerable
equainmity, we were glad when evening came, bringing,
as it were, the morrow within hail. All day thick white
clouds had lain heavily banked on every side, never per¬
mitting a glimpse of the grand Alpine landscape to
appear, but now they were darkening into blackness, and
the little stretch of snow which had been visible from the
windows in the daylight was blending with the gloomy
sky. In the chalet for cattle before the windows, the
only building in the waste besides our own, we had
watched the men with their lanterns milking the cows,
and foddering them for the night; now they too had
crossed to our side, and shut the door, and there was
nothing to look at but the ceaseless rain pouring from the
low eaves in little waterspouts.
The prospect was not cheerful, so the last traveller
forsook it, and the few detained together having pre-
\'iously gone out and got wet, and come in and got dried,
and had the best dinner the house could afford, prepared
to spend as pleasant an evening as they could by the
lively fire that burned at one end of the long, low room.
For the aborigines had given up their inner room to the
The Attempt. 355
strangers, and were congregated in an outer one, con¬
nected with ours by an open doorway, through which we
could see them at their different employments, and the
sleepier members slipping by degrees up the ladder in
one corner to the bedroom storey above.
One of the girls having placed some milk, Mrschwasser,
and hard bread on the table, and hearing that we
wanted nothing more for the evening, we were left
to our own reflections and conversation. The last, as
was natural at the close of a gloomy day in one of the
wildest habitable regions, took a somewhat melancholy,
mysterious tone, that accorded well with the rush of the
wind and rattling sleet outside, and the uncertain fire-light
gleaming on the dark-brown rafters within. Two mora
tourists had been added during the day to our party,
which now consisted of a Swiss botanist or naturalist,—
a man apparently steeped in science, from which, however,
he could emerge for the benefit of the unlearned; an
elderly Englishman, of unfailing good humour, evidently
weather proof; a German student, with long, damp
yellow hair, and a rather good-]o(jking abstracted coun¬
tenance ; my brother, and myself,—the only lady.
Manuel, who spoke little German, and therefore found
the people of the house dull companions, had, in virtue of
his pleasant manners, been admitted to a share of our
fire, and French conversation, and his handsome Italian
face gave the picturesque element to our party.
" At least," said the naturalist, " this weather gives me
time to sort out my plants, and to arrange and classify
some most beautiful specimens I have picked up in this
pass. Ah, sir," to the Englishman, " little you know the
pleasure, the glory of finding some strange variety, some
curious species,—you examine, you dissect with an
interest ahvays increasing,—triumphantly, at last, you
assign name, species, locality,—or, possibly, for you
remains the glory of giving a new name to the child of
your own discovery,
" Thank you," said the Englishman, " but I don't care to
know much of those arranged and classified pleasures. I
don't like your definitions and limitations ; this tying a
label with a Latin name to all the ornaments of life,—
keep them for business, I should say, and it is the business
of you men of science to turn plants and rocks inside out,
and upside down, to see which are most alike. I enjoy
their beauty intensely, and wish for nothing further."
356 The Attempt.
" So," said my brother, " you admire that white flower,
but don't want to know that it is called Gnaphalkim
Dioecium, and would rather not be told whether the cliff is
porphyry or basalt."
" No, sir," he answered, " I am not quarrelling with
natural history as a business,—mine is law. What 1 mean
is, that I doubt whether the pleasure we derive from the
beauties of nature is enhanced by any scientific know
ledge."
" Often the idea of people who know nothing about it,"
said the naturalist half aside; but the German student broke
in with—" I quite agree Avitli you, sir, this rifling of the
hidden secrets of nature, this prying, inquisitive habit,—
what an inferior state of mind it is to that awe, that
longing, that dread pleasure with which we gaze on the
undefined and mysterious."
" As to that," said the Swass," " even granting that we
stand on a higher step of the ladder then you do, the
undefined begins very soon for the most learned, and
the mysterious surrounds us all."
" However," said my brother, " we must allow that there
are mysteries of ignorance,—a darkness that the light of
science drives away before it, as surely as the morning will
reveal that that black square of window looks out upon
rocks and snow."
" Yes, look at that outside darkness,—what is it, and
what does it mean, and what may it not bring with it ? "
answered the German. " The instinctive shrinking from
darkness we all have,—and children so strongly,—is, to
my mind, a proof that influences, unfelt in the daylight,
and apart from our ordinary nature, are then to be felt." -
"What, sir, do you believe in ghosts!" exclaimed our
lawyer.
"1 would believe in them if I saw them," he answered ;
" at least, I see no reason to think them impossible."
" Well," said the naturalist, " without beheving in
ghosts, I believe in some strange impressions, some un¬
accountable forebodings, which can neither be classified
nor labelled with Latin names "—smiling at the Englishman,
who answered, "Go on sir, go on with your story, for I
see you have one. The lady and myself, whom I thought
the most poetical of the party, are left quite behind ;
go on."
The Swiss did not immediately go on, however, for a
tremendous gust of wind, which shook the house, roused
The Attempt. 357
us all for a moment. " Heaven help those on the moun¬
tains !" said Manuel, raising his head and listening. At
this moment a young woman stood in the wide doorway
between the rooms ; softly advancing to our fire, she said
in French, " The fire is out, yonder," and seated herself
on the end of a bench beside the German student. She
would have been very pretty, but for her excessive pallor,
and her hair was plaited with silver pins in the North
Italian fashion. We thought her one of the girls of the
establishment, and in a moment asked the Swiss for his
story.
" It's  hardly   a   story,"   he  said,   " merely   an   illus¬
tration of what I was saying of presentiments.    More
than   once,  while  making botanical   researches  in   the
marshes of La Vendee, I have stayed a few days at the
house of Pierre Brachard, a strong man of five-and-thirty
or thereabouts, with a wife and two children.    Last time
I visited him. I  observ* d in him  a  great  depression  of
spirits—he used to be a very cheery fellow.      On the
the evening of my departure, he begged me to be a friend
to his family after his   death.     ' Certainly, if I  survive
you,' I told him, ' but yours is a better life than mine, my
fi-iend.'     ' No sir,' he replied, ' I fear I am doomed; I shall
not see sunset to-morrow,' and he gave me the following
explanation.   That time last year his family had been down
with marsh fever, common enough in that district, and
he had a touch of it himself;   One night he awoke, feeling
low and ill, and went out and looked over the marshes
lying under a faint moonlight—' when I saw sir,' he said,
in an awe-struck whisper, -La Nacelle Blanche, (the white
boat) ; in it I saw one figure, I dared not look again, but I
knew it was the pestilence boat that haunts the marshes,
and is the death warrant of all that see it.    Some terrible
power constrained me; in  spite   of my  horror,   I  was
forced to the water's edge, felt  myself in the boat, knew
I was whirling away with a noise of waters in my ears,
till all was lost in confusion, and I awoke as it were by
the water side, a mile from home.     But I know I shall
not survive the year, and to-morrow is the last day.'    It
was all in vain to tell him it was a delirious  dream—a
fever  fancy; he shook his head with an air of settled
gloom.
" Next morning we parted; that evening, a dense fog
came on, in which I lost my way; they are common
enough in that country, and sometimes very dangerous.
358 The Attempt.
The morning after, Pierre Brachard was found drowned
in the river, not far from his home. It was thought that
in the darkness he had mistaken the main river for a
shallow branch stream, and been lost in attempting to
ford it; but it was a curious coincidence." There was a
momentary silence, and I own I glanced at the doorway,
hoping for a comfortable view of household hfe and work,
but the outer room ■was dark and deserted, and I wished
there was a door between us and the dreary cavernous
space.
" A fever fancy, indeed!" said the Englishman, " There
is nothing to wonder at either in the first or the last part
of your story. Any of us who have had a fever may know
that; and by your account, your man at last was in such
a state that he would have thrust his head into the first
pool of water and held it there to fulfil the prediction of
the goblin boat."
" It is true," said Manuel, " that a man who is afraid is
in real danger where another is not; and there is nothing
so enfeebhng to the strength of the strongest as anything
supernatural. Pierre should have stayed at home that
day.-'
" What! have your stalwart nerves been tried in that
way ? I would give something for your story," said our
friend, laughing; but Manuel, to my disappointment,
shrugged his shoulders with an emphatic negative, and an
intimation that he was " de son siecle."
" There must be," I said, " some mysterious ideas and
beliefs associated with such wild scenes and such a wild
night as this—or you Savoyards are the most unimagina¬
tive set of people in the world. In Scotland, we should
be ashamed of such dulness."
" I did not say there were no ideas," said Manuel, like a
true Chamouniard, accommodating himself to the last
speaker. " Ideas Ave have, and I will tell you one. The
spirit of the last person lost on some dangerous mountain
is said to haunt the spot till another takes his place, and
you may hear his wailing cry on such a stormy night as
this—there—you heard it then ! But it is hardest upon
those who are lost upon a very unfrequented path, or
where very few are lost. Perhaps they wait many years,
and these of course long for a traveller to succeed them,
and moan in his ears to terrify him : at least so they say."
" It sounds a hard case," said the lawyer, " that a poor
ghost is obliged to wander up and down a glacier merely
The Attemt. 359
because he had the ill-luck to leave his body there. It
might suit some of you enthusiastic climbers very well,
but I should not like it myself."
" Of course," replied Manuel, gravely, " if it is credible,
it is as a sort of purgatory."
" Do you believe it ? " said the stranger girl tm-ning full
upon him.
" Do I believe it ? Well, not exactly," answered
Manuel, " but listen. Francois Reybaz of Valorsine was
to come from Piedmont home one winter day, nearly three
years ago. Well, the weather changed suddenly the day
he was expected, so, as of course he did not arrive, two
of his friends asked me to go some way up the Col with
them, iu case he should have set off and should want
assistance. I can tell you we were just in time—an hour
later would have been too late. We found him lying on
his face, nearly covered with the powdery snow of the
tourmente, about eight miles from the village. And he told
me and a few others (for to this day he does not like talk¬
ing of it), that when it first began to snow he thought
nothing of it—he had been out alone izi far worse storms
—when it came into his head how one Carini, a rascal of a
Piedmontese, had lost his life there years before, and how
he might now be hoping that he (Reybaz) was his
successor. Then he thought the dead man's voice
sounded behind him. He turned sharply round and saw
a man, or rather spectre, moving close behind him, but
looming dimly through the heavy snow. He crossed him¬
self and manned himself to look again, it was gone—but
a few minutes later it was there again ; he ran, it glided
on beside him ; he stopped, it was gone for an instant, but
was back even while he looked. At last, he said, the hate¬
ful thing drew near, seemed to overshadow and grasp
him; his brain was in a whirl, and he fell on the snow and
knew nothing more till he opened his eyes, when we were
chafing him with snow and pouring brandy down his
throat."
" Why, this is the very brother of the last story," said
the Englishman, " with the additional spiritual influence
of the brandy ; for I daresay yours was not the first Cog¬
nac Monsieur Reybaz had been refreshed with that day."
" No, no," said Manuel, warming into the subject now,
and feeling his credit at stake, " Reybaz was sober
enough. There are many stories about ^ fantomes d'aver-
tissement' and haunted passes in the country.    There is
360 The Attempt.
old Michel Dessalone in onr village, for instance, I've
often heard him tell of his escape in crossing the snow
near the Grivola. It was a good many years ago and
early spring. They may have been smuggling, though
he does not exactly say so, he and a man, whose name I
foi-get—say Jean. At any rate they Avere overtaken by
bad weather, heavily laden; and one stormy evening, like
this, were glad to creep for shelter into an empty chalet,
half buried in snow. There they got a fire lit, and did
very well. There was a window fastened by a wooden
shutter in one gable, and a door at the side of the hut.
And so Jean had fallen asleep, and Michel was think¬
ing of nothing, when he heard a low tapping at the
shutter. He runs and opens it—no one; but he discerns
a dark figure against the snow, limping towards the door
—quick to open the door. No one ; but in two minutes
something taps at the window again. He sees the same
limping figiu'e outside, shouts and wakes up Jean, to
whom he tells all.
'" The saints protect us !' says Jean, ' It's the limp¬
ing muleteer who was lost in the winter, and he wants
you to take his place.' Nevertheless Michel opens the
door again, and there is the black figure without, seeming
to beckon him forward. Michel had, he says, the greatest
longing to follow him; he seemed dragged by some
invisible force, but he still had hold of the door, and
making a violent effbrt, he slammed it, rolled a stone
against it, and sat down by Jean at the fireside, clinging
to him in terror. Well, they had not at all a pleasant
night, and Tvere glad to get away safely in the morning."
"Now, had your friend Michel heard of the limping
miileteer for the first time that night, or was he a well-
known frequenter of the Grivola ?" asked the Enghshman;
but he received no answer, for ^'Q were all looking at the
stranger girl, who had risen, and was standing, framed as
it were, in the wide blackness of the doorway. The
German student, struck, as he afterwards declared, by
her extraordinary paleness, said, " Are you afraid to
stay with us—do you believe in ghosts?" Never shall
I forget her strange expression as she looked back
with a kind of fixed stare, and broke into a short
wild laugh that filled me with horror ; it seemed
not to belong to the slight form and comely face before
us,—so loud, discordant, and miserable it sounded,—and
the next moment she was gone!
The Attempt. 361
For a second or two we merely looked at each other,
when " Prettily done, and dramatically, and a pretty girl
too," said the Englishman. "But where has she gone?"
I said. " Up the ladder to bed, I should suppose," he
answered, " I think we had all better follow her example,
one gets quite nervous telling such tales in the dark."
" I never observed that little beauty before," said
my brother,—"Nor I," "Nor I"—Avas heard, till it was
evident that we had all seen the girl for the first
time when she joined our party half-an-hour previously
—which was surprising, if she belonged to the little
inn. The German snatched up a candle, saying " This
is uncanny, I wUl see to it," and we all followed
him into the outer room; it was quite empty, with the
exception of a man lying fast asleep on a sort of shelf of
hay in one corner.
" Did you see the girl pass through ?" said the
German, shaking him up. " The girls had gone to
bed upstairs in the loft long ago," he said, stretching
himself. " How many girls are there in the house ?"
" How many? two and the hostess—what you saw—what
is it all about?" " She does not belong to the house," ex¬
claimed my brother, " Manuel, she may have gone out, we
should seek her," and he opened the door, which, as usual
on the mountains, Avas not bolted ; a wild gust of drifting
snow swept in, blowing out the candle, some one flew for
the other one in the next room, and Manuel shut the door.
"Much more Kkely to have gone up the ladder, sir, no
one would think of leaving the house to-night—no one at
least who had anything to lose," he muttered. By this
time the commotion had roused the family, who, as their
toilette merely consisted in shaking themselves, came
down the ladder pretty quickly, and were soon all col¬
lected, and heard our tale. None had ever seen or heard
of such a girl, and we sought every corner of the house
and cattle clmlet for her in vain. The night was fearful,
yet Martin and Manuel penetrated some little way into
the darkness Avith a lantern, feeling, as they afterwards
confessed to me, exceedingly eerie; but they saw
nothing, nor any trace of footsteps, which indeed in the
snow-storm would not be long discernible. Next morn¬
ing it was snowing still, and blowing hard; but, by three
in the afternoon, the new-fallen snow lay smoothly all
round, glittering in the sunbeams, and we left the place
with most of the other travellers.
*    " DECEMBEK 1872.
362 The Attempt.
Ten days afterwards, we met the German student
again at the "Three Kmgs" at Basle. "Have you heard?"
he said, "here in the newspaper is the account of the
discovery of our girl—in a prosaic style—but I was on the
spot, and can tell you all about it. It was six days after
you went away; the English gentleman and 1 were both
at K , at the foot of the pass; the body was found in a
drift about an hour's walk from the Gast TIaus, where I
met you; she was just as we saw her—pale and pretty,
the row of silver pins in her hair. They had seen her in
the village the morning of that day that she appeared to
us ; she Avas quite a stranger, but had made some inquiries
about the Comasque pedlar who Avas lost there a month
previously, and she had gone to look at his grave; but
observe,"—and he lowered his voice—" she was found
about two miles from our inn, but between it and the
village, near the pedlar's cross; she was lost, you see, before
reaching the inn, and no one had seen her there, and
when she sat at our fire, her clothes did not look damp.
Even your Englishman can only account for that by say¬
ing that, no one knows why, she must have been for some
time concealed about the clmlet or the house."
"And does heaccount forthe rest of the story?" we asked.
"Oh," he answered, "he said something about her being
wretched or mad, and made worse by our silly stories,
or not wishing to live,—but, for my part, I think she had
done with hfe when we saw her." And I have no doubt
the honest Bm-sch was honoured among his more
credulous comrades as one who had sat on a bench with
a spectre, for, as I heard him tell the story that evening,
I almost believed it myself. Manuel, however, who held
the theory that the gu'l was alive, but that the ghost of
the pedlar had beckoned her out on the mountains to take
his place, always told the story quite differently, coloiu-
ing to that effect. And when I was last in Switzerland,
I found that the original had split into two stories, very
unlikfe each other, and full of love and romance. They
are, however, often told on the same evening, for they
alarmingly confirm each other; besides, both happened
lately, and both are undoubtedly authentic, as there are
witnesses to prove.
E. J. 0.
The Attempt. 363
Bright may the morn be
That ushers in for thee
Another year.
And may that year be bright,
Illumined by His light—
Our Saviour dear.
And may that sunshine dry
The tears that dim thine eye ;
And blessings shed.
Unto the blest cross cling,
So shall the sheltering wing
Be o'er thy head.
Say'st thou, that to this day
More thorns in life's rough way
Than flowers thou'st had;
Still let the thorns thee teach
Some bleeding hearts to reach,
And some make glad.
Onward I thy motto be.
The world hath need of thee.
Let womanhood
In thee most brightly shine.
Adorned by light divine,
Noble and good.
Frucara.
-<*oi^ot>-
To render the title of my paper somewhat more intel¬
ligible, I must begin by explaining that the " mothers "
therein referred to are women for the most part in very
poor circumstances; and also, as we should natin-ally
expect, with few exceptions mothers of households.
These poor women inhabit some of the meaner streets in
the northern district of Edinburgh, and attend a "mothers'
meeting," held once a week, under the auspices of a few
364 The Attempt.
of the ladies connected with a church in the neighbour¬
hood.
Here, if the digression may be allowed, I would pause
for a little tfl refer to an incident of this mothers' meeting
which occurred the winter before last, at the time of the
unhappy Continental war, and wliich afforded a pleasing
proof that the harassing cares and struggles which too
often form the entire life-history of these poor women are
yet powerless to extinguish in their hearts a feeling of
compassion for the sufferings of others.
The lady who takes the chief superintendence of the
meeting had read to the women one day a touching little
narrative, probably now familiar to most of us, describing
the good effects produced on the soul of a wounded
soldier, through the instrumentality of some texts sewed
upon a bed-quilt presented to one of the hospitals by a
pious Tvoman, who turned out to be the mother of the
very man who had received such benefit from the sacred
words imprinted on it. On concluding the tale, the lady
suggested to her audience that such a work might be a
pleasant and useful one for them to engage in. The
women at once entered into the benevolent proposal, not
only willingly, but most eagerly; paid for gi-eat part of
the materials necessary for the construction of a " cosy"
quilt, and quilted it entirely themselves, thus depriving
themselves ungrudgingly of several of the valuable work¬
ing hours which they had been wont to devote to labour for
their private necessities.
But I have lingered long enough over preliminary
remarks, and must hasten on to the proper subject of this
paper—the tea-party.
Since the commencement of the mothers' meeting, it has
ahvays been customary to invite its members once a year,
at the season usually devoted to festive gatherings, to a
social tea meeting, held in a school-house adjoining St
 's Church,—an entertainment which seems to be duly
appreciated by the guests.
From an early hour in the forenoon of the 29th of
December—the day fixed for the party—the school-house
was the scene of busy preparations for the event of the
evening. A company of ladies and gentlemen, number¬
ing in all about twenty, were scattered throughout the
various rooms, arranging the evergreens and other decora¬
tions, cutting sandwiches and cake, filling cream pots and
sugar basins, to say nothing of the still humbler occupa-
The Attempt. 365
tions  of washing cups  and  saucers, and carrying about
kettles of boiling water.
The preparations completed, the company dispersed, to
meet again at half-past six, for the purpose of welcoming
the expected guests. We, too, if you please, Mall avail
ourselves of the invitation offered by the open door, to
step in and see what we can find to interest us within the
walls of the homely school-house. Entering first into an
outer room, very slightly decorated, we find ourselves in
the presence of one portion of the invited company not
previously referred to,—the children of a mission school
meeting on Sunday afternoons in a room below that in
which thev are now assembled.
There the little creatures sit, each one graspmg its own
"jug" or "tinnie," the whole sixty or seventy making,
when we enter, as little noise as could be heard in the
best regulated private school-room, although we are told
that, fearful lest any of the good things should be lost
through tardy appearance, they had begun to assemble
at five o'clock, (a full hour and a-half too soon), and al¬
though, as testified by the frequent hurrahs that come to
our ears in the next room, during the evening, they suffer
from no lack of lung power.
Passing from the children's room through a small ante¬
chamber, which does duty this evening for kitchen, dairy,
robing-room, and what not, we stand now on the
threshold of tho large school-room, the principal scene of
the entertainment. Here a cheerful and pretty sight
awaits us.
The apartment, grim and gaunt enough on ordinary
occasion, wears for the time a smiKng face of welcome.
The bare, unsightly walls have been made to hide their
deficieuces beneath tastefully arranged decorations.
Above each \\andow hangs a festoon of evergreens,
whilst the panes of two at the end of the room are con¬
cealed by a curtain of red calico, bearing each a text of
Scripture in letters of white and gold. On the one is
written "Glory to God in the highest;" on the other,
"Peace on earth, good-will toward men." Above the
platform is a scroll with the appropriate motto, "A Happy
New Year." On another part of the wall we read, " No
Cross, no Crown;" the cross and crown being tastefully
worked in holly and other evergreens.
A pink curtain, neatly looped up, behind the speaker's
platform, a pillar in the centre of the room  enwrapped
366 The Attempt.
with gay pink calico, and entwined with a wreath of ever¬
greens, and a Christmas tree of modest dimensions placed
on the platform table, complete the list of the principal
decorations.
We must not, however, forget to notice two neatly
executed architectural designs, carved in wood, the work
of a humble chimney-sweeper, liimself generally one of
the gUests, whose skill in this art we are called upon to
admire at each yearly meeting of the kind. So much for
the adornments of the tea-room.
Let us now turn oiu" eyes to a more important feature
in the picture—the guests themselves. Seated at three
long tables, whose snowy coverings, clustering tea
cups, and rows of cake-baskets and plates, well filled
with tempting piles of sandwiches, cakes, and bread and
jam, give them a cheerful and home-like appearance, are
a goodly array of men, women, and children; for, al¬
though this is, primarily, a mother^ tea-party, the fathers
corresponding to the said mothers are also invited, solely
in virtue, be it understood, of being their wives' hus¬
bands. (An edifying example this of the new views of
women's position which are fast gaining ground).
Babies, too, of all sorts and sizes, are here, fi-om the tiny,
white-robed innocent, whose fragile form you almost fear
to handle, lest it should suffer from the touch of un¬
accustomed fingers, to the sturdy armful, that looks
tough enough to enjoy a " toss in a blanket." These
juvenile guests have, I suppose, no better plea to offer for
their presence here, than the prosaic one, that they cannot
be left behind.
Perhaps the expression " home-like," made use of
above, may have provoked a smile. Home-like! Are
snowy damask table-linen, silver plate, and piles of cake,
then, familiar spectacles in the homes from which these
poor people come ? Rather an ideal home this surely to
most of them ! Might not something plainer have served
the turn f Perhaps so ; but is the advantage so
decidedly on the side of plainness after all % Are we not
all the better for having our minds elevated at times,
by the placing before us of a higher than our wonted
ideal ? And if one of those humble mothers carries away
with her this evening the determination to emulate, not
the holiday luxuriance, but the bright and tidy aspect of
the tea table at which she has been present, will not any
pains bestowed on its adornment be amply repaid ?
The Attempt. 367
The proceedings open with two verses of the Hundi'edth
Psalm, sung to the old familiar tune. Then a blessing is
asked by the minister of the church, and the grand opera¬
tion of the evening—the tea—is set on foot. A proces¬
sion of tea-pots and their bearers files into the room, and
the former are deposited at either end of each table, in
front of the ladies who have been requested to do the
honours of the tea-boards.
For a considerable time, the hands both of the tea-
makers and their assistants are fvdi, for the guests have
evidently come fully prepared to do justice to the good
cheer set before them.
At length, however, the demands of appetite seem to
be satisfied; the tea-tables are cleared, and a report of the
progress made by the Mothers' Meeting during the past
year is read aloud by the minister of St 's, who adds,
at the same time, some wise words of Christian counsel,
pleasantly spoken, and interspersed with amusing incident
and anecdote.
This is followed by " God Bless the Prince of
Wales," from the choir of the clnu'ch, accompanied
on the harmonium l>y a lady well fitted for the task.
The conclusion of this song is greeted by a roimd of
applause, actuated no less, let us hope, by the loyalty
befitting the occasion, than by admiration for the per¬
formance itself.
Then another speaker rises to address the company,—
a minister, well known beyond the limits of his own
church and country by his valuable contributions to our
treasury of sacred song. Serious and aff"ectionate words
fall from his lips, and are attentively listened to by the
elder guests. But, alas ! that I must record so flagrant
an instance of the precocious depravity of the Imman race.
Will it believed that the babies have, by some tacit under¬
standing, agreed to suppress the reverend gentleman?
The happy babies crow, the unhappy babies cry. A des¬
perate rush at the leadei's of the opposition is made by
some of the ladies, who, by dint of treating them to a
promenade across the room, succeed in restoring a certain
amount of quiet.
To this succeed a Christmas hymn, sung by the choir;
a short speech from a gentleman whose lively and genial
temperament makes him a favourite with all present; a
touching and plaintive song, feelingly rendered by a
young lady; and then what, to the younger members of
3G8 The Attempt.
the party at least, constitutes no doubt, after the tea, the
chief charm of the evening—the magic lantern.
At this point of the proceedings, the children, who have
been occupied in the adjoining apartment ■with tea, hymn-
singing, and addresses, are drafted into the large room to
share in the pleasure of the exhibition.
The first series of pictures shown is said to be for the
benefit of the parents, and consists of a number of photo¬
graphic views of Alpine scenery, admirably exhibited by
means of the oxy-hydrogen light.
The second series is for the chikh-en;—and well is
any trouble expended on the exhibition repaid by the
shouts and screams of merriment that greet the inevit¬
able lady whose bonnet gradually lengthens out to
dimensions surpassing the wildest nightmare of an over¬
wrought milliner, the never-failing old gardener whose
olfactory organ, intent on inhaling the sweet perfume
of a rose, is suddenly assailed by some winged tormentor
of dubious contour; and the familiar castigation of the
young rogue caught in Jlagrante delicto stealing the
jam, with many another tlmlling scene, now almost as
well known to the yearly spectators of this exhibition
as their A.B.C, but ever new and ever delightful to the
little folks for whom they are specially produced.
What though the necessary change of position in the
figures is not always effected with sufficient dexterity to
prevent the startling aj^parition of a three-armed mon¬
ster ! What though in this scene, a pipe is beheld to pass
through the jaws of a dog, with a disagreeable suggestion
of the phantom-world; whilst in that other, a group of
bees, each nearly as large as a well-to-do sparrow,
slide along the canvas in front of a hive, with a lazy and
melancholy motion, as different as can well be imagined
from that generally attributed to the little bvxsy bee,
so famed for "improving each shining hour!"
Who can look back, across perhaps no great stretch
of years, to the delight aroused in his or her own breast
by the sight of a moving picture, and not feel a glow
of sympathy with the shouts and hurrahs that greet
the comic slides of the magic lantern ?
At length the appearance of a herald, bearing in his
hand "a banner with the 'good' device" " Good Night,"
annotmces the close of this part of the proceedings.
The gas is raised again, and now a number of mysteri¬
ous-looking   paper  parcels   are   brought   forward,   and
The Attemjit. 369
distributed among the mothers by name. What may
these contain? Let us peep in fancy through their
wrappings, and we shall see in this young mother's parcel
a clean and bright-coloured quilt for the baby's cradle,
or a tastefully made " overall" fur the little toddler at
her side; in that busy housewife's, a serviceable working
apron; while yonder old lady's heart is being rejoiced by
one of more ornamental,'^if less useful, appearance, to
set off the afternoon gown, donned when the morning's
work is over, and the " A\'rapper" laid aside. Whilst
the minister is showing these gifts among the older
guests, the little ones are being supplied with a small
book and an orange each.
With this the evening's entertainment closer. A short
prayer is offered, and then after another outburst of loyal
feeling, finding expression in the National Anthem, the
company disperses, and all wend their way home, re¬
freshed in spirits, let us hope, by participation in that
friendly and pleasant season of intercourse between two
portions of the great human family, who ordinarily
dwell perhaps too far apart.
Meigeag Bheaq.
4 a nt t.
I.—MILTON.
" Fifteen pounds sterling—overmuch, he said ;
Sure loss to him—ten were enough.    And I—
I had my dreams once, dreamt of wealth and fame,
And listenuig multitudes,—a poet's name
With laurels round it, bright immortally—
Fool! fifteen pounds—and then o'er-paid, he said.
Fool—was I ? Let me tliink—these fifteen pounds
Buzz in my brain, and drown those other sounds
I used to hear—Hush! they come back once more
As waves of ocean surging to the shore
Rolling adown the years.    One name they bear—
Each wave breaks, singing "Milton"—Aye, but where
Will then be Milton ?—Silent and heedless he.
Cold, dead, regardless, as those rocks where beats the sea."
3 a
" ■^ DICEMBER  1872.
370 The Attempt.
II.—CHATTEKTON.
Speak not of laurels for the poet's tomb !
They are too freshly green, too gladly fair
To crown the dead.    Living—ye grudged to spare
One little leaf, he so had joyed to wear
Of all those wreaths now rotting on his tomb.
Men passed unheeding—aye, no human ears
Heard his heart break; none saw the hidden tears,
The undercurrent of a misery
Too strong to stem, too proud to ask for sympathy.
He saw them—all those garlands on the sod;
Pleaded—" one tiny leaflet now"—no echo woke;
Prayed—"a little love"—no answer spoke;
Said—"I can wait"—but waiting liis heart broke—
Earth's laurels are too late ; for him—-he is with God.
Jeanie Morison.
(TRANSLATED   FKOM   THB   GERMAN.)
The first three days of our exploring expedition, we—
myself and two friends, by name Gabriel and Roche,—
spent in traversing a coimtry which differed only slightly
from the one through which we had previously passed.
The prairies were usually indented with deep water-filled
hollows, but this sxnnmer's great drought had completely
dried up both hollows and brooks, so that we and our
horses had often been tortured for days together Avith an
unquenchable thirst. On this occasion, however, on the
evening of the third day, we were fortunate in finding
a clear fresh rivulet, and after partaking fi-eely of its
sparkling waters, we encamped on its banks for the
night, wrapped ourselves up in our coverlets, and finally
fell fast asleep, having first taken care to make a fire to
keep off Avolves.
At midnight, I was suddenly aAvakened by the rest¬
less movements of our horses. I fancied their rest¬
lessness was occasioned by wolves roaming about in
our neighbourhood, so I lay with my ear pressed to the
ground, listening intently  for anj- sounds indicative of
The Attempt. 371
their approach, but I heard nothing save the sighing of
tlie wind as it swept mournfully t)ver the withered grass.
The horses did not share my feelings of security, for they
continued to paw the ground impatiently, snorting in
evident dread; so once more I got up, and, looking
closely on all sides, I at length noticed a faint though
unmistakeable red hne across the horizon. A moment's
lull in the wind enabled me also to hear that dis¬
tant hollow growl which in these parts proclaims the
approach of a numberless herd of wild hoi'ned cattle.
Our horses grew desperate, and strove frantically to
break free from their tethei'S, and make their escape from
the impending danger. " Up," I shouted to my sleeping
companions. " Get up, Gabriel! Roche! make haste, my
friends, make haste ! Saddle your horses, and ride for
your lives ! The prairie is on fire, and the buffaloes are
being driven in our direction by the flames ! "
Both instantly started from their grassy beds; but not a
word was exchanged between us, for each felt tlie danger
that lay in his path, and knew that by haste alone could
an escape be effected, if it was not indeed already too late.
One moment, and our horses were saddled ; another, and
we were riding with the speed of lightning along the
prairie, the horses leading us according to their own
instincts, for we had thrown the reins over their necks.
Our flight had been so hasty and sudden, that all our
wraps, with the exception of Gabriel's, were forgotten
and left behind.
For a whole hour we thus rode on with unabated
speed, when suddenly we felt the ground behind us
shake, and soon the sounds of a far-off bellowing,
mingled with much howling, struck upon our ears.
The air, too, Avas dense and heavy, and flames of fire
were blown nearer and nearer to us by the wind.
Fugitive deer of all kinds shot past us like arrows;
stags leaped over the ground in company with wolves
and panthers. Herds of antelopes overtook us and
vanished again with the rapidity of a dream, and in their
stead appeared one poAverful buffalo.
Although our horses exerted every nerve, our extreme
anxiety to get on came over us with such passionate
vehemence, that it seemed, in our impatience, as though
we were literally standing still. The atmosphere grew
heavier, the heat greater, our ears were pierced with
keen, shrill shrieks, and once there was mingled witli
372 The Attempt.
them such a tenible yell of pain and despair, that our
horses stopped in tlieir mad career, trembling in every
limb. But the stoppage was only of a second's duration,
and we flew on again with redoubled energy.
An old stag passed quite close to us,—its strength
was gone, and in another moment it lay dead on
the ground. Presently, there came rolling towards
us with the rushing noise of a mighty whirlwind,
a multitude of immense and also of lesser animals.
Swiftly, swiftly they came along, buffaloes and wild
horses amongst the rest, and all jumbled together,
one huge, dark mass, each hindering and imped¬
ing the other. And this mass was distant from us
only one quarter of a mile; our horses were well nigh
exhausted, and we gave oiirselves up for lost; two
seconds more, and we should be trampled upon by
myriads of hoofs. And now Gabriel spoke, in the stern
commanding tone which showed so plainly that he had
long been accustomed to every kind of danger; even
now, he looked death in the face with calmness and forti¬
tude, as though scenes like this were his proper and
natural element.
" Down from your horses," he cried, " one of you
must hold them. Give me whatever can help to
raise a fire, and quickly, for not a moment is to be
lost! " Speaking thus, he kindled a piece of tinder on
the pan of his pistol, and was soon busily engaged in
making a large fire, piling upon it the materials which we
gave to him for the purpose, which consisted principally
of dried grass and other vegetable matter, besides a por¬
tion of our own clothing. Soon our labour was rewarded
by seeing the flames spring brightly forth.
The huge mass of animals pressed on, bellowing louder
than before; but what was our consternation on perceiving
that they made straight for our fire, without the least sign
of alarm or mistrust. Nor indeed was there much cause, for
the flames, which gave such good promise at first, sank
lower and lower, so that the beasts would, we felt assured,
spring over them with little, if any, fear. On, on they
came, that desperate living mass ; we could already dis¬
tinguish their horns, their feet, and their white foaming
mouths. I could see their Avild eyes glitter; they did not
swerve to one side, nor make any opening in tlieir ranks,
but, like messengers of death, drew nearer and nearer
still.    My brain reeled,   my eyes grew misty with the
The Attempt. 373
terror of the moment, and covering my face with my
hands, I crouched upon the ground, awaiting, as quietly
as I could, my inevitable fate.
Scarcely had I assumed this position, when I heard
an explosion, which was followed by a fresh bellow¬
ing, so loud and deafening as to leave no doubt that
the buffaloes were not more than twenty steps distant
from us. I expected every moment to be our last,
but death did not come. I heard only the roaring
as of a mighty wind, and felt the tremor of the
earth. Quickly I raised my head, and venturing to
look up, I beheld our extinguished fire once more burning.
Gabriel had thrown some brandy into the dying embers,
so that the explosion I had heard was occasioned by the
bursting of the leathern flask in which this liquor was
contained, and which Gabriel did not, he told us, take
time to open, but threw just as it was into the smoulder¬
ing heap ; and the bellowing that had succeeded this
act, was the death wail of those wretched animals,
which came into contact with the blue flames of our
merciless pillar of fire.
Before, behind, on all sides, we could see nothing
but the shaggy hides of these great monsters. Not
a gap was distinguishable in the huge mass, except
the narrow lines we ourselves had left open to pre¬
vent our sharing the fate which had befallen our
unhappy companions. In this dangerous situation we
were compelled for the present to remain. Our life
hung upon the chance of the animals not closing up
this narrow line. Providence kept watch over us, and,
after what seemed to me a dreary time of fearful suspense,
the mass became thinner and thinner, till at length we
found around us only a few weak, faint animals, and those
feebly trotted on after their comrades.
This danger then was fortunately over, but there was
still another equally great to be encountered. As we
watched the flames gradually but surely closing in about
us, and rendering our little hiding-place no longer one of
safety, we became too fully aware of the fact that the
great prairie behind us was one sheet of fire. Once more
we sprang into our saddles, and the horses, which had
now recovered their breathing powers, and were like¬
wise inspired with this new fear, bore us, with bound¬
ing steps, in the rear of the buffaloes. Another terrible
moment I    The raging sea of fire, with its hissing waves.
374 The Attempt.
as it rolled swiftly onwards aided not a little by the keen
morning breeze, contrasted strangely with the gentle
glimmer of early dawn. Had our first escape from the
danger of being trodden to death by those aAvful beasts
not been attended with so marvellous a success, we should
now, in all probability, have yielded to despair, and relin¬
quished at once this seemingly useless struggle for life.
But the thought of oui' former success urged us on. We
galloped courageously onwards, up hills and down
slopes. The fire lay dense behind us, and was creeping
to our side like a wily snake. We became aware of this
as we rested once in order to allow the vast herd to lead
the way across a deep, wide ravine which we had reached,
and down whose declivity the animals fell headlong in
vast numbers, in their unbounded haste to leap over.
What were we to do ? The flames seemed determined not
to lose their prey, but came on more rapidly than before ;
their fiery tongues rising high above our heads, nearly
sufFocating us with their hot and tawny breath.
Instantly we made up om minds as to the right step to
take. Yon abyss must either save us or become our grave.
Speed was life. Resolved to suff'er together, whatever
might betide, we drew closer to each other, and goading
our horses on \At\\ the spur, plunged down the yawniug
chasm, and reached the bottom,—a depth of some hundred
feet ffom the groimd on which we had first been standing,
—without any harm whatever, beyond the shock necessarily
produced by such a sudden precipitation. In a straiiger
or more awful manner was no man's, life ever saved, and
we hastened to thank Heaven who had thus so merci¬
fully preserved us yet a second time. We heard
overhead the hissing and crackling of the flames ;
and increasing daylight showed them raging by the
sides of the precipices,—now blazing upwards, now down-
■\vards, as though longing to spring across the space,
and destroy all hving things in the western prairie also.
It was not without considerable difficulty that we
cleared a portion of the ground for our own and our
horses' use, from amongst the poor animals which had
been killed in their downward leap, and now lay thick
under our feet; but after a time we accomplished the
work satisfactorily, and could then look around us with
pleasure. It was evident that our horses need not lack
either drink or grass, for the brook was only two feet
beneath us, and its clear refreshing water swept gently
The Attempt. 375
through the ravine, whilst its verdure-clad banks offered
tempting pasturage. But fear and exhaustion held, for
the present, so complete a check on the poor creatures, as
to prevent hunger being felt, apparently even for an
instant. They made several efforts to rise, but in vain ;
and it was with a look of great pain that they became
aware of their utter helplessness, and sank back into their
former recumbent position from sheer weakness.
Multitudes of beasts were still speeding on, on to a far
distant part of the prairie,—so it seemed to us ; and as
the trembling of the ground had not yet subsided, we
concluded that the fugitives were making their way to a
still more distant and safer place of abode. And truly,
their fear was not without good cause. The wind blew
eo strongly, as to force the dreaded fiery element across
the ravine in which we were located, to the other tiide,
and there it continued its devastating work. How sincere
and heartfelt were our thanks to the Almighty for our
miraculous escape ! And now, safe from any immediate
danger, we kindled a fire and prepared a meal for our¬
selves, consisting of one of the young buffaloes lying' at
our feet.
Two days we remained in this asylum, in order that
we might yet be thoroughly rested, and recruit the
strength of our poor horses. On the second day, we
heard loud and frequent peals of thunder, so knew that
a storm was raging, and guessed that the heavy torrents
of rain would soon quench the fire. Our expectation
proved correct: for on the morning of the third day of
our captivity in the earth's bosom, we could proceed on
our journey with feelings of security and ease, the atmos¬
phere being once more as clear and free from clouds of
smoke, as on the first morning of our proposed exploring
expedition.
We followed the brook downwards for a few miles,
but its beauties were, for the present, spoiled by the
ugly sight of the dead bodies of the numerous animals
which strewed its banks, and dyed with blood its other¬
wise crystal water. Indeed, it was with considerable
difiiculty that we fought our way along the wind¬
ing paths on which they lay so thickly ; and it was
only by means of much leaping and pushing, that we
managed to get along at all, and we deemed ourselves
fortunate in gaining by mid-day a firm foothold on the
plnin of the prairie.    But what a comfortless sight!    As
376 1 he Attempt.
far as the naked eye could reach, nothing was visible
save bare and scorched earth. Not a bush had the ter¬
rible flames spared, whilst charred bodies of red deer and
buffaloes lay strewn by thousands all around.
Towards eveningwe passed a fine broad stream, and here
the scene changed from one of desolation to one of loveliness
and plenty; for the further progress of the fiery monster
had here received a sudden check from the strong cur¬
rent of the water, and left unscathed a large and splendid
prairie, clad in cool luxuriant verdure, extending far and
wide, studded with clover and wild roses, alternated here
and there by a plum tree with its pretty white blossoms
standing out in bold relief. Animals of all kinds lay
stretched on the cool green sward, resting their weary
limbs after their late panic-stricken flight, and lulling
themselves to sleep with the gentle lick, so characteristic
of the quadruped. Some shghtly raised their heads as
we drew near, but the greater portion of them contented
themselves with lazily opening their sleepy eyes.
The sight was peaceful beyond all description, and invol¬
untarily reminded one of the engraving, found in very old
Bibles, representing the creation. Wolves and panthers
had their abode only a few yards from a small herd of
antelopes ; buffaloes, bears, and horses lay cradled to¬
gether. But alas, we knew too well the reason of these
creatures lying so happily, but unnaturally together; we
knew they had fallen on these spots from exhaustion, not
from pleasure, and were so weak as to be utterly unable
to change their position one iota. We came presently to
a jaguar; lying just below him was a calf. Upon our ap¬
proach the savage brute attempted to rise and pounce
upon us, but his strength Avas not equal to his will. He
therefore contented himself with bending his head on his
body so as to form a complete chcle, hiding his head on
his breast with his heavy paw, and uttering a prolonged
and distant yell, which had in it a compound of both
vexation and rage.
Had we had powder to waste, we would have
delivered the graminivorous animals fi'om many of
their carnivorous neighbours. But we had entered
these their lodgings like robbers, without either respect
or leave, and every charge of powder wasted would
make our situation worse in case of a conflict. Our
horses required rest, so we unsaddled them, and left
them to roam about where and how they chose.     For
The Attempt. 377
ourselves, we had still untouched a good portion of
our yesterday's calf, and we were glad, for we could
not bear the idea of destroying any of tlie poor, frail
little creatm-es about us.
Close by our side lay a noble stag, in whoSe favour
I was immediately prepossessed. The poor creature
was making several futile efforts to reach a clump
of clover which lay temptingly close at hand, and
its dry, parched tongue plainly showed how much it
stood in need of water. I plucked a couple of hand-
fuls of the clover, and offered it to eat, but inclination
was evidently stronger than appetite. A little pond
was close by, so I took my cup, filled it with the pure
liquid, and gently moistened the stag's lips, placing
the rest of the water so that it could easily di-ink. I shall
not readily forget the expressive look that came into its
soft grey eyes as I thus ministered to its comfort.
My companions, too, became by degrees so greatly inte¬
rested in the sufferings of the poor beasts, that they Avere
induced to take as many hares as they could under their
protection, and get water for them out of the pond also,
so that they soon recovered their strength, and made
haste to flee before the wolves should revive and catch
them. When I had brought my stag its second cupful of
water, the grateful animal licked my hand, and tried to
stand up and follow me, but it had not yet sufficient
strength, and could only follow my retreating figm-e with
its eyes, in which was such an expression of thanks, as
spoke more distinctly than whole volumes of written
words could have done ; at least /thought so,—I could per¬
fectly read their meaning. I now began to think of seek¬
ing for my friends, wlio had been away from me for some
time, when they suddenly made their appearance,—knives,
tomahawks, and clothes all besmeared with blood. They
had undertaken a crusade against the wolves, and killed
so many that they were really fatigued, and their arms
refused to do any more work for a time.
Perhaps the reader may not understand the absolute
hatred which a prairie traveller entertains for wolves.
Suffice it to say, that these beasts of prey were so odious,
as to induce us to encamp amongst them for the night,
with the sole purpose of destroying as many of them as
possible, By reason of their extreme weakness, there was
no danger to be apprehended in such an undertaking; so,
placing our pistols securely about us, in case a panther or
^   ^ DECIMBEK 1872.
378 The Attempt.
a bear should attack us suddenly and unawares, we set
out to our enemies' abodes, disturbing a few jaguars by
the way, whom we thought it not prudent to stay to
attack, so quietly passed them by, and presently found
enough occupation amongst a congregated herd of wolves.
.How many of these abominable animals we slew, I should
not dare to state ; but we did not leave them, I know,
until our hands were weak and tired, and our tomahawks
blunt and useless. The exertion we had undergone
shai'pened our appetites, so that we thoroughly enjoyed
our supper, and lay down to rest with the happy con¬
sciousness of having done a good day's work. But rest,
hoAvever requisite and ■«^ell earned, we were doomed not
to enjoy that night, for hardly had we closed our eyes,
when a heavy shower of rain came down upon us, and in
less than five minutes we were soaked to the skin. At
length the warm rays of the early morning sun dispersed
the gloom and the dark lowering clouds, and we joyfully
rose to prepare for ourselves a good and substantial meal,
with which to warm ourselves a little, and do away with
any bad effects of our wetting, which might, in all likelihood,
ensue. We foimd that many of the wild beasts, having been
revived by the shower, had already gone away, but others
still lay stretched on the turf, doubtless only too willing
to follow their companions' example, if their strength
were sufficient for the purpose. Having seen to our
horses' wants and comfort, we then proceeded on our
homeward journey, fully satisfied with the resiilt of our
little expedition; and eight days later we arrived at our
settlement safe and well.
Madge.
A Prize is offered for the best prose article appearing in
the Febx-uary number of The Attempt. Articles for com¬
petition must bo sent to the Editor on or before the 1st
of January.
