THE   ATTEMPT
A LITERARY  MAGAZINE
CONDUCTED BY THE MEMBERS  OP THE
LADI'ES' EDINBURGH LITERARY SOCIETY.
VOLUME    IX.
'AUSPIC lUM   MELIORIS   ^VI."
PRINTED FOR THE LADIES' EDINBURGH LITERARY SOCIETY
BY
COLSTON   &   SON,   EDINBURGH.
MDCOOLXXIU.
CONTENTS.
' After Life's Fitful Fever, He Sleeps Well," by R.,
At Home and Far Away, by Melensa,
Beatrice, by E. J, O.,       .
Brought Back to Earth, by Lutea Reseda,
Burns and Byron, by Elfie,
Comparative Merits of Mental and Natural Philosophy,
by Elise,     .....
Consecrated Knight, The, by Yolande,   .
Despair and Faith, by Marty n Hay,
Dissolving Views in Cheshire, by Elfie,    .
Early Experiences of an Author, by Martyn Hay,
Equal, by Enna,   .....
Exhibition of  the Royal  Scottish'^'Academy for 1873,
M. E. T., 
From Eve to Sunrise, by Melensa,
Funeral Address on Mrs Mary Somerville, by Hilda,
Gareth and Lynette, by Grace,
Ghosts!, by Hermione,      ....
Glencora, by Oraicron,     ....
Harbour Bar, The, by R.,
Use, The, by Meigeag Bheag,
In Hiding after Culloden, by Mas Alta,  .
■■' In the Evening it is cut Down," by Naomi S. Smith,
20.
On the.
PAGK
60
340
54, 83
150
33
152
346
287
207
124
206
The, by
90, 106
262
225
1
348
236
9
18
89
115
CONTENTS.
IV
PAGE
245
183
293
46
65
" Larger Hope, The," by Frucara,
Lines Written for a Game, by E. H. S.,    .
MacdufTs Cave, by Meigeag Bheag,
Making of the Maker, The, by Lutea Reseda,
Meeting of the Council of Flies, Report of a, by Aliqua,
Mermaid's Fountain, The, by E. J. O., 183, 217, 246, 279, 310, 830, 353
" Middlemarch," A Letter on, by X. H., . . .129
Milla Forres, a Tale of the Forty-Five, by Jeanie Morison,
10, 60, 74, 97, 144, 161, 193, 237, 264, 296, 321, 367
Mother Eve, by R., . . . . .329
" My soul desired the first ripe fruit," by Naomi S. Smith, 307
Notes on some Pictures in the Royal Academy, by Enna, .     257
Our Debates,        . . . . • 3p'^
Our Library Table, . . . . . 96, 351
Painting and other Fine Arts, A Few Words about, by Elise, 174
Poet's Apology, A, by Lutea Reseda,       ....     255
Princess Elizabeth, The, by Yolande,       . . . .217
Review of the Past Year, A, by Elfie,     . . . .25
Serenade, by Melensa,       ......        73
Sketch ofthe Sewing-Rooin, A, by F. C. S.,       . . .289
Some Defects in Education, by Noli-me-tange^e, . .     341
Something about Everything, by Elsie Strivelyne, . .        41
Spring, by Omicron, ......      142
Subjects of Debate, &c., .....        192
" They were troubled, saying, It is a Spirit," by R.,        • .      278
Touch that Heals, The, by Frucara, . . . .95
Walk in the Town of a Woman from the Country, A, by X. II.,       120
When two that love are Parted, by Veronica, '   . . .      350
INDEX TO   CONTRIBUTORS'
NOM S    DE    PLUME.
 ▼ 
PAGE
Aliqua,
 65
E. H. S.,  .
 183
E. J. 0.,   .
20, 54, 83, 183, 217, 246, 279, 310, 330, 353
Elfie,
                  25,33,207,
Elise,
154, 174
Elsie Strivelyne,
41
Enna,
206,257
F. C. S.,   .
 289
Frucara,
.   '        .           .           .           .           .           95, 245
Grace,
 1
Hermione,
 348
Hilda,
.      225
Jeanie Morison,
10, 60, 74, 97, 144, 161,193, 237, 264, 296, 321, 367
Lutea Reseda,
    46, 150, 255,
Martyn Hay,
 124, 287
Mas Alta, .
 89
Meigeag Bheag,
 18, 293
Melensa,
 73, 262, 340
M. E. T.,  .
 90, 106
Naomi S. Smith,
 115,307
Noli-me tangere,
 341
Omicron,   .
. 142, 236, 365
R.,
9, 60, 278, 329
Veronica,   .
.      350
X. H.
120, 129
Yolande,   ■
....           217, 346
^
THE   ATTEMPT.
(iaii^th  and lirtuttc.
The new volume which the Laureate has given to the
world contains two poems, the second of which. The
Last Tournament, was first published some months ago
in the pages of a magazine. It is therefore to Gareth
and Lynette, the first of the two Idylls, and that which
gives its name to the book, that we turn with the greatest
interest, as being entirely new to us.
The place of this Idyll in Mr Tennyson's great Arthurian
epic, is, he informs us, immediately after The Coming of
Arthur. The story is tlierefore taken from the beginning
of the history of the Round Table, and the scene is laid in
theearly morning of King Arthur's greatness, when the sun
that was to set so darkly and sadly was still mounting up
and brightening towards its noon-day splendour.
Arthur had come to his kingly place in the strange
mysterious way described in the previous poem, and was
gradually convincing or conquering his opponents, and
proving his right to kingly power by kingly deeds,
driving back the heathen from the borders, punishing
the wrong-doers, and righting the oppressed within the
land—striving with all his might to found for his people a
kingdom of truth, and justice, and purity, in wJiicli he
shoiild rule only as the servant and representative of
" the deathless King, who died for men." And he was
drawing to himself by an irresistible attraction, all the
true and noble hearts in his kingdom, and forming them
into " that fellowship of goodliest knights," who were to
be instruments along with him in his great work,—men
" sworn to vows
Of utter hardihood, utter gentleness,
And, lo\dng, utter faithfulness in love,
And uttermost obedience to the king."
JANCAKT 1873. A.
The Attempt.
So Arthur himself describes his knights to   the  young
hero of the idyll, Gareth, who was longing to join himself
to that goodly fellowship.
In the story of Gareth we have what we may call
one specimen given us out of many of the working
of that influence wliich Arthur exercised in the early
times of his reign, when, by a mighty spell, he
drew all noble young souls to himself, with a longing to
serve him, and follow him, and become like him, and
Btrive along with him for the right and against the wrong.
Gareth is a king's son,
" The last tall son of Lot and Bellicent,
And tallest"—
kept inactive at home, when his brothers have gone to
Arthur's court, by his mother's fond and fearful love for
her youngest child, but longing to leave the nest—the
cage, as it seemed to his eager spirit,
" to sweep
In ever-highering eagle-circles up
To the great sun of glory, and thence swoop
Down upon all tilings base, and dash them dead,
A knight of Arthur, working out his wiU
To cleanse the world."
Bellicent at last yields to her son's prayers, but imder
one condition, by fulfilling which he is to prove his
obedience and his love to her, and also to convince her
that his wish is no passing boyish fancy.   She tells him—
" Thou shalt go disguised to Arthur's hall,
And hire thyself to serve for meats and drinks
Among the scullions and the kitchen-knaves,
And those that hand the dish across the bar.
Nor slialt thou tell thy name to any one.
And thou shalt serve a twelvemonth and a day."
Bellicent's thought was that " her own true Gareth was
too princely-proud " so to degrade himself, and that thus
she might keep her boy at home with her after all. But
Gareth cheerfully accepted the condition, and, with two
companions, " that still had tended on him from his birth,"
left his mother's house, and set forth on his way to
Arthur's court at Camelot.
That magic-buUt city of enchantment sometimes shone
before them in the morning sun, and sometimes seemed to
vanish altogether; and when they reached the great gate,
wrought by Merlin's art with sculptures of weird and
wondrous beauty that seemed to move as they looked
on them, they met an aged bard, who warned them of the
The Attempt.
glamour that would come over them if once they set foot
within the city. His two companions are afraid, but
Gareth, doubting only because of the " one white lie " to
which his promise to his mother compelled him, yet pur¬
posing to make good amends for that by his after deeds,
presses cheerfully and boldly on through the streets of the
city towards Arthur's hall.
" And ever and anon a knight would pass
Outward, or inward to the hall : his arms
Clashed ; and the sound was good to Gareth's ear.
And out of bower and casement shyly glanced
Eyes of pure women, wholesome stars of love ;
AJid all about a healthful people stept
As in the presence of a gracious king."
Such was the royal city in the fresh bright morning of
Arthur's reign.
Entering the great hall, Gareth hears a voice, and sees
" the splendour of the presence of the King,
Throned, and delivering doom."
When other suppliants have been heard, and have received
justice, Gareth comes forward, and makes his request to
be allowed to serve in the royal kitchen for a year and a
day. It is granted, and he is handed over to the charge
of Sir Kay the seneschal, who is to be his master.
" A goodly youth, and a goodlier boon,"
the king says of him, in granting his request, and Lancelot,
standing by, and observing all keenly, tells Sir Kay there
is some mystery, for this is surely a noble youth; but Sir
Kay, " the most ungentle knight in Arthur's hall," takes
no heed, and treats his new " kitchen-knave" roughly
and harshly. But Gareth does all liis menial tasks well
and cheerfully and with a noble grace, as becomes a
king's son, and wins the hearts of all his companions.
His time of servitude, however, does not last long, for
when a month has passed, Bellicent relents, and lets
Arthur know the truth; and so Gareth is again brought
face to face with the king, and seeks admittance into the
fellowship of his knights. This is granted him, and
Arthur also consents that he shall have the first quest,
and that till he shall have shown his powers on that
quest, and so made a name for himself, his name shall be
concealed, known only to the king, and to his "noblest
brother and truest man" Lancelot.
The quest comes that same day. Lynette, a beautiful and
high-born damsel, comes seeking aid for her sister Lyonors,
Tlie Attempt.
kept a prisoner in her castle by four lawless knights, in order
to compel her to marry the greatest of them, who but
delays carrying out his purpose by force till Lancelot
shall be sent to fight with him as Lady Lyonors'
champion, whom he trusts to overthrow, and so wed the
fair lady with the greater glory. Lynette, therefore, asks
that Lancelot may be sent. But Gareth, standing by and
hearing, claims this quest according to promise, calling
himself the king's " kitchen-knave, and mighty through
his meats and drinks."
He gets the boon he craves, and is appointed to the
quest, but the maidenis astonished and disgusted that
a scullion should be given her to do a knight's work.
" Wherefore did the king
Scorn me, for, were Sir Lancelot lackt, at least
He might have yielded to me one of those,
Who tilt for lady's love and glory here,
Rather than—O sweet heaven—O fie upon him—
His kitchen-knave.
To whom Sir Gareth drew,
(And there were none but few goodlier than he)
Shming in arms, ' Damsel, the quest is mine.
Lead, and I follow.' "
So the pair journeyed on,—the lady flying before the
knight in disgust while she could, and flouting him in
disdainful anger when she was forced to endure his com¬
pany, until, after some adventures by the way, they came
to the place of first trial, where the first" lawless warrior,"
who called himself Morning Star, paced before "a silk
pavilion gay with gold," paced on the farther side of
a bridge which spanned the full and narrow stream.
Gareth fights and overcomes this warrior, and he and
the damsel go on to meet the second, and soon come
upon him.
"So when they touched the second river-loop.
Huge on a huge red horse, and all in mail
Burnished to blinding, shone the Noon-Day Sim,
Beyond a raging shallow."
Him Garetli also overcame, for after they had met mid¬
stream, and had struck four strokes,
" as the Sun
Heaved up a murderous arm to strike the fifth.
The hoof of his horse slipt in the stream, the stream
Descended, and the Sun waa washed away."
Then they went on to the third trial.    It soon came,—
The Attempt.
" For there, beyond a bridge of triple bow,
All in a rose-red from the west, and all
Naked it seemed, and glowing in the broad
Deep-dimpled current underneath, the knight
That named himself the Star of Evening, stood.
The third combat is the fiercest.    The knight's armour of
hardened skin turned Gareth's sword,
" tin at length Sir Gareth's brand
Clash'd his, and brake it utterly to the hilt."
The combatants closed in fearful wrestle ; but at length
Gareth, straining to his uttermost,
" Cast, and so hurl'd him headlong o'er the bridge
Down to the river, sink or swim."
Then came the last trial, the most terrible of all.    For
just before the castle of Lady Lyonors was set
" A huge pavilion like a mountain peak,
Black, with black banner, and a long black horn
Beside it hanging."
From it issued,
" High on a night-black horse, in night-black arms.
With white breast-bone and barren ribs of Death,"
a silent monster, said to have the strength of ten men.
With him Gareth closed in battle shock. Death was cast
to the ground, and slowly rose.
" But with one stroke Sir Gareth split the skull.
Then with a stronger buffet he clove the helm
As thoroughly as the skull ; and out from this
Issued the bright face of a blooming boy.
Fresh as a flower new born, and crying, ' Knight
Slay me not : my three brethren bad me do it.
They never dream'd the passes could be past.' "
So Gareth won the quest,—
'• And he that told the tale in olden times
Says that Sir Gareth wedded Lyonors,
But he, that told it later, says Lynette."
Such is the story.
I do not think that Mr Tennyson has been so suc¬
cessful in this delineation of the early times of Arthur's
reign, as he is in some of the scenc^s taken from the days
of mistrust and gloom that marked its close. The Idyll,
of course, suffers from being read out of its proper place
in the series, for we cannot exclude from our minds the
thought of the sin, and sorrow, and failure, which the poet
has long since brought before us with such power, and
The A ttempt.
which, therefore, we must always feel overshadowing the
fairest and brightest days of the Round Table. But,
even allowing for this, I still think that in this Idyll we
miss " the wild freshness of morning,"—the free, spon¬
taneous spring and play of thought, and aspiration, and
action; the unlimited hopefulness and sense of life that
belongs to the fresh early growth of a man or of a nation.
There is something of it in the incidents of the poem,
which are probably due to the old chronicles,—there is a
boyish energy and fulness of life, a love of rough jokes
and fanciful extravagances, which, however, do not find
themselves easily expressed in Mr Tennyson's refined and
thoughtful, but rather monotonous style; and the result is
an artificiality in the tone of this Idyll, which is hardly to
be found in any of the others.
This   artificiality  extends  to  the   allegorical  side   of
the poem.    All the Idylls are  more or  less  allegorical,
for  as  we   see plainly  in   that  one,—The   Holy   Grail
—which    is    especially    full   of   strange   mystic   sym¬
bolism   and   significance,   the   whole   story   of  Arthur
and  his  followers has for the poet a deeply allegorical
meaning.    But  this Idyll  alone, instead  of ha-sang the
mystical  meaning  woven  in  with  its  story  by  subtle
touches, so as to reveal itself only to those who look for
it,   gives us an undisguised  parable,—a very beautiful
parable, it is true, but less beautiful, less  poetical, and
less impressive, from its very plainness and deliberateness.
The parable of " The war  of time against the soul  of
man " has been presented to us by Mr Tennyson in nobler
form and with fuller meaning, in the story of his great
hero himself, whose morning victories were easily won;
whose noon-day strife was hot and hard; the struggles of
his life's evening sore, perilous, and well-nigh overwhelm¬
ing ; whose glorious day sank at last in seemingly fatal
and disastrous defeat, which was really but the entrance
" into an isle of rest, whence in higher glory he should
return again."
We may infer from the hint at the close, that the love—
story which runs through the Idyll is the poet's own con¬
ception, by introducing which he adds a new beauty to
the old story of adventure and success; bringing out in
his way of treating it the modern thoughts about love,
as a gradual draA\dng together and union of minds and
hearts, in the place of the simpler and more outward
notion of the old chronicle, in which bravery and prowess
The Attempt.
are rewarded by the winning of a rich and beautiful bride.
This love-story is the best thing in the poem. To it
belongs the lovely song, so often quoted that it is needless
to repeat it again, beginning—
" 0 morning star, that shinest in the blue,"
richly musical in itself, but gaining great additional
beauty from its setting, making, as the successive verses
are sung by Lynette, an unconscious chorus to the story
of the change of her feeling for Gareth—the vanishing of
contempt, the slow uprising of love.
The characters of Gareth and Lynette are not unlike
those of Pelleas and Ettarre; the same characters,
one might say, fallen on good days instead of on
evil—formed, when all around served to train them
to truth and nobleness, instead of to debase and degrade
them. Gareth has, like Pelleas when he first comes
before us, an implicit trust in man's honour and woman's
truth, and a perfect devotion to the lady whom he
serves, in spite of difficulty and scorn, which yet does
not descend into that servile submissiveness which lowers
the character of Pelleas; for Gareth, when most scorned
and flouted, keeps the same perfect knightly courtesy,
neither resenting Lynette's contempt, nor yet so sub¬
mitting to it as to lose his own self-respect.
In Lynette we see a frank child-like consciousness of her
owTi charms, which, in her happier story, is never soured
into the heartless vanity of Etarre; an impatience, a readi¬
ness to despise at the fii'st glance without looking below the
surface, a carelessness of another's feelings, which, in a
maiden growing up in an evil time, when all the air was
filled with subtle poison, and faith and truth were almost
unknown, and the highest and noblest outward seeming
concealed or were believed to conceal the basest crimes,
might have hardened into scornful pride and cruelty, and
ended by blighting all better things and changing the
whole character into one of treacherous wickedness, but
which, in Lynette, living in an atmosphere of generous
thought and noble endeavour, knowing of evil only in the
form of open violence, were changed by the true courtesy
and nobility of her knight into frank admiration for his
greatness, then into reverence and true-hearted love.
The melody of the poem all clings about its love-
story, for the versification is, on the whole, less flowing
and sweet than Mr Tennyson's usually is, and there are
8 The Attempt.
Bome lines, especially near the beginning, of quite
unmanageable awkwardness ; but, as the poem goes on,
and relates the adventures of the knight and the maiden,
it grows sweeter and more musical, and there are some
passages that have all the old beauty of sound answering
to sense which we have learned to expect in Mr Tennyson's
verse.
On the whole, however, I cannot think that this last
poem will add greatly to the Laureate's fame, though
when set in its proper place in his Arthurian epic, it may
have its part in bringing out the story and the meaning
of the whole.
The other Idyll in the volume. The Last Tournament, is
a much more powerful and siistained effort, more worthy
of Mr Tennyson's genius. It belongs, like Pelleas and
Ettarre, to the last part of the Arthm-ian epic, but it is
not, like that poem, simply repulsive and horrible. The
story of Tristram, Isolt, and Mark, is a sort of shadow
of the story of Lancelot, Guinevere, and Arthur, repeated
in far lower natures, and unredeemed by any touch
of penitence or self-devotion, and it stands as a sort of
typical instance of the way in which the queen's great
sin spread a poison around which was eating out
the heart of the nation. But it is only, after all, an
episode in the poem, the main interest of which lies
not at Tintagil, but at Camelot, not in the guilty
love of Tristram and Isolt, but in the whole picture of the
beginning of the end. The vague mistrust that haunts
the king—he dreams not yet of the worst, but he can¬
not but observe
" The foot that loiters, bidden go,—the glance
That only seems half-loyal to command ;"
and he questions whether it may be that the realm
which he has upreared, is falling " back into the beast, to
be no more; " then all these vague suspicions, and others
more dreadful still, spoken out to the king, in coarse foul
words, by the robber chief, whom he, still constant to his
vows and his duty, goes forth to punish and destroy; the
last toin-nament itself, where Lancelot sits as mnjjire,
weary and sad, where the laws of cliivalry are broken,
where many knights turn cravenly from the contest, and
Lancelot gives the prize with listless scorn to one who
fought for it for the sake of a guilty love, and all feel that
the old faith and the old courtesy are gone, and "the
The Attempt.
glory of the Bound Table" is no more ; these, joined
with countless smaller delicate touches, combine to make
up the dark picture of shame, disappointment, and failure.
Nature herself feels the gloom, and instead of the bright
spring morning on which Gareth entered Camelot, we
have the stormy autumn afternoon, whose rain drenches
the white robes half-unwillingly worn in honour of the
Dead Innocence.
This poem, with its one idea, so firmly held and so
powerfully worked out, forms a fitting prelude to the two
last and greatest of the Idylls, which tell of the repen¬
tance of the guilty Queen, and the " passing of Arthur "
into the mysterious unknown land from whence he came.
Grace.
Her sails are tattered, her sails are brown,
Tempest driven is she;
She hath wandered up, she hath wandered down.
Tossed on the cruel sea.
Spent she comes to the harbour mouth—
Spent as the swallows are
When they reach the gate of the golden south—
But what of the harbour bar ?
Where hast hailed from, thou shattered bark.
Tossed on the cruel sea?
From waters so fierce, from waters so dark,
Methought no darker could be.
But dark is the sea, and dark is the sky,
Where the tempests brooding are,
And never saw I waters so high
As those on the harbour bar.
Whither art bound for, this dreary night,
Out on the cruel sea ?
The City of Gold, with its lamps alight,
Is the haven where I would be.
I have fought with the waves, I have fought with the foam,
I have wandered afar, afar;
Oh, God ! if I perish so near to home,
Lost at the harbour bar I
JANBAEY 1873, B
10 The Attempt.
Ships are lost at the harbour bar,
Who have weathered the cruel sea ;
Ships are lost who have sailed from far,
Storm-tossed and spent hke thee.
There is but One who can face the sea
Where those white breakers are;
Hast a pilot on board with thee,
Can weather the harbour bar ?
Her sails are tattered, her sails are brown,
A tempest-tossed bark is she,
But the lamps are lit in the Golden Town,
And the winds are hushed on the sea.
The storms that stayed her, the adverse tides,
They all forgotten are ;
Into the harbour safe she rides,
Over the harbour bar. R.
A TALE   OF   FORTY-FIVK
" Altius ibunt qui ad summa nitunter."
CHAPTER   I.
MILLA FOERES  AND  ITS  tNHABITANTS.
The sun was setting over the Aberdeenshire hills on
a glorious evening in autumn, throwing long shadows up
the glens, and deepening the purple on the heather. The
air was very still, so stUl that the long boughs of the birch
trees scarcely stirred as they drooped over the little
mountain burn that brawled down the glen.
On a mossy granite boulder, which some ancient hurri¬
cane had hurled down from the mountain above, and
deposited at the burn's edge, and over which now grew a
gigantic birch tree, a young girl was sitting, lazily dang¬
ling the broad straw hat, which she had removed for the
Bake of the sweet evening air, by its strings over the burn.
Judging by her appearance, the girl might have numbered
about nineteen summers. She was shght and very fair,
with masses  of clustering  chesnut hair, and a pair of
The Attempt. 11
bright laughing eyes that matched her hair in colour.
The open sleeves of her simple white dress showed her
rounded young arms, and opening in front, gave a glimpse
of a snow-white throat and neck, where the Forbes tartan
plaid, in which she had muffled herself, had fallen apart.
She is evidently waiting for some one, for at every sound
she looks up quickly, and strains her eyes to catch a
glimpse of the high road, which runs along the foot of the
glen. By and by unmistakeably wheels are heard. Im¬
mediately she mounts the granite boulder where she has
been sitting, and begins waving her handkerchief towards
the cari'iage, which is seen rapidly approaching down the
road. The signal is answered from the carriage. Bound¬
ing from the rock with the spring of a wild deer, she
hastens down the glen, and tlirough a little wicket gate,
which leads to the back entrance of an old-fashioned High¬
land country house, buried amongst hills and trees. She
arrives, breathless, at the front door just as the carriage
enters the avenue, and stands waiting on the door step,
with glowing cheeks and sparkling eyes, till it drives up
to the door, when she springs on the carriage step, and
half devours its inmate with kisses before she has time to
alight. Oscar, the big Newfoundland watch-dog, seems
to share in her joy, for before the new arrival has got up
the door steps, his big paws are on her shoulders, and his
tongue is in alarming proximity to her face, for which
unseemly demonstrations he meets with only the laughing
reproof,—" Down, down, Oscar. Poor old fellow, are you
glad to see me home again % " to which he replies by
vigorous wags of his huge bushy tail, and renewed gam¬
bols of an equally alarming nature. Just inside the door
stands the old family /acto^^iw,—clanswoman, retainer,
nurse, housekeeper, general counsellor, all that is implied
in the now, alas, almost extinct species of family servant;
less servant than humble friend, whose fidelity was per¬
fect in its very humility, whose service was a part of her
religion, and who would as soon have dreamt of the possi¬
bility of the termination of her duty to the family, as of
the possibility of the termination of her duty to her
Master in heaven.
" Well, Elspet," said the new comer, taking the old
woman kindly by the hand, " how has all been with you
since I went away ? "
"Deed, Miss Barbara, I'm fixin to see ye back agaii..
Milla Forres is no like itsel' when yere back's turned; iki
12 The Attempt.
but what Miss Nancy's a braw hoose-keeper, but ye canna
pit an auld heed on young shou'ders ye ken."
" Now, Elspet, that's too bad," laughed our young friend
of the burn side, " it's not fair to tell tales of me to Bar¬
bara that way, when she's just arrived too ; and I'm sure
I came down to that horrid old kitchen of yours every
day nearly, and told you when to kill the white cock, and
what to do with the turkey's eggs, and this is all the
reward I get!"
" Ou aye. Miss Nancy, saving and excepting the day
Maister Macdonald cam', an' ye went out wi' him to fish
i' the Eagig, an' there was naething i' the hoos, or i' the
farm yard either, but the singed sheep's heed that was
ower frae the day afore, an' the braw English leddy frae
the castle comin' to her denner; and the day the pedlar
gaed by, and ye couft twa new breast knots, an' ye had
nae money to pay for the peats; and the day—''
" Hush, hush, Elspet," said the girl, laughing, and hold¬
ing her hand before the old woman's mouth, "you mustn't
tell Barbara all my delinquencies; besides, ye're forgetting
the bonny new mutch I bought, besides the breast knots,
with the money for the peats."
" Na, I'se no forgetting. Miss Nancy, it'll be lang or I
forget it," said the old woman, looking fondly at her
nurseling, "an' as I was saying, its ill pitting an auld
heed on young shou'ders."
" Come Elspet," said the new comer, " you're giving me
credit for a very remote antiquity."
" Na na, Miss Barbara, ye're yoimg eneuch i' years,
I ken, but there are folks^ that are born wi' heeds that
dinna need gray hairs to steady them, an' ye're yin o' that
sort, I'se warrant."
The new comer smiled kindly on the old woman as she
passed into the old-fashioned hall, where the family gener¬
ally sat. The traveller was also a yoiing girl, perhaps two
years older than her sister, but differing much from her in
appearance,—tall and nobly formed, with a sort of uncon¬
scious stateliness in her walk, and an equally unconscious
pride in the poise of her Avell-formed head; she was
fairer, too, than her sister, with great, deep blue, dreamy
eyes, and brown hair with a thread of gold in it, and a
broad, white, placid brow. The blue eyes were looking
vety kindly just now down on the bright little sylph that
clung to her as a climbing rose might to the oak that sup¬
ported it.    She took the smiling little face between her
The Attempt. 378
wakes, he will not seem so changed then,"  she led her
gently from the room.
It was many days before that awaking came, for from
the dead sleep in which he was on his arrival, Alaster
passed into feverish delirium, and for days and nights,
the sisters and Elspet watched him tossing and moaning
on his pillow, and rambling in incoherent sentences over
the terrible scenes he had lately passed through. Mingled
with his ravings of the battle field and the camp, came
sometimes passionate words of love, and often the names
of the two sisters who sat watching him so anxiously.
Barbara trembled often, lest his rambling words should
betray the secret to Nancy,^—it was so plain to herself in
many of them; but Nancy had no idea of the real state
of the case, and when Barbara's name occurred where
her own name should properly have been, she put it
down simply to the incoherence of delirium. Elspet,
however, was keener-sighted, and Barbara caught her
gray eyes watcliing her curiously when Alaster had
uttered some passionate word coupled with the name
of the elder sister. Barbara herself always seemed to
consider it nothing more than the ravings of delirium,
and her perfect self-possession somewhat threw Elspet
off the scent; nevertheless, the old woman was uneasy
and perplexed, and watched matters keenly. Another
pair of sharp eyes and ears were watching also,
with faculties sharpened by strong personal feeling. Dr
Brown was of course in constant attendance upon the
sufferer, and very soon he discovered not only that
Alaster loved Barbara, but that Barbara loved Alaster.
A bitter pang shot through his patient, manly heart, as
he made the discovery, for, hopeless as he had always
taught himself to believe his own love was, perhaps he
had clung more to the faint possibility that at some
future time, when he should have risen in his profession,
he might at last venture to confess the passion that lay
deeper in his heart, than he himself was quite aware of.
Be that as it may, to know that Barbara's heart was
given to another, sent a bitter pang, on his own account,
to his; and the thought that it was given to a man who
was plighted to another, filled him with generous pain
for her. He knew so well himself what the pain of a
hopeless love was, and he knew Barbara too well to
imagine that her love for her sister's betrothed, could
sopm other than a hopeless love to her.     His heart so
14 The Attempt.
Macdonald, but he was the eldest son ol one of the principal
Jacobite families in Perthshire, and that was quite suffi-
cent to satisfy the old Colonel. Barbara was not so easily
satisfied however ; and she hastened l^ack to Milla Forres
as quickly as the tardy coaches of these days rendered
possible, to see, with her own eyes, after the well-being of
her young sister, leaving her father still in Edinbm-gh
deep in poHtical intrigues.    And here our story begins.
CHAPTER   II.
THE    SHADOW.
MiLLA Forres was looking its loveliest the morning after
Barbara Forbes' arrival, as the two sisters set out for
their accustomed stroll before their early breakfast. It was
that glorious autumn weather—of all weathers the most
delightful in Scotland—when all nature seems to rejoice
with a deeper joy, even than the green gladness of early
spring. The heather was sparkling thick with dew-drops,
the water of the little burn laughed and glittered and
danced in the bright sunshine, the great purple moun-
tams stood out in hazy grandeur in the clear, sharp air,
and the hundred tints of the birch trees had all a streak of
gold. The two girls wandered up the glen drinking in
the keen, pure morning air, and rejoicing in the universal
gladness.
" After all," said Barbara, at last, " there's nae
place like hame," Nancy; I wouldn't give these dear
old heather hills for all the grandeur I saw in the south."
" What! not for Edinburgh, that you raved so about
in your letters % " said her sister.
" No, not even for Edinburgh; Edinburgh is very
beautiful, but, do you know Nancy, I never felt at home
there, except when I got away out of sight of the houses,
half-way up Arthm-'s Seat, where I could see nothing but
the hills and the sky, and those grand old Salisbury
Crags, and even then it wanted the bonny Eachig, and
and the birks, and the heather,"
" Why, I thought you would have looked down on
Milla Forres for ever after seeing Edinburgh; I think I
should," said the younger sister.
" Look down on Milla Forres ! " said Barbara, " I should
as goon think of looking down on you. Elfie."
The Attempt. 15
" Well, I was'nt quite sure but you might do that too,''
said the younger girl laughing, " after seeing all the grand
folks."
The elder sister merely laughed incredulously, and
drew closer the little hand that rested on her arm. They
walked on in silence for a little while, and then Barbara
felt her sister suddenly start, and a bright blush came to
her fresh, young cheek.
" Why there's Alaster," she exclaimed. " What
could have possessed him to get up so early this morn¬
ing ; he's lazy enough generally, I'm sure."
Barbara looked up and saw a tall, young Highlander, in
a Macdonald tartan kilt and plaid, striding rapidly down
the glen towards them. She turned and looked smilingly
and lovingly on the bright, blushing, young face by her
side, and thought she had not far to go to seek for the
reason of Alaster Macdonald's early rising. As the young
man approached, he lifted his bonnet with Highland
courtesy as he said, in a bantering tone,—" The top of the
morning to you young ladies, you're early astir."
" The top of the morning to you, sir," said Nancy,
saucily, " pray what's become of your contempt for larks
and dew-drops this morning % "
" I'm afraid I didn't come to pay homage to the larks
and dew-drops Elfie," he said; then added, " Will you not
introduce me to my future sister, Nancy ? "
" I don't see that you need much introduction, you seem
very much inclined to introduce yourself," said the girl,
laughing and blushing, "but as Barbara has just come
from the air of a city, I suppose it should be done with
all the honours. Mr Alaster Macdonald, of Castle Ronald,
allow me to present you to Miss Barbara Forbes, of Milla
Forres."
" Well, now," said Barbara, " that ceremony being satis¬
factorily performed, I hope, Nancy, you will allow us to
leave the air of the city, and return to that of the moun¬
tains, which, by the way, has given me a keen appetite.
Mr Macdonald will you come home with us to breakfast ? "
" I did not mean to encroach on your hospitality thus
early. Miss Forbes," said the young man half bashfully,
" and yet, if you will allow me, I do not know how to
refuse myself the pleasure," and he looked admiringly at
the bright face and sylph-like form by his side. So the
three turned down the glen towards the old mansion-
house, chatting and laughing merrily.    Their clear young
16 The Attempt.
voices rang out through the fresh morning air, and the
old hills smiled down upon them as they passed under
their sombre shadow, and the burnie sang at their feet,
and the lark over their heads, and there was not a cloud
in all the sunny sky. Ah! how often, in after days, when
the clouds had gathered, did the thoughts, of two at
least of their number, return with a strange lingering
regret to the brightness of that first autumn morning.
Long before they reached the front door of the old hall,
Barbara had made up her mind to approve of her sister's
choice, and the half-jealous feeling, of which, even while
she was ashamed of it, she could not feirly rid herself, at
the thought of any rival in the young heart, which till now
had been exclusively her own, had flided away. The
gentle chivalrous courtesy of Alaster Macdonald's manner
was specially grateful to her proud, sensitive, impression¬
able nature, quick to feel mental atmospheres in others,
and peculiarly alive to the charm of knightly difference.
There was a kind light, too, which shone every now
and then in the young man's dark brown eyes, which
seemed to her to promise well for her darling's happiness.
It was a merry little company, therefore, that eat round
the breakfast table in the old hall that morning, devour¬
ing home-made cakes and scones, and Highland butter,
with the appetite of youth and happiness, and making the
thick old walls ring with their joyous badinage. Barbara
watched her sister closely, and saw that she was happy,—
happy, as through all their happy childhood she had never
seen her before, and with one half-stifled sigh that this
feeling, so new and strange, should thus outweigh all that
a life-long affection could do, she smothered the last spark
of jealousy in her generous, loving heart, and resolved
that from henceforth she would be content that her
darhng should be happy, even though she could have so
small a share in making her so.
AVhen breakfast was over, leaving the lovers together,
Barbara went down stairs to give the household orders
to old Elspet. It was the first time she had seen the old
woman alone since her return, and sitting down on the
broad window ledge, in the old-fashioned kitchen, she
began a confidential talk with that faithful old family
friend.
" Come, Elspet, I want you to tell me all you think about
these doings of Miss Nancy's while we were away, she's quite
stolen a march on us all," she said, smiling. To her astonish-
Tlie Attempt. 17
ment the old woman did not return her smile, nor answer
immediately, but bent her head lower over the dish of
beans slie was sheUing. " What's the matter Elspit," she
continued, still smiling, " do you not hke the braw wooer
upstairs ? " Still the old woman did not answer, but as
she raised her head Barbara saw tears trembling in her
eyes. The smile left her face, and she asked anxiously
" What can be the matter Elspit % You must tell me. Is
there anything wrong %" The old woman's fingers
trembled visibly as she went on shelling her beans, and
slow tears began to roll down her withered cheek as she
answered slowly—
" Na, na, Miss Barbara, there's nocht wrang as I kens o',
an' he's a braw callant, an' a bonny, an' I ken ye'se say
it's nocht but an auld wife's havers, but oh! my bonny
Miss Nancy, the bairn that I nursed i' my bosom," and the
old woman's voice was choked in sobs.
"Elspit, dear Elspit, what is it?" said Barbara, now
thoroughly alarmed, kneeling down beside her old nurse,
and taking her hand in hers.
"Nocht but an auld wife's havers, as I pray the Lord
on my bended knees ilk nicht. Miss Barbara, an' aiblins
I'se wrang to frichttm ye wi' them, my hinny, but they
did say as ower folks hae the second sicht, an' my grand-
mither saw the battle o' Killiecrankie sax months afore it
was focht."
" But what has the battle of Killiecrankie to do with
Nancy and Alaster Macdonald % "
" Aiblins naethin, my dear, but I saw a sicht."
" What was it you saw, Elspit, tell me quick % " said
Barbara.
" Aweel then, gin ye maun ken, Miss Barbara, it was
the very first nicht they were plighted tae ilk ither, an'I had
heard naethin o't, for Miss Nancy was at Carrick Castle,
an' I hadna'  seen Maister Macdonald ava; I was lying
awake  i' the   gloamin, and a' o' a suddent I saw Miss
Nancy an' Maister Macdonald (only I didna' ken wha he
was at the time), and yersel, Miss Barbara, standin' a'
thegither i' the glen i' the bricht sunlicht o' just sic a
mornin' as this.    I saw ye a' just as plain as I see ye now,
an' I saw the draps o' dew on the heather, and the muckle
hills, and I heard the Eachig wambling ower the stanes, just
as if I were outside the door this minute, and ye were a'
three standing lauchin' i' the sunlicht," the old woman
paused, and Barbara said cheerily—
JANCAET 1873. 0
18 The Attempt.
" Well, Elspit, there's nothing very horrible in that, is
there"?"
" Na, na, gin that were the end o't; weel, as I said, ye
were a' three standin lauchin' i' the sunlicht, but by and
by ye're shadow. Miss Barbara, began to grow langer and
langer, an' I wonered, for it seemed to be the mornin' still,
an' as it grew langer an' langer it grew darker an' darker,
an' it fell ower the ither twa, I couldna' see ye're face,
but I saw the faces o' the ithers as the shadow grew
darker ower them ; Maister Macdonald's face grew like
death, an great draps o' sweet stood on his broo, but Miss
Nancy didna' seem to see the shadow, an' she went into
it an' was swallowed up in it smilin' an' lauchin,' just as
afore. Then her shadow began to grow langer an'
langer, an' I saw you an' Maister Macdonald standin' in
it, an' baith ye're faces were as white as death, but they
were quite quiet an' calm like, an' had a sort o' shine on
them, like what the Bible says o' the Martyr Stephen,
when they were stonin' him, an' then they a' faded i' the
dark again."
Barbara's face was very pale, and her hand trembled a
little as she rose from her knees, and putting her arms
round the old woman she kissed her tenderly.
" You silly old Elspit, to frighten your dear old heart
with a dream like that. I'm sure you had eaten some
crab for supper before you went to bed; confess now, you
dear silly old thing," she said laughingly, but the old
woman only shook her head sadly as she muttered,—
" Guid grant it be sae, but they did say ower folks hae
the second sicht."
Jeanie Morison.
(7b be continued.)
From the German of Heinrich Heine,
I.
I AM the Princess Use,
And dwell in Ilsenstein ;
Come with me to my castle.
Great joy shall there be thine.
The Attempt 19
n.
With my clear waves I'll sprinkle
And cool thy aching brow ;
Thou shalt forget thy sorrow,
Poor wretch, so care-sick now I
^>'
m.
In my white arms I'll rock thee.
To my white breast thee hold ;
There shalt thou lie a-dreaming,
Of the fabled joys of old.
rv.
I'll kiss and I '11 caress thee.
As I was wont to do,
To the dear Kaiser Heinrich,
Now lost to mortal view.
The dead are dead for ever,
But all things do not die;
And I am fair and blooming.
My laughing heart beats high.
VI.
Come down into my castle.
My castle of crystal bright;
There mingleth the shout of the vassal.
With the dance of lady and knight.
vn.
There rustle the silken garments,
Mid the clang of spur-clad feet;
The dwarfs blow horn and trumpet.
And the clashing drums they beat.
VIII.
Yet my arm shall twine around thee,
As round Heinrich it twined of old,
When I closed his ear, that he heard not.
Though the horns blew loud and bold.
Megeaig Bheag.
20 The Atlempi.
Perocchfe spesso ricorda Beatrice,
Sicch' io lo intendo ben, donne mie care.
Vita Nuova.
It is now almost six hundred years ago, that is in the
year 1275, that a May-day festival was held at the house
of Folco Portinari, a rich and noble citizen of Florence.
This festival in honour of spring, was of some importance,
and was later celebrated in the public gardens of the city
on Ascension Day ; but at the time of which we speak,
was held by the leading citizens at their own houses.
And to this feast came a young man called Aldighiero
Aldighieri, bringing with him his little boy of nine years
old, Dm-ante or Dante Aldigliieri, and there the boy be¬
held among the other children, Beatrice, or Bice as she
was commonly called, the daughter of liis host, a little
maiden not much over eight. That meeting was fraught
with great consequences to the world at large, as well as
to the children. Let us pause for a moment to glance at
their circumstances and surroundings.
The time was the very zenith of the middle ages, just
when all remains of the ancient civilisation had vanished,
and before the dawn of those scientific discoveries which
have moulded modern life. St Louis had not long ceased
to reign in France, Edward First had just begun to reign
in England—great men both, who held in with a firm
hand the barons who lorded it over kings and people
throughout most of Europe. Italy, at the height of its
influence and power, was involved in perpetual struggles
with the German emperors, while the Italian cities, guard¬
ing their liberties from all outer central powers, though
rent by factions within, were yet strong from the very
fire and devotedness of their political loves and hates.
Mind clashed with mind, as sword with sword; the public
was so small that any citizen might hope to make his
mark upon it. There were already great architects in
Florence,—several of the buildings we now admire there,
belong to this period, and are scarcely modernised ; there
were poets and painters ; the arts had begun to flourish;
and in the comforts and splendours of life, Italy had
already attained a point that England had hardly reached
two centuries later. But in all countries, let it be re¬
membered, this seems to have been a period of exquisite
The Attempt. 21
taste. The dress both of men and women has never been
more graceful and beautiful; church architecture had
reached perfection—the loveliest and purest specimens of
Gothic date from this century, and the architecture of
dwelhng-houses was also appropriate and grand, if not
luxurious. Some of these characteristics of the time and
place throw much light on our subject. We find an
intense feeling for beauty, also a political fervour, induced
by ardent patriotism, acting upon a small number, when
friends and foes were near acquaintances. Further, we
see the sort of narrowness of conception brought about by
the scientific ignorance, which viewed the fragment of our
globe then known, as the centre of all creation—sun and
stars as its satellites, space and time as filled with it and
its history. Perhaps the intellect worked the deeper for
being less difiVised; the human mind and its relations to
its Creator were profoundly searched and studied, and
philosophy and theology Avere open as pursuits to all per¬
sons of education. And, amid such surroundings appeared
Dante, to leave us in his poem the very essence of the
middle ages condensed, as it were, into one splendid
crystal,—the deep if sometimes pedantic, philosophy,
the narrow cruelty, the intense patriotism, the fervent
religion, and lastly, our special subject, the profound
veneration for the feminine ideal—Beatrice.
" She was," says Boccacio, " about eight years old
when they first met, very charming and pretty in her
childish way, with a gravity of speech and manner not
expected of her tender age; and she was, besides her
beauty, so full of goodness and sweetness, that she was
considered by many as a little angel; and Dante, child as
he was, received her image with so much passion into his
heart, that from that day forward she never, while he lived,
departed from it." For the history of this love we must
turn to Dante's own autobiography—La Vita Nuova—
which consists of a series of poems Written at different
times, connected and explained by a prose narrative,
written when he was about the age of twenty-seven.
Before going further, we must mention some opinions of
commentators on the inner meaning of Dante's works.
We constantly find in them a mystic symbolism underly¬
ing the narrative ; and he himself informs us, in one of his
letters, that his great poem means—first, just what it
says on the surface,—that is, so far as his genius could
show the realities of the world of spirits; then, secondly, a
22 The Attempt.
parable of the life of man, and how he rises from evil
through purification to goodness.   From this point of view,
Virgil would represent human, and Beatrice divine illumi¬
nation.     Further political   and moral  significations  are
interwoven, making Dante, as Miss Rosetti justly remarks,
a   very   difiicult   study,    "Not   because  he is   obscure,
but  because he is  prismatic."    He  flashes   out   several
different ideas at once, and there always seems something
new to discover in his writings     But some commentators,
disdaining the key Dante himself has given, have gone so
far as to assert the whole " Vita Nuova " to be a political
allegory, of which the " Divina Commedia " is a continua¬
tion, in which Beatrice stands for Germanic supremacy in
Italy; and all the cotemporary poems of his friends (for
they also would need explaining away, as they allude to
various facts connected with Beatrice) to be, not what
they appear, but a kind of Argot or Jargon, in which the
ladies praised by name stand for various political entities.
This reading was first, we believe, invented by an exiled
Italian, and certainly seems like the dream of a political
exile, morbidly brooding over his own and his country's
misfortunes.     It is  vigorously, and, we think, entirely
refuted by the best Italian  commentators;   and though
we   follow   them   in   believing    that   more    meanings
than one may be traced in the   " Vita Nuova," we also
take their view that there can be no greater mistake than
to suppose the actual narrative to be primarily or chiefly
allegorical.    The people lived, the events happened, and
Dante strove to soothe the ache of his life, by finding a
mystical as well as an external explanation for them.  And
who shall say that he did not seize some deep truth; for
the eternal meanings of apparently trivial events may be
there for those to find, who most see through the accidents
and shadows to the essentials of existence.    We need not
here dwell on those inner meanings, except to protest
against  their  interfering  with  the  truthfulness   of the
simple natural story which is our present subject.   Dante,
the fiery man of action of middle life, the stern embittered
exile of later years, was evidently in his early days a man
of the warmest and keenest afiections.
Amor e cor gentU son vina cosa—
he sings, and, indeed, it seems as if love was the mainspring
of his life,—love of woman, love of his country, or rather
liberty, and love of art.   Beatrice, his lady, married; and his
The Attempt. 23
love seems to have been only the purer and the less selfish';
she died, and he seems to have suffered an agony of loss,
while her memory continued to be all that was left for his
best affections to dwell upon.    His patriotism, after being
thoroughly called into action, seems to have been blighted
by gross ingratitude in the rulers of the native city once
so dear to him: love of abstract justice remained, but
that for his country was tiu-ned to gall.    The love of his
art,—spontaneous  and unconscious  at first,—grew and
deepened, and while his broken hopes lived again in a new
form as religion, his poetry too, culminated in the inten-
sest yearning for perfection,—the furthest flight towards
ideal glory ever achieved outside of special revelation, in
the mysterious music of the Paradiso.    A devoted lover
and an ardent patriot, whose private and public life were
alike unfortunate,—a man of most sensitive pride, forced
to feel his dependence on coarsely patronising nobles, it is
difficult to conceive any one more full of splendid vitality,
of power, and brilliant genius, whose happiness was more
completely wrecked, to whom life less fulfilled its promises.
But we owe to these disappointments the Divina Commedia.
Without them, could it ever have been written, could it
ever have plunged so deep and soared so high, to live as
a record of human trust in ultimate justice, mercy, and
happiness,—to serve, as it has done, for a foundation of all
that is highest in modern poetry'?    Dante has gone into
the very depths of evil,—he has proclaimed it with no
faltering voice as utterly hideous and hateful, and in its
nature perishing; and he has come out from it with the
announcement, that in spite of it, all is well.    Like some
great cathedral, not without its gloomy crypts, its gro¬
tesque mouldings, but ever tending in intense aspiration
heavenwards, whose every stone is placed with consum¬
mate art and with unerring instinct of proportion, stands
the  poem  that   embodies   so  much   of the  thought  of
humanity.    Part, no doubt, shows the distinctive ideas of
the middle ages, and is  chiefly of historical value; but
most belongs to all time, and to all men and women, as
much as to his first readers in mediteval Italy.    What,
then, was the influence that first and last chiefly swayed
this extraordinary man ?   We may answer, Beatrice ; and
it is on Dante in his relation to Beatrice that we wish in
these papers to dwell,—Dante as a gentleman in Florence
six  hundred  years  ago, passionate and gifted, fond of
music, painting, and literature, and a master in poetry.
24 The Attempt.
" In that part of the book of my memory, before the
which is httle that can be read, there is a rubric, saying,
IncipitVita A\iova." Thus Dante begins his autobiography,
and goes on to describe the first interview of the two
children. Beatrice was dressed that day in " that most
noble colour, a subdued and goodly crimson, girdled and
adorned in such sort as best suited her very tender age."
From that time love governed his soul, often commanding
him to seek '' this youngest of the angels ; wherefore I,
in my boyhood, often went in search of her, and found
her so noble and praiseworthy, that she seemed, as says
Homei',—' not a daughter of mortal man, but of God.' "
Probably the children, when quite young, met often, and
delighted in each other's company. We know their houses
were only fifty paces apart; but it is in the nature of
things that they should have been more separated after¬
wards. At any rate, a second epoch or beginning of his
love seems to be fixed by Dante in a recorded interview,
nine years later, in the street, when she walked clad all
in white, between two elder gentlewomen, a young-
maiden in her first bloom of beauty, and saluted him
so gTaciously, that the sweetness of it overwhelmed him.
To use his own graceful expression,—" La sua ineifabile
cortesia, la qual e oggi meritata nel grande secolo,"
haunted him afterwards in the loneliness of his own room,
and overtaken by a pleasant slumber, he saw her in a
vision borne in the arms of Love, from whom she accepted
Dante's heart "as fearing," and then Love went up Avith
her to heaven, and anguish broke the dream. And Dante
writes thereon his first sonnet, in which occurs the line,—
" Allegro mi sembrava amor, tenendo
Mio core in mano,"—
and from this time records that love had complete
mastery over him. A period of genuine youthful passion
seems to follow. Beatrice is in church, he gazes upon
her with such absorption that it attracts the attention of
the bystanders, some of whom whisper that another lady,
then seated in a direct line between him and Beatrice, has
brought him to this pass. Not wishing his secret to be
made manifest, he encourages the mistake, and using this
lady as a " screen," writes many things in her honour, but
with covert allusions to the real lady, who, it appears, had
the clue to the mystery. And it is certainly to be hoped
that the lady who served for years as a screen was
equally well informed.    On her departure from Florence,
The Attempt. 25
Dante feels himself obliged to adopt another " screen,"
which we may easily imagine to have been a very delicate
matter, and which this time seems to have been less
successfully carried out. It looks as if he had been too
ardent, or the " screen " not discreet enough ; at any rate,
the matter was spoken of by many in terms scarcely
courteous, he tells us—whereby he had many trouble¬
some hours; and worst of all, Beatrice, believing evil
rumours, denied him "her sweet salutation, in which alone
was his beatitude." For this salutation not only was wont
to make him overflow with happiness, but also filled him
with such warmth of charity, that he would then have
pardoned whoever had done him an injury; and we
suspect in Dante's case, its power over him could have
been described in no higher terms. He says that after
sobbing himself to sleep like a chidden child, love again
appeared to him in a vision, and said, " My son, it is time
that we lay aside our dissimulation," exhorting him to
throw off disguise, and write a poem openly to Beatrice,
but not to send it where it could be heard by her without
his aid. " Ma falle adornare di soave armonia, nella quale
io saro tutte le volte che fara mestieri." Love lurked in
music then as now.
After the poems were written, some questions occur
which much perplex Dante, and with them we think closes
one period of this love history. " Is love on the whole a
good thing f he asks. Yes, for it diverts the mind from
aU mean things. No, for the more faithful the lover the
more pangs he suffers. Yes, for the name of love is
sweet; and names are the consequents of things. No,
for his lady was not " come le altre donne, che
leggiermente ei mova del euo core." Beatrice was not
easily moved, and about this time also an event probably
happened which changed their mutual relations.
E. J. 0.
{To he continued.)
JASUIKT 187S. D
26 The Attempt.
"Time rolls his ceaseless covirse."
As a refluent wave of the great tide of human affairs
leaves another year on the shores of the past to add its
little shell of eventful circumstance to the mighty rocks
of history, we are reminded of the stealthy encroach¬
ments of the Great Enemy on the territory of life. So
insensibly do the years creep on, that they are but
counted as they are gone, and their duration seems even
briefer than their retrospect. That which has just gone
seems, on a general review, less striking and eventful
in character than its immediate precursors; but it is
an important link in the historical chain of the ages.
A prominent feature which has imparted a singularly
dull aspect to the last twelve months has been a meteoro¬
logical one. Whether the weather deities have been
petulantly disposed towards the new comet, said to have
been in their neighbourhood, science does not seem to
have as yet determined; but certain it is that Dame
Nature has, summer and winter alike, forsworn her
time-honoiu'ed smiling aspect, and appeared a very im¬
personation of " Niobe all tears." Even the kindly inter¬
position of the usually capricious St Swithin failed to
effect a revolution in favour of sunshine.
A winter of high markets is the natural sequel to a
rainy summer, and the expense and scarcity of necessary
articles of food and fuel reduce housekeeping to consider¬
able straits. The trial is, however, modified to the
toihng population by an almost unparalleled degree of
commercial prosperity, which has raised the rate of bank
interest to an abnormal figure in check of the inevitable
speculative mania which must follow par consequence.
The startling price of potatoes, bread, and coal is counter¬
balanced by a value set upon labour which makes the
working-man relatively richer than his employer, who
has to pursue his vocation for the public benefit under
intimidation of absolute compliance with the demands of
his employes, thus occupying a most critical position of
twofold trial. The unnatural antagonism of class against
class involved in the system of strikes, so profusely illus¬
trated during the past year, is recognisable as the fruits
The Attempt. 27
of radical politics, which have probably developed on a
larger scale than many of their propagators anticipated,
so that we would fain hope much severer lessons are not
yet needed to teach our people that, as anarchy is the
perfection of tyranny, so republicanism is the most
aggravated form of despotism.
A wholesome antidote to the poison of false feeling
diffused through the national system was administered by
the illness of the heir-apparent, and its noble sympathetic
results, in an expression of loyal feeling unprecedented in
the annals even of loyal Britain. Not less touching than
the world's eager anxiety on behalf of the safety of this
one young life, or even the universal attitude of supplica¬
tion for its preservation, was the noble demonstration of
glad gratitude that acknowledged the deliverance. It
was something to find the diverse, many-minded multitude
of mankind of one heart after all; for humanity is the
glory, as it should be, the characteristic of the race; and
no nobler triumph of its expression could have been
wished than on that day of national thanksgiving, when
our dear Queen went through the streets of her metropolis,
with no other guard of honour than her faithful people, to
return public thanks to God for her son's recovery. The
same electric thrill passed through the nation's heart,
when our sovereign addressed those two beautiful letters
to her people, which, in theii* earnest simplicity and heart¬
felt truth, proved her right to that position in the affec¬
tions of her subjects, which is greater elevation than a
throne. If the nation remain but true to the harmonies of
the chord which vibrated throughoxit the length and
breadth of the land, there is a glorious future in store for
the good old British constitution, such as will complete
the discomfiture of all revolutionists, republicans, and
anarchists, Bradlaughs, Odgers, and Sir Charles Dilkes.
Britain's devotion to her commercial interests, to the
prejudice of ancient honour and prestige, has become too
notable for denial; but the undue presumption upon the
resultant principle of " peace at any price," evinced in
the grossly exhorbitant Indirect Alabama Claims of America
awoke a patriotic chord, not dead, though seldom stirred,
which compelled a slightly less one-sided exercise of
Geneva arbitration. As regards domestic legislation, it
seems a consideration seldom taken into account by our
senators, that much good might be done for the country,
by regulating the carrying into effect of old laws, instead
28 The Attempt.
of making innumerable new ones. Now that the Ballot
Bill has at last passed, its troubles do not yet seem at an
end, and it remains to be seen what is to be the result of
the introduction of the favourite element of electioneering
excitement into the administration of education under
the new Act for Scotland, remembering that the very
element of religious instruction to be so regulated, has not
only been the sine qua non of all parochial teaching, but
the acknowledged strength and backbone of the system
since its foundation by John Knox.
The happy prevalence of peace has not been without
acknowledgment   on  the part   of   the foreign  powers.
Of the festive demonstrations, commemorative no less of
the  Kaiser's late warlike triumphs than of his present
peaceful dispositions, the most strikingly important was
the   friendly   reunion   at   Berlin   of   the  Emperors   of
Germany, Russia, and Austria, as the representatives of
the   three   great   European   poAvers,   to   the   complete
ignoring   of   the   ancient   head   of   the   council  which
generously affords  to  be merely amused at the slight.
The omnipotent genius of the empire  has shown itself
equal  to   much  in  the  accomplished   expulsion  of the
Jesuits from Germany, and the promised overthrow of
the gaming tables—systems which eat as a canker into
the heart of national prosperity.   France and Spain are still
too like volcanoes, from which an eruption any day need
not surprise us.    It seems a particularly hard fate for the
poor young King Amadeus, who made the effort to confer
on an oppressed people the benefit of order and wise
government, that the result should be so disheartening;
but those who best know Spain are not without hope for her
when she shall have recovered from the effects of centuries
of darkness and oppression.    France still struggles with
the lesson Avhich she has been taught without ceasing, but
never learnt, viz.,—that she is incapable of self-govern¬
ment.    The inconstancy of her temper, and the instability
of her  institutions, just  now  illustrated  in a wish to
revert to a style of government, from one form of which
there was but lately such a violent recoil, leads us to
anticipate a future that will be but a repetition of the
past, full of the same  mistakes and sufterin^the same
penalties,—unless hope should again arise in the presence
of a Avise restraint, the most beneficent agency for the
regulation of lawless impulses.
India has cost us dear in many ways, but in none more
The Attempt. 29
BO than in the lives of great men, which have fallen a
sacrifice to British interest in her welfare. Yet more
tragic in effect than the malign influence of climate, was
the dirk of the assassin, which deprived England of a great
statesman, and India of a valuable viceroy, to whose
distinguished abilities and amiable virtues, both parties in
the state united to do honour. Lord Mayo thus leaves
no unworthy precedent for Lord Northbrook, and all suc¬
ceeding viceroys, to follow, though his reign was brief as
it was brilliant.
The grim King, in reaping his usual harvest, has cut
down one of the mighty (so far, at least, also, a victim to
interest in the welfare of bur Indian empire), in Dr Norman
Macleod, a name that has been for years proudly cherished
throughout broad Scotland, and many lands besides.    By
his loss, the world is robbed of one of its most beneficent
benefactors, its most active regenerators, and most gifted
sons.    He was a lover of the race; and the warm and in¬
tense   humanity of his   sympathies opei'ating upon the
singular vitality of his genius, constituted the great secret
of his world wide influence.    Dr Macleod was   one   in
whom this principle of healthful and vigorous vitality was
developed, morally, mentally, and physically, in such an
exceptional degree as to stamp all his different efforts in
life with an originality which commanded attention and
respect.    In the church, society, literature, and the pulpit,
he was an acknowledged power for good; and his genial
temper and humorous disposition, as well as his earnest
enthusiastic  spirit, were  recognised as   the natural ex¬
ponents  of the well rounded character  of a  Christian
minister.    Although not scatheless in the arena of ecclesi¬
astical politics, nor free from the foibles incident to a
generous   nature,   Dr Macleod's   character,   as  a  whole,
formed   an  equally  happy  and   powerful   testimony  in
favour of Christianity, confirming a remark once made
■ in reference of his powers as a preacher, viz., " That man
would compel his hearers to be Christians."    As a preacher,
indeed, he has stood   alone  among  many distinguished
compeers."   The   fervid    eloquence  which   adorned  his
sermons, being merely the charmed channel through which
an appeal to the heart of his hearers flowed direct from
that pure spring in his  own, which welled upward from
the Fountain of Truth.    Above all, we recognise in him a
man of great constraining power, not so much because of
his commanding intellect, or large heart, as from the grand
30 The Attempt.
principle of faith, which was the root of his whole char¬
acter, the secret of his strong courage, and the watch-Avord
of his active life. In him we see such a family resemblance
to the heroes of faith, as reminds us especially of Martin
Luther. Long may it be ere the memory or teaching of
such a Scotch Martin Luther lose their impression on the
hearts of his countrymen.    Peace be to his memory !
The Episcopal Church in Scotland has also this year
lost two of her brightest ornaments, having, in the early
part of the year, been called on to mourn the death of the
venerable Bishop of Edinburgh, Dr Terrot, and still more
lately, one who has gained the affectionate admiration of
men of all sects and parties, by the catholic spirit, the
geniality and generous sympathies which were his
distinguishing characteristics. In Dean Ramsay, not only
his own church but all Scotland has lost a man to whom
all looked as the embodiment of many of the brightest
features of the national character.
Looking beyond our own border we find that the
English Church has lost, in Professor Maurice, one of her
greatest religious teachers. A man whose influence has
extended far beyond his own personal sphere.
Of a different stamp was the brilliant and sparkling
genius of the lively Irishman, whose death deprives us of
the clever political comm.entaries of Cornelius O'Dowd,
which so long imparted flavour to Blackwood's staunch
conservatism, as well as any further recital of the dashing
adventures of the race of Charlie O'Malleys and Harry
Lorrequers. The pen of Charles Lever has ministered too
long and too pleasantly to hours of ennui and langour for
us merely to feign regret that it is now laid aside for
ever; but our consolation must be that its creations are
immortal, and that Mickey Free will be as fresh and
delightful to generations to come as to that in which he
was made known to the world.
In the retirement of Italy, where this gifted son of Erin
passed the last years of his life, has also passed away a
well-known artist, whose name, early connected with
painting, has latterly been associated with the progress
of photography, which his genius was the means of
developing under "skiey influences" peculiarly favourable
to satisfactory results. Robert MacPherson, as, in great
measure, the engineer of his own fortunes, supplies an
example of the successful growth of Scotch artistic
genius on Romish soil.
The Attempt. 31
Yet another fair flower of our own nurture has been
plucked in this garden of Italy. Mrs Mary Somerville's
life furnishes a triumphant vindication of the capacity of
the feminine mind for scientific achievement, and her
death closes a career of industry in which time-honoured
womanly employments were not ignored in the presence
of learned avocations. Neither did the distinguished
lady's strength of understanding and power of genius
obscure the womanly elegance of her mind and amiability
of disposition, so that her life and character must be
considered remarkable.
Our obituary closes with the name of a lady who, like
Mrs Somerville, has lived to a good age as the ornament
of a distinguished circle of English society, and the
wife of one of the greatest statesmen of the age. So
much has been said of the virtues and graces of Lady
Beaconsfield that it is unnecessary further to magnify
them here, unless it be to say that the womanly devotion
with which she repaid the chivalrous worship of her
husband (too rare a thing now-a-days in such perfect
development) seems to us the brightest ornament of her
character.
Edinburgh has lately had  the  honour  of welcoming
quite a galaxy of distinguised visitors.    A special interest
attached to the visit of the Ex-Empress of the French,
not only from the magnitude of that royal lady's mis¬
fortunes, but from the resolute magnaminity with which
she  has  supported  them.    Of   other   foreign   royalties,
including the Queen of Holland, and a Prince and Princess
of the triumphant house of  Hohenzollern, the Burmese
and Japanese Embassies were specially honoured as the
intelligent bearers  back  to  the  east of a message of
western civilization.    A visit so prized as Her Majesty's
first   stay  in   our   capital   since   her  widowhood,   was
necessarily made the   occasion   of  signal ebullitions of
royalty,   the  credit  of which, however,   can  hardly be
claimed by the citizens as occurring at a date when the
inhabitants are generally out of town, and our city is
taken possession of by admiring tourists.    The warmth
of the reception afforded to the Prince and Princess of
Wales, evinced  such a continuance of  the   feeling  so
spontaneously expressed during the dark days of last
December, as rendered it matter of some disappointment,
that the privacy of the royal visit was so strictly preserved
as to avoid all demonstrations of loyalty.
32 The Attempt.
A traveller whose approach had been so well heralded
by the trumpet of fame as Mr Stanley, had his welcome
insured, but its chief warmth was the undoubted tribute
not to reputation, but to the intrepid and adventurous
achievement of a task that had in vain puzzled the
learned and attracted the brave.
Last, and certainly least of this group of celebrities,
came the Tichborne claimant, whose efforts to elicit a
Scotch demonstration of sympathy met with signal
failure. Apart from its general interest of character
and circumstance, the Tichborne case presented an instance
of a trial protracted to a length of which the legal annals
of this country offered no previous example.
Amongst the publications of the past year we may
mention, among scientific works, Dr Bastian's work on the
Beginnings of Life, and Mr Darwin's on Expression ; in
theology, as the most generally interesting, Dr Stanley's
Lectures on the Scottish Church, with the reply to it put
forth by Dr Rainy; in poetry, a new work by Mr Brown¬
ing, and another by the Laureate; among books of travel,
the most remarkable is Mr Stanley's account of his excit¬
ing adventures in search of Dr Livingstone; while in
fiction, we may observe, in a prominent position, Mr
Black's Strange Adventures of a Phaeton, though the
chief place must be given to George Eliot's Middlemarch,
which has run its course throughout the year.
We may fitly conclude this paper with a New Year's
motto, in the words of the last-mentioned distinguished
author—
" Our deeds still travel with us from afar,
And what we have been makes us what we are."
Elfie.
The Attempt. 33
Comparisons are proverbially odious, but they are
occasionally useful, and especially natural in the survey
of human character. In our private circles, we are every
day comparing the kinds of excellence and the degrees of
beauty we meet in society; and names that are before
the world, blazoned with the rare hues of distinction,
become blended in our speech and thoughts, the cne with
the other. The unfairness of the process is constantly
declaimed against, but it is not the less indulged in, and
such names as Shakespeare and Milton, or Thackeray and
Dickens continue to supply duet harmonies to the trumpet
of fame. Such are not without their use and value, when,
instead of weakening and depreciating by invidious and
unjust comparison, they rather strengthen and individualize
the points compared, by the power of contrast. It is the
influence of this idea that has attracted us to institute a
side-by-side comparison of the synthetical and antithetical
characteristics of two great poets, George Gordon, Lord
Byron, and Robert Burns.
Their names at once suggest a startling contrast. The
one, born in the purple of aristocracy, the other, wearing
the hodden grey of the peasant, they existed in a social
antipodes to each other as distinct as wealth and liberal
education can be separated from grinding poverty, and
narrow opportunities of gaining knowledge. But, on the
enchanted ground of genius' domain, they meet as equals,
shadowed with the same magic mantle, crowned with the
same laurel wreath, dowered with the same magnificent gifts,
" The vision and the faculty divine,"
" To witch the world with noble minstrelsy."
For, if ever it was true that the endowments of a poet are
" The hate of hate, the scorn of scorn,
The love of love,"
it was true of those two poets. Burns and Byron. Theirs
was the brotherhood of transcendent genius that could
conquer men's hearts by its awing, thrilling, softening
power; and theirs, alas I too, the kindred fate of crush¬
ing sorrow and bitter disappointment. Their lives were
frail and mortal, as their poetry is immortal and imperish¬
able ; standing in history's graveyard as broken columns,
FEBRUABT   187S. E
34 T}ie Attempt.
with defaced fronts more touching in their story than the
most elaborate inscription. Yet, though both are
tragedies of strangely concurring briefness and heart¬
rending pathos, the story of Robert Burns is (as well
remarked in the February number of Blachwood) less
tragically terrible than that of him who was of the world
accounted a more fortunate man.
As with the lives, so yviiYL the poetry, which must, to a
certaiu degree, be the expression of a man's inner life;
and as the life of Burns was less jangled and out of tune
with the ruling order of destiny, so his poetic inspira¬
tion was sweeter, nobler, truer to the harmonies of the
human heart. So far poetry was identified with both
lives, that its mode of expression accords with the leading
tone of each mind ; in the one, characterised by intensity,
in the other, by individuality; and hence an instance of
the influence of character, in its operation on genius. As
Alexander Smith says of Burns :—
"Of all the great men of the north country, his was incomparably the fullest
soul. What fun he had, what melancholy, what pity, what anger, what pas¬
sion, what homely sagacity, what sensitiveness. Of everything he was brimful
and overflowing."
On the other hand, the outlet of Byron's capacity is
narrowed by an individuality that limits its grandest
poetic outbursts to a selfish reference. His was a selfish
nature, so in his poetry we find him ever analysing self,
thinking of self, reverting from all other subjects of con¬
templation to self, nay, the principle of self-devotion was
the power that stimulated his genius into activity.
Burns' earlier poems are full of youthful grace, freshness,
and fervoiu"; Byron's were at once branded as weakling
productions, as characterized by artificial sentimentality
and morbid bathos, fitly enough named " Hours of Idle¬
ness." Such as they were, their reception stung their
sensitive author into different exertion. His genius woke
not till his selfish pride was touched, and then arose, a
giant, to scourge all meaner mortals into admiring
wonder. Burns needed no such flagellating influence to
quicken the exercise of his inspiration. His muse was no
Nemesis, whipping him into Pegaeean harness by a sense
of wrong, but Coila, blushing sweet iu modest worth, the
impersonated geniiis of his own loved land :—
" He seized his country's lyre
With ardent grasp and strong,
And made his soul of fire
Dissolve itself in song."
The Attempt. 35
This was enrely the fulfilment of a nobler mission than
bewitching the world with the song of his own woes,
like him whose grand powers made even that small
theme seem great:—
" Black clouds his forehead bound,
And at his feet were flowers,
Mirth, Madness, Magic found
In him their keenest powers."
Burns' was the better use of a great gift, and in this,
(though both were so magnificently dowered that the one
cannot be beggared at the others' expense), the poorer
man was the richer, and more truly enriched the world.
We would remind those intellectualists who award to
Byron the choicest niche in the temple of poetic fame as
a Master Expresser, that felicity of expression does not
fulfil the whole mission of poetry, whose aspects are at
least threefold, exercising the powers of Creation, Imita¬
tion, and Expression. The Creative power, which christens
the poet himself, revels in the realm of Imagination,
" And gives to airy nothing,
A local habitation and a name ;"
the Imitative faculty, as the poet's art exercised in the
drama, is most nobly ilhistrated in the case of
" The man whom natiu-e's seK had made
Herself to mock, and Truth to imitate;"
and Expression, even on the authoi'ity of its greatest sup¬
porter, is merely the " dress of thought," and in its use, the
poet becomes the interpreter of nature, animate and in¬
animate, to the less perceptive world. Thus " finely
touched," the poet's spirit is not finely touched " but to
fine issues," the thrifty goddess determines the glory of her
creditor according to his improvement of the lent scruples
of her excellence, and his greatness becomes involved in
the use he makes of his gifts, as well as the possession of
the gifts themselves. In this application of poetic talent,
we cannot doubt that Burns was decidedly superior to
Byron, if tlie benefit of humanity is to be considered as
the aim of true poetry. His was no selfish song, but a
flood of pure, natural, poetic impulse, that refreshed and
strengthened the world, encircling with the rainbow halo
of imagination the humblest scenes of everyday life, and
evolving the poetry inherent in all surrounding nature.
Byron otherwise exercises his power to throw the
glamour of poetic light over the monotonoiis self-tortur-
ings   of   a   blas<^,   misanthropic   spirit.       His   grandest
36 Tlie Attempt.
descriptions of nature are permeated with an unwhole¬
some melancholy which we now know by his Kfe to have
been in great measure affected. Its eccentricity, never¬
theless, attracted the world, and his greatest work de¬
rived much of its first popularity from the vague,
mysterious figure, whose shadowy presence is felt
throughout, lending a crowning interest to every scene
described. The same personage appears in different
forms and situations in all his other narrative poems.
In them, Byron did one great thing,—he consum¬
mated the revival in the history of poetry, in¬
augurated by Sir Walter Scott, and stamped the
age with a poetic vitality different to the weakling life
of the preceding century. Not that he did so from
choice, as he boldly avowed his preference for the twitter¬
ing strains of the Little Nightingale of Twickenham
to the immortal music of the Swan of Avon; but, as has
been well remarked, his genius was equal to any appli¬
cation. Disdaining not to stoop to the public taste, and
ready to curry favour in the surest way, he could sing as
well in a style that would please as not, and devoted his
gifts to a popular use. So following in the wake of the
great Scottish Minstrel, who had led the way with his
border tales, ho too struck the chord of narrative in song,
and at once transferred the interest of the world-wide
audience to eastern story. How immeasm-abl}^ inferior,
those representations of Turkish life are to the inimitably
painted border scenes of our great Sir Walter, is at once
evident, equally evident as is the fact of their poetic
excellence. Poetic beauty they have in a rare degree,
but dramatic excellence none, for Lord Byron lacked the
power of creating and sustaining character. His stories
sink into nothing beside his fits of poetic musing, and,
according to Lord Macaulay's discrimination of his
dramatis persoHO', they maintain no individuality, develope
no unmistakeable or subtle characteristics, and neither act
nor speak in character.
As a mark of Burns' greatness in this respect, we have
only to refer to his inimitable dramatic fragment. Tarn o'
Shanter, one of the greatest triumphs of direct inspiration
that can be noted m poetic record. The work of one
day, (according to a brother poet, " The best day's work
done in Scotland since Bruce fought Bannockburn)," it
illustrates more strongly, perhaps, than anything Burns
ever wrote, the vivid facility of his genius, which could
The Attempt. 37
impart to the creatures of his imagination an imperishable
individual existence, by wielding the instrument of lan¬
guage with Shakespearean strength and skill. Those
who are bound in the thraldom of the narrow conven¬
tionality of the day, do suffer from queasiness because of
the absence of modern English refinement in the fresh,
vigorous Scotch ; but even so are some people blinded to
the beam of Shakespeare's greatness, in searching out
the mote of his occasional derelictions in word morality.
Happily, such small exceptions can no more affect the
immortal greatness of our Scottish than of our English
Shakespeare; the imperishable enunciations of each will
live as long as the languages in which they are written; and
Hamlet and Tam o' Shanter's " familiar household words "
of wisdom will be embalmed with classic honours in the
mind and memory of society, reading or non-reading.
With all his remarkable power of language, wealth of
words,   and  masterly  expression,   the  vein   of   Byron's
poetry is not rich as Burns' in pithy, terse expressions of
homely wisdom, keen observation, gentle philosophy, or
fervid  sentiment.    The   reason   may  be  found   in  the
supremacy   of   Burns   as   a  lyric  poet,   which  involves
singular happiness of expression.    As a song-writer, he
has been equalled by very few poets in the world, and
certainly surpassed by none.    He touches the chords of
joy and woe with the hand of a master; and humour,
pathos,   love,   friendship,   patriotism,  independence   are
wrung out with alternate force and tenderness, kindling
the imagination  and rousing the heart.    In  these im¬
mortal effusions, Burns uses poetry as the key to the
human heart, a sanctum  of which Byron  has not the
entree; and, so long as poetry is a thing of the heart,
intellectual  genius must bow to that which sways the
soul of man with the resistless potency of a governing
motive power.    If we but reflect for a moment on the
manner  in which  our two poets treated the standard
subjects of lyric inspiration, we must become convinced of
the superior greatness of him who sang as he felt with
his warm heart, over that of his mighty successor, whose
poetic vision was that of the gigantic intellect.
First, there is love, the theme of all poetry since the
world began. Both poets were therein much exercised and
not always happily so. Both were crossed in the purest affec¬
tion cherished by either, for the " Mary" who was in each
case, the pure impersonation of his womanly ideal.    How
38 The Attempt.
much of the impression was due to the very effect
of the romance of disappointment on poetic minds, we
need not stay to enquire. They both loved and sorrowed,
but how differently I To the one, this disappointment
became a hardening, embittering influence, darkening a
whole Hfe with its mahgnant shadow of self-constituted
misery; to the other, a " lingering star, whose less'ning
ray " shed a pure, benign radiance upon the path of every¬
day life and common duty. No woman who values her
sex can fail to recognize in the love which reigned in
Burns' life, and breathes in hie poetry, a sincere devotion
to, and faith in woman, which neither the life nor the
writings of Byron acknowledges. Byron's amatory
effusions are all descriptive of his own feehngs, his love,
his disappointment, Ids suffering, and on too many
occasions does he scoff at the very idea of faith or con¬
stancy in the womankind he professes to adore. " Believe
a woman or an epitaph!" he exclaims, for in his estima¬
tion, she is a very weathercock of impulse :—
"Pique her and soothe in turn, soon passion crowns thy hopes."
It is pleasing from such declarations to turn to Burns
love-songs, and there find everything most excellent in
nature brought into requisition to illustrate the beauties
and graces of the fair half of creation ; as for instance, in
that most exquisite of love-songs, " My Love is like the
red, red rose," or the little less beautiful "0' a' the airts
the win' can blaw," and " 0 wert thou in the cauld blast,"
not forgetting the touching commemoration of the endur¬
ing truth of such love in " John Anderson, my jo, John."
The ruling key-note of all Burns' songs is intense,
unquenchable patriotism, a passion nowhere acknowledged
by Byron, who, on the contrary, expressed the utmost
loathing of his native country, in which he had seen some
sorrows certainly, but which had the claim of native land
upon his heart. Lord Byron's cosmopolitanism springs
fi-om the same root of enlarged selfishness, as the present
cry for the extinction of patriotism in favour of universal
brotherhood. We have only to glance at history to see how
contemptible is the career of a nation devoid of nationality,
which is no more a bond restraining universal love and
freedom, than family ties are gyves preventing the
development of individual character. Happily, Scotland
has ever been a patriotic country, andher patriotism has won
her chief glories in history and song ; but the world at
large, though aware of the history of the j)ast, had not the
The Attempt. 39
fact of a grand living national character brought within
its knowledge till Burns stirred the theme, and made
" Auld Coila's hills and dales " resound with the " native
wood-notes wild," Thus, it is not necessary to conjure
up that trumpet-sound to martial fame on a battle-field,
" Scots wha hae," to prove Burns' patriotism, but enough
to think of the simple, homely Scottish life and character
he has painted in all their lights and shades, showmg the
poetry in a life of duty, however humble, or a home ot
love, however lowly, till
" Kustio life and poverty
Grow beautiful beneath his touch."
One grand, strong feature he ever loves to bring to the
front, as it was with him a personal, as well af3 a national
attribute, and that is the honest independence of a Scotch¬
man, however poor. As a telling vindication of the
superiority of character, independent of class distinctions,
what indeed can equal
"The rank is but the guinea stamp,
The man's the gowd for a' that."
This manliness of character is what Byron wanted, as
however great a poet, he was a little man, wrapped up
in a puny, morbid sensitiveness to the acknowledgment
of the importance derived from his rank. And, therefore,
although this self-consciousness might add to his fame in
one way, by ehciting curiosity, wonder and admiration, it
could not win the devotion accorded to Burns, the secret
of which was well marked by one of Scotia's hardy sons
of toil, who, when asked if he could explain what it is
that makes Burns such a favourite with all in Scotland,
replied, " It is because he had the heart of a man in him.
He was all heart, and all man; and there's nothing at
least in a poor man's experience, either bitter or sw^eet,
which can happen to him, but a line of Burns springs
into his mouth and gives him courage and comfort if he
needs it.    It is like a second Bible."
This is after all the grand secret of Burns' power. It
is the strong loving sympathizing humanity of his poetry
which commends it to all lovers of poetry and of the race ;
and hence of his fame it has been truly said—
" First the banks of Doon beheld it,
Then his own land formed its span,
Ere the wide world was its empire,
And its home, the heart of man."
Byron had no sympathy for his kind; but he wins it
by the sheer force of his genius.    It is the tribute we
40 The Attempt.
must pay, and we pay it, while the poet himself is wrapt
in solitary converse with nature, exclaiming,
" O that the desert were my dwelling-place,
With one fair spirit for my minister ; "
or describing his hero, as becoming, " in man's dwellings,"
"A thing
Restless, and worn, and stem, and wearisome,"
What a contrast to such utterances of stern misanthropy
is the picture drawn by Professor Dugald Stewart of the
peasant-poet gazing, in his company, on the beautiful
landscape viewed from the hills of Braid, and acknowledg¬
ing that, of all that varied scene, he derived the greatest
pleasure ii-om the sight of the smoking cottages, knowing
the worth and happiness they contained. This is, indeed,
the man who could write the " Cottar's Saturday Night,"
the poet whose descriptions of the scenic beauties of his
native land are all interwoven with some episode in the
life of its people. " The Banks o' Doon," " The Brigs o'
Ayr," " The Birks o' Aberfeldy " are beautiful to him, but
chiefly interesting as the scenes of himian life and passion.
The objects of nature do not shut out, but suggest and
confirm his human interests.    In a love-song he sings,—
There's not a bonnie flower that sprmgs
By fountain, shaw, or green,
Nor yet a bonnie bird that sings,
But minds me o' my Jean."
His sympathies extend to the animal creation. In a
storm, hearing the " winnocks rattle," he " thinks him o'
the ourie cattle," he has a lament for his pet lamb, Mailie,
a '' guid New Year" for the farmer's aitld mare, Maggie, an
indignant word for the "barbarous art" that w^ounds a
hare, a kindly feeling even for the mouse, and the most
poetic expression of sympathy for the crushed daisy,—
" Wee modest crimson-tipped flower."
Can there be any doubt of the strength of genius'
wdng that occasionally stoops in its soaring flight, any
prejudice in favour of a great poet necessarily choosing
only great subjects ? Let Wordsworth's gentle rebuke
be the answer :—
" When Poesy steals along or stops,
Watching the least small bird that round her hops,
Or creeping worm with sensitive respect.
Her functions are they, therefore, less divine,
Her thoughts less deep, or void of grave intent
Her simplest fancies 1    Should that fear be thine.
Aspiring votary, ere thy hand present
One offering, kneel before her modest shrine,
With brow in penitential sorrow bent."
Elfie.
The Attempt. 41
^onuthinu about €tn;iinth!ttjg.
(conclusion.)
Nothing is so truly a man's property as that which he
knows: not his wealth, for it is liable to unforeseen
changes, and is at best but one of the modes by which he
may express noble ideas, not in itself conducive to their
conception; not his family, for even his children have
their own individuality of character, diverse from his, and,
except in earliest years, uncontrollable by him; not his
social position, for its value depends on the current opinions
of the day. These are all possessions that can be touched
by his fellow-men, but his knowledge is exclusively his
own, not to be taken from him save by the power that
alone commands his intellect, and to whom injustice is
impossible. And yet, few are able to distinguish between
the gold and the dross, the knowledge that ennobles and
the knowledge that degrades, and fewer still can perceive
what frame of mind is fitting for him who would acquire
the former. He to whom such perception is possible
knows that he must sit, an humble pupil, at the feet of
the great teachers of men. To him, all that is beautiful
and wonderful comes as food to the hungry; from among
various opinions he culls those which his mind is most
calculated to receive, assimilating them, so that the tone
of his daily thought shall be the richer for each volume
that ho peruses. He truly becomes a " knowing man,"
or king, ruling self, the most difficult of subjects, till, by
virtue of that sovereignty, he attains, without seeking it,
some deserved influence and dominion over his fellow-
men, meriting the encomium of the poet on the " equal
mind;"
" Who reigns within himself and rules
Passions, desires, and fears, is more than king."
Now there are certain qualities needful for the acquire¬
ment of wisdom, and the due appreciation of its value;
notably reverence, calmness, and patience. To these
three it may be thought that enthusiasm should be added ;
but though in its way it does much, though when the fire
of it is subdued so as to be of a constant heat, not fitful
nor quickly burned out, it is a powerful assistant to the
student, it is yet of less force than the calmness and
patience  of determination.     Enthusiasm may  enable a
FEBRBAHT 1873. P
42 The Attempt.
man to leap at a truth as if by inspiration, but it misses
the full satisfaction that crowns the labour of the investi¬
gator who has slowly trodden every step of the way.
The necessity of a habit of reverence is more and more
thrust upon us as we observe the baneful results where it
is lacking; and we might almost add, where, in this com¬
plaisant age of ours, is it not lacking ?
In conversation, in action, in literature, we find the
same taint shoAving itself, the same covert sneer at what
may be termed the aesthetic side of life, the same refusal
to give credit to ideas removed from the ordinary run of
common-place. Side by side with this defect we observe,
as usually happens, its opposite extreme obtaining, in
the form of a credulity to which nothing comes amiss,
while between these two are endless shades of a dogmatic
self-conceit that appears to be in part the outcome of the
time, in part cultivated and cherished with a curious
complacency, as though to speak contemptuously of a
thing were to prove its non-existence. It follows then
that to few, as has been already said, is the true spirit of
study comprehensible, or the thorough appreciation of the
beautiful, whether in the arts or in nature, possible.
In support of this assertion we would ask, how many
average men, not specially gifted with a turn for literature,
have ever looked into the stores of older volumes in their
own language, not to speak of the great schools of other
countries; nay, how many have read one tithe of the
better works of our own time? A book that requires
serious attention does not commend itself to those who
must have their learning made easy, after the fashion of
modern teaching; who will not condescend to a nut, but
must have the kernel extracted for them and sugared
withal. We once chanced to hear such a reader reviling
the Laureate for his incomprehensibility; and venturing to
enquire if the poem under discussion had been studied,
were met with the reply, "No, I have not patience to
read poetry that must be studied." This, then, is what
we have come to; this is the vox popidi for you, men of
genius who have chanced upon these latter days; you
shall not utter the God-given thought that is in you, as it
is born in your brain ; it will be (being of somewhat lofty
extraction) too difficult, too intense perhaps, for the
reader; you must soften the coloiu'ing and make it plain
to the most careless eyes, for there will be no patronage
for you if your meaning is not lowered to the level of the
The A ttempt. 43
most untalented in the impatient crowd that has no
reverence for your power.
It is a curious result of this hurried and carping way of
reading, that the mind becomes in time absolutely incap¬
able of perceiving what is in reality plain enough. Thus,
to take Tennyson again as an example, we have more
than once heard men, not unused to books, profess them¬
selves unable to understand the expression "want-
begotten rest;" yet, taken with the context, nothing could
be plainer. The poet does not envy the caged linnet that
never knew the woods, nor the beast rejoicing in the
lower liberty in which conscience is unkno"UTi, nor yet the
unloving heart that thinks itself happy in escaping the
anxieties of love, " nor any want-begotten rest." Does it
seem possible that explanation should be needed here,
tliat to make them understood, these few lucid words
should be lengthily rendered as the rest or false content¬
ment that proceeds from mere lack of knowledge*?
Perhaps the much vaunted practical mind would better
comprehend that to some, ignorance is not bliss.
The popularity of sensational writing is another proof
of the habitually low level of taste among us; these
books, which run through numerous editions, and are read
by thousands, are as a rule not only destitute of any
claim to admiration, but are positively pernicious. There
is in them no attempt at evolving any principle, no
thought of making noble and ignoble things appear in
their true light; they are, on the contrary, reversed, for the
hero or heroine is often of the ignoble sort, and depicted
as the more interesting for that reason. The ancient
stage villain is nearly akin to the gentleman of the
modern novel; he is of two kinds, tawny and leonine, or
black-haired and fiendish, the latter being frequently pre¬
ferred. Even in describing physical beauty the lowest
standard is adopted; we hear little of expression, but we
have " thin flanks " and " knotted muscles," which make
the reader involuntarily think that he is either in a stable
or the Ring, while the hero is further endowed with a
sensuous mouth and " thunderous eyes," whatever those
may be. Indeed, in one famous novel, these organs so
gleam and glare about the pages that we can but marvel
that the heroine should love them. Here, again, is the
lowest view taken, we presume by choice, of the truth
that strength is attractive to a woman ; that it is so, is a
natural law, but to a woman of even ordinary refinement
44 The Attempt.
this brutal sort of might is by no means pleasing; and
Whyte Melville has touched a finer chord when he shows
us the utter loathing and repulsion that succeed, in the
proud heart of Valeria, to her brief fancy for the daring
Gladiator. Yet worse are the heroines dear to sensation¬
alists, for rarely do we find in them anything that is
" pure womanly." As girls, they have a passion for one
of the dark heroes already married; as wives, they have
curious and often singularly stupid secrets from their
husbands; while there runs through the whole plot
a dallying Avith evil worthy of French writers alone.
Altogether we can but trust that the novel of to-day
no longer fulfils its supposed intention, the truthful
representation of our ordinary domestic life. The
langviage in which these volumes are written is as chaotic
as the ideas that it seeks to express; when the authors
wish to delineate a dress or a room, we have description
run mad, and we may remark that a catalogue of uphol¬
stery or millinery comes more readily from their pens
than a picture of natural loveliness; they are familiar
rather with Birmingham ware than with starlighted
heavens or running brooks. To these, then, or to their
readers is any true knowledge possible ? We answer
sadly. No. It were too far to seek for the primary causes
of so great deterioration; but we would fain hope that a
reaction is speedily to set in, and that the higher modes
of teaching now beginning to spread may aid in bringing
about a happy change.
Meantime, cannot those among us, who know the last¬
ing pleasure of well chosen books, do somewhat towards
cultivating a better taste'? Can we not persuade any that
the lily is more beautiful than the nightshade, and that in
deliberately choosing the poison they are fatally injuring
the mind that is their highest possession ? After a revel,
a simple repast is unwelcome ; but could the revellers be
persuaded to turn aside and leave the feast untasted, they
would find it speedily cease to tempt them, and if a child
were allowed from the first free access to thoroughly noble
works, there would be for him at a later period no charm in
these inferior volumes. Men seem to forget that literature,
like other arts or sciences, requires heedful cultivation,
and we may as well expect a mind crammed with sensa¬
tionalism to bo able for any branch of study, as hope to
make a musician by the playing of polkas, or a painter by
the copying of signboards.    And it is not as though the
The Attempt. 45
better food were hard to find,—is there not corn in Egypt
and to spare?     Not everyone can hear Beethoven well
rendered, or have a Vandyk at hand to copy, but to very
few are books quite inaccessible.    Again we repeat, it is
for the young we plead; the eager, thirsty brain panting
for new draughts, the fallow field, with the early sun upon
it, ready to make the sown seed spring into rapid growth,
the tares, alas, with a ranker, quicker verdure than the
wheat.    We do not commend the narrow care that thinks
to exclude wrong by limiting the conception of right; it
ia worse than futile to suppose that mental starvation can
result in aught but subsequent rapacity, when the guiding
reins are of necessity removed; nor do we for a moment
suppose that good can be attained by the presentation of
overdrawn  pictures   of the  punishment   of   vice.     For
example, the perusal of a prize tale, in which a whole
family perishes from intemperance, will hardly suffice to
cure that sin; hysterical shriekings at crime will not abate
it.   But we hold that a mind trained from childhood to love
what is lovely and of good report, taught, both by active
teaching and by fitting freedom of choice among varieties
of excellence, Avill turn of its own free Avill from vitiated and
lowering literature to the delight of high ideas and beau¬
tiful language.    He who has lived in the nursery with
Hans Anderson and the Water-babies, who has gone to
school with Tom Brown, and sailed Westward Ho with
Amyas Leigh, has many more chances in his favour than
the boy who rushes straight from the region of super-
humanly good children (who always die) to the smuggled
novel and modern farce.    Or, since space obliges us to
speak only of light  literature, he who   can appreciate
TroUope's life-like characters, Charles Kingsley's manly
English, Melville's high-bred sentiment, and Eliot's search¬
ing chapters, will fling away in disgust the feverish plot
that labours slipshod  through three volumes;   nor are
there  wanting  other  authors   of whose  works   it   can
happily be said that no high-minded girl need fear to
open them.    One word more we would add in favour of a
mine of wealth now too often over-looked; we allude to
the Norse and Icelandic literature, which should be speci¬
ally attractive to us, since in our veins runs some of the
gallant Northern blood.    Moreover, there is fresh air in
their pages, blowing over the life of a free, rough, bold,
but essentially noble people, not untouched with sadness,
as  befits   those   on  whom   there  rests   the   "Mountain
46 The Attempt.
Gloom." Very lovely, too, is the modern tale of Arne from
the same region, bearing the same impress of freedom,
though spoten in a minor key, unlike the great battle
songs of the past. Nearly akin to these, and deserving
of our hearty love, are our own Highland tales, whose
quaint fancies lead us back to the days when we firmly
believed in the existence of Jack's Beanstalk. And
reaching this ancient article of faith, we are fain to lay
down the pen, for our thoughts have but led us back to
the simplicity of childhood, and we confess that the child
who knows so much less and believes so much more than
we, is the innocent and unconscious apostle of that uni¬
versal gospel of the wise, which says—" The pursuit of
knowledge is but a course between two ignorances, as
human life is itself only a travelling from grave to grave.
. ... In fact, the recognition of human ignorance is
not only the one highest, but the one true knowledge,
and its first fruit is humility."
Elsie Strivelyne.
iltij  Palling of thij  Paluii.
There is a people, peculiar among men, whose name
is as then' fellow-men's conception of their essential differ¬
ence from themselves. Finders have they been called, of
things hidden from ordinary eyes, as from aU else, save
Galahad, was concealed The Grail; Prophets have they
been deemed, inspired, ecstatic, moved by immediate
afflatus from the gods, and seeing, with direct intuition,
the Future and the Past; Makers have they been titled,
for they have brought forth things seen from the unseen,
and have moulded plastic chaos in their forming hands.
What makes them so ? Run through all their fist of
bodily and intellectual powers, and they may seem not
richer than many who yet fall short of being what they
are. In the study of inorganic chemistry, we discover
how very difierent the compounds may be that result
from the same elements in chfterent proportions; nay,
even from the same elements in the same proportions.
How natural, then, must it be that the slightest variation
in the proportions of the same spiritual and organic
elements   should   give   results   most   widely   different ?
The Attempt. 47
Who can weigh out the last scruple of the excel¬
lences required in such grand combinations ? Only a
surer Finder, a more all-seeing Prophet, a more skilful
Maker than themselves,—even the original and all-
originating Poet, the Great First Universal Cause.
After His week of working days, wherein He wrote the
Poem, whose simplest words we yet have scarcely learned
to spell, He entered on this seventh days Sabbath of His
rest, which lasteth still. In it He makes no new things,
but combines, and lets the secondary causes that He once
hath stirred work out His will, controlling their mediate
power unto His final end. K, then, He ^vdll a Poet as a
witness of His nature, or interpreter of His works, what
has He need of?
I. The    Spirit.      In    all    considerations    regarding
humanity, it seems a matter of course to group them
into those relating to  the   soul  and  those   relating  to
the body.    But, shut in as we are with our one known
existence, we find it impossible to conceive the one with¬
out  the   other; so  that  we  are  impelled to treat  the
embodied soul as a complex element, resisting analysis,
for us.    And yet we can make a sort of formal analysis,
by concentrating our attention, for the time being, upon
either.    In that mysterious compound, the body certainly
is not elemental; whether the pure spirit be so or not,
we cannot say,—the Almighty has  arranged it for us
beyond our ken.    What evolution from the material has
crawled up  to  this glorious   climax ?    What power  of
selection and variation originated  the  species.  Spirit?
What transmitted influences and hereditary dispositions
have space and time merged in this metaphysic essence ?
No poet believes these new opinions.    He knoios his soul
was sent him  straight from God; that " the inspiration
of the Almighty giveth him understanding."    Of course,
he   cannot   prove   ultimate   truths  to   unbelievers;   he
intuitively believes in and hy his soul.    This quick soul-
sense is God's special gift in the innate, to the born poet;
the result of the form in which his mind was cast.    It
is witnessed by its  ever seeking unto Him; it may be
blindly, unnaming, unknowing Him ; but through its keen
perceptions being made aware of the reality that hides in
the  unseen, and of that  all-embracing Soul in things,
towards which it yearns.
II. Its circumstances.    Let no one undervalue circum¬
stances.    Many assert that genius must ever prove itself.
48 The Attempt.
and that, given the eoul-power, it will master any circum¬
stances. But they forget that, while some external aid
is necessary even for the recognition of the diamond,
more is needed to make it shine to its advantage
in clear rose facets, while too much of the same treat¬
ment would file it out of existence, or leave it in
the comparatively valueless form of diamond dust. Even
so the eoul-power may he concealed and dormant, or may
be crushed beyond its enduring; for only a due propor¬
tion of treatment will enri(;h it to its true nature. This
treatment, all things that in any way affect this given soul,
we may widely name its " circumstances," and sub-divide
them into {1st), Its relations with the body. The veil of flesh
must be thin, and at least semi-transjjavent or translucent
to it. It must not obstruct or retard the out-going or
the in-coming messages. The bodily sense then, like the
soul sense, will be keen and quick, or must liave been so,
at some time of life, that the imagination may through it
be stored. The experiences of this combined being form
its education. All men are educated iip to the number of
the days of the years of their lives, and by these days.
There is, therefore, no question between education and
no education, but between the various manners and
matters of education. A man is educated by {^d), Local
circumstances. The course of natiire has a peculiar
power over all of us. It requires no upholding care
at our hands, but is ever ready to display its charms;
it asks no flattery, but being beautiful for us, it
flatters us; being varied, it refreshes us. Its utter
indifference to us and all our concerns, revolving as it does
in another circle that never intersects our own, produces
a feeling of awe in oiir admiration and of reverence in our
curiosity. The lightnings flash and thunders roll, the
rainbow glows, and the shadows flee away, and there
seems a new heaven and a new earth, beautiful and
sparkling. We have seen, but the things seen reck not of
our beholding. I am far from believing that residence in
the country is at all necessary to foster a due appreciation
of nature. The scene of our work-a-day world is too apt
to lose its sanctity and we our interest in, or comprehen¬
sions of its charms. More is often learned in one long
gaze by those whose unused eyes revel in it, as a Holy-
day of bliss, a Sabbath of rest, a feast of communion, of
which they dream, and to which they outreach, ujitil they
meet  again.    There  are  some  who  can  ever feed the
The Attempt. 49
sacred fire in unwearied worshipping at the shrine itself ol
nature, but it is rarely so. Absence makes the heart
grow fonder. Imagination, like hope, is not of things
seen, for if they are seen, why are they yet hoped for. If
they are seen and sung, their singer may be a Finder, but
may fall short of being Prophet or Maher. Travel to some
small degree is necessary to a poet, and he grows richer
the more he wanders. Because variety is necessary
before there can be any exercise of thought or comparison,
before the comparing faculty is ripened, and the judg¬
ment purified. The stronger the contrast, the more the
imagination is impressed, therefore, men who dwell in cities
write most sweetly of the green fields, that a rare holiday
has spread out before their feverish eyes; those who
dwell in weary trim Dutch flats, most kindled by the
gorgeous disarray of wild free hills ; or the natives of the
lonely mountains by the full, ever-flo^ving tide of life in Lon¬
don city-streets. And those who never saw a lake—when
on some westland crag they, for the first time, see the
billows from the Atlantic break and roar, and flash in spray
beneath them, may well silence their dearest friends with,
—" That is the sea I Look, tremble, and be still!"
While artists are most trusted, who make their sketches
" on the spot," poets write best away from it. They
must have time to calm their heated admiration; their
art of perspective is not that of the London Academy;
their representation is not of the scene, but of the spirit of
the scene; so that which best clings to their memory, and
strikes their imagination, is most likely to re-kindle it
in a reader's heart; the essence, not the detail. And,
therefore, those scenes of youth that fortune has removed
for ever, become idealised most in the poet's song. The
enchantment and the mist of distance throw a veil of
beauty over the most uninteresting of views ; if so be,
it once had power to make him think it dear.
Bd, Social circumstances. The locality in which he is
placed afl^ects much the extent of one's society, but
not necessarily its value. That is a distinct gift of
Providence. The real moulding of a man depends on
his closer social circumstances, his family-relationships.
The imitative disposition of childhood causes the potency
of example in that early period of education which is as an
external force to the child's will, and often gives it its life-
direction. Four walls may contain all things and beings
that influence it, and yet who can measure the outspread-
FEBEUART 1873. G
50 The A ttempt.
ing results. The tender mother, the eweet sister, the
brave, true-hearted brother, the reverence-worthy father,
—is not a poet rich in having these, living or dead? And
in his riper years, his love extends perhaps, to some one
other, the type of all ideal perfections, and beauties ; the
very supplement and completion of his own unity. If
he be disappointed or deceived, the sun is veiled in black¬
ness, and the stars fall from their throne, and truth
departs from the earth. No doubt he is very miserable,
but it is the outflowing love that poetises men, not the
incoming. In losing one, the poet does not lose all.
He still may keep AmseZ/"enriched, mayhap, by loving;
and trusty friends and wise acquaintances, many as
his nature or his lot allows. And even casual passers-
by may help him. Therefore it is sometimes better
that he should be where he may meet many,—that
is, in a town. Jean Paul Kichter says a poet ought to
have himself born in a small city. Not having leisure to
discuss the point with The Beloved of the German
Fatherland, I "svould only remark, that the opportunities
for finding the greatest varieties are greater in a large
town, where one is also removed from much of the
narrowness, and pettiness, and gossip of a smaller place.
And travelling must also educate through its presenting
contrasts ; for the minds of men in different climes vary
as much as do the contour of their soil, A wider sphere is
provided for the poet, if he be born in some good social
circle, for thereby he may be said to travel within the
circuit of his own city, and gain a similar good. Not to
be despised is rank, for all things else being equal, there
is a refinement in manner, a tasteful avoidance of the
mean or disagreeable in habit, a magnifying of the chival¬
rous, that must have a reflex action on the poet's mind
and song. And though true greatness has no title-deeds,
and knows not the name of Caste, yet the rough granite
crag on the lone hill-side will be a nobler thing when
formed and polished by a master-hand to represent some
gifted man.
Atli. Monetary circumstances. Almost a part of the
preceding is this ; for since so many men have a shyness
of and shrinking from others whose incomes are much
smaller than their own, a man's sphere is narrowed by
the measure of his purse. Riches have no effect in making
genius, but they have a powerful eff"ect m cultivating it.
They alone can provide means of advantageous travelling,
The Attempt. 51
of any very wide liberal education, and of many cultiva¬
tions so enriching to mental soil. Yet let no one think
riches an absolute good, nor poverty an absolute evil.
The one may be even more suffocating to his poet-breath
than the other. It is apt to provide flattery and self-
content ; and the sense of responsibility does not always
keep pace with the power to fulfil, so that the rich may
spend his riches, and learn less richly than the poor, who
spent his little well, and profited wisely in his careful
choice. More even than others may the poet use the
words of Agur, the son of Jakeh, " Remove far from me
vanity and lies ; give me neither poverty nor riches," lest
I in any way forget Thee, 0 my Maker, and my respon¬
sibility to Thee, and to the talents Thou hast lent me!
5^/i. Book education is properly travel through time.
There, by means of arbitrary signs, invented by skilful
man, the once-present becomes ever-present; and he may
become acquainted with great minds of other periods,
and other civihsations. No introduction is reqiiired, no
aristocratic prejudice debars admittance ; a little money
and a little time, gives him the franchise he desires.
There he finds a whole University of patient instructors,
against whose thoughts he toughens his own. There he
opens a whole mine of knowledge-wealth, the hopes, the
acts, the feehngs, the manners, the beliefs of the younger
world. The poet should pre-eminently be a Knower;
his knowledge is his material, his Chaos, whence he
evolves Cosmos. There can be nothing in his Cosmos
that was not crude in Chaos; for his mind is only his
instrument. He, above all men, should seek the general;
should make powerful generalisations from helpless par¬
ticulars ; that at last he may be able to speak to every
man in his own tongue, and become a universal affirma¬
tive for many yearning tongue-tied dumb.
6iA. Life-education. The poet may be ripening by all
these preparatory experiences, but he needs a some¬
thing more, call it sorrow, loss, anxiety, bonds, or what
you will, a something that prevents content. Contented
beings are satisfied in life, and do not sing it; but contra¬
diction makes them find their voice, as plucking harp-
strings wakes their thrilling tones. It is a concentration
of the contrast before alluded to, and its educative force.
It may take many a form. It may be the first cloud in a
lifetime of summer and sunshine; it may be a bitter
disappointment in a slow-fostered faith in some one being.
52 The A ttempt.
or  it  may  be a  life-long  struggle against   Fate,   who
ever harshly contradicts his will and wish; or a sudden
awakening   to   the  awful   solemnity  that   lies   behind
the gaudy tinsel trappings of his life.    Then begins that
reviewing of the past, that comparing of the present, that
straining to discern the   future, that grasping after the
meaning of things, and yearning after theii' Maker, that
we especially note in the brotherhood of poets.    That
many write poetry without such stirring discord, is no
disproof of my words ; for many copy the great painters
tastefully enough, who never will attain to be masters
themselves.    Imitative ability is no poet-test.    Look at
Milton's "But not to me returns day," at Burns' "The rank
is but the guinea stamp, the man's the gowd," at Byron's
once-disappointed love, and ever-stung vanity, and the
thousands  who  are   of his   school.    Who   can   discover
Shakespeare's   stimulating  woes ?      Yet  he  must have
known such before he drew them.    Indeed, reading faith¬
ful biographies of great men, we are  almost tempted to
echo the Swiss Pastor in Les Nouvelles Genevoises, " I am
selfishly content that poets should suffer, for it is the only
way to make their songs truly sweet for us.'' The manner
of trouble moulds the form of the poetry.    Political disad¬
vantages rouse representations of the woes consequent on
the governing policy, or perhaps lashing satires; wrest-
Hng with the meaning of the unseen results in speculative
and metaphysic questionings.     Bodily weakness has  a
tendency towards subjective themes, which occasionally
become  little  more  than  versified   complaints.      Now,
though no doubt the law of the Erewhonites for imposing
imprisonment with hard labour on the high crime and mis¬
demeanour of ill health, would materially reduce the num¬
ber and purify the expression of many apparent incurables;
yet it might sweep out of literature a large number of
thoughts that, having solaced one, may solace another in
like  case.     No disease  is   so hypochondriacal  as  love.
Yet in it the subjective is pardoned, nay, welcomed, as
being the common voice of man, for no one passion has
swayed, in like manner, half so many hearts.    There is
also a high type of poetry,  where the Ego is only used
as the particular representative of the universal, which
is the ripe end of all poetical and philosophic prepara¬
tions—a subjecto-objective type —that we must not con¬
fuse with   cruder kinds.
7th. Leisure.      The sorrow may be too crushing, the
The Attempt. 53
anxiety too absorbing, to permit expression. The poet
must get beyond it a little way, into a breathing space,
whence he may review the situation, and may idealise
its elements. Other men may, from morning to night,
pursue their worldly occupations, under pressure of
anxiety and sorrow, and yet fiulfil their calling. But if
the poet has, for instance, to strain every nerve to win
the meat that perishes, for himself and his own household,
to drain his soul-power in the bread and butter sciences, he
never will become what he might be, never utter more
than flaming words, or, mayhap, fire sparks of song.
Sth. A motive, or " efficient cause." Whole myriads
of Gray's " mute, inglorious Miltons " may have been;
but, being mute, are " inglorious," and no " MUtons."
The ever-becoming are not till they he. The name is
only the ratification of the being. The motive springs
from some desu-e, such as. The desire of sympathy, not
in the meaner sense of the word—akin to pity,—but
a search after recognition by kindred souls. Believing
in the mighty potency of soul on soul, when he feels
his spirit thrilled by the wonders revealed to him, he
expresses it, that he may establish himself as a hnk
in the chain of humanity, and so the electric wave
pass through him to others. The desire of fame: The
love of approbation, wakes with the earliest signs of
intellect; and, through life, remains as a wholesome extra-
moral restraint on the actions of ordinary men. When
this becomes purified and intensified by age and judg¬
ment, it often developes into the abstract form of desire
of fame. Mere personal acquaintance form a sphere too
narrow for him; he would be honoured by the distant,
both in space and time. It is a passion considered de¬
corous in a poet, " the last infirmity of noble minds,"
though some may question its grandeur. The desire of
money, which all men agree to call most contemptible,
and to believe most unpoetical, is closely allied to the last,
and serves, quite as well as any other, to draw forth a
poet's power. And, after all, where is its meanness % The
natural inertia of full content might prevent a man from
exerting his genius in expression; but the desire of " pro¬
viding things honest in the sight of all men," originating
in love of approbation; or of supporting his own life in
obedience to the moral law; or the life of fi-iends in
obedience to the law of love written on his heart, may
wake him like a giant from his sleep to do a giant's deeds
54 The Attempt.
A desi?'e of calming one's too passionate fervours. A
necessity is laid on some to speak, blind, imperious as the
inspiration that precedes it, and a part of that inspiration;
when the Vates pours forth, hardly responsible, his wonder¬
ful revelations. Such were the oracles of old; such even
in modern days have been found poets. Seeley said of
Goethe, that he wrote down a feeling in order to get rid
of it, and in the very writing, it departed, so that what
was true when he had written, had ceased to be true when
it was read. But Goethe had a calmer and more philo¬
sophic natm-e than most poets, who retain their raptures
in a smouldering glow that may be rekindled when fanned
by a genial breath.
9th. Practice. We must not forget how practice in¬
creases skill. Few poets, or then readers, find their first
essay of power equal to their succeeding ones. They may
prove the poet, but it is but in a green bud of promise.
Time, new learning, and many failures, help him on to
glowing flower and seed-bearing fruit. Aristotle's "natural
ability," " knowledge," and " practice," may then be held
necessary for poet as for orator; and it is only by the
concurrence of all these elements, in proportions weighed
out in the balances in God's right hand, that we may
hope to see a poet made. Lutea Reseda.
Part II.
Ita n'fe Beatrice in I'alto cielo,
Nel reame ova gli angeli hanno pace,
E sta con loro ; a voi, donna, ha lasciate.
Non la ci tolse quality di gelo
N6 di calor, Biccome I'altre face ;
Ma solo fu sua gran benignitate.
Vita Nuova.
At this time the life of Dante was prosperous. He was
an accomplished scliolar, already a renowned poet, and a
man who had many friends. He shared in the campaign
of the Florentines against the Arrezians in the year 1289,
and belonged to the band of cavaliers who volunteered
for the first assault in the battle of Casentino, not the
earliest in which he had fought. Though not a wealthy,
he was a  distinguished citizen, and  might,  one  would
The Attempt. 55
think, have aspired to the hand of the fairest of Florentine
maidens.    Was he not considered a sufficiently endowed
suitor for the daughter of the rich Folco ?   Or when he at
last resolved to praise her openly, was it too late to move
her  heart ?     Was there always only the  friendship of
early companionship on her side %    We can never know ;
but we do know, that Beatrice married the knight Simone
dei Bardi; and we find at this point, in the Vita Nuova,
the beginning of a new epoch, in which we believe may
be traced all the allusion ever made by Dante to this
change in the circumstances of his love.    Hitherto, be it
observed, the salutation of Beatrice sufficed for his happi¬
ness—noAV  a  friend    thinking  to   do  him   a   pleasure,
conducts him to an assemblage of ladies come together
to do honour to a bride, married that day, and about to
sit down at table for the first time in her husband's house.
In old Florence these particular assemblies were restricted
to married women, therefore Beatrice, who was present,
was now certainly married, if she were not, as Rosetti and
others think, the bride herself.    It looks like it, for " I
hardly knowing where unto my friend conducted me, but
trusting in him (who yet was leading his friend to the
last verge of life)," writes Dante, " resolved to stay ^\dth
him and do honour to these ladies."    This time the sight
of Beatrice seems to have overcome him with an agony
of emotion, he leant on the painting that ran round the
walls of the house unable to support himself, and his
friend was obliged to lead him away.    " And when my
perceptions were come back," he says, " I made answer
to my friend; ' Of a surety, I have now set my feet on
that point of life beyond that which he must not pass
who  would return.'"     Some great   self-restraint seems
here indicated, and there follows a record of the tears
shed in solitude, of   the self-questionings why  he   still
sought the companionship of this lady that brought him
but   grief and  scorn,   and of the  anguish  he  endured
through love.    And now his   aspect, changed  through
suffering, made his secret generally known; and he tells
of a conversation with a company of ladies, who ask him
why he continues to love this lady whose presence causes
him such grief, and to what his love aspires.    " Ladies,"
he answers, " the end and aim of my love used to be the
salutation of my lady—but now that it has pleased her to
deny me that, love has placed my beatitude where my
hope will not fail me—in those words that praise my
56 71ie Attempt.
lady." And now, indeed, the poems become longer, more
beautiful, and more peaceful; nay the old happiness in
the later ones seems reviving, as if Dante's heart had
reconciled itself to be content with the ideal love that
was then a recognised form of the sentiment; sometimes
alas I disfigured by unbridled passions, but often perfectly
pure, and in its unselfish devotion, ennobling beyond all
other earthly feelings.
This ideal love of the Trouveres, minstrels and knights,
that was common and esteemed in the middle ages, gave
the last touch to that elevation and consecration of
women for which Christianity had laid the foundation in
southern Europe. Always honoured in the north,
invested with new dignity in the south, it was now
that Poetry, in its first revival, spread its halo round
them and crowned them Queens of the Imagination.
This sentiment was meant to be, and usually was, most
pure and elevated. Exceptions there doubtless were, and
as the middle ages were not times when hypocrisy
flourished, we have records that do not attempt to dis¬
guise great laxity of morals, as w^ell as those which tell
of self-sacrificing affection. But many of the ladies, we
may well believe, were worthy of the homage paid them.
Slie who is greatly honoured tends to become honourable.
We naturally dwell on what the man does, but on what
the woman is; and her distinctive atti'ibute of beauty
may so shine in her moral nature, that there is nothing so
moving to the heart or so inspiring to the imagination as
such noble natured women as it is given to most people
to meet once or twice in a life-time. They have a charm
that no familiarity can dull, and no closer acquaintance
can darken.
"Yea, let me praise my lady whom I love,
Love's self being love for her must holier prove ;
Ever as she walks she hath a sober grace,
Making bold men abashed and good men glad,"
sings Dante's predecessor, Gruido Guinicelli. But are we
not apt to imagine our ideal lady rather in ancient
costume, ■with hawk on hand, and all the entourage of
cliivalry, than in the prosaic dress and circumstances of
modern life? Do we not rather lack aspiration, and hardly
even aim at the type possible to those who have leisure and
culture % Do not our girls, however honest and good, too
often allow themselves little social inelegancies, bits of
The Attempt. 57
second-hand slang picked up from school-boy brothers,
and unrestrained carelessness of manner that hinder them
from being thoroughly ornamental and dehghtful, and
developing into perfect ladies 1 More serious doubtless
is it, to find the semblance without the substance ; men
have sometimes said that there is no such fair promise so
often delusive as the face of a well-brought-up young
woman. An innocent expression may belong only to the
youthful beauty of the face, when the character is artful
and petulant; and a sympathetic manner sometimes
comes from a nervous susceptibility that conceals unre¬
strained selfishness. But the grace and considerate
kindliness of a true lady can hardly be assumed and give
an assurance of genuine worth.
Dante dwells more on the manners than even on the
beauty of Beatrice, especially when he tells how others
shared in part his enthusiasm for her. " She came," as
he says, " into such favour with all men that when she
passed, people ran to behold her, which was a deep joy to
me, and when she drew near to any one, so much truth
and simpleness entered his heart, that he dared neither
lift his eyes nor return her salutation, and to this many
that have felt it can bear witness. She went along
crowned with humility, and when she had gone by it
was said of many, this is not a woman, but one of the
beautiful angels of heaven."
She showed herself so gentle and so full of perfection,
that she diffused around her a soothing quiet beyond any
speech. No woman could envy her, for through her, all
women were raised higher. She comes one day before
Dante, preceded by his friend Cavalcante's love, the Lady
Primavera, and his heart swells with delight, as one who
beholds a radiant summer, heralded by a brilliant spring.
On the last day of the year 1289, her father, Folco
Portinari, died, and the will still exists, in which he founds
a noble hospital for the sick poor, and leaves a bequest to
his daughter Beatrice. While the ladies of her acquaint¬
ance were passing in and out of her house, on visits of
condolence, Dante sat at the door to gather tidings of his
beloved mistress, and seemed, these ladies said, as mourn¬
ful as if with them he had witnessed the grief of Beatrice
weeping in her chamber above. Still the Florentine
citizens are wont to sit outside their house doors half the
warm summer days; but this was in January, and must
have marked for all Dante's devotion to his lady.
FEBErART 1873. H
58 The Attempt.
Next in order comes the record of a dream, told in such
beautiful poetry as shows that the author of the Divina
Commedia was coming to his maturity. Like aU his
poems, it loses much in translation, but Mr D. G. Rosetti
has made the English language do all it can to render it,
and from his version* I give some extracts.
Dante had an illness, and lay unable to move, racked with
intolerable pain, while a young and gentle lady, a kins¬
woman, watched over him. Feeling how frail was life,
and how "it fails in us after a little while," the thought
came, " Yea, to my lady too this death must come." And
then he slept—
" And in my brain did cease
Order of thought, and every healthful thing,
Afterwards wandermg
Amid a swarm of doubts that came and went,
Some certain women's faces hurried by,
And shriek'd to me,  'Thou too shalt die, shalt die.'
Then saw I many broken hinted sights
In the uncertain state I stepp'd into,
Meseem'd to be I know not in what place.
Where ladies tlirough the street, like mournful lights,
Ean with loose haii', and eyes that frighten'd you
By their own terror, and a pale amaze :
The whUe, little by little, as I thought,
The sun ceased, and the stars began to gather,
And each wept at the other ;
And birds dropped in mid-flight out of the sky ;
And earth shook suddenly ;
And I was 'ware of one, hoarse and tired out,
Wlio asked of me,  ' Hast thou not heard it said ?
Thy lady, she that was so fair, is dead.'
Then lifting up mine eyes, as the tears came,
I saw the Angels, like a rain of manna,
In a long flight flying back heavenward ;
Having a little cloud in front of them.
After the which they went and said ' Hosanna !'
And if they had said more, you should have heard.
Then Love spoke thus : ' Now all shall be made clear
Come and behold the lady where she lies.'
These idle phantasies
Then carried me to see my lady dead.
Her ladies put a white veil over her.
And with her was such very humbleness
That she appeared to say, ' I am at peace.' "
He wept in his dream and sobbed, " Oh I Beatrice, peace
be with thee," and the lady with him wept too, thinking
it was the pain of his infirmity, and other ladies ran and
wakened him saying, " Sleep no more, be not disqiiieted;"
and for them he wrote the poem describing it all.
* Early Italian Poets, Rosetti.
7'he Attempt. 59
It was a presentiment of the grief to come. Far off
in the centuries as that grief is, it stands recorded
in such bm-ning words that, as we read them, the old
sorrow moves us yet; so long healed, we may beheve, so
lost in the joy of the future, so salutary in its influence on
the survivor, yet so intensely bitter that it has given
words for the saddest moments of human life. The
sonnet marking real joy in his ideal love, beginning,—
Si lungamente m' ha tenuto Amore,
E costumato alia sua signoria,
Che si com' egli m' era forte in pria
Cosi mi sta soave ora nel core,
was never finished. There is an abrupt break, and the
words follow,—" Quo modo sedet sola civitis plena po-
pulo! facta est quasi vidua domiua gentium. I was
still occupied witla this poem when the Lord God of
Justice called my most gracious lady to Himself, that
she might be glorious under the banner of the most
blessed Queen Mary, whose name was greatly reverenced
by the holy Beatrice." After his eyes were wearied
with weeping, he wrote Avhat he calls a poor little
widowed poem, so beautiful, that it is unfair to give
extracts, though one will be found heading the chapter.
In another quaint poem, entitled the 9tli of June, 1290
(the day Beatrice died), he expresses, with great force, the
more weary and irritating aspect of affliction, which is
felt at times replacing a tenderer, nobler grief. Sorrow
comes, and says she will stay with him, and ushers in
sickness and grief for company. " Go forth," he says in
vain; she stops arguing; Love now enters all in mourning
raiment; Dante, certainly out of temper, demands,
" What ails thee trifler ? " and he replies, " A grief to be
gone through, for our own lady is dying, brother dear."
The desire to find no comforter but Death, who makes all
soiTow brief, seems to inspne others of Dante's touching
poems.    In one he says,—
" Whatever while the thought comes over me
That I may not again
Behold that lady whom I mourn for now,
About my heart my mind brings constantly
So much of extreme pain
That I say, soul of mine, why tarriest thou ?
Truly the angu'sh soul, that we must bow
Beneath, until we win out of this life
Gives me full oft a fear that trembleth,
So that I call on Death,
Even as on sleep one calleth after strife.
60
The Attempt.
Saying, come unto me ; Life showeth grim
And bare ; and if one dies, I envy him."
But a fuller life, not death, was to be wrought in him
through the memory of Beatrice.
To be Continued.
" ^pr life's fitful fmr, h ^Ittp txdV
Sleep well, for it is night—
Night over land and seas ;
The moon is sending white
Snow-showers on the trees ;
Sleep, thou art faint with pain ;
Night hath a potent spell
For weary heart and brain,
Sleep well, sleep well.
Sleep well, for it is night
Over the sin-stained land ;
We look in vain for light,
On one or the other hand.
Night is the hour of dread—
The hour and power of hell;
We weep not when the dead
At night sleep well.
Sleep well, for after night
The morning cometh on.
And visions of deliaht
Grow real with the dawn.
When we shall wake, or how,
God knows—we cannot tell.
Death-crowned is thy brow.
Sleep well, sleep well.
R.
—OO^OO-
A TALE   OF   THE   FORTY-FIVE.
i
CHAPTEE   III.
THE YOUNG CHEVALIER.
In spite of the laughing disbelief with which Barbara pro¬
fessed to treat Elspet's dream or vision, the old woman's
forebodings left an uneasy feeling in her mind. She was
angry with herself for the folly of letting any such thing
disturb her, but, superstitious, at once by virtue of her
race, and of her own impressionable temperament, a
superstition which had been deepened by many a weird
tale which had beguiled her childhood, and by the moun¬
tain solitude in which she had been brought up, it was in
vain she tried to rid herself of a feeling of some dreadful
unknown future, which seemed to hang like a dark cloud
ill
The Attempt. 61
between her and the sunshine of the present. With the
old, motherly, protecting love which had always been her
attitude towards her motherless younger sister, it never
once entered her head to relieve her own mind by speak¬
ing of the matter to Nancy. To Elspet, she laughed at
and made light of it, but none the less, she went about
her household concerns that morning with a graver face
and a sedater step than usual. When she met the lovers
again at dinner, she was at first silent and absent, so much
so that Nancy began to banter her, declaring she
seemed most like a love-sick maiden, and to speculate
as to whether any of the gay chevaliers she had met at
Prince Charlie's court had anything to do with her abstrac¬
tion. Seeing that her gravity was observed, Barbara
laughed off her sister's banter; and, making a strong effort,
forced herself to join in the merry conversation.
The more she saw of him, the more she was attracted by
young Macdonald, and the more she felt convinced that
her sister's happiness was in good and safe hands, and
gradually the fears that old Elspet's auguries had induced
became fainter and fainter, till at last they disappeared
altogether, and she joined with all her heart in the happy
talk and laughter of the others. After dinner, young
Macdonald took his leave, and the two sisters sat down
together on the broad window-seat of the old hall, to talk
over all that had happened to each of them during their
first separation.
"Well, Babby," said Nancy, nestling close up to her
elder sister, "and how do you like Alaster, now that you
have seen him at last % "
" Very much, vay darling," said Barbara, stroking fondly
the clustering chestnut curls that drooped over her shoul¬
der, " so much, that I think, after all, I must be content
to let him have the largest share in my little sister's
heart," she added, half sadly,
" No, no, not that, Babby, nobody can ever be to me
what you have been,"
Barbara smiled fondly, and shook her head. " It's no use,
Nancy dear," she said, " there is something stronger than
even a sister's love, and it has come to you, I saw it in
your eyes this morning."
" Indeed, Babby, it's no such thing, I love Alaster dearly;
but I wouldn't give your little finger for his whole body.
I only saw him the other day, and haven't you nursed me
and loved me ever since I was a baby ? "
62 The Attempt.
But Barbara only smiled and said, " It's all true, Elfie,
but it's no use reasoning about it, I saw it in your eyes.
And it's all right, dear, that it should be so," she added
tenderly, " you know the Bible tells us that ' a man shall
leave father and mother, and cleave unto his wife.' God
meant it to be so, Elfie, and it's only our selfishness that
objects."
"I don't know about 'father and mother,'" grumbled
Nancy, " but the Bible says nothing about sisters, and I
know I wouldn't leave you for all the husbands in broad
Scotland."
" AVell well, dear, it's all right, I'm not going to lose^ny
little sister, I'm only going to get a big brother you know,
and a right noble brother too, or I'm much mistaken."
A softened happy light shone in Nancy's brown eyes aa
she nestled closer to her sister and said, " I thought you
would like him, Barbara."
"Now Nancy, tell me all about the wooing; you're far
before me you see, and know all about it; and poor me,
who never had a real lover, would like just to know how
they set about it."
"Oh Barbara I such nonsense," laughed Nancy, "t/ou
not had a real lover, when I came in on the Laird of New-
haugh down on his knees in the hall, and his wig all gleet
with tearing it in his despair, and young Graham, of Loch-
abers, that told papa, " By Jove, sir, she's the finest young
woman between Land's End and John o' Groats, and if
she'll marry me, I'll never swear another oath, sir, and go
to church once every Sunday;' and—"
" Hush, hush, lassie, do you call tJiese true lovers, I want
to know how people go about it when its the real thing,
and not make-believes like that."
Then smiling and hiding her blushing face on her sister's
shoulder, Nancy told how the sweet old song had been sung
to her, and the twilight closed around them still sitting in
the window-sill of the darkening room, and their voices
grew lower and more hushed, and their hearts opened more
freely to each other as the twilight deepened. Ah ! how
often did that holy twilight hour of perfect confidence
and love recur to Barbara's mind when the shadows
that fell arotmd them were deeper and gloomier than
those shades of evening in the old, darkening hall! They
were still sitting there, almost silent now, when the
rumble of Avheels on the gravel outside, and a loud bark
from Oscar startled them from their quiet reveries.    The
The Attempt. 63
front door was opened by a hand that evidently under¬
stood its fastenings, and before the girls had time to reach
the passage the hall door also was opened, and, by the
light of a lantern which he held in one hand, the girls
recognised their father, muffled up, though he was, in a
large travelling cloak and cap which nearly concealed both
face and figure.
" Papa!" exclaimed Nancy, starting forward eagerly.
" Hush, hush, my dear," said Colonel Forbes, putting his
finger on his lips, " I do not wish it known to any but
you and Barbara, and old Elspet that I and this gentleman,
pointing to another muffled figure, which, the girls now
for the first time, discerned in the passage, " are in the
house; we are here," he added, hfting his hat, " on the
king's business. Barbara, my dear," turning to his
eldest daughter, " tell Elspet to get the best room ready
speedily for this gentleman, he must needs be tired with
travel, and make ready what supper you can at once."
Barbara went immediately to fulfil her father's orders,
and as she passed nearer the stranger, and for a moment
met his eyes, she started and stood still for a moment,
but instantly recovering her self-possession she proceeded
on her errand.
Her father and the stranger exchanged glances,
and then the latter stepping forward and throwing
down his travelling cap on the table, exclaimed with a
laugh, " By my troth, Forbes, it's of little use, bright eyes
will be sharp eyes too, your fair daughter hath not forgot
the galliard I danced with her at Edinburgli."
A shadow came over the Colonel's face as he said
hesitatingly, "Is it prudent sire? I could answer for my
daughter's loyalty with my life, yet your majesty's fortune
is a terrible die to hang on the discretion of a young
maiden," and he glanced uneasily at Nancy who stood
gazing amazedly at the young stranger, whose long
curling locks of yellow hair had at once betrayed him, on
the removal of his cap, as the far-famed and ill-fated
Charles Stuart.
" Nay, then I too will answer for your fair daughter's
discretion with my life," said the young Chevalier, " and
in proof thereof, I have this moment put my life in her
hands; lips like those were never made to betray the
unfortunate."
" Nay, sire, a Forbes of Milla Forres, man or woman, was
never  known  to betray friend   or foe, much less their
64 The Attempt.
lawful sovereign," answered the old man with a tinge of
hauteur in his voice. " Nancy, go and help your sister to
provide the best that Milla Forres has to offer to the
future king of Scotland."
When Nancy was gone, the young Chevalier sat down
somewhat dejectedly by the table. " Hardly so sure to
be king of Scotland yet, my trusty friend," he said sadly,
" Charles Stuart has much to do ere he can sit on the
throne of his fathers."
"If not of Scotland yet su'e, at least of all true Scottish
hearts," answered the old man, " and ere long of Scot¬
land too."
Here Elspet entered the room to lay the supper. The
moment she saw the stranger who sat by the table, she
started and crimsoned all over, and nearly let the supper
tray fall in her surprise and alarm.
The Chevalier laughed at her evident recognition, and
said, " Your daughter is not the only one who has sharp
eyes in this house, Milla Forres."
" You need not fear for Elspet's fidelity sire," said the
Colonel.
The Chevalier turned to the old woman, with that stately
courtesy which made him a favourite alike with rich and
poor, " My good woman," he said " you too are a friend
of the unfortunate Charles Stuart ? "
''^ Aj, ay, sir," said Elspet, curtsejong over and over
again, in her delight and confusion ; " I am that, and sae
Avere my forbears afore me, an' its a prood woman is
Elspet Forbes that her auld een should hae been blest wi'
a sicht o' ye, an' her auld hands baket the breed ye
are to eat,"
" Many thanks, my good woman, the bread will be all
the sweeter, I warrant, that it comes from a friend's hands.
Come Milla Forres, the mountain air has somewhat
sharpened my appetite, shall we begin upon my friend
Elspet's good cheer ? "
Jeanie Morison.
(To he continued.)
The Attempt. 65
HELD FOR MUTUAL ENQUIRY AND ENLIGHTENMENT.
Subject—'"^e Age of a Man."
Much conjectm-e having existed on this point, and it
being considered a subject of the deepest interest to the
fraternity of Flies, the meeting was numerously attended,
and the most learned individuals of the race were expected
to take part in the discussion.
Sir   Fly   the   Dragon,  being voted into  the  chair,
remarked, that he felt unworthy to occupy a seat of so
much honour ; that he was painfully conscious he bad not
given the subject nearly the attention which had been
bestowed on it by his friends, the Houseflies; that his
avocations had rather called him away fi-om that most
wonderful being whom they had met to  consider; and
though he had had thereby the benefit of a larger range
of observation, his  roving   life  had  debarred  him   the
advantages resrdting from systematic notice and steady
calculations.    Of one thing, however, he could assure the
audience: wherever he had met with flies, aye, even with
midges, who had given the subject their attention, they
all deemed the views that would be presented to them at
that meeting to be built on a foundation so firm, and the
conclusions to rest on evidence so incontestable, that it
was   utterly   impossible    they   could    be    overthrown.
Certainty, absolute certainty, was written on their deduc¬
tions,  and  if man,  whom   they  discussed,   were   even
himself to utter words suited to their comprehension, he
would  sooner  believe  that  that  sovereign  being were
himself deceived,  or perhaps seeking to deceive them,
than that   their  conclusions,   drawn  from   premises   so
indisputable, could be mistaken.    (Buzz, biizz, buzz, and
great applause.)
The Housefly was now introduced, and when quietness
was restored, he spoke as follows: Fellow Diptera, it is
with much pleasure I announce the subject of debate pro¬
posed for the present hour: the Age of the Man, whom we
frequently behold coming in and going out of this apart¬
ment, in which the whole of my life has been spent. As
regards the facts that I shall bring before you, not only
UAKcn 1873, I
66 The Attempt.
can I rely on my o^vn most careful observations, but I
have the records of my ancestors, which I have found
treasured in the dust of the chamber corners, and which
extend over a period of six years.    My first calculation
regarding" this man's age is based upon his mcreasing
height.    During my own life-time, I have not been able,
even with the investigation of a fly's eye, to detect any
perceptible   difference.     A  film may have been spread
over the cuticle of the head and shoulders, and there has
been a decided lengthening of the tubes which abound on
the upper surface of the head.    It is probable that these
furnish new material for height, and that the flesh gradually
increases  round  their  roots.     But,  compared with  the
antiquity of this wonderful, this colossal being, my own
life is biit as a moment.    I am, therefore, very glad to have
some data on which we can rely.    A learned fly who lived
six years ago—that, as you well know, is the record of an
antiquity of which few remains are existing—this fly, my
great-grandfather, six times removed, has given the most
minute description of this same individual as  he then
appeared.    I hold other documents bringing down evi¬
dence  to  the  present  moment  of the  identity  of the
individual.    The step of a fly did at that period, even as
it does now, measure the twentieth part of an inch.    The
record states that three flies successively made the journey
from the sole of the man's foot to the crown of his head;
that this journey was thrice repeated, and that the exact
measurement of the individual was 1439 steps.    We have
no record from this time for four- years, and then the
measurement, conducted on improved scientific principles,
amounted to 1440 steps.     Within the last two years a
difference has again been perceived of half a step, con¬
sequently we may reckon that in six years the man has
made an increase of stature of three-fortieths of an inch;
or, to simplify the calciflation, one-tenth of an inch in
eight years; or, more easily, one fly's step in four.    Now,
assuming that he has originated in a molecule, it is impos¬
sible for us to form any notion of the time that passed
before the proto-expanse, Avliich we now know as the sole
of his foot, was formed; but supposing a uniformity in
his growth—and we have no reason for believing that
other agencies have been at work than those which we
and   our   forefathers   have   observed—they   are    quite
sufficient, give us but unlimited time, to account for his
present appearance.    And here we may form some esti-
The Attempt. 67
mate of his age: 1440 steps multipled by 4 (the number
of years the growth takes to measure a step), amounts to
5760, and 2 for the half step makes the exact number of
5762 years during which the man—how amazed, if he
understood fly language,' would he be to know the close
and accurate calculations of which a tly's brain is capable !
—yes, 5762 years, I repeat, at the lowest computation, must
be the age of the individual man before us. (Buzz, buzz.)
It is a space of time absolutely beyond our grasp. Con¬
sider how countless must have been, during that time, the
flutterings of wings of oiirselves and our ancestors—that
momentary period by which all our ordinary calculations
are reckoned. A learned friend of mine has started another
hypothesis, very ingenious, and apparently borne out by
a remarkable fact which he is to bring before the meeting.
It -will not, however, in any way overthrow my theoi-y
of the amazing antiquity of the man. Nay, it rather opens
out another thought, which may multiply my thousands
by tens of thousands; and, oppressed ^\^.tll the vast Aveight
of years, too many by far for an insect of the day to
calculate, I leave the subject, feeling assured that, how¬
ever astonishing the period may seem, it is as certain as
the many eyes which have so illuminated our imderstand-
ings; and no fly, nor even man himself, can gainsay it.
(Buzz, buzz, buzz, and prolonged applause.)
The Fly of a New Idea being now introduced, he
advanced-with some hesitation, and continued the debate:—
It hardly becomes me in the presence of so distinguished
an anthropologist as my friend who has just finished his
discourse, to presume to speak; but he was pleased to
admire the ingenuity of my hypothesis, and though not
quite satisfied of its correctness, felt that it was not
impossible but that future discoveries might verify the
same. He therefore wished me to bring it forward before
this learned assembly. My thoTight is this: instead
of the original molecule, from which man is constructed,
being found in the sole of the foot, I have reason to
believe it is developed from the centre of his body, I
have often rested on the central part of a man, and have
felt, at regular intervals, distinct u.ndulations of the
surface. This makes me think that the seat of en¬
largement lies there; that the man was originally a
partially developed torso; that then the head, afterwards
the arms, and lastly, the legs, have been formed. The
arms I place before the legs as being nearer this centre of
68 The Attempt.
undulations—probably, of living energy. 1 am strength¬
ened in this belief, by having beeii able to make very
minute observations on the sole of his foot. I am a
hoary-headed fly now, approaching my ninetieth day. I
and my friend Fly Inquiry, at that time living in an
apartment above this, had our attention directed to this
subject, and, as in that room two of the human species
slept, we determined to use our finest instruments for
mensuration, and to report, night after night, the changes
which we might observe. Neither of us could find the
least difference in the upper surface of the foot, but in
the sole—now observe, this is according to my theory of
gradual increase t(jwards the extremities—there was a
perceptible thickening, and the substance grew harder.
(Buzz, buzz). I can speak of seventy-three days' ex¬
perience, and the diiference is exactly the twentieth part
of a step. Now observe the exactness of the calculation:
the twentieth part of a step in seventy-tlu-ee days would
be equal to the fourth of a step in one year, or to the half
step which has been observed in the last two years.
(Buzz, buzz, and applause). I have, however, during the
last thirty days made a still more startling discovery.
At the extreme end are five digits, a portion of whose
surface is covered with a hard bony substance. It is in
this the growth is most surprising. If it is, as my
hypothesis would lead us to believe, the last extension of
the molecule, these horny substances are destined to play
a very important part in the yet undeveloped history
of man. During these thirty days, there has been at
least two steps of increase. At this rate, it would, during
a year, be equal to more than an inch. Then think,
if man live yet a thousand years, and the same rate
of growth continue, think of the enormous claws that
would be formed, ploughing, or digging, or mining
.the whole surface of the earth. (Much buzzmg). There
is but one objection to this anticipation. My friend who
made observations, similar to my own, on the other
human being, after watching a growth of the horny part
at the same ratio as the specimen I investigated, foimd,
on the fourteenth day of observation, all the additional
substance had disappeared, and it was reduced to a
somewhat lower level than before. But why should we
for a moment think that a phenomenon wholly unac¬
countable, observed on one individual of the human
species,  must   be   common  to  all ?    No   symptoms   of
The Attempt 69
separation of the new from the old substance could be
detected by me ; and is there anything improbable in the
supposition, that these horny organs are destined for a
gigantic growth, when we consider the size of the trees,
which are evidently not nearly so important in creation
as man, and still more, when we read in the records of our
forefathers of the erection, sometimes during tlie life of a
single fly, of a habitation measuring 6000 steps in height
as well as in length and breadth? (Loud and continued
buzzing).
The Bee, the most learned geometrician of the party,
now rose, and the Houseflies warmly applauded a lady,
the  powers   of   whose   mathematical  mind,   tliey  were
conscious, far exceeded those of their own.    The lowest
hum was silenced, and the meeting paid the most marked
attention.    The Bee fully believed, with the last speaker,
that man had been developed from a centre rather than a
basis ; but she considered that the original point was in
the head rather than in the heart.    She supported her
opinion by observing, first, the much greater consohdation
of the head.    In order to ascertain the fact she had twice
risked her life by digging into man with her sting.    On
one   occasion she   chose the  crown   of his  head;   but,
pointed as the instrument Avas, she could penetrate a very
short way below the surface, owing to the   exceeding
hardness   of   the   structure.    On  another  occasion  she
chose, what she believed was called, the calf of the leg ;
and then the softness of the flesh was such that she could
have  remained digging in as   deep  as  the  instrument
would allow,  had not a sudden shriek and convulsive
movement, and the direction to her of flashing eyes—
those eyes in the monster she so much dreaded—made
her feel that life was  more  than  present  pleasure  or
scientific knowledge, and drawing up her sting she flew
through the open window with the utmost speed.    Are
not, continued she, dryness and hardness characteristic
of age %    Who would think that alluvial mud was older
than granitic rock—man does not, I know—and is it not
within the compass of Bee knowledge that the flower is
younger than the stem ?    Then who woidd imagine that
the fleshy leg is older than the bony head %    But I have
other proofs.    We have only to look round this room, and
we see representations of the half-formed man.    As it
happens, we see him in four different stages.    Over the
chimney-piece is simply a head, the first stage of man :
70 The Attempt.
on this side, his head and shoulders; there, opposite us,
is the body partly developed, and the arms Uke^vise ;
whilst underneath the  head  is hung a picture   of the
perfect man as we now see him.    Could evidence be more
conclusive?    There is man in different ages, drawn by
man's   own  hand;   and  were   our  lives  prolonged,  we
might see the nails extending and perhaps branching out
until they rose from the feet like the antlers of a stag,
aye, and perhaps leaves may grow upon them, and they
become walking  trees, to   shadow man,  or  even fruit-
bearing  trees,  so that he   may be destined yet  to be
developed  into   a  self-supporting   organisation.    (Buzz,
buzz, and tremendous applause).    But I am indulging in
speculations   of the  future,   instead   of quietly  making
known my calculations of the past.    These are somewhat
abstruse and will require much study.    I have therefore
written them in honey on a rose leaf, and will leave them
with you.    I have reckoned the probable time for the
formation of head, body, limbs, etc., and you will find
that instead of 6000 I must have 20,000 years for the
growth of the man.    The thick part of the body must
have requu-ed a much longer time than the sKghter limbs,
and the arms alone must have taken many centuries.    I
have only one more remark to make.    Not having con¬
fined myself to one room, like my esteemed friends the
Houseflies, I have observed more varieties of the human
being than they have, and I feel there is something very
anomalous in the tubes on the surface of the head.    It is
undoubtedly the sjDecial formation of the present epoch
of man.    Though the pictorial records of the past and
careful scientific research show the  successive   eras  of
heads, arms, legs, etc., I have never witnessed personally
a  half-formed  man;   but  the different  stages   of hair-
growth are now visible to one, like myself, of somewhat
extended observation.    From this, I imagine that man¬
kind  are   not   all   contemporaneous.    The  limbs  being
equally developed, whether the species is large or small,
marks  them  of   one   period  in   creation,   but  the  hair
probably reveals an earlier or later formation during that
epoch.    Some with hair of great length, thirty inches
long, I imagine to be the most aged; and others where
no hair is on the top of the head, only, so to speak, around
the edges,  I  have  no   doubt  are  the  youngest.    This
capillary formation is, to my mind, the most interesting
part of the structure of man, at least to bees and flies, for
The Attempt. 71
it most nearly resembles parts of our own organisation,
I trust I have not trespassed too long on your attention,
but I am glad to add the stores of knowledge which I
have gathered to the elucidation of this great subject,—
" The Age of a Man." The Bee resumed her seat amidst
the loudest demonstrations of applause.
Sir Fly the Dragon rose to propose that the cordial
thanks of the meeting be given to the Houseflies and
Bee, who had bestowed so much time and attention on
these matters, and who had made such abstruse calcula¬
tions, that proofs had been most conclusively adduced to
show that the age of a man was altogether beyond the
calculation of an insect. It was enough, he continued,
to cause quite a flutter of the wing, to remember the
absurd notions that they had at one time held, and which
their fathers devoutly believed, even that the life of a
man seldom reached a hundred years. Away with such
a midge-like idea I Man's days are not like those of a fly
to be easily reckoned. Generations after generations of
diptera must pass away, but this man would still exist,
and that with a development of which their most flying
imaginations—surely, that is descriptive of the flights of
a fly's mind—must fall immeasurably short. (Buzz,
buzz.) To you, my most learned friends, I again repeat,
the thanks of this meeting are most cordially tendered.
At this there was much buzzing and applause, which was
interrupted by
A quiet old Fly in the corner rising to make a few
remarks. He said,—I feel not less than Sir Fly the
Dragon how much we are indebted to our very learned
friends who have favoured us with the result of their
patient researches and abstruse calculations. I cannot,
and therefore I dare not, contradict their assertions ; but
there ar» a few questions that will revolve in my brain,
and which, even after listening to their learned discourses,
I only feel to be more importunate than before. I have a
natural dislike to take things for granted, and I like facts
better than hypotheses. I receive as facts—for the testi¬
mony seemed conclusive—that the man whose age we
met to discuss has groM^n the step of a fly in four years,
and that he now measures 1440 steps. But where is the
proof that for a number of years—my brain cannot hold
the number; I painfully feel it is but the brain of an old
fly—he has grown in the same ratio % It seems also a
fact that the tubes on the upper surface, and the horny
12 The Attempt.
substances at the digital extremities, are growing at a
much more rapid rate. If ratio changes with distance,
why not with time also ? The argument of the increase
from the head downwards, borne out by pictures, is
admirable and nearly conclusive, but still my stupid old
head, whose rusty gateway needs forcing with positive
proof, inquires. Is it not possible that man might draw
the head and leave the limbs unrepresented'? The
pictures, he thought, militated against the theory of the
hair being the last development, as one of the head
alone had the hair very abundant.
Here the Bee rose and said:—Not at all; it rather
favours my theory, that mankind, though coeval, are not
contemporaneous. The present is the epoch of the foot
formation. The hair, which belongs to the oldest forma¬
tion—the head—has been, I gather from the pictures,
common to aU; and, as each formation is perfected, is
probably cast off, even as we insects do the shell of our
chrysalis.    (Buzz, great approbation.)
The old Fly bowed, and continued:—It is possible; but
again, it was thought that the hardness of the head
proved its antiquity. What is thought, then, of the
hardness of the horny, digital substance now in course of
formation 1 [The Bee looked much displeased, changed
her buzz into a hiss, which was taken up by the assembly,
and the interruption lasted some time.] At last the old
Fly continued his speech :—Excuse me for not giving
implicit credence to the theories advanced. It is my
matter-of-fact brain that thinks the proofs inconclusive
(increased murmurs), and, however interesting the en¬
quiries, I am not better informed than before of the age
of this wonderful being who sits beside us. Let us, then,
speak diffidently, for, if he understand our words, they may
possibly seem to him as ridiculous in their absurdity as to
us they appear great in their wisdom. (Renewed disap¬
probation.) I fear my incredulity of the theories advanced
is distasteful to you, but my aged grandfather, with a
peculiar turn of his venerable proboscis, has often said,
" My son, be careful, lest thou fly beyond thy flight.
Flies are not made to follow the lark. They have the
gift of a wonderful eye ; blessed with a reflective, but not
a reasoning, power. Meddle not thou, therefore, Avith
what thou canst not calculate." (Hissing and great
disapprobation.)
The sound of the commotion roused the man, and the
The Attempt. 73
insects' eyes, quite fitted to detect in an atom of a moment
that his eye was directed towards them, gave speedy
information of his intentions, and in an instant the council
was dissolved and the diptera dispersed.
Aliqua.
Come to thy casement, sweet my love I
All the night long I've watched for thee 1
Come 'neath the glittering stars above,
Waiting thy smile to see !
All wearied life has sunk to rest,
All sounds in stillness sleep.
And ling'ring here, though yet unhlest,
My patient watch I keep.
Thou smil'st on the flowers that round thee throng,
Thou turn'st to the winds that to thee sigh,
Thou heedest the wild bird's pleading song,
But still unheard am I.
The flowers will fade, the bii-ds will wing
Their flight o'er land and sea,
But while time lasts my thoughts will cling
To thee, my love, to thee!
See now Aurora's golden ray
Night's drowsy eyes in brightness steeps !
Back from her wild dark brow away
Her diamond-starred hair she sweeps I
The pearly light is glimm'ring dim
Where ocean's moan is heard,
And hark I the low wind's morning hymn—
One word, my love—one word !
Melensa.
MARCH 1873-
74 The Attempt.
A   TALE   OF   THE   FORTY-FIVE.
CHAPTER   IV.
LORD PITSLIGO'S  CAVE.
Ere day-break next morning, Colonel Forbes and his
illustrious guest had quitted Milla Forres. Old Elspet
was the only member of the household who was aware of
their departure, for the Prince had protested so earnestly
against disturbing his fair hostesses of the night before
at such untimeous hours, that Colonel Forbes had at last
given a reluctant consent to allow old Elspet to wait
upon him at the hasty breakfast of which he partook
before starting, without calhng upon his daughters to
minister to him with their own fair hands.
" Good morrow to you, my good woman ; your bread
was most excellent; it was easy to see that it was baked
by loyal hands, and Charles Stuart thanks you for it
kindly," said the Prince, as he leant from his saddle to
hand back the empty quaigh from which he had just
drunk his duch-an-dorich,—that unfailing " God speed
you " of Highland hospitality,—and with it tried to slip a
piece of gold into Elspet's hand; but the old woman drew
it back.
" Na, na," she said, " ne'er shall it be said as a Forbes
took siller for serving her lawfu' Prince, an' he in trouble.
Mony thanks to your majesty, a' the same," she added,
curtseying low.
"But, my good woman, it would ill become Charles
Stuart to allow such faithful service to qo unrewarded,"
said the Prince; "if you will not take the money, how shall
I reward your services ? "
" Ah sir, ye'r Majesty, I mean, there's service an'
service, an' there's a service that can neither be boucht
nor yet paid for wi' siller."
" True, my good woman; I did not mean to pay
you for your loyal affection, that, I know, I could never
do, but I would give you something to show that Charles
Stuart is not ungrateful."
" Ye hae paid me ower and ower again, ye'r Majesty,
when ye deigned to thank auld Elspet, wi' ye'r ain lips,
The Attempt. 75
for the trifle o' service she has done ye ; but gin ye wad
gie me something to mind me that I hae been sae
honoured, gie me a siller groat, that I can wear roun'
my neck to my dying day."
The Chevalier drew a ring from his finger, and saying
kindly, " There, my good woman, that will be as good a
keepsake as a siller groat," he struck his spurs into his
horse, and rode hastily away, followed by Milla Forres,
leaving old Elspet curtseying to the ground.
The first streaks of dawn were just beginning to break
over the hill tops as they rode up the glen, and the first
stir among the birds, and first rustle of the leaves, to foretell
the coming day. The hills loomed large in the half-
twilight, and the morning star was still shining brightly
as they wound along over the rugged mountain road.
The Chevalier rode on in silence, evidently buried in
painful thought, and Colonel Forbes respected his abstrac¬
tion. As the day-light broadened, and sounds of life
began to be heard in the various Highland cottages which
they passed, Colonel Forbes' face grew more watchful and
anxious. He looked sharply at the occasional shepherds
whom they met in those mountain solitudes, and started if
they encountered a bare-footed Highland lass carrying her
pitcher to the mountain burn. The Chevalier, on the other
hand, rode along as if unconscious of all around him, and
Colonel Forbes had to repeat his whispered suggestion to
muffle himself more completely in his cloak, several times
before he seemed to hear it As the morning wore on,
mists began to gather on the hill-tops, and gradually
rolling dowTi their rugged sides, filled the valley between,
and enveloped the two horsemen in their dusky folds.
Then, for the first time. Prince Charles broke the long
silence. Pointing Avith his riding whip to the mist roUing
on to meet them, he said—
" Ay, Milla Forres, I fear it is even with the fate of
the House of Stuart as with this morning's promise,—
bright at the dawning, but setthng ere noon into mist and
darkness."
"Nay, my liege," answered his companion; "the mists
of his native hills do but conspire, with the true hearts
that dwell under their shadow, to shelter the heir of Scot¬
land from the eyes of his enemies, tiU the time be come
when he may sit fearlessly, in open day, on the throne of
his fathers."
The Prince smiled sadly.
" You liave a ready wit, Milla Forres, yet I fear my
76 The Attempt.
figure was the truer.    Do we approach this cave where
we are to meet my Lord of Pitsligo ?
" Yes, sire; yonder are the Boulders of Buchan, in half
an hour we shall be there."
The road now wound along the top of the magnificent
crags that overhang the sea on the north coast of Aberdeen-
shire ;  rocks inaccessible save to the wild sea mew that
builds her nest on their crags, with the mighty northern
ocean dashing at their feet.    They passed the bay of Aber-
dour, smiling and sunny now, as if it had never sucked
into its depths—" full fifty fathoms down "—Sir Patrick
Spens and his " merry men  a'."    A little past the fiital
bay, Colonel Forbes, first looking cautiously round to see
that no straggling fisherman was in sight, signalled to
the Prince to dismount, and carefully tying their horses
to a ring fastened under an overhanging chflf, he led the
way over the face of the rock, clambering painfully on
hands and knees, and looking back anxiously, at every
moment, to see how the Prince followed him down the
perilous path.    Charles Stuart had been trained to athletic
sports from his boy-hood, and the hardships of his adven¬
turous life, acting upon a nature constitutionally brave and
hardy, had innured him to an utter fearlessness of danger,
which had no small share in endearing him to a nation so
rugged, enduring, and contemptuous of danger, as the
Scotch;   and he  folloAved his   guide down the  perilous
descent,  where the  precipice  literally  hung   over   the
dashing waters beneath,  with unfaltering  footstep and
unAvavering eye.    Perhaps, next to his misfortunes, and
the romance of his position, this hardy courage had the
greatest  infiuence in deepening the  hold the Jacobite
cause had taken in the Highlands of Scotland.
When they had climbed about half way down the cliff.
Colonel Forbes drew aside the branches of a small shrub
which grew on the face of the rock, and kneeling carefully
down, signing the Prince to follow him closely, he crawled
on hands and knees into what seemed a little crevice m the
rock, and disapjDcared fi-om view. Following his example,
the Prince likewise crawled into the darkness. After a
few moments they found the crevice gradually widening
and becoming lighter, till at last they were able to stand
upright in what appeared to be a little subterranean room
of about eight feet square. As soon as the dim light of
the cave enabled him to distinguish objects, the Prince
Baw before him the figure of a tall, venerable looking old
The Attempt. 77
man, standing with uncovered head before him, who
would have knelt and kissed his hand, but the Prince
prevented him; grasping his hand warmly in his own,
and saying as he did so—
'■ Nay, my lord of Pitsligo, we come as grateful guests
to an honoured host, when we visit you here in a retreat
more honourable to you than any castle in broad Scot¬
land."    The old man's eyes ghstened as he answered—
" My liege, since you have thus honoured it, this cave
will be a prouder dwelling place to me than any palace
in the land. Will you be pleased also to honour my
humble fare?" he added, drawing near to a rude table
carved in the rock, on which was spread a substantial
meal. The travellers gladly accepted the courtly old
man's invitation, for a forty mile's ride had whetted their
appetites. As his eyes became more accustomed to the
twilight of the cave, the Prince looked more attentively
at the noble face and figure of his venerable host, and
marvelled at the massive calm of the broad brow, and the
gentle benevolence of the full blue eyes. Constitutionally
sensitive to atmospheres, his spirits began to rise as he
thought that this man was one of his chief supporters.
Frivolous and wavering as Charles Stuart often showed
himself, there was a chord somewhere in his nature that
always thrilled to nobility, in whatever shape he found it,
and he bowed himself immediately in the presence of the
intellectual and moral grandeur which he instinctively re¬
cognised in his venerable host. On his side, Lord Pit¬
sligo, the literary friend of Fenelon and Madame Guyon,
the quietest and the devout Christian, was no less attracted
by the engaging manner and beautiful sad face of his royal
guest. A Jacobite, at once in virtue of family tradition,
of the strong natural conservatism of his refined nature,
and of the generosity that ever clings to a falling cause.
Lord Pitsligo had already risked lands and fame in the
cause of the young man now sitting at his rock hewn
table, and the time was not far distant when he should
gladly risk even life itself for his sake, and when the
cave, which now afibrded him only a convenient place of
concealment for a dangerous meeting, should be the only
shelter of his declining years.
78 The Attempt.
CHAPTER V.
AIASTER's   MISSIOIT.
The Uttle party in the cave soon got into earnest dis¬
course, while partaking of the plentiful, if somewhat rude
repast provided for them. There was need of wise
counsel as well as of strong hands, in the present position
of Prince Charles' affairs, and he listened eagerly to the
sagacious advice and fatherly cautions of the Idnd and
wise old man. It had been well for Charles Stuart if he
had listened as attentively to the veteran's words when his
throne hung in the balance at Carlisle, and his own fatal
folly lost the game. The conversation was carried on in
low eager whispers, for, far as they seemed to be from
the possibility of being overheard, the habit of secrecy
had grown so strong that they instinctively drew close
together, and lowered their voices as they consulted over
the plans of their campaign. Suddenly, in the midst of
their whispered discourse, they were startled by what
sounded like a movement among the branches of the
shrub that concealed the entrance to the cave. They
broke off their conversation in an instant, and sat rigid
and motionless, every power of their being absorbed in
the one act of listening. Again there is distinctly a
rustle among the branches. Prince Charles seized his
gun, and pointed it at the mouth of the cave. He was on
the point of drawing the trigger, when old Lord Pitsligo
laid a restraining hand upon his arm.
" The report may betray us, my liege," he whispered,
" if it be needful, we have other iveapons," laying his hand
on the dirk which hung by his side. Unmistakeably now
there is some one in tlie narrow passage which forms
the entrance to the cave. Lord Pitsligo moved to the
door, and holding his dirk ready in his hand, said in a low
voice,—
" Who comes there ?"
" A friend," replied a low voice from the passage.
" A bold one then, since he comes with his life in his
hand. Friend nor foe shall enter here till he tells his
name and errand."
" My name is Alaster Macdonald, of Castle Ronald,"
answered the voice, " and my errand to warn Charles
Stuart of treachery."
" Alaster Macdonald !" exclaimed Colonel Forbes, " nay,
The Attempt. 79
this must be a traitor. I left Alaster Macdonald in Glen
Forres not eight hours ago ; Pitsligo, guard the entrance."
Prince Charles' hand again rests on the trigger, but
Lord Pitsligo again restrains him.
" Nay, my liege, traitors are ever cowards, and it is no
coward that hath ventured on hands and knees through
that passage to face three desperate men; besides,
methinks I recognise the voice." By this time the
adventuroiis new-comer had crawled to the door of the
cave, and now stood erect in the half-twilight; his kilt
was covered with mud, and dripping with water, and his
jacket half torn from his back.
" By my troth," exclaimed Colonel Forbes, " it is verily
none other than young Castle Ronald, whom I left coui't-
ing my daughter in Glen Forres !" But how came you
here, sirrah f" he asked, his brow darkening, " and who
betrayed to you the king's secrets ? By my troth, if it be
daughter of mine—"
" Colonel Forbes," interrupted the young man eagerly,
" time presses, the enemy are on the track ; if you would
save your king, ask no questions, and follow me."
Colonel Forbes' brow grew yet blacker.
" How, sirrah, shall we follow, who know not if our
leader be a true man or a traitor ?" The young man
straightened himself haughtily.
" Think you, Colonel Forbes, traitor had faced that
passage, knowing it so guarded ? " Then turning to the
Prince, and bending his knee, he said, " I beseech you,
my liege, if you value your life, follow me." The Prince
hesitated, and Colonel Forbes laid his hand uneasily on
his dirk. Lord Pitsligo had stood closely watching the
young man during this conversation; he now turned to
the Prince.
" Follow him, my liege, this is no traitor."
" I can take but one with me," said Macdonald, "more
were observed, but they may not find the entrance to the
cave and, if they should, you are safe, my lord," turning
to Pitsligo, " when the Prince is gone. Colonel
Forbes,," he added, " I hope when you come to know
Alaster Macdonald better, you will trust him more. My
liege, follow me, as swiftly as you may. My boat lies at
the foot of the cliff."
" At the foot of the cliff," exclaimed both Forbes and
Pitshgo together.
80 2he Attempt.
" A wild goat could not scale the Reefer's Rock," added
Lord Pitsligo.
"I have scaled it just now," said the young man. " My
liege," he added, " I beseech you, do not hesitate ; delay
is cleath."
"I follow you," said Charles Stuart resolutely, "lead
the way."
On hands and knees the two crept through the
narrow passage, on to the face of the Reefer's rock.
When he saw the fearful over-hanging precipice, and
heard the wild waves dashing at its base, and playing
with the tiny skiff which was moored at the foot of the
rock, for a moment the Prince grew pale, and his brain
swam ; but summoning up his great personal courage, he
followed his companion dauntlessly. Now clambering
on hands and knees over water-courses, now swinging
themselves from point to point of the projecting cliffs by
some straggling tree root, now springing over chasms—
at last they reached the bottom of the cliff. A half-
audible •' Thank God " burst from Alaster Macdonald as
the Prince set his foot upon the shingle of the little
beach where his skiff was moored. With practised hand
he undid the moorings, and the little boat, with its
precious freight, was soon tossing on the dashing waters.
To explain Alaster Macdonald's unexpected appearance,
I must go back in my story to the morning of that
eventful day at Milla Forres. Barbara and Nancy Forbes
had sat up long the night before, talking over their unex¬
pected visitor, and when they left their rooms rather later
than usual on the following morning, they were much
surprised to hear from old Nancy that their father and
his illustrious guest had left the house before day-break.
" Guid go wi' him, he's a braAV gentleman, an' kens a
guid bannock when he sees it," added old Elspet, as she
recounted, Avitli no small pride shining in her honest old
eyes, her farewell conversation with the young Chevalier.
As the two girls were sitting down to breakfast, Nancy's
quick eyes spied Alaster Macdonald riding up the avenue.
" Barbara," she exclaimed, " there's Alaster coming, do
you think we may tell him about the Prince ? I JinoAv
he would like so much to hear all about him, and you
know what a true Prince Charles' man he is?" But
Barbara shook her head.
'• No, little one," she said, " you must try yom- powers
of keeping a secret, even from Alaster, you know we
promised father to tell no one." Nancy looked disap¬
pointed; but, loyal to the bottom of her warm little heart,
Tlie Attempt. 81
she did not for a moment question the rightness of her
sister's decision, and they both received Alaster as if
nothing particular had happened since their last meeting.
The stream of pleasant talk flowed on, and all three
round the breakfast table were more than usually gay and
happy; their spirits always seemed to rise when together,
as if each found something peculiarly exhilarating in the
society of the others.    At last Alaster said—
" By the way, has old Lauchlan M'Lauchlan begun to
take ' a drappie ' now and then ? "
"Lauchlan M'Lauchlan, impossible!" exclaimed both
the girls together.
" Why on earth do you ask such a question ? " added
Nancy.
" Well," said Alaster, " if he had'nt taken ' a drappie'
this morning, he's gone suddenly ' wud,' that's all."
" Why, he's the soberest, doucest man in the country¬
side," said Barbara. " What can you be thinking of?
What has he been about, Alaster 1"
" As I passed his cottage, this morning," he answered,
" he came limping out, with his crutch under his arm, and
his face all flushed, and caught hold of my horse's bridle;
and I noticed that his hands were trembling so that he
could hardly hold it. I said, ' Good morning to you,
Lauchlan, my man, what is it you want to-day ? ' It was
a long time before he seemed able to make any answer
at all, and when he did, he only said—' Maister Mac-
donald, there are bloodhounds watching the cave on the
Reefer's Rock,' and he hobbled away back to to his house
again."    Nancy laughed merrily.
" The idea of old Lauchlan getting excited about any¬
thing, he must have gone ' wud,' as Alaster says, Barbara,
and what on earth could put bloodhounds in his dottled
old head ? there's not such a thing in the country-side."
Barbara did not answer; and not attaching any import¬
ance to the old man's words, neither her sister nor Alaster
noticed that she had grown suddenly pale. The break¬
fast was nearly over, and soon after they rose from table,
without any more having been said on the subject.
" I am tired, Nancy," said Barbara, " Would you mind
telhng Elspet I'll come to the kitchen in an hour?"
" Halloh! Barbara, you shirking the housekeeping,"
laughed her younger sister, " Elspet will think my care¬
lessness infectious ; I'm so glad she'll have a crow to pluck
with you next," she added, as she ran laughing from the
UABCH 1S73. L
82 The Attempt.
room. The instant she was gone, Barbara rose and shut
the door, and turning to Alaster, who now noticed, for
the first time, that her face was perfectly white, she said
hurriedly,—
" Alaster, let me speak to you while she is gone. That
old man's words had a meaning; hush," she added, as he
seemed going to answer, "there is no time to lose, I
must tell you before Nancy comes back. I am going to
trust you very far; it is a matter of life and death, I
know you will be faithful."
" I will," he answered firmly, " so help me God ! "
" Alaster, the Prince slept here last night; he and my
father have gone to the Reefer's Rock." The young man
started, and grew pale in his turn. " You understand
now," she added, " what the blood-honnds meant, the
king's men must be on his track, he must be warned."
" I will warn him," said the young man quietly.
" I knew you would, but it will be very dangerous. Oh,
how I wish I could do it myself, but my going would only
attract attention, and double the danger. Oh, Alaster, I
cannot bear to ask you to do it, they are armed and
desperate, and may take you for a spy; and that entrance
to the cave,—but what can I do % "
" Trust me, dear Barbara," he said gently, " if human
power can save them, I will."
" But you—oh how I wish I could go myself."
" Dear sister," he said, taking her hand gently, " do not
fear for me, I will take every precaution; you would not
have me to break my allegiance."
" No, anything but that," she said, " and yet— hush,"
she added, " do not frighten poor Nancy," as she heard
her sister coming singing up the stairs.
"• Trust me," he said, in a low voice, as Nancy entered
the room laughing merrily.
" Well, Barbara," she said, " as I told you, you'll have
a nice crow to pluck with Elspet. Do you know what
she said when I told her that you could'nt come to her for
an hour ? "
" No, let us hear," said Barbara, forcing herself to smile.
" She said, ' Guid preserve us gin Miss Barbara's gotten
her head turned next; he's a braw gentleman the—",
then, breaking off with a sudden laugh, remembering the
secret she had to keep, she set her rosy hps firmly
together, and said, " But I won't tell you another word
about it."
{To he continued.)
1
The, Attempt. 83
1 ^ a t r 114.
" Thou takest not away, O Death !
Thou strikest— absence perisheth ;
Indifference is no more ;
The future is all-glowing bright,—
For on the past has fallen a light
That tempts us to adore."—Wordsworth.
Not at once did Dante struggle, through the pain and
depression of his bereavement, to the solace he found in
the work for which it was destined to prepare him. In
his own forcible words, we give an incident of the first
anniversary of Beatrice's death :—" On that day which
fulfilled the year since my lady had been made a citizen
of eternal life, remembering me of her as I sat alone, I
betook myself to draw the resemblance of an angel upon
certain tablets. And while I did this, chancing to turn
my head, I perceived that some were standing by me, to
whom I should have given courteous welcome, and that
they were observing what I did; also, I learned after¬
wards, that they had been there awhile before I perceived
them. Perceiving whom, I arose for saluation, and said,
—' Another was with me.' "
And in less innocent occupations than painting and
poetry, he evidently tried for awhile to forget his grief.
There are indications of a period of recklessness and wild
living, succeeded by a religious reaction, wliich probably
caused liim to enter the third order of the Franciscans ;
and it is clear that about two years after the death of his
lady, love appears again as a great power in his life. A
fair lady, beholding him from a window, seemed greatly to
compassionate him. At first he sought her company,
because something in her air and paleness reminded him
of his lost Beatrice, but at last, he began to rejoice in it
for her own sake. The thought of her became too
pleasant to him, and, mth bitter reproaches to himself
for his infidelity, he yet meditates whether this may not
be a rescue provided by love from his sorrow through the
sweet means of this compassionate lady. But no ;—one
day, at the ninth hour, he seemed in a vision to see again
the glorious Beatrice, clothed in scarlet, and young as
when he first beheld her, and his heart repented the
inclination " with which it had so basely allowed itself to
be possessed, despite the constancy of ray reason; and all
84 Ihe Attempt,
my thoughts returned to their own most lovely Beatrice."
At the same time, he took much to the study of pliilo-
sophy, and read various Latin authors, " understanding,"
he says, " as much as was possible with the amount of
grammar I possessed, and with a little assistance from
my genius. By which genius I had already seen many
things, as it were, in dreams, as may be seen in the Vita
Nuova." We know from history that somewhere near
this date, about 1292, Dante married Gemma Donati, the
marriage being arranged by mutual friends, who hoped
thus to cure him of his lasting grief. On this marriage,
and on his wife, there is a complete and somewhat ominous
silence throughout all his works. It is certain that, after
his exile, they never met again, as she remained in
Florence, where her kinsfolk belonged to the dominant
faction. She had several sons and one daiighter,
Beatrice. Tradition speaks of the marriage as loveless
and unhappy, but nothing by cotemporary ■uiiters wores
than a fretful temper, is alleged to the discredit of Gemma
during the nine years they lived together. However that
might have been, Dante, after a period of restless misery,
once more fixed his affections on the memory of what
Beatrice had been, and his visions of what she was. He
seems to have dwelt upon the thought of her with an
ever-increasing joy, indeed, a sort of belief in real inter-
com'se with her; and the Vita Nuova concludes with
these remarkable words :—" Ajjparve a me una mirabile
visione, nella quale vidi cose, che me fecero proporre di
non dir piu di questa benedetta, infino a tanto clie io non
potessi piu degnamente trattare di lei. E di venire a ci6
io studio quanto posso, si com 'ella sa veracemente.
Sicche, se piacere sara di Colui, per cui tutte le cose vivono,
che la mia vita per alquanti anni perseveri, spero di dire
di lei quello che mai non fu detto d'alcuna. E poi piaccia
a Colui, ch'e sire della cortesia, che la mia anima se ne
possa gire a vedere la gloria della sua donna, cioe di
quella benedetta Beatrice, che gloriosamente mha nella
feccia di Colui, qui est per omnia sa'cnhi hcnedictiis."
" Beloved, O my brother—sorrow worn,
Even in that lady's name who is thy goal.
Sing on tUl thou redeem thy plighted word."
So wrote Cino da Pistoia in a sonnet addressed to Dante;
for this pm-pose, to write more worthily concerning
Beatrice, was known many years before the first book of
the Commedia—the Inferno—appeared in  1307.    Mean-
The Attempt. 85
Avliile, Dante, already so deeply wounded in the affections,
had fallen into other misfortunes, which lasted all his life.
After being raised to the chief magistracy of Florence, the
highest point of ambition to a citizen, he departed on an
embassy to Rome, never to return; for a faction mean¬
while overtlirew his party as tainted with Ghibilinism,
his house was plundered, himself exiled, and an edict
issued shortly afterwards, condemning him, in case of his
return, to be burnt alive. Among other property lost at
first, but afterwards recovered by Gemma, were the first
seven cantos of the Inferno, written, however, not in
Italian, but in Latin. These seem to have been sent five
years later to Marqius Malaspina, under whose protection
Dante then lived, and probably decided him to re-write
and continue his great work. The hopes of ambition had
proved as disappointing to him as the joys of love; but
his misfortunes seem henceforth to have nerved him to
place his affections and his aspirations higher, and fr-om
this time the Commedia was the work of his life. A
wandering life—now in far countries as a poor scholar,
attending the disputations of the universities, certainly in
Paris, perhaps in Oxford; now lingering as near his still
loved Florence as he dared; now staying at some one or
other of the minor courts of the petty tyrants of Italy,
but always homeless, without ties, without possessions—
we cannot wonder that the man brought up in easy com¬
petence, accustomed to honour and triumph in his native
city, should have bitterly realised how "salt was the
bread of others," and how weary the "ascent of other
men's stairs." Various hopes for him flickered at times on
the political horizon, but none were fulfilled; and deep
disappointment at the failure of the last,—an embassy he
undertook for a friendly noble to the Venetians,—is said
to have hastened his death, at the age of fifty-eight, at
Ravenna. He did not long survive the completion of the
Paradiso, though his last work was a free translation of the
Penitential Psalms into Italian verse, with some additions of
his own. From first to last, Beatrice is the presiding genius
of the great poem in which we will now trace her ; always
remembering that first and chiefly, the best commentators
agree Dante meant us to recognise the real woman,
Beatrice Portinari, his early love, though he wished also
to figure in her, not Theology, for that appears separately,
but the personification of blessedness in God. " This
ideahzation of a beloved   mistress," says Count Balbo,
86 The Attempt.
" was done not only by Dante, but by Petrarch, and after¬
wards by many others, called, on that account, Platonists,
some not being poets, but only lovers. These considered
a virtuous and beloved mistress as a means of rising from
vice to virtue, from earth to Heaven, from a devotion to
material and base things to a comprehension of what was
spiritual and divine, and even to Grod himself. This
knowledge and adoration of Grod and blessedness in Him,
is what we find figured under the name of Beatrice. The
allegory does not destroy nor conceal the real image of
Beatrice, but rather elevates and gloiifies her in a manner
which others have attempted, though none have succeeded
like Dante."
And as, describing in the first canto of the Inferno, how,
sore beset with enemies and his own sins, he had lost his
way in the dreary forest, the first streak of light that
glimmers in the dull horizon is when the envoy Virgil, the
kindly guide, tells him he is sent by Beatrice; so she is
etill the inspiration and guiding light in the full glory of
the last cantos of the Paradiso. We can fancy the
pleasure with which Dante put in her mouth the words,—
' L 'amico mio e non della ventura,"
as, in his now darkened life, ho could still dwell on the
reality of that pure and true friendship. The lady has
sped down to Limbo to rescue him; she is so pure and
high, the evil atmosphere cannot hurt nor assail her, but
it is no scene for her, and be does not meet her there.
Dante has to toil thrt)ugh the awful abyss, and labour up
the steep ascent of Purgatory, before the scene begins to
grow beautiful, and the light clear, in preparation for her
presence. Dante and Virgil have reached the groves of
the earthly paradise, where the trees all bend one way,
circled by a river
" With a brown, brown current,
Under the shade perpetual, which never
Kay of the sun lets ia, nor of the moon,"
when a sudden lustre runs across the forest, a delicious
melody is heard, angelic apparitions are seen, and then,
amid a flight of angels scattering flowers, and singing
Benedictris qui venit, appears a lady veiledin snowy white,—
Beatrice herself, like the sun half veiled in vapour rising
in the roseate eastern sky. He could not yet see her face,
but his spirit trembled with aAve, as only in that beloved
long-lost presence, whose virtue had transfixed him before
The Attempt. 87
his boyhood was past. The whole description is of the
utmost beauty, it thrills with the bliss of re-union with
her he loved best on earth, before she had " gone to her
second state," but also with the feeling of the deep
unworthiness of a stained and erring mortal in the pre¬
sence of angehc purity.
" Guardami ben, ben son, ben son Beatrice,"
she says—^words of overpowering delight, even when fol¬
lowed by reproaches for his wanderings in untrue ways,
after her death had left him desolate; pursuing false
images of good that " never any promises fulfil." Silent
and abashed, Dante stands before her, and only when the
angels sing again, and he hears in their sweet melodies,—
" Compassion for me more than had they said
O wherefore, lady, dost thou so upbraid him?"
does the ice congealed about his heart melt into sighs
and tears, while she continues her rebuke, and elicits the
answer,—
" ' Weeping, I said : my steps were turned aside
By the false pleasure present things displayed.
Soon as your face was to my view denied.' "
" How differently," Beatrice replies, •' should my death
have moved thee.
" No lure to equal that fair form of mine
Now unto dust returned, did ever Art
Or Nature to attract thy heart design :
And if with all thy life's supreme delight.
Thy doom it was at my decease to part,
What mortal thing should have allured thy sight ?
Thou should'st have left the treacherous joys of earth,
And followed me, who was no longer such,"
—words which are for ever to be cherished by those whose
affections have been bereaved of their chief earthly object.
At last, when Dante passes the river Lethe, his
pmdfied eyes are allowed to rest on the unveiled
countenance of his mistress; but he will not trust his
poetry to describe her, who seemed more to exceed her
former self than formerly she seemed to him to exceed
others; or to dwell on the ten years' thirst for her
presence that was at last satisfied, as he gazed on her.
They were now re-united for the rest of the vision—a
vision soon, he trusted, to be a glorious reality, when
death should finally set him free. And now upwards
through the spheres of Paradise they soar together, each
fresh ascent he makes by the force of aspiration kindled
88 The Attempt.
by the smile of Beatrice, which irradiates him with ever-
increasing glory.
" O insensata cura de mortali,
Quanto son difettivi sillogismi,
Quei che ti faimo in basso batter I'ali !"—
he exclaims: they are toiling at jurisprudence and
sacerdotalism,—ruling by force or by cunning,—engaged
in commerce and war,—while he, far above the jars and
miseries of this dark, confused world, was rapt in the
bliss of his vision by the side of Beatrice. She, after her
ten years' life among the angels, was ready to answer all
his questions and solve each doubt; and when at last she
quits his side, it is only that he may last see her, above
where he can yet rise, with hands clasped, praying for
him.
Soon after the Paradiso was finished, Dante died in
exile, but he had finished his work; his great poem
was completed in all its symmetry, polished, regular,
and perfected as a crystal. And he had well fulfilled his
hope of writing about his lady what had not before been
written of any woman. The memory of her short retired
life, however beautiful, would probably have passed away
with the next generation, had it not been for'her poet
lover, who has shown us, in the very spring of his genius,
in the deepest pulses of his heart, her lovely image, and
her ennobling influence.
We can best conclude the subject in Dante's own
words, taken from the last address to Beatrice, in the
thirty-first canto of the Paradiso, for in the last two
cantos her name occurs no more, as though all personal
thoughts were lost in the concluding hymn of praise.
" O! lady, in whom all my hope is strong,
And who enduriid to achieve my weal,
To leave thy footsteps traced in deeps infernal.
Of all the many things that I have seen
Through thy great power and thy beneficence
I recognise the grace, I own the virtue.
O, guard thine own magnificence in me,
So that my soul that thou to health has rendered,
May pleasing thee, rise from this mortal life."
E. J. 0.
The Attempt. 89
I It   Ijitring   after   dTulloben.
Royal Academy, 1869.
Sleep, bonnie gentleman, the long sad day is over,
Sleep, bonnie gentleman, the bloody field is fought;
Night's tresses dark sweep heavily the bleeding earth to
cover,
And hide awhile the carnage, the Southron sword has
wrought.
Sleep, bonnie gentleman, your gallant face is weary,—
Your white lips, how they shake, as you murmur in your
sleep!
What sounds of horrid strife in your restless slumbers
hear ye"?
A soldier's rest, fair sir, should more dreamless be aud
deep.
How tight your hand is gTasped on the broad-sword by
you lying !—
The steel is dull and reddened, and flaw aud dent are
there;
How that awful blade has flashed in the wild eyes of the
dying!
There are gore-smears on your fingers, and blood-drops
ia your hair.
But, oh I our own dear lad—lost, royal, noble Charlie,
This night, where is he hiding his sad discrowned head ?
Is he flying through the midnight by lonely mountaki
passes?
Or crouching on the hill-side, the bracken for his bed ?
Keep, 0 God, where'er he be, our heart's darling Prince
from danger I
Stretch over him Thy hand, and protect him with Thy
might;
God  comfort  Scotland's  heart,  and avenge  CuUoden's
slaughter!
And, God save our own Prince Charles, and defend for
aye the right! Mas Alta.
MARCH   1873, M
90 The Attempt.
FOR 1873.
On entering the Exhibition of Paintings for 1873, the
eye is at once struck by the great improvement visible in
the arrangement of the rooms. The obstruction that
formerly existed to the free entrance of the South Room is
removed, so that a complete vista is at once obtained of
the whole length from north to south. You see the
statuary and sculpture facing you, and forming a noble
background to the paintings lining the walls on either
eide. We do not, however, approve of another alteration
that has been made by the new arrangements of the com¬
mittee, and that is, the removal of the architectm-al
drawings to the Small Octagon. They accorded so well
with the water-colours in the North Room, that it is a pity
to have altered their position; and by their proximity
to the oils in the Small Octagon, the effect of both the one
and the other is destroyed, besides obliging the committee,
for want of room, we suppose, to hang a number of excel¬
lent oil paintings completely out of the line of ^aew.
We do not think that, either in the quality or the
quantity of the paintings exhibited, there is any falling
off from former years. On the contrary, the progress
that is made by oiu" younger artists is most visible, and
cannot fail to excite the attention of aU those who make
Scottish art a source of study and interest. Also, as
regards the borrowed pictures, we have in the present
exhibition more than half a dozen, which of themselves
would repay the price of the season ticket which admits
visitors to the paintings. And surely if art be regarded
as the great outcome of a nation, if a people's progress
and civilisation be measured by the poet's pen, the
artist's pencil, or the sculptor's chisel, we have much
reason to rejoice that in these things our little island
holds its own among nations, and may well be proud of
the stand that is taken in European fame by the men
whose works we are now about to remark upon.
According to our usual plan, we will first examine the
borrowed pictures that hang upon the walls before we
proceed to the works of owe own native artists. We
begin, then, with No. 30, North Octagon, " The Marriage
of H.R.H. the   Prince of Wales,"  the property of Her
The Attempt. 91
Majesty. All we have to say of this picture is, that it
displays an amazing amount of work, that it is the largest
piece of canvas we have ever seen upon these walls, and
that Her Majesty's kindness in lending it permits all her
loyal subjects to have an opportunity of witnessing the
representation of a gorgeous pageant in which they were
aU interested. Probably no living artist would have
accomplished so well the portrayal of these innumerable
faces, these surprisingly well-arranged groups, as W. P.
Frith, who is quite at home in English crowds and English
character—witness his "Railway Station" and "Derby
Day,"-
" And all went merry as a marriage bell."
" The light shone o'er fair women and brave men."
For the delineation of such scenes Frith shows himself to
be peculiarly qualified. The groupings are so arranged,
light, colour, shade, and background are so admirably
managed, that not one fair face is lost to view, not one
stalwart noble but is well defined, so that we wonder,
large as the canvas is, how it contains so much; and
while the noble Bride and Bridegroom are the prominent
objects of attraction, still all the surrounding royalty and
nobility, although subsidiary, are well in sight and distinct.
We Avill now turn to a picture of a very different stamp.
We allude to No. 431, South Octagon, " Chill October."
This is the picture that excited so much attention in
London when lately exhibited at the Royal Academy.
Years ago, when Holman Hunt and Evrett Millais first
rose upon the horizon of fame, and when people began to
look on them, to criticise, to praise, and to blame, what
one chiefly heard about Millais was his minute attention
to details, his photographic accuracy in small objects,
a butterfly's wing, a blade of grass, a bit of heather,
or a small flower. The beautiful was of no account with
him,—it must be reality, hard, dry, uncompromising
reality,—with no imagination, no poet's heart and soul to
lift him above the trivialities of detail. His accurate
manipulation, the merit of his sharp and truthful pencil,
were never denied; but it was alleged that the grand and
general effect was lost or unheeded, while the spectator's
mind was microscoped into an intent admiration of the
minute rendering of small objects of still life in the fore¬
ground. He was also charged with violent colour. Bear¬
ing these criticisms in mind, we now ask the spectator
to place himself before this wonderful exposition of living
92      ' The AtUmp.
nature. Here also is microscopic fidelity; look at these
reeds in the foreground, at those burdocks in the middle
distance, they start out from the canyas, and you fancy
you could grasp them in your hand. But now raise your
eyes from these things and suryey the grand waste of
waters before you, with the wonderful reflections of the
dull white clouds aboye, watch the atmosphere of this
picture, for it has an atmosphere, see the lights and shadows,
they almost go and come, see miles and miles of water,
trees, land, and then the blue misty Grampians rising in
the far-off distance,—what breadth of treatment is here,
what wonderful silence, utter stillness, complete repose,
undisturbed eyen by the flight of swifts overhead, winging
their way to summer regions, and leaving behind them
the winter's storms and hurricanes, of which this grand
repose of nature, in all its sweet melancholy, is in this
chill October day the near precursor. In the iar distance
is a solitaiy pedestrian slowly walking towards those soft
willows, gently bending before the rising breeze, which
yet has scarce sufficient force to riiffle the broad bosomed
Tay. This little touch of life is most poetical; too for
away to jar upon oiu* sense of silence, still it gives the
one chord wanting to the scene, and makes us feel how
oft we ourselves have wandered out on such a day, and
with such sweet melancholy around us, with departed
summer behind, and the storms and ice-bound ports of
winter before.
In the South Octagon is also another landscape by a
famous artist. No. 486, •' The Moimtain Torrent," by Peter
Graham. We will confess at once we are disappointed in
this picture. In the first place, the subject is too large
for the canvas, and the middle distance has no chance in
it; then that heavy, brooding, snow-like mist, stifling
the hills in the background, approaches too close to the
mountain torrent in the foreground. There is, however,
great softness and richness of tone and colotu". The
heather-covered hills are smooth as velvet, but there is
an air of overhanging sluggishness and heaviness in the
atmosphere of the whole scene, increased by a want of
force and strength in the mountain torrent, which fails
to throw up its spray Avith any kind of lightness or
vivacity.
Leaving the landscapes for our second notice, we will
now look at No. 234, in the Great Room, Faed'e well-
known  picture  "From Dawn  to  Sunset," exhibited in
The Attempt. 93
Edinburgh some years ago. This charming and_ most
perfect picture must be familiar through the engraving to
every one, so that it is of little use describing it. Faed is
eminently the painter of humble life, and he has the rare
and unusual gift of refining all he touches, of eliminating
the coarse and vulgar element therein, remaining, how¬
ever, always the painter of the " humble poor."
" Let not ambition mock their useful toil,
Their homely joys and destiny obscure,
Nor grandeur hear with a disdainful smile
The short and simple annals of the poor."
In fact, Gray's lines invariably rise to one's memory
when looking at Faed's productions. Both poet and
painter seize upon what is beautiful and human to
excite our sympathy and our love, leaving quite out of
eight the painful and the degrading. The picture before
us, of the humble cottage with its work-a-day inhabitants,
overcome and enveloped in their present grief—the death
of the old mother—calls upon our best sympathies as much
and more than if it portrayed the death of one of the
great ladies of the land, although true and faithful to every
homely detail. No death scene we remember was ever
more finely suggestive of the " Great Presence." We see it
on the countenance of the dutiful and God-fearing son, in
the uplifted warning hand of the good and comely house¬
mother, in the hidden face of the loving daughter, in the
chastened, awe-struck look and arrested attitude of the
healthy, rosy children. All is in sympathy, every line
that is drawn leads up to that one sentiment. The
fragile life is departing, that for years and years has been
reverenced, loved, and worked for by this affectionate,
honest, godly family.
Faed has another picture not perhaps so widely known.
No. 448, "Ere care begins." Here a mother is sitting
by the side of her cottage. She has just laid down her
healthy, happy babe upon her knee, soothed to sleep by
the sweet nourishment it has taken from her bosom.
How truly modest, good, and happy she looks. Her face
and dress are a miracle of richly glowing colour. A sweet
landscape spreads out before you, suggestive of the pure
influence of nature, and of a mother's love and care.
Could lowly, unlearned life be always depicted as Faed
brings it before us, there would be nothing in it that
we could not admire and respect. But it is not always
Bo depicted.    Look at the Dutch school, for instance; how
94 The Attempt.
faithfid and true to detail, but how ignoble and even re¬
volting it often is in its choice of incident. Thank
heaven, our own Sir David Wilkie did not offend in this
respect; for although, like Burns, it was the humour of
the poor he mostly dwelt upon, still it was always done
so as to excite the spectator's sympathy. We have, how¬
ever, a very fair and pleasing specimen of the Dutch
school in No. 305, Great Room, by Josef Israel, La
HagTie, "Age and Infancy," representing an old grand¬
father amusing a little child with toy soldiers. The child's
face and cap agreeably reheve the sombre texture of the
picture.
We now turn to two examples of Erskine Nicol.   The
first is No. 408, South Octagon, "His Ba'bees."    To some
lovers of art, no doubt, this picture has great attractions,
for the face and figure of the miserly old man drawing his
money  out   of his   pocket  is   painted  with  wonderful
vigour and expression; but for us, if we  cannot  sym¬
pathise with the living subject, no more can we with its
delineation on canvas.     From such a scene  of  sordid
avarice'we simply turn with cold repulsion.     No. 263,
Great  Room,   by  the  same  artist,  is  a  more  pleasing
subject, "A Country Booking Office."     The old woman
in the foreground is capital.    One is sorry for that old
woman, comfortably clad as she is, with shawl topping
the old fi-ieze cloak, well shod, and well happed.     Still
one   feels    the   over-reaching   carman  is   too  much  for
her; and the  gravely meditative eye, as she  pulls the
money out of her pocket, tells us, as plainly as it can
ep(3ak,   that   the   hard-earned  money  she   is  about  to
waste upon that haggling carman is the fruit of many
pinching   economies.      The   eyes   of  the   pretty   Irish
maiden   standing beside them  tell the same tale;   and
so   do  the   downcast looks of the   rosy  car-boy.     We
sympathise  with   the   good   old  soul  much  more  than
with   her   large-jawed  husband,   who,   speechless   with
indignation, turns   his  heavy eye to   the   overreaching
knave.    There are several good groups in this picture,
painted in with much quiet and truthful humour.
No. 469, South Octagon, " Judith," by J. M. Portaels,
is a fine female figure, with deep devotional feeling ex¬
pressed in the uplifted eyes and parted Hps, as she is
about to enter the tent of the sleeping Holofernes; but
this is the one sentiment expressed, there is no outward
indication of the murderous intent within, either in face
The Attempt. 95
or attitude. It is self-immolation, not assassination, that
animates her, and, therefore, to us the pictm'e fails to
convey the full meaning of the scene.
Let us close our present notice by drawing attention to
two examples that hang in close proximity in the Great
Room. No. 326, by W. G. Orchardson, " The Forest Pet,"
is open to much criticism. It presents, however, to our
eye such a fanciful scene of sylvan innocence and sweet¬
ness in the female figure, in the tender green of the
foliage, and in the light tawny coats of the timorous
deer, that we involuntarily turn again and again to look
at it. There is great delicacy and harmony in the con¬
ception and treatment; gentle deer, soft green herbage,
and waving trees seem to be fit companions of that
languid, white-robed girl, whose intelligence and fancy
were never made to stray beyond. It is like a scene that
the melancholy Jacques in the forest of Ardennes might
have come upon.
No. 342, " To the fields I carried her milking pails," by
John Pettie, has more colom% life, and motion. The two
young lovers, pail in hand, coming through the corn-field,
are very charming; the landscape is appropriate to the
sentiment, and a very pretty picture is before us of pleas¬
ing scenery and sweet feeling. This must conclude our
remarks for the present. Next month we intend to notice
a few of the most prominent among our own artists.
M. E. T.
(To be continued.)
f he ®ourti that geals.
We stretch our fevered hand towards Thee, Lord,
For Thou art near, and Thy own gracious word
Invites our touch;
Woimded we've been, where we had thought to win,
Poisoned with whisper'd doubt, and stained with sin,-
Thou healest such 1
Nor healing only, strength we also need,
0 Fount of Life I for this Thy gift we plead,
This water pure ;
Here let us drink, and forthwith we may go
Quickened to bear the cross, to quell the foe,
And aye endure.
96 The Attempt.
We bless Thee, Lord, for access to Thy side,
Here we unveil the grief or care we hide
From other's ken,
Assured of Thy sympathy so sweet,
Since Thou hast trod ow path with bruised feet,
Thou Friend of men!
0 wondrous Love I and yet we've doubted Thee,
Earth's mists had veiled our eyes, we could not see
Thy glorious light,
But now, 0 Star of Morn! we own Thy ray,
Be Thou our Guide until we reach the day
Which has no night.
Frucara.
-0^0-
OUR LIBRARY TABLE.
Molly Dent; or, A Little Child shall lead them.
Edinburgh: Maclaren & Macniven, 1872.
This little book is the simple record of the outer and
inner life of a poor washerwoman; the story, freshly and
graphically told, with not infrequent touches of quaint
humour mingling with its deeper and more pathetic
interest, of how a nature, energetic, active, helpful, and
kindly always, but with a weary restlessness within, came,
through the simple words of a little child, to have at last,
underlying and consecrating all its energies, the " great
fundamental Rest."
It is a book we can heartily recommend to our readers,
especially to those of them who may have an opportunity
of reading or g'iving it to women of the class to which
Molly herself belonged.
The Attempt. 97
A TALE OF THE FORTY-FIVE.
CHAPTER   VI.
" THET  ALSO  SERVE WHO  ONLY  STAND  AND  WAIT."
" Nancy, dear," said Alaster, going up to her as she came
into the room, " I find I have a message to do, I must
leave you early this morning."
" Why, Alaster, you said just ten minutes ago, that you
had the whole forenoon to yourself, and that you would
come and fish in the Eachig. What's come over you
now?" said Nancy, pretending to pout. "I don't beheve
a bit in your message."
" Nay, Nancy dear, I really have a message that must
be done; you cannot think, my darling, that I would
leave you otherwise," he added gently. He spoke so
gravely that Nancy looked up in surprise, and was still
more astonished when she detected the glitter of some¬
thing suspiciously like a tear on his dark eyelashes.
" Goodbye, my pet, I must be off," he said, suddenly
catching her to his breast, and holding her tightly there
for a moment, then releasing her, he instantly left the
room, and before she had time to recover from her sur¬
prise, she saw him cantering quickly down the avenue.
Constitutionally shy of any display of strong feeling in
the presence of a third party, it "was very rare for Alaster
to be thus demonstrative when Barbara was present, and
Nancy felt at once that something more was meant than
a usual parting of a few hours.   She turned to Barbara,—
" What can be the matter with Alaster 1" she said, " I
never saw him like that before. I do believe he was cry¬
ing. Can there be anything wrong ? Can he be ill, do
you think, Barbara ? " she added, anxiously.
"Nonsense, deai% what a foolish, anxious, little goosie
you are when Alaster's concerned," said her sister, forcing
herself to appear at ease. " Is it such a very unnatural
thing for a lover to kiss his lady, and to be sorry to say
goodbye, when he expected to have had a long, happy
forenoon with her ? "    Nancy smiled.
" It is uncommon for Alaster though; I never remember
his looking like that before."
" Hoots, lassie, love comes in fits and starts, does it not,
like an interraittant fever ?    He's got the hot fit on him
APRIL 1873. N
98 Tlie Attempt.
now, that's all." Nancy laughed, but she evidently did
not feel quite easy.
" Did he say anything to you about this mysterious
message of his 1" slio asked.
" He said it was due to his allegiance to go."
" Oh, then, it must be about the Prince. I wonder if he's
found out that he was here ; how funny he must have
thought it, that we didn't tell him, if he has."
" Now that he has gone, I nmst go and redeem my
character with Elspet," said Barbara, rising.
" Oh yes, indeed youliad better! Wasn't I near letting
out aboiit the Prince telling you what she said, Barbara?"
But Barbara was already out of the room. Self-pos¬
sessed as she was, it was more than she could bear, to
carry on that conversation with her yomig sister,—so
happy and unconscious, with such a gulf of misery yawn¬
ing at her feet. For Barbara well knew thejperils of the
enterjji'ise on Avliich Alaster had embarked—perils of all
kinds, from friends as well as foes, by land and by sea. In
their hurried interview, she had had no opportunity even
to put him on his guard against some of the dangers which
her acquaintance with the locality of the Reefer's Rock,
and with the entxance to the cave suggested to her own
mind; and, now that he was gone and beyond her reach,
she felt as if, should evil happen to him, fche woi;ldbe little
short of his murderer. She did not go to old Elspet as
she had said. She felt as if it were iitterly beyond her
power to talk to the old woman about the ordinary house¬
hold matters; so, instead of going to the kitchen, she
turned abruptly out at the back door, and, half miming
till she was beyond sight of the windows, she wandered
down the burn's side till she came to a bit of soft heather,
under the shelter of a great rock close to the water's edge,
which had always been her place of retreat and refuge in
her childish troubles. Even Nancy did not know of this
sanctum of her sister's, for Barbara's was one of those
natures at once proud and sensitive, which have always
great difficulty in Liying bare any sorrow that strikes
deep, even to their nearest and dearest. Every childish
grief of Nancy's had always found a sympathising com¬
forter in her elder sister, but Barbara had never sought
for such sympathy in return; and the little heathery spot
beneath the rock had been the scene of many a burst of
passionate childish sorrow which had never been poured
into human ear.     One  comforter she had often found.
Tlie Attempt. 99
however. Old Oscar, the big Newfoundland, had one day¬
long ago tracked his child mistress to her retreat, and the
loving, uncompre] lending sympathy of his great brown
eyes raised to her face, and his caressing tongue licking
away her tears, had melted her reserve; and, throwing
her arms round his rough neck and burying her face in his
curly hair, she had wept her fill. Ever after, Avlien Bar¬
bara was missing, Oscar had tracked her to her hiding
place, and many a tale of sorrow she had poured into his
sympathising, though uncomprehending heart, and felt as
if she had found a friend. To-day, as usual, Avhen she
reached her retreat, she curled herself up on the little soft
spot of heather, and lay quite still. It was another lovely
autumn day, with the sunlight glittering on the water,
and the little burnie singing its cheery song, and the
breeze just moving the maiiy-tinted leaves of the birch
trees, but Barbara's heart was too full for her to see or to
hear any of tlie sweet sights or sounds around lier. At
first, she lay almost as if she had been stunned by some
heavy blow, and thought itself seemed paralyzed. Hy
degrees, however, the sense of anguish returned, and she
pictured to herself, as in a horrible night-mare, all the
perils of the enterprise on which she had sent her sister's
lover. The watching " bloodhounds" of which old
Lauchlan had spoken, the terrible precijjice of the
Reefer's Crag, the narrow entrance to the cave, guarded
by three des2:)crate men, who in all probabiHty might
mistake their deliverer for an enemy, and destroy at once
his life and their own last chance of safety. Then she
pictured Nancy's despair when the news should come of
her lover's death, and she almost seemed to hear the
muffled tramp of feet, carrying some unsightly thing,
covered with a white cloth, up the avenue. Then she
thought of her young sister's long blighted life when
Alaster should be gone, and that it was she who had sent
him on the fatal mission, and wondered if this was what
old Elspet's dream could mean. It never seemed to occur
to her mind, rendered morbid by her terrible sense of
responsibility, that there was a possibility of Alaster's
mission coming to other than a disastrous conclusion; nor
did the thought of her father's danger more than cross
her mind; her whole soul seemed absorbed in the idea
that her sister's lover had gone out to certain death, and
that it was she who had sent him. How long she lay
there she never knew, but by and by the idea began to
100 The Attempt.
come to her dimly, that she must get up and go home,
that Nancy would be missing her, and perhaps be
frightened, and the old motherly feeling came to her
again, that whatever happened, Nancy must not be
alarmed. So she rose from her bed on the soft heather,
holding on for a minute by the rocks, for her limbs seemed
to refuse to bear her weight, and making a strong effort
to steady her whirling brain, she set out to walk slowly
homewards. As she entered the court, she was met by
old Elspet, who, astonished at her long absence, had CQme
out to look for her.
" Aweel, Miss Barbara," began the old woman, " as I
was saying to ]\Iiss Nancy, the Prince is a braw gentle¬
man, but gin yeve gotten ye'r head turned neist,—
but what's Avraiig wi' ye, hinny," she added suddenly,
struck with Barbara's colourless cheeks and faltering step.
" Oh, Elspet," moaned the girl, tottering forward a few
steps, and almost falling into her old nurse's arms, " I
must tell some one, or my heart will break."
" Hinny, hinny, what is it, what's gane wrang wi' my
ain lassie*? eh but it maun be a sair dule that gars 3/6 greet
that gate," said the old woman, for Barbara's tears were
now falling fast.
"Come into the kitchen, Elspet, and I will tell you; but
where is Nancy ?  she mustn't know."
"Miss Nancy's gane down to the Eacliig. She left
word as how she wasna going to lose her fish for denner
for oiiy of Maister Alaster's freaks. She's ta'en the rod
wi' her."
" Thank God," murmured Barbara, " then she suspects
nothing."    The old woman's face grew suddenly pale.
" Then it's aboot Maister Alaster that ve're wae. Miss
Barbara?"
" Hush, Elspet, we may be overheard here. I will tell
you all in the kitchen," said the girl, moving with steps
that still tottered to the back door. Elspet followed her
into the great, clean, old-fashioned kitchen, and sitting
down with her on the broad window ledge, and leaning
her tired head on her old nurse's shoulder, Barbara told
her the startling events of the morning. Old Elspet
listened silently throughout, only now and then stroking
tenderly the girl's bright hair, and when she had finished
her story, she only shook her gray head sadly, and
muttered,—"It's the beginning o' the shadow, it's the
beginning o' the shadow."
The Attempt. 101
CHAPTEK VII.
' THE BEGINNING OP THE SHADOW.
Ever afterwards, that  bright   September   day  lived  in
Barbara Forbes' memory as a hideous mightmare.    How
she  lived  through  its  long torturing  hours she never
could recall; and yet many trifling incidents in its course
remained in her mind  long  after, as if they had been
burned into the very centre of her being.    She remem¬
bered, as distinctly as if it had been yesterday, how the
shadow of the witch-elm before the window grew longer
and longer in the afternoon sunlight, and how, always as
it lengthened, old Elspet's words kept ringing in her ears,
" It's the beginning of the shadow, it's the beginning of
the shadow."    She spent all the long hours of that after¬
noon alone, for Nancy had met Lady Macdonald and a
gay party of visitors from Carrick Castle on a fishing ex¬
pedition like herself, and they had persuaded her to join
their impromptu  pic-nic, and  sent down  a little bare¬
legged highland boy to beg Barbara also to join the party.
An unspeakable feehng of rehef came into Barbara's heart
as she heard that her sister would not return that night,
for, brave as she was, she felt that her self-control was
hardly sufficient to sustain itself even in solitute, and she
had looked forward with absolute terror to having to face
her sister, and still keep her terrible secret.    She sent the
boy back to the pic-nic party to say that she was de¬
lighted that Nancy should go for the night to Carrick
Castle, but that she herself miist remain at home, as she
had some writing to do for her father, which must be
dispatched by to-morrow's coach.    She was thankful, too,
that she had an excuse that sounded so plausible, and,
sick and dizzy as she was, she sat down to write the copy
of some letters which her father had desired to be sent to
the Royalist party in Edinburgh.    She remembered to
her dying day how the letters seemed to swim before her
as she wrote; but having made the excuse, she was too
conscientious to allow it to prove a mere excuse, and she
struggled on bravely till the last line was written, and
the packet neatly made up and sealed, and consigned to
old Elspet's hands to be despatched by the early coach
the following morning.    Her conscientiousness, painful as
it  was, was  of service to her, for it helped to pass a
102 The Attempt.
couple of those torturing hours which must pass e'er she
could have news of Alaster's fate.    Old Elspet came and
looked into the room several times while she was writing,
with a wistful face, biit she always   went  away  again
silently.    SomehoAV there was something that overaAved
her in the intense feeling in her young mistress' white
face, and the nervous fingers still resolutely doing their
appointed Avork.    When   it Avas   done,   and  the packet
fairly sealed and delivered, Barbara rose from her desk,
and tottered, rather than Avalked, to the sofa, and sank
down upon it utterly exhausted.    Oscar crept quietly up
beside her, and laid his rough head lovingly against her
cheek, and there she lay in a state of half unconscious¬
ness, she kncAv not hoAV long.    Suddenly she came to her¬
self Avitli  a  great   start.     The   autumn   twilight   had
deepened into night as she lay there, and noAv the red
harvest moon was shining full into the room through the
unshuttered AvindoAvs.    Surely there AA'as a dark  figure
standing in its light betAA^een her and the Avindow.    She
started to her feet.    ' Barbara,' said the figure, drawing
toAvards  her.    She knew the voice in  a  moment, and
stretching her arms toAvards him with a great cry, she
would   haA''e   fallen   to   the   ground,   had   not   Alaster
Macdonald caught her in his arms.     The sudden relief
from the fearful tension of the last tA\'elA''e hours had been
too much for her, and for the first time in her life she had
fainted.    Very gently and  tenderly Alaster carried her
back to the sofa.    For a moment he Avas frightened, and
half laid his hand on the bell to ring for assistance, but,
ignorant of Nancy's absence from Milla Forres, and of old
Elspet's knoAvledge of his  late   dangerous  errand, and
fearing to alarm the first, and enlighten the second, he
resoh^ed to do the best he  could for  Barbara without
alarming the household.    He  Avas, however,   someAvhat
puzzled how to proceed in the novel circumstances in
Avliich he found himself.    He remembered to have heard
legends of buckets of cold Avater used on similar emei'-
gencies, but one glance at the pale, sAveet face lying in
the moonlight,  effectually dissipated  that idea, and he
resoh^ed   to  try  gentler  remedies.     So  he  undid  the
fastenings of the Avindow behind the sofa, and let the
cool autumn breeze bloAV OA^er the insensible gii'l, and
quietly  stood by waiting for the result.     Very lovely
Barbara looked lying there, Avitli a stray ray of moonlight
lighting up as Avith a glory her pale noble face, and bathing
The Attempt. 103
in soft radiance the outUne of her slender form. And in
the midst of his anxiety, an involuntary thrill of admiration
at once at her beauty and her bravery shot through
Alaster's mind. In the midst of the engrossing excite¬
ment of his own share of the adventures and perils of
that eventful day, and in his intense anxiety for the
safety of the Prince, and fear lest his enterprise should
become known to Nancy, and cause her alarm—the
thought of Barbara and her share of the pain had never
crossed his mind; and now, when he saw the revulsion of
those long torturing hours of anxiety on the pale, motion¬
less face before him, his heart began to reproach him for
what he considered his selfish thoughtlessness of her
suffering, and with his self-reproach, there came wonder
and admiration at the girl's brave self-control. In a few
minutes the cool breeze began to revive Barbara. She
half opened her eyes, then shut them again with an
uneasy motion.
"Barbara, dear," he said, taking her hand.
" Oh, let me sleep, let me sleep," she moaned, "let me
sleep, or I shall die ; oh I have killed him, I have killed
him, what will become of Nancy,"
" Killed who, Barbara ? " he asked gently ; " all is well,
nobody is killed,"
" Oh yes," she moaned, " I've killed Alaster, he's gone
to the Reefer's Rock.    Oh Nancy, Nancy ! "
" No, no, dear Barbara, Alaster is here by your side, all
is well."
"Alaster here!" she exclaimed, struggling up to a
sitting posture. " Do not deceive me, is not Alaster dead ?
did he not fall from the Reefer's Rock ? Oh, have pity, and
tell me quick; this suspense will kill me."
" Dear Barbara," he said, drawing her towards him, " I
am Alaster, all is well; the Prince is safe in hiding, and
your father has gone with Lord Pitsligo to ,"
" Is it indeed jow, Alaster ? Oh, thank God! Poor
Nancy," and she hid her face on his shoulder, and burst
into tears.
What was it in that last speech that sent a twinge
through Alaster's heart 1    He hardly kncAv himself, and
he did not give himself time to think about it; yet the
ungrateful twinge was there.
" Does Nancy know?" he asked.
" No, poor child ; thank God she has gone to Carrick
Castle.    I think it Avould have killed her if she had known,
104 The Attempt.
Alaster. I know the suspense nearly killed me ; and what
was my anxiety to what hers would have been I "
Again that inexplicable twinge in Alaster's heart.
What could it mean ?
" I had to tell Elspet," she added. " I should have died
if I had told no one, Alaster; but you know she can be
trusted. But now, tell me all about it. Where is the
Prince, and how did you get here ?"
" The Prince is on board a vessel in the Firth. But I
had better tell you all the day's adventures from the
beginning. After leaving Milla Forres, I rode as fast as
I could towards Rosehearty, for I felt sure that if Old
Lauchlan's warning were true, it was there I should
get news of the ' blood-hounds.' I got there about twelve
o'clock."
"Twelve o'clock ! why it was half-past nine when you
left here, and it's at least forty miles to Rosehearty."
" Yes, but Nero can do a good morning's work when
she's put on her mettle, you know, and certainly I tried
her mettle this morning. Well, I was afraid to take Nero
into Rosehearty, she showed such evident signs of hard
riding, that I feared it might arouse suspicion if I rode
her into the town, so I halted at Braco. You know
Walter Gordon is a staunch Jacobite, so 1 thought I might
trust him, and indeed I could hardly avoid doing so, even
had I wished it, for it Avas absolutely necessary that I
should have a boat ready, in case of finding that Old
Lauchland's warning was well founded ; so I told Gordon
the whole story, and he gladly promised to let Nero stand
in his stable, and to have his fishing boat ready to row
me to the Reefer's Rock in half-an-hour. So, having put
my disordered dress in order, that no one might suspect
the hurried journey I had made, I sauntered down to
Rosehearty, and into the bar of the Pitsligo Arms. Old
Johnny Troup was standing at the bar, and I began a crack
with him about the herring fishing, etc. By-and-bye I
brought round the conversation to the prosperity of his
inn, and the number of visitors in Rosehearty at present.
" Ou aye," he said, " the inn was doiu' nae that ill.
Pitsligo hissell sleepit here the nicht afore last, an' a gran'
' moussu' o' a flunkey he had wi' him that he had broucht
straight ower frae France, that couldna ask civilly for a
bit herring, but ca'd the bonny fish jist out o' the water
' poison,' the ill tongued villain, warse luck to him; an'
last nicht there M^ar three grand gentlemen frae England,
The Attempt. 105
that speirt a wheen o' questions aboot Lord Pitshgo, an'
whaur he went till, whan he leeved here, an' gin he had
ony freens m' him 1 There's naething like they English-
ers for curiosity. They askit some questions aboot the
whereabouts o' the Reefer's Rock tae, an' they gied Tibby
Johnston's laddie half-a-crown no half-an-hour syne, for
just showing them the road till't. Hech sirs ! but they're
flush o' cash, they Englishers.'
" I thought I had got as much out of Johnny Troup as
I wanted then, so I paid for my glass of beer, and pre¬
tended to saunder away as indifferently as I could, but I
can tell you my heart was beating hard ; that half-hour's
start might have lost all. As soon as I was clear of the
town, I ran as hard as I could to the beach below Braco,
and found Gordon and his boat waiting for me, as he had
promised. I got in, and we rowed with all our might
round the headland to the bottom of the Reefer's Rock.
As we passed the last promontory, we saw three horse¬
men riding straight to the top of the cliff. In a moment 1
knew that the Prince's safety depended on whether they
or I first got to the cave. \Vhen we reached the foot of
the rock, there Avas nowhere to moor the boat,—the waves
dashed to the very foot of the precipice. ' You must take
care of the boat, Gordon,' I said, ' while I climb the rock.'
He called out,—' Macdonald, you are mad, you must be
weary of your life.' But I jumped into the water, and
swam to the foot of the clift'. 1 had almost given it up
then, in despair, the precipice seemed actually to hang
over me, and there seemed no foothold even for a wild
goat; but, just as I was nearly despairing, the wind blew
almost against my hand a long tendril of ivy which had
got detached from the rock. I seized it, and swung
myself up by its aid to a projecting ledge." He paused
a moment, then went on, " It was an awful climb, that
next half-hour's, but, thank God, I did it, and I was in
time."
" But the entrance of the cave ; how did you get through
that? I feared they would take you for a spy," said
Barbara."
" So they did at first, but Lord Pitsligo knew my voice,
and the Prince trusted himself to me."
Alaster would not tell Colonel Forbes' daughter how
nearly her father had embrued his hands in his blood.
" He is a Prince worth fighting for," he added, kindling as
he remembered the Chevalier's cool courage in tlie awful
APRIL 1873. 0
106 The Attempt.
descent they made together. " He followed me down the
Reefer's Rock as coolly as if it had been his palace stau-
case. Gordon had succeeded in mooring the boat, and we
got into her at once. Just as we had begun to row, we
saw the three horsemen looking down over the top of the
cliff, but we kept under the cliff out of sight till we had
rounded the headland, and then rowed out to sea, where,
as good luck would have it, a Dutch barque was lying at
anchor, and its captain gladly consented to take one
John Brown, a herring merchant, boimd f ir Amsterdam,
on some business negociations, on board. So we left the
Prince there, and Gordon and I rowed back to Braco. I
was anxious about your father, now that I had got the
Prince off my hands, so I hung about Rosehearty till my
friend Johnny Troup came up with the news that Lord
Pitsligo and ' ane Colonel Forbes had just ridden up to
Auchiris.' Then I mounted Nero again, and here I am,
safe and sound, to tell my own tale."
"Thank God!" murmured Barbara. "Now Alaster,"
she said, rising, " you and I both need some supper, and
Elspet will get your bed ready; you must not think of
going further to-night."
■   Jeanie Morison.
2o be Continued.
FOR 1873.
(second notice.)
Before examining some of the more prominent of the
landscapes of our Scottish artists, we have to remark
upon one or two pictures of a different class. And first
upon our list is No. 204, Great Room, " Christ and the
Sleeping Disciples," by Sir Noel Paton. The ai-tist has
seized upon the moment when " Christ cometli and findeth
the disciples sleeping,"—" What, could ye not watch with
me one hour ? " By the heavy froAvn on Peter's bro"w, and
the rigidity of his attitude, the artist plainly intimates
that Peter sleeps against his will, and almost hears these
reproachful words. Christ, with bent head and clasped
hands, stands to the left of the disciples. His face is in
deep shadow,—it is of the colour of death, and we are
J
The Attempt. 107
made to feel that, with none to help or to save, with¬
out even the sympathy of those for whom He trod the
wine-press alone, He is about to enter that dark and
dreadful valley, utterly companionless. This, no doubt, is
the feeling the artist intends to convey. AVe question
much, however, if this is an age in which such a subject
and such a feeling can be adecjuately dealt with, and we
do not unjustly disparage Sir Noel Paton when we assert
that, with all his line imaginations, he has failed to give
us an adequate idea of Christ, the divine Saviour of man¬
kind. Those were days of deepest reverence, of burning
faith, in which Leonardo da Vinci painted his " Last
Supper," and Guido his " Ecce Homo ; " and all artistic
power is but the expressi(jn of the strongest feeling of
the age. The embodiment of religious faith and bur»ing
zeal does not belong to the nineteenth century; our
modern artist does but give us a tame and conventional
copy (;f the grand realisation of the old masters. The
draperies in this picture are well arranged, and the colours
rich, but subdued. The grouping of the disciples is well
managed. The distance is faulty, and the trees curiously
inchned to grow sideways, to allow, we suppose, of the
very faint streaks of dawn falling effectively upon the
faces of the disciples, leaving Christ in shadow. In the
distance Judas is dimly seen leading the soldiers who
are to take Christ into captivity.
In Mr Paul Chalmers, we have an ardent disciple of the
Dutch school of painting. He is almost Rembrandtesque
in his skilful use of light and shade. In No. 194, the
" Knitter," the face of the old woman knitting by the
window, is thrown into relief by the semi-obscurity which
reigns over the surrounding details, and the patient old
face is the sole object of interest to the spectator. The
best specimen in the rooms of this style of art, is a picture
we have already alluded to, No. 305—" Age aad In¬
fancy," by Josef Isi'aels, a foreign artist. In this
picture, although the attention is skilfully brought to bear
upon the face of the old man and that of the little child,
by the chiaro-obscuro that reigns through the apart¬
ment, still, a large brown smear is not all that we have
for background every detail being worked in with great
fidelity and minute attention to the actual accessories of
the humble life we are surveying. We consider that a very
-excellent example of this style of painting is to be seen in
No. 616—" She works, and thinks of days gone by," by
108 Ihe Attempt.
Joseph Farquharson. A lonely old woman is pursuing
her daily avocation. The sensitive and meditative face,
telling of a well-spent life in the past, is the great point
of interest in this very clever picture ; but all the neces¬
sary accessories of her daily life are well brought in, and
painted with sufficient care to interest us, without dis¬
tracting our attention from the sentiment of the picture,
which is that of a lonely and solitary old age, with no
appliances or comforts to soften the rugged ending of a
life of toil, and yet possessing a life within, strong enough
to repel the benumbing influence of the cold neglect of
the life without. It is curious to observe how, year after
year, the same idea is embodied by our artists at the same
period of time. We have in this year's exhibition more
than half a dozen examples of lonely old age, and not least
interesting among them, is No. 415—" A Lonely Life,"
by Mr Hugh Cameron, in which the same idea, under
somewhat different treatment, is brought out of patient,
solitary old age. In this picture, an old woman, loaded
with faggots for her fire, is opening the door of her cot¬
tage. The sun is setting over a fading landscape, night
is closing in, and darkness is about to fall not only upon
the aged life, but upon nature also, to rise again when
the appt)inted hour arrives. This is the most suggestive
of all the examples Mr Hugh Cameron has given us of his
fine and delicate feeling for true art. No. 301—" Going to
the Well," is charming in sentiment, and the figures of
mother and child are full of sweet simplicity; but the
field they are walking through, and the pretty landscape
around them, is slurred over with inartistic carelessness.
No. 515—" Thrift," a little girl at work, is, as far as the
manipulation is concerned, the finest example this artist
has given us. The face of the child is beautifully painted,
and full of expression; which cannot be said of No. 370,—
" The Camellia," which, however exquisitely finished,
lacks vigour of expression—the young lady looking down
at the camellia in her hand, is utterly devoid of any expres¬
sion whatever. No. 39, North Octagon—" Rummaging,"
is a fine and delicate bit of colour. There is also a
portrait from Mr Cameron's hand—No. 224, " Hermann,"
whicli, for vivacity of expression and softness of touch,
is admirable. To return, however, to Mr Paul Chalmers,
we have to remark of this artist, that his portrait
of Mr James Kirkwood, No. 241, Great Room, stands pre¬
eminent among the more than average excellent examples
The Attempt. 109
of portraiture that we have this  year upon the walls.
Portrait painting is a branch of art that requires not only-
close and subtle observation of the character and habits of
mind of the individual, but also the artistic acumen to
present this character and these habits to the eye of the
friend or the spectator in their best possible aspect;  the
man himself must be there, but it should be the man when
he is most himself,—in his highest mood, and his most
fortunate aspect.    If the artist succeeds in doing this,
and without too much idealising and improving of nature,
we are satisfied.    Such a portrait painter is   evidently
Mr Paul Chalmers.    We have here this old divine sitting
at rest after his many labours.    How strongly painted
is the venerable head and face ; and the calm attitude and
clasped hands tell us he has now arrived at that age in
which rest is to be taken.    This very fine portrait is an
example of vigour and force of expression superior to any
in the rooms, which, nevertheless, are full of excellent
portraits, too numerous to mention here ; for whether it
is that    Scottish physiognomy is,   generally   speaking,
strongly marked and  individual in expression,  so  that
there is strong individualism to seize upon,—possibly the
peculiar nationality favouring both sitter and artist—cer¬
tain it is, that we see more powerful and vigorous portraits
from Scottish artists, and of Scotch people, than are to be
seen elsewhere.
No. 427—"The Late Colonel Sykes," by Mr James
Archer, although somewhat hard in outline, is extremely
vigorous and truthful.
No. 430—" Sir Alexander Anderson," by Mr George
Reid, is a very characteristic portrait.
No. 262—" The Rev. Robert Buchanan," by Mr Norman
Macbeth, is an example of careful finish, and studied
attention to every detail efface and figure.
We have excellent examples of vigorous painting and
sharpness of handling, from Mr Barclay, too numerous to
mention.
In Mr Swinton's style of portrait-painting, we have
quite different treatment. He has excessive softness
and delicacy of touch, and manages to bring out an effect
very striking as well as pleasing. No. 328—" Lady Eliza¬
beth Pringle," and No. 59—" Portrait of Mr Davidson,"
are capital examples of Mr Swinton's softness and delicacy
of manipulation.
We have scarcely left ourselves space to glance at one
110 The Attempt.
or two more of the figure pictures, before we proceed to
the landscapes and water-colours.
No. 356—" Interview between Jeanie and Eifie Deans,"
by Mr Herdman, is not so good a specimen of this artist's
work as could be desired. There is no individualism,
either national or personal, by which we could recognise
Scott's brave-hearted heroine, and her sister Efiie is here
quite a fine lady. She is also somewhat out of drawing,
and the texture of her gown is far from satisfactory. All
the painful accessories of prison life are here put in, and
the best figure in the picture is the sympathising, if
rugged jailer, looking on in silence at the distressing
meeting between the two unhappy girls.
Something of the same fault-finding might apply to Mr
Gibb in regard to his historical picture of •'Marmion," No.
379. It is, however, powerfully painted, and the figure of
the old monk supporting ]\Iarmion is the best in the pic¬
ture. Mr Gavin, evidently the painter of mulatto life, has
only one example. No. 480—" Oh ! carry me back to Old
Virginie." A dark-eyed mulatto is singing this melody
to two young mulatto girls. The one smiles with
pleasure as the well-known air swells through her ears ;
the other is overcome with melancholy regrets at the
forced exile from her native land; thus bringing out the
truth that diiferent temperaments are variously affected
by the same influences, according to the associating and
latent ideas that are called into activity.
Mr Lockhart has two noticeable figures of Spanish hfe.
No. 31—" A Spanish Gipsy" playing the guitar, is a very
forcibly drawn figure. The black-eyed smiling girl stands
out from the canvas with all the incisiveness of a
daguerreotype. No. 546—" Anita—A Spanish girl in
humble life," is real and life-like.
AVe should have noticed also, but can do no more than
enumerate, several splendid little gems of art scattered
through the rooms, that would repay hours of study and
attention Such as No. 317—"Dead Game," by John
Faed, the best example of this kind of study in the rooms;
and also 539, by the same artist, " Scene from the Gentle
Shepherd," which, in point of brilliancy of colour and
delicacy of finish, is worthy of his talented brother. No.
198, by Mr John Houston, "The Reveille," a splendid bit
of colour; No. 214—"Asleep," by Joseph Farquharson ;
No. 215—"Poverty," a beautiful example ot fine work, by
Joaquin  Cuadras ;  No.   434—" Keekie   Bo,' a  promising
The Attempt. «111
sketch from a young artist, Mr Robert Sanderson ; No.
624—"Alice Lee," by Mrs Charretie, a most pleasingly
drawn female figure; No. 596—" A Plea for Ragged
Schools," by W. Macdufi"; and many others too numerous
to mention.
We must now devote the space left to us to some of
the capital examples of Scottish landscape.     Mr Waller
Paton this year exhibits certain aspects of nature with
which we are not at all acquainted, and in which we find
it difficult to believe.    No. 107—'' Entrance to Cuiraing,
Skye," is, perhaps, the strangest picture in the Exhibition.
There is a wonderful scenic effect in the way the blocks
are pitched; here and there and everywhere enormous
peaks, huge boulders that appear about to tumble head
foremost below, pools of water, driftings from the sea,
lying in all sorts of diverging places; interminable rocks,
pools, and boulders,—and then out beyond, the open sea,
lit up  with  a purple  glory  from  the illuminated   sky,
that sheds around and over all this strange scene an irra¬
diation  of pink and  purple colour, that makes it look
like enchanted ground—like a sudden phmge into the
Wonderful cave in the " Arabian Nights."    We should like
to believe in this world of strange appearances, but we
find it impossible.    We pass on to No. 350—" Holy Island,
from Penlester Glen, Arran."     Here, again, in spite of
our admiration for the beautiful foreground, with all its
variegated  and  elaborate  detail  of cottages  and  corn
fields,   of wooded  stream  and   beautiful  waving trees,
we look across the  open sea at Holy Island, rising up
from its depths, which we expect to see clothed in deep
purples and sombre greens, and we cannot understand
or believe in the pink and violet hues in which Holy
Island presents itself.    A bright afternoon sun is shin¬
ing over all, and casting brilliant lights and deep sha¬
dows,  and this we have seen, but not in such strangely
coloured hues as are here depicted.    No. 553—" Seatield,
Fife," is still more distasteful to us.    Mr W. Paton is, in
sentiment and work, one of our finest landscape painters.
We regret our own disappointment in the examples in
this year's Exliibition.
In No. 333—" Threave Castle," we have Sir George
Harvey's only landscape. It is a very pretty scene,
painted in our President's usual manner,—^limped trans¬
lucent water in the foreground, with nice reflections of a
genial warm tinted sky ; a lonely tower rising up from a
112 The Attempt.
mossy bank; rising ground to the right, and dipping
down into the water; a mass of light foliage—somewhat
confused in its proximity to a large tree, gratefully re¬
flected in the cool stream below ; a somewhat muscular
angler is throwing a fly in the water, too smooth and
glassy, we should suppose, for successful sport.
Mr Paul Chalmers has, in No. 500—" The End of the
Harvest," a much admired scene of autumn twilight. The
setting sun has all but disappeared behind some distant
elms, and in the distance, the smoke of burning stubble
ascends. In the foreground is an extensive potato
patch, with an old man and girl busily filling up the last
bag with potatoes. The setting sun glints the top of some
potato bags already filled, but the semi-obscurity in
which the large brown foreground is lying, prevents dis-
tinguishability of objects. This is a most masterly paint¬
ing, although, on close inspection, the touch seems coarse
and rough, at the proper distance the effects are magi¬
cal. The spectator's attention is not arrested by the
beauty of the scene, but by the masterly and powerful
expression of a certain aspect of nature.
Close beside, and somewhat overpowered by its proxi¬
mity, is Mr Bough's " Western Shore of lona," 496, There
are points of great beauty in this picture. Nothing could
be finer than the soft rolling clouds lying low in the
west, or the splash of the water on the rocks in the mid¬
dle distance. The sky is particularly fine, covered with
clouds tinted by the setting sun, it has that uncertain
look so frequent in our variable climate. A flock of gulls
to the left is settling down in search of food. In the
distance, stretches, as far as eye can reach, the open sea,
on which the hght beautifully falls. Immediately to our
left are rocks sloping down to a field, with cattle and sheep.
In No. 405, South Octagon, we have a bit of Mr Bough's
favourite "Borrowdale, Cumberland." We have here nature
in her sweetest aspect, and one of Mr Bough's happiest
efibcts of a summer sun shining through the dispersing
clouds, bringing into luminous clearness in the middle dis¬
tance a cornfield in all its mellow richness, and lighting up
the distant hills. To the front, a green lane comes winding
down from among the hills, along which a horseman lead¬
ing cattle is slowly advancing. The hills to the left of
the picture are thickly wooded and full of exquisite beauty,
a winding stream occupies the right. It is just such a
Bcene as it makes one happy to look upon.    We love our
The Attempt. 113
country lanes and hedges, and we know the fresh green
herbage; these changing clouds and breaking lights are
not to be found elsewhere. The manipulation of this
painting reminds us somewhat of Mr M'CuUoch's earlier
pictures. There is also in No. 193, Great Room—" The
Quhair and the Tweed at Innerleithen," a painting of Mr
Bough's, but its somewhat chalky reflections and extreme
brightness of colour make it a less pleasing picture than
either of those we have mentioned.
We now pass on to Mr Cassie, who has five or six spe¬
cimens in his usual manner—No. 240—" Barnbougle—Sun
rising through Mist," is somewhat cold in treatment; it is,
however, a pleasing picture. No. 352, although barren of
subject, is a very charming effect of " Sunrise—looking
out to Sea." The gentle swell of the waves is very
happily given, and the rising of the sun is bright and
cheering, without being exaggerated. Nos. 550 and 620
are two very pretty pictures of sea and shore under
different aspects.
Mr E. T. Crawford has some delightful sea views. In
No. 226, Great Room—" Sloop and Brig aground at low
water," we have finely painted ships, and such perfect
naturalness of grouping, and of tone and composition, that
it reminds one forcibly of some of the best examples of
the Dutch school. Indeed, we do not hesitate to say that
this admirably painted little scene might easily pass for
an example of Wouverman's. There is not a better thing
in its way in the Exhibition. No. 217—" Boat Shore,
Cockeuzie," has a charmingly breezy look about it, and No.
313 is an example of still rougher water. No. 442, " Coast
scene—Morning," is also a charming example of Mr Craw¬
ford's careful manipulation and faithful delineation of
nature.
Mr John Nisbett has one or two clever sea pieces, wit¬
ness No. 343—" North Berwick from the East Links." No.
394—" Out into the west as the sun went down," and No.
391, " Ground Swell near Dunbar." Though necessarily
leaving unnoticed a number of charming landscapes, we
must look, in passing, at Mr John Smart's fine picture of
a "Summer Spate," No. 153. This is a picture that will
repay a long inspection. The middle distance is particu¬
larly fine, and the rush of water from tlio summer spate
in the foreground, is painted with great force and vigour.
We must now turn for a few moments to the water-
colours in the North Room, and here again we have some
APRIL 1873, ■       P
114 The Attempt.
admirable examples of Mr Smart's skill in this delicate
branch of art. No. 863—" Ben Venue," with cattle in the
foreground, is a powerfully painted picture. In 929—" A
Highland Homestead," we have a truthful delineation
of the scene represented; the cattle are excellent. Mr
Smart has several other examples in the water-colour
room, all equally worthy of notice.
Mr Waller Paton is most charming in No. 1003, 977,
and in 906, with its fine transparency of water. One could
almost wish he would confine himself to this lovely branch
of art.
Mr Arthur Perigal, has been in Venice, and has brought
us back many characteristic views. However hard and
oblivious of atmosphere he may be in his oil paintings, he
is always charming in water colours, and has in Nos. 1023,
1093, 1110, brought Venice to us in aU its clearness of
atmosphere.
Mr Bough has a fine effect of " Moonlight" in No. 1051,
" A Derelict Ship," and an old familiar scene in No. 1074,
" Canty Bay."
Mr Nimmo has three miniatures on ivory of exceeding
softness and delicacy. This artist seems to emulate the
old masters in his lovely flesh tints and fineness of work.
Leaving unnoticed, for want of space, Mr Ballantines
charming picture. No. 872—" Biding his time," and others
of great beauty, from well-known names, we will look for
a moment at some very promising examples from our
younger artists, whose career we watch with great interest,
as destined to fill up the gap that the future will inevi¬
tably make in the number of those at present in the
van.
No 897—" The Cuiraing, Isle of Skye," by John T. Reid,
bought by the Association, is, we take it, a true transcript
of nature, and is pleasantly and artistically dealt with.
The scene, though strange, is faithful to nature, and there
are touches of true artistic skill throughout the picture,
holding out much promise for the future. No. 909—" Edin¬
burgh, from Jacob's Ladder," the twilight hour stealing over
the grey old town, is also a faithful picture, although
perhaps not a pleasing one. Two other landscapes, by
the same artist, deserve notice, namely, Nos. 826 and 864.
Mr George Manson has, in No. 1015—" The Fountain
Well," an admirable bit of life, charming in colour.
Mr John Blair, a very young artist, has a remarkable
specimen of still hfe in No. 986; and No. 926, by the same
The Attempt. 115
artist, is wonderfully like in touch to one of Bhkett Foster's
light and feathery effects.
Among the ladies' names, we notice many of our old
favourites. Miss MacWhirter has, in No. 1058—"The
Apothecary's Shop," a clever scene of still life. Mis3
Bouvier, in No. 861—"The Spelling Lesson" gives us a
charming little scene. Miss Jessie Kier contributes some
fine sketches from nature; and the Misses Crichton
some delicate flower studies.
We also notice several new names among the lady con¬
tributors, to whom we wish every success to which
their evident progress in this peculiarly feminine branch
of art entitles them.
M. E. T.
" Jtt the toninjg it is tut §mn.**
I.
A WALK in the sweet fresh country,
Up hills that are foreign land,
And, departing, I leave behind me
One kiss on a dying hand.
The dying pale hand that is trying,
As I go on my lonely way
To wave a farewell from the window,
Fond words that it cannot say.
Oh, dear dying hand I when, next summer,
The flowers are beginning to grow ;
Will they open their eyes to the grass-land,
When thou art lying below *?
n.
The days become shorter than ever ;
I must hasten to catch the breeze
That blows on the mountains crisply.
And freshens the dusty trees.
I must hasten to get up my strength
For another long night of un-sleep,
When the stars seem for ever and ever
Their weariless vigil to keep.
I must hasten back to my love,
116 The Attempt.
To tell him the view I have seen
From the height of these grand old mountains,
Up high where he hath not been.
I must gather some mountain roses,
Soft scented with summer rain,
And lay them by him on the pillow
Who longs so to see them again,
I must tell him, oh ! many a story
Of the birds and the wild sea foam
That dashes its kisses for ever
On the edge of its rocky home.
m.
And so I trudge on, ever wishing
I was back by my darling's side,
In the hush of the twilight window,
Where wandering rosebuds hide.
1 grudge every moment that passes
Away from that window, and yet,
My heart is unconsciously longing
To see the great golden sun set.
Ah me! if my darling could witness
Once more, with his dying eyes,
This glorious radiant picture,
Like a vision of Paradise;
I think in the far dim future,
When we meet on a sunny hill,
He would tell me he had remembered
The sight of its glory still.
IV.
I stand on a bold hill-shoulder;
The sea-waves are dashing below
In the light of a ruddy sunset.
Like wreaths of crimson snow.
Far doAvn in the nether valley,
I can see the smoke arise
From the tiny little cottage
Wherein my darling lies.
As I linger, the soimd of voices,—
Voices soothing and clear.
Come stealing up the mountain path,
And this is the song I hear:—
The Attempt. 117
" D'oii venez vous
Enfant tres-cher
Des cieux qui sont blens
Des cieux qui sont clairs % "
2d Voice.
" Je ne sais pas, mignonne,
Les cieux d'ou je viens
De la Main de Jesus
Dont tout je tiens."
1st Voice.
" Ou vous en allez-vous
Enfant tres-cher
A la Grand' Rue
Enfant trfes-cher?"
2d Voice.
" Oui petite mignonne
A la Grande Rue
Dans laquelle on voit
Le Palais de Dieu."
But the voices grow distant and faint,
With the breath of the fitful air;
Though now and again as I linger
And listen patiently there,
In a wayward and tender softness
Of that dying western breeze,
The words are wafted distinctly
From under the linden-trees.
1st Voice.
" Mon ame est isolee.
Enfant tres-cher,
Et deja ^puisee,
Et moi, je suis bien triste,
Enfant tres-cher."
2d Voice.
"Mignonne, bien-aimee,
Dans nos tristes temps
Nous sommes Isoldes
Au s^rieux;
118 The Attempt.
Mais, je vous en prie,
Tenez-vous en h Dieu
Car il veut bien
Nous soigner tous
Pourquoi s'inquieter
Pauvre malheureuse?
N'attendons-nous pas tous
Le Reveil de Dieu."
V.
The sun dips into the waves,
And I turn away from the sea,
And hurry again down the hill
To one who is waiting for me.
In the hush of the twilight window,
Where wandering rosebuds hide,
Where angels are gathering closer.
Kneel by his lonely bedside.
He tells me he has been dreaming,
A dream of another land,
Where they were waiting in silence
That glittering angel-baud.
He tells me he is so happy.
So peaceful, so loved, so forgiven.
And only waiting in patience
For Jesus to take him to heaven.
So I treasure my little stories.
To tell him another day,
When he will playfully ask me
For what I have got to say.
Meanwhile, in the musical twilight,
I sing him softly to sleep,
While the stars seem for ever and ever
Their weariless vigil to keep.
Singing, ah I singing softly
To Ids dying, listening ears
A hymn that shall sound for ever
In the lonely future years.
Listening for every sigh
Of the languid and failing breath
Till my voice wails out in the silence—
The awful silence of death.
The Attempt. 119
VI.
A dreary voyage before me
Over the foreign wave,
And, departing, I leave behind me
Sad tears on a foreign grave.
Is there more to be told you ?
More that will interest any
In the tale of a darkened existence,
The sorrow of one out of many ?
Ah, no ! for the world has not power,
Or leisure, or love apart
From its busy self-occupation,
To comfort a broken heart I
As a dream it Avill come again,
It will come to me once more.
The view from the sunny hill-tops.
The waves on the wild sea-shore;
The hush of the rosebud window,
The kiss on the dying hand.
The walk in the blooming country.
Up hills that are foreign land.
Oh God ! if I could but forget it,
If only the dream could be,
Swallowed up in a dream for ever.
As waves die into the seal
Do we pine for the sunny high-road
That has found us in storm and rain ?
Or long for flowery thickets
That bloom in a weary plain"?
Ah, no ! we can bear Avith sorrow
Where joy is a thing unknown;
But sorrow is tenfold sadder
Out of which joy hath grown.
And, groAving, hath fled for ever.
Leaving, with many a dart.
The ghost of a cruel remembrance
To rankle the bleeding heart.
But the sin of earth will seem darker.
And her sorrows easy and few.
When the crimson day shall dawn at last.
At the glad " Re'veil de Dieu I "
Naomi S. Smith.
120 The Attempt.
Tege question was started at a dinner table where I had
once the privilege of meeting Dr Hanna and Mr George
Macdonald, why the genius developed in the London
atmosphere was so seldom native genius; why men ^nd
women, whose names emerged from the crowd of London,
60 generally belonged to those who had settled in Lon¬
don after having passed their childhood elsewhere ?
I hazarded the remark, that the reason might be that
the powerful compressing force of the sense of loneliness
in a crowd, was more felt by the stranger in London than
by one who had his family associations there, and that
the influence of such loneliness was more quickening than
the direct influence of the advantages to be found in that
centre of civilization. I spoke from my own experience,—
an experience, indeed, " as moonlight unto sunshine," in
comparison with that through which the stranger in Lon¬
don must pass; yet, though difievent in degree, alike in
kind, for I have passed a wandering life and a solitary
life, and, even in a well-known city, have " known the
heart of the stranger."
Very different in degree, yet alike in kind, to the walk
of a stranger in London, is a walk I almost daily take,—
down the Lothian Road in Edinburgh.
The current of life is far from being dense in that
locality, yet, passing through it day after day, without
a point of hving contact Avith any of its component indi¬
viduals, save such as springs from a common humanity, I
find it dense enough to force my soul into yearnings else
unknown, into depths of fear, and up to heights of faith,
of which I else had never been free.
1 will give three of the sights which thrilled me there,
and the thoughts that thence arose.
About the hour that men go to their offices, I walked
down the length of that dirty road behind two gentlemen.
I saw the face of only one of these every now and then,
as he turned to speak to his companion. It was a florid
face, with stubby grey whiskers. The dry business man
was written in every lineamnet.
I wondered how dry, and was occupied in speculations,
as to what there might be left of the dreams of youth still
smouldering beneath that   dry-as-dust exterior, when a
The Attempt. 121
little in advance, a group attracted my notice. It was
the not unusual group of a young man standing looking
at a young woman. He was a lad of about twenty years of
age, tall, lanky, sandy-haired, loose-jointed. His face was
freckled, his eyebrows were almost imperceptible from their
whiteness. He looked like a lad from the country on the
look-out for work in the town. So much for the material
form, but the lad's soul was in his face. The expression
of that face was as a glory. Endymion before Diana
might thus have looked, I thought, when he did
" Count and count
The moments, by some greedy help that seemed
A second self, that each might be redeemed
And plundered of its load of blessedness,"
and then I glanced at the object of that rapt adoring gaze.
A snub-nosed, red-cheeked, cross face, full of an habitual,
discontent, crowned with a dirty bonnet and a heap of
tawdry, dirty flowers— a maid-of-all-woi'k out of place—
not of the self-denying, unselfish, womanly divine type,
which, thank God, is still not uncommon amongst us, but
a girl essentially self-seeking and fusionless, who would
make a husband's home as dirty and comfortless as a den
could be.
Oh ! man's amazing power of idealizing love I Oh! poor
poet youth, how will you stand the waking ? Even aa
this wonder, swift as wind, passed through my mind, I
caught the face of my business man turned to look upon
the sight, and upon that face which I had set down as
hard and dry, shone " the tender grace of a day that was
dead." Nothing could surpass the depth of its expression
of mingled love and pity, as again and again he turned to
look at the entx'anced boy.
Passing on and musing upon what I had seen, I re¬
membered a sight I had met on that very road a few
days before.
A woman was approaching me, carrying a ragged whin¬
ing baby on one arm. The other ai'm was raised and
bent across her face, which was completely hidden
behind it. Just as she neared me, a woman who was walk¬
ing in front of me suddenly seized that arm and dragged
it aside, with an exclamation of " Eh, Maggie !" The
face thus suddenly shown was such that I involuntarily
stood still and gazed at it. It was the handsome face
of a woman about two or three and twenty, dark eyes,
APRIL 1873. Q
122 The Atiemjyt.
masses of rough dark hair, and such a look upon the face
as I never saw before, and hope I may never see again.
Expression it could not be called, for expression implies
the use of a medium,—and the naked agonized soul itself
seemed there, inarticulate, terrible, ashamed, proud, en¬
raged, broken, loving, hating,—a woman trod upon, struck,
reviled by the man for whom she would have died, by the
man for whom she had lost her womanhood; nothing short
of that supremcst horror could be present there. By our
common heart of womanhood I knew it. It was but for
an instant that the look which mortal eyes should never
look upon was seen by mine, for Avith a gesture not to be
disobeyed, she pushed her fiiend aside, and again covering
her face, went on her way—whither '?
Her friend and I stood for a moment looking after her,
then without a word went on our several ways.
I did not torture myself thereafter that I had been
silent, for the bond of silence had been imperatively laid
on me by natural instinct. No money, no human sym¬
pathy, coiild have touched that soul. It was Avrestling
with its God, with a God that showed Himself to her as
froward, hateful, and hating, yet evermore to be adored.
Thence my mind drifted as to what might be the end
of the boy's idealizing love. He never could passthroTigh
that woman's fiery tortm-e. His passions never coidd rise
to the strain of that wrestling. Her nature's intensity
was not his, but his catastrophe, if he wins his heart's
desire, and gets his wished-for bride, will, in its different
way, be equally terrible.    Mrs Browning sings,—
" I love love, truth's no cleaner thing than love."
I more than endorse that sentiment. To my mind, truth's
no other thing than love. I have faith in love's insight.
In that girl, who, to my unloving eyes, looked so un¬
attractive, he saw, I doubt not, a deeper truth than I had
eyes to see. He sa^v " a daughter of the gods divinely
fiiir," and a daugliter of God in Christ, God himself has
called her. Such my creed holds her to be—such his love
sufficed to see her; but alas! for the trial of his fiiith.
How will he emerge on the other side of the cruelly pro¬
saic hoiu-s, and days, and years ?
Will he keep a poet's yearning, and lose the man's
tenderness, and harden into the sneer of the cynic?
Will he keep the human heart, and lose the ideal vision,
and degenerate into the beast's satisfaction with the thmg
Tlie Attempt. 123
that is ? Will he, in his love for the person, give up one
after another, all desu'es for attributes beyond that per¬
son's attained level ? Better the last alternative than the
first,—better a beast than a devil; but neither a goal to
which he now looks, neither a state to which his soul right¬
fully belongs. My heart felt profoundly sad, for it seemed
to me that all intense natures stood in dread danger ot
one or the other loss. How few have the power to love
their chosen to the end, and yet to hold fast their lofty
ideal! Into my sadness welled up the recollection of a
third sight.
It was of a tiny coffin I had once seen in a room where
I visited. Just a fortnight before I saw.it, I had got the
bed coverings out of pawn, and had put some coals into
the empty grate, and had done what little I could to help
the family in the dire trial of a father out of work. Now,
the mother, pale from childbed pangs, sat upon a bed
from which, as one glance sufficed to show me, the cover¬
ings had again disappeared. They had gone, I felt sure,
to pay for the little coffin before me, which, studded
thickly with brass nails, and with a shining new plate,
with the babe's name inscribed upon it, looked so
strangely in contrast with the surrounding squalor. The
poor, worn-out mother had many little lives tugging with
all their varied needs upon her inadequate strength,—yet
she looked heart-broken on the coffin of the little one so
lately given, for so short a time known, so soon taken
away. Father and mother both must have consented to
the sacrifices involved in paying for that adorned little
coffin. Their money was not thrown away. For one
thing, it rendered to me a measure full, pressed down,
and running over, for everything they had ever accepted
at my hands. It showed me the divine human heart
yearning over the helpless babe. It enabled me, in the
midst of a fool's destructions, to hide my head in the
folds of a Father's garments, and to find joy and comfort
in the words that best express our human state, which at
its best is altogether vanity,—" Naked we came into the
world, and naked we go out of it."
Yes, the naked helplessness of the babe is its strongest
hold upon the parent's tenderness,—a strength perfected
in weakness. The naked helplessness of the dead is our
strongest hold upon the Divine tenderness. Let us lay
hold upon God's strength to make peace with Him.
Broken, and scattered, and dust-begrimed fragments at
124 The Attempt.
the best, oh, Father ! are all that remain of thine abun¬
dant gifts when we have eaten of them, but Thou wilt
give commandment to gather up the fragments that
remain, that nothing be lost. X. H.
^ajilg (t'ii^tntMti^ cf an Jtiitliar.
From my earliest childhood I was fond of writing. My
favourite lesson time was that allotted to composition,
when I gave my young imagination full play, and took
myself and my governess into flights which bewildered
both of us.
I wrote thrilling epitaphs on tombstones (composed ol
paper pasted on a board), erected over the graves of my
pet dogs and chickens who died natural deaths,—recording
in melting terms the principal incidents of their hves,
and the faithful record of their last moments; but, un-
ortunatcly, the rain in a few days obliterated their memory,
and posterity is thus depri^-ed of a valuable addition to
literature. My fondest day-dream was to sec a story of
my composition in print, and I thought that Byron, of
whose poetry I was then enthusiastically fond, had never
penned truer lines than these,—
" 'Tis pleasant sure, to see one's name in print,
A book's a book, although there's nothuig in't."
My day-dream at length formed itself into a resolution
to launch my little craft upon the ocean ; it might come
back to me, or it might not,—at any rate, I would chance it.
I took heart of grace, remembering with becoming
modesty,—considering the difference between us,—that
Charlotte Bronte's " Jane Eyre " had been rejected by a
dozen publishers before it found a purchaser, and that
Milton's " Paradise Lost" was sold for either five or ten
pounds. Accordingly, when I was about seventeen years
of age, I wrote a short story, called " His Life and ]\Iine."
How carefully I hid my manuscript in the sacred precinct
of my own room; for 1 had heard that geniuses, as a rule,
were never appreciated in their own families, and remarks
had come to my ears of the " waste of time and paper,"
which cruelly crushed the rising hopes of my young breast.
Some day I would show them that my time and paper
had not been wasted; in the meanwhile, as it was merely
The Attempt 125
the pencilled copy I was iinishing, I need not have hid jts
existence so carefully, for I defy any of my relations to
have deciphered it, except with the most extreme
difficulty, in which case the game would have been hardly
worth the candle.
I made one exception in favour of my pet sister, whom
I took into my confidence; and at all times she was called
on to be my audience, to admire my plot, appreciate my
genius, and correct my grammar.
The only point on which we were at variance was
when my voice beginning to shake as the tale waxed
most pathetic, I handed her the manuscript to read till I
had recovered my composure. She could not understand
how I could shed tears over a thing of my own creation,
and I maintained, and still maintain, that though it may
have been a foolish, it was a most natural tiling to do;
the stories of others were just as fictitious as my own;
we knew them to be all fanciful together, and if the one
moved us to tears or laughter, why not the other ? Many
a day did she and I discuss the probability of the tale
being accepted by the editor of a certain magazine (one
rather obscure was chosen, as being more likely to be
pleased with small things) ; we made rough copies of the
note which was to accompany it; we received with rap¬
ture the imaginary answer, and lived the rest of our days
in the sunshine of prosperity, she sharing in the glory
reflected from her sister's well-earned fame.
The good of mankind, the love of letters, the desire for
applause, the love of fame,—these Avere the feelings which
actuated authors, and these we thirsted for; but behind
all, and I doubt, though I scarcely then confessed it to
myself, before all, was an arriere pensee and keen hope of a
golden profit which was to folloAv on the publication of
this and similar stories, whereby I was to build up the
fortunes of the family, and, in a melodramatic scene, to
" heap coals of fire on the parental heads, in reward for
their remarks on wasted time and paper, by throwing into
their lap the sordid gain which was the result of my
talent!"
How pleasant, how delicious the anticipation. Alas 1
how different the reality, for to this day I have never
seen a penny!
At last a fair copy, accurately punctuated, was made,
and a note carefully written accompanied it, setting forth
that I hoped the editor would find it suitable, &c., &c., for
126 The Attempt.
the pages of his magazine, and if not, begging for its
return. I appended a romantic nom de plume, and with
many fears and prayers sent out the craft which was to
bring me back such a golden cargo.
I may mention, what I blush to think of, hoAV I wrote
my note on deep mourning paper, hoping this would
induce the editor to suppose I was a struggling widow
in reduced circumstances; or one of these marvellous
orphans one meets in books! who nobly maintain their
whole family by the workings of their brains^ and so to
render him more lenient in his judgment of my story.
Days, weeks elapsed, and no sign. Never did love-sick
maiden watch the advent of the postman more eagerly
than I did, and well did I understand the feeHng, " that
hope deferred maketli the heart sick."
Freely as we had spent the coming fortune in imagina¬
tion, it is a consolation now to think that Ave did not take
up any bills on the strength of its coming.
At last, one glorious summer day, when I was beginning
to try and think no more about it, and to deem that it
was lost for ever, I set off, accompanied by some English
friends, to climb the highest peak of the Ochils.
Everything Avas bright and beautiful, no shadows were
on the hills, and the valley lay sparkling in the sunshine;
the air Avas exliilirating, and I came doAvn from the clouds,
which I considered Avas the proper abode for an author,
and enjoyed myself A\dth all the joyous abandon of seA^en-
teen. In the evening, Ave came home someAvhat tired,
but with spirits yet unexhausted, to the little Avatering
place at which Ave Avere then residing, ready to do ample
justice to an evening meal, and full of the happy day Ave
had spent.
Scarcely had I passed the threshold, Avhen a letter in an
unknoAvn hand was put into mine. This Avas the ansAver
at last.
I Avas giddy from sudden excitement, and blind from
suspense for a moment; then I tore it open, greedily
devoured the contents, and saw that my story was
-accepted I
Never, no, never if I live to eighty, can I hope to ex¬
perience such a moment of intense, intoxicating joy, as I
did then; it was the acme of all my desires, and I was
more than content. I could not speak, but, mutely en¬
joining silence, I placed the letter m my sister's hands,
sure of a sympathising friend.
The Attempt. 127
What to me were all the good things spread on the
table? What the relation of our day's excursion and
adventures, which one and all of the party were pouring
forth at the same time ? Up I went to the clouds again,
and I hope my friends enjoyed my hazy talk when I did
condescend to join in conversation. Poor mortals, what
could they have in common with a British Author ?
Several times during the evening, the letter, the pre¬
cious letter, was drawn surreptitiously from my pocket and
re-read, and I longed for the proud moment when the
book would be placed in my hands, and I could judge for
myself how well my words looked in print. I fancied
myself carelessly placing it in my mother's hand, asking
her to read that little paper and give me her opinion
of it; and I went to bed well pleased with the world in
general, and in a state of unmitigated satisfaction with
myself.
How cold the morning light is ! How it takes down a
last night's rapture, and throws a less pleasing aspect
over all our affairs! I was still much satisfied with my
success, looked at the letter again, and almost blushed to
find myself vaguely disappointed that there was no men¬
tion of remuneration.
I daresay that will come, I thought, I remembered
having heard that often months elapsed before people
were paid for their writings; it was sure to come some¬
time, and then what presents I should buy I
At length the magazine appeared. I nearly learned my
story by rote, so often did I peruse it; indeed, when
bound along with the other numbers of the year, so often
was it looked at with fond affection, that to-day, if I take
it in my hand, it falls apart at my page, and the gilding of
the back is completely worn off.
Youthful enthusiasm having worn away, I have learned
to estimate my story at what it is worth, and that is very
very little (I don't mean in a pecuniary point of view, for
that is simply nothing at all) ; but even in those days my
pride got considerable blows from the frank criticism of
my friends. My brother-iu-law dubbed me "Battle,
murder, and sudden death," from the sanguinary manner
in which I despatched my characters; my brother, who
in common with many men, thinks a woman is fit for
nothing but mending stockings, and that if she has a mind,
she should repress its workings, picked it to pieces in a
merciless manner, assailing all its weak points;   an  old
128 The Attempt.
friend of the family, who had himself published several
volumes, to whose criticism I humbly submitted it, read it
to the end ^vithout remark, and then coolly enquired—
" What do you mean by this ? ' His name being written in
the book of immensity.' Where is this volume to be
procured ?" I gave him no response; in fact, I
could not answer the question. When I wrote it,
I thought it sounded grand and awfiil, and vague
and mystical, and that my readers would lose their
curiosity in the solemnity of such a majestic flight.
But the climax was put to my feelings when I
proudly read " His Life and Mine" to our old nurse,
expecting that she would feel an honest pride in having
had some share in the upbringing of such a prodigy, when
at the close she solemnly shook her head, and exclaimed—
*' Eh! siccan a peety that you and Dickens hae nae
morals ! " That sweeping assertion made me stagger for
a moment; let us hope she meant morals in the light of
those which " adorn a tale." However, there was some
slight compensation for the blow, in the fact of being
classed with such a writer.
Martyn Hay.
The Annual Prize offered for the best prose article
appearing iu the February number of The Attempt has
been gained this year by Lutea Reseda, for her article,
" The Making of the Maker."
Members are reminded that their half-yearly Subscrip¬
tions fall due on Saturday, May 5th, and are referred to
No. XI. of the Society's Laws.
The Attempt. 129
My Dear Friend,—You have asked me to review Mkldle-
mareh. Under the best of circumstances, I should feel in
relation to such a task as if I were a mouse set to review
a city, and I am by no means circumstanced at the best
just now,—for my time, my thoughts, and my pen are very
fully occupied in other ways. You must forgive me, then,
if instead of a review I send you only a very inefficient
letter.
MiddlemarcJi professes to be a study of provincial life
in England, and as such, it gives ns at least seventy
characters all distinctly individual. This multiplicity of
life is complained of by some who think that, as works of
art, both this book and RomoJa would have been more
perfect with a less lavish use of George Eliot's wonderful
gift of drawing character. I cannot agree with this
criticism, for, in the case of Romola, the complexity of
individual lives which crowd the stage seems to me an
essential part of the representation of the Florentine
republican days ; and in the same way, a study of pro¬
vincial life necessitates the picturing of these numerous
petty circles, all revolving round then* different centres.
The set over which the Chettams and the Brookes preside
is entirely separate from the gaieties where Rosamond
shines, and from the lower sphere where Bulstrode
deals out " his beneficence at once ready and severe;"
"ready to confer obligations, and severe in watching the
results." The Garth and the Featherstone relationships
have little in common with one another, or with the other
circles named. Yet all these interests intersect one
another, and are curiously and subtly interlinked. It
would repay some trouble to trace the skill with which
all this distinctness and interlinking is carried out.
Take, for example, the introduction of Lydgate on the
scene, through the medical proclivities of Lady Chettam
and Mrs Renfrew, and the easy speed with which, as if
drawn by the eyes of a basilisk, we are, through Rosa¬
mond's silent wishes for a well-born suitor, brought along
with poor Lydgate right into the heart of the Vincy
family, and so on by natural steps into the Garth and
Featherstone connexion.
How wittily we are made to feel the approach of the
"high-coloured,   dark-eyed,"  self-assertive, trenchant-
MAT 1873. R
130 The Attempt.
tongued Mrs Cadwallader, through the gossip of her maid,
and the prophetic wincings of Mr Brooke! How cleverly
Mr Brooke's " miscellaneous invitations," which " seemed
to belong to that general laxity which came from his
inordinate travel and habit of taking in too much in the
form of ideas," are worked to bring together those who
could meet only in such " fortuitous concourse." How
strangely and significantly the mercurial-minded and
steadfast-hearted Will Ladislaw is used by " sarcastic
destiny" in that " stealthy convergence of hiiman lots," in
that " slow preparation of effects from one life on another,
which tells like a calciilated irony on the indifference or
the frozen stare with which we look at our unintroduced
neighbour."
It would be difficult to determine which of the studies
of character is the most wonderful. Perhaps the character
of Bulstrode is the masterpiece. It is painful, among such
a large number of characters, to find no'picture of a living
goodness rooted in a distinctively Christian thought and
feeling; and looking upon the book even as a work of art,
I feel that the same remark applies to it which has been
made of Miss Edgeworth's and of Dickens' writings.
Such a lack in a work of art is a serioiTS defect, for in so
large a number it is unlikely that not one soul should be
found honestly and distinctively Christian. It is intensely
painful to find Bulstrode figuring as the sole represen¬
tative of Christian profession, and it is both unjust and
tintrue_to make such a man sole representative. At the
same time, this character of Bulstrode is a very cunning
work. Few readers can part with this man with their
hearts softened by his wife's loyalty, and their eyes
tearful, by reason of her " look up, Nicholas," ivithout
learning to be silent in judgment. " Some called him
a Methodist, and others a hypocrite, according to the
resources of their vocabulary." Lydgate, with a doc¬
tor's acumen, " formed an mifavourable opinion of the
banker's constitution, and concluded that he had an
eager inward life and little enjoyment of tangible
things." A still deeper insight comes voicelessly with
the charity not didactically inculcated, but livingly
breathed into its by tlie same spirit, to which was due "the
movement of new compassion and old tenderness, which
went like a great wave" through that figure with the
changed mourning dress, and the pale face with "the
trembling about the mouth," at the sight of wliich Bui-
The Attempt. 131
strode burst out crying.    This is a charity we need not
go far to learn, for, " thanks to the human heart, by which
we hve," a Mrs Bulstrode is not a rare phenomenon in\
her loyalty any more than in her " odd patch work of''
phrases  and habits."     Such conduct as hers would be
possible to most women towards their nearest and dearest,
and it only needs the help of a little social imagination to
extend that possibility so as to embrace a wider surround¬
ing.    Mrs Bulstrode's manner of meeting life's crosses is
far  more  common  than   Rosamond's   entire selfishness. \
r Every female~cliaracter in the book is more frequently |
I met with than such an instance as Rosamond is  of an '
i utterly heartless loveliness.
We have all known the sweet ladylike Celia, with her
nice manners and her ready blushes, her touch of naive
malice and self-satisfied, matter-ol-fact common sense; her
strong domesticities and affectionate disposition, and in¬
capability of passion; her clear sight of the immediate
land and deaduess to all aspiration; her " indirect mode of--s
1 making her negative wisdom tell" upon beings of larger J
speculation; her small criticisms, and occasional awe of her
deeper-natured sister.
Genial Mrs Vincy, with her good-humoured face, and
Niobe throat, and flying pink ribands; the two Garths,
mother and   daughter, with  their  sterling  qualities   of
head  and heart ;   the   dear  old innocent  triad    of   Mr
Farebrother's   drawing-room ;   Mrs   Cadwallader,   Lady
Chettam, are all every-day characters,     Dorothea even
has her appearance at wide intervals in most large circles
of acquaintance, but few could name a Rosamond, such
as she appears on the morning of the threatened execution
in the house.    Short, however, of this extreme develop¬
ment of heartless selfishness, a woman like Rosamond, in
many of her characteristics, is not difficult to find.    The \
Acombination  is  not  uncommon,  of great   gentleness of \
I manner   and   lovely   fragility   of   appearance,   with   a   ';
; mulish   obstinacy  and   a   persistent   clinging  to  small   1
I purposes, like that of a snake'^s clinging'to the ground /
(■"when it is entering a hole,—a clinging so tenacious that (
I a strong man may pull with all his might at the tail pfj
the creature and yet be eluded. ^
Mr Brooke is so life-like, that we feel his character
must have been drawn from life. We cannot help
smiling at this worthy man, " nearly sixty, of acquiescent
temper, miscellaneous opinions, and uncertain vote," who
132 The Attempt.
" took in all the new ideas at one time," but saw that
" human reason may cany you too far, over the hedge in
fact," and "pulled up in time." His little peculiarities
amuse us, whether he takes us " on a severe mental
scamper," in a skipping and uncertain way, passing from
one unlinished passage to another v.dth a '• yes now, but
here," or whether his remarkably fluent pen runs off on its
own account, and becomes an independent cause of events
influencing many lives. Still, a student of George Eliot
cannot but feel that here the writer has not had the
same keen enjoyment of the sport as was evident in the
characters of Mrs Poyser in Adam Bede, in that of Felix
Holt's mother, and in the inimitable monkey of the
Spanish Gipsy.
It would take too much space for me to enter into
more of the characters in this book. I will pass on to
consider the Avork in relation to its other professed aim.
It professes to be the history of the blundering life of a
cygnet, " reared uneasily among the ducklings in the
brown pond," who " never found the living stream in
fellowship with its own oary-footed kind;" of one who
might have been a St Theresa, but who found for herself
" no epic life wherein there was a constant unfolding of
far resonant action," " only a life of mistakes, the off¬
spring of a certain spiritual grandeur, ill matched with
the meanness of opportunity." " With dim lights and
tangled circumstances, she tried to shape her thought
and deed in noble agreement; but after all, to common
eyes, her struggles seemed mere inconsistency and form¬
lessness." "Her ardour alternated between a vague
ideal and the common yearning of womanhood; so that the
one was condemned as extravagance, and the other con¬
demned as a lapse."
George Eliot refers this f^iilure of the later-born
Theresa to their being " helped by no coherent social
faith and order, which could perform the function of know¬
ledge for the ardently willing soul." She has, however,
neither hope nor desire for the return of the past order—
the medium in which Theresa's " ardent deeds took
shape:" she believes it gone for ever. She wastes no
sighs on that having passed away; she aims, obviously,
at the desirability of a clearer and nobler social air; at
a change in the conditions of society, and of education,
especially of women. Her sarcasm is biting against " the
plans  of education, at  once narrow and promiscuous,"
The Attempt. 133
which make " woman's knowledge only another name for
motley ignorance;" and against the low estimate of
woman's relation to man, which so largely taints the
wisdom of the nobler sex, and so often results iu men's
giving foolish answers, to their own destruction, when
they are brought under the conditions of modern civiliza¬
tion to heai'—
" A subtler sphinx renew
Eiddles of deatli Thebes never knew."
The pictures given of this manly Avisdom are not
flattering, whether in the collective buzzing of admirers
round Rosamond, whether jerked out in Mr Chicheley's
ideal of a " blonde mth a swan neck, and a certain gait,"
" with a little filigree about her," " something of the
coquette, and a little of the devil," " who would make a-': •
dead set at a man;" whether seen in Lydgate's dreams,'^'"
V as he plays about the flower of Middlemarch, the woman
" perfectly lovely and accomplished," " with a true melodic
charm," " producing the effect of exquisite music," quite ,
\   contrasted with that Miss Brooke, " who did not look at "^^mMJ^
\   things from ajiroper feminine angle," and " whose society 'ii^iU*rit^
would be about as relaxing as going to teach the second
form, instead of reclining in a paradise, with sweet laughs
for bird notes, and blue eyes for a heaven ; " or whether
ponderously  evident  in    Mr   Casaubon,  who   considers '
the great charm of the sex to lie in its "capability oir^^j,.
ardent, self-sacrificing affection," and in that capability,'.^
sees Dorothea's " fitness to round and complete his own
existence."    " He took a wife to adorn  the remaining
quadrant of his coiirse,  and to be a little moon which
would cause hardly a calculable perturbation."    Lydgate
found a Rosamond, and Casaubon met a Dorothea, results
how utterly perplexing and bafiling to all preconceived
ideas, readers of Middlemarch know.
Poor old Casaubon could see clearly the desirability of
a worshipper for the author (in posse) of the Key to all
Mythologies ; but it never occurred to him that a wor¬
shipper infers and requires a glory correlative to the
spirit she brings. " Providence in its kindness had
provided him with the wife he needed." " Whether
Providence had taken equal care of Miss Brooke, in pre¬
senting her with Mr Casaubon, was an idea which could
hardly occur to him."
If the poor elderly creature could even have acted like
a properly absorptive sponge in relation to Dorothea's
134 Hie Attempt.
cravings to love and serve man, it would have kept her
quiet. " With all her yearning to know what was afar from
her, and to be widely benignant, she had ardour enough
for what was near to have kissed Mr Casaubon's coat
sleeve, or to have caressed his shoe latchet, if he would
have made any other sign of acceptance than pronouncing
her, with his unfailing propriety, to be of a most affec¬
tionate and truly feminine nature; indicating, at the same
time, by politely reacliing a chair for her, that he regarded
these manifestations as rather crude and startling." He
liad no power to accept a helpmeet where he had only
/^desired " the uncritical awe of an elegant-minded canary
'Uir4."     .        . ,        '^    "    ~;
Great as is my admiration of the book, I feel a want in
the writer's view, as great as in the state of society she
condemns. What if Mr Casaubon had lived to a great age,
as a white-moled shrivelled-up individual hke him would
have been likely to do ? Is there no " lofty conception
of the world, which might frankly include the parish of
Tipton," poor old Casaubon, and all, and Dorothea's rule
of conduct there'?
Assuredly there is none which would allow of a true
full   development   of Dorothea's faculties, which would
give her a field for her own powers to expatiate in,  or
satisfy her hunger for intensity or greatness :—none.
^       But it seems to me that God yery often so casts the ,\
human lot, that we cannot walk in accordance with His ■
high  requirements   without   sinking   our   own   wealth
altogether; and our lives m such a case are a daily dying
to self,—yet a daily living by faith, and a daily increase of
our  talents. ' To me, the study of such a creature as
Dorothea would be far more satisfying, if a head as power¬
ful and an insight as keen as George Eliot's were inspired
by that fear of the Lord, which is the beginning of Avis-
dom,—to  shoAv  the   drama   of such a soul's unfolding,
under the conditions given, of the utterly uncongenial
marriage,   and  the  utterly irresponsive  neighbourhood.
I thought at the beginning of the book that this was the
writer's intention, as an iart contrast to Romola.    There
seemed indications of such  an  intention  in  Dorothea's
piteousness, when Will Ladislaw gave a pinch to annihilate
the vaunted laboriousness of Mr Casaubon ; in the " new
alarm on her husband's behalf, which was the first stirring
of a pitying tenderness fed by the realities of his lot, and
not by her own dreams."    " When she looked steadily at
The Attempt. 135
her husband's failure, still more at his possible conscious¬
ness of failure, she seemed to be looking along the one
track where duty became tenderness." This pity would
only deepen under the pressure of the miserable
impossibility of her fulfilling the doctor's prescription to
amuse Mr Casaubon. This pity conquered in that
struggle, so wonderfully given in few but burning words,
when Dorothea, chilled and repulsed by Mr Casaubon's
Tinresponsive hardness, sat in the dazzling sun rays,
and knew not whether the discomfort was not part of
her inward misery; "and instead of tears, there came
words."
" She began to hear herself, and was checked into still¬
ness. Like one who has lost his way, and is weary, she
sat and saw in one glance all the paths of her young hope
which she should never find again. And just as clearly,
in the miserable light, she saw her own and her husband's
solitude. Now they walked apart, so that she was obliged
to survey him. If he had drawn her towards him, she >
would never have surveyed him,—never have said " Is he
worth living for 1" but would have felt him simply a part
of her own life. Now, she said bitterly,—" It is his fault,
not mine." In the jar of her whole being, pity was over¬
thrown. Was it her fault that she had believed in him,—
had believed in his worthiness ? And what exactly was
he? She was able enough to estimate him,—she, who
waited on his glances with trembling, and shut her best
Boul in prison, paying it only hidden visits, that she
might be petty enough to please him. In such a crisis as
this, some women begin to hate." But with Dorothea
the resolved submission came, and in her first meeting
with her husband thereafter, she felt something like the
thankfulness that might well up in us if we had narrowly
escaped hurting a lame creature.
Such a beginning might have resulted, in George Eliot's
wonderful hands, in a study at once unique, profound, and
ennobling, of a soul great enough " to find in loss a gain
to match," and of a character notably imperfect of its
kind, though of a kind greater than those around her,
being perfected through the allowing " patience to have
her perfect work ;" perfected not indeed in the accomplish¬
ment of any long recognisable deed, but in the full round¬
ing of a noble soul capable of the divine. Certainly, such
a life and such a study would be intensely painful, but it
would be a pain of which the fire would shed a true
136 The Attempt.
and steady light.    This, however, would require a prin¬
ciple which George Eliot's fatalism steadily ignores.
Perhaps George Eliot has found reason to think that
no woman could stand a long and protracted strain like
this, that no woman could thus enlarge her own stature,
unsupported by man, that woman's perfecting must come
(through her personal satisfaction in love; and without the
realized nearness of God in the man Christ Jesus, I too
' think that no woman could do as I have spoken of.
The chief interest and value of the book lies in its fulfil¬
ment of an aim which, though not professed, must still,
I think, have been the leading one in the writer's mind.
■ This book seems to me to be a study of the value of
woman in the social order, and of her true worth in
relation to man. This value is not only greater, but it is
quite other than that which is assigned to our sex by
clever young men like Lydgate, and elderly sages like
Casaubon.
1 have just been reading a pamphlet called *' Why
women cannot be turned into men." If you are not
already acquainted with it, it is a pamphlet worth your
reading. It is very unsparing in its admission of woman's
inferiority to man in every manual employment. It points
out that " women have never brought themselves into
true relation with nature," and that they lack ingenuity,
inventiveness, and exactness in all their doings.
I thoroughly endorse all that is said. There is nothing of
the work which falls to our share, from scrubbing a floor
to embroidery, from cooking a potato to playing on the
piano, which a man cannot do better than a woman can.
I not only endorse all this, but I go beyond the admis¬
sions of the pamphlet. Not only in relation to nature, and
in all mental processes which require strict and accurate
reasoning, and long tension of the attentive faculties, but
also in gentleness, patience, and tenderness, I believe
that men excel women,—for these qualities, so often
supposed to be especially ours, are all of them qualities
which belong to the magnaminous, which belong to
strength. They are qualities which are developed in men
in proportion to their strength and maturity of develop¬
ment, and when developed, are to the like in women "as
sunshine is to moonshine, as is to water wine." Nothing
is more ruthless than youth. Tenderness belongs to
God. Pity's divine yearning is best seen in the face of
man,—for in man, and not in woman, was God incarnate.
The. Attempt. 137
But we have our value. The pamphlet to which I
have already alluded, speaks of women's value in their
indirect "harmonizing and advancing of material progress,"
through their stimulation of the promotion of luxm-ies;
and of their value in quickening moral progress, " through
the appeal of their helplessness to man's strength, bring¬
ing out the noblest and finest parts of his nature."
Woman's A^alue lies in the line indicated, but it stretches
far beyond these limits.    Woman is essentially a requirer.
'"The true woman is a requirer at man's hands' o/" 7a"s oion
ideal.    In the true woman extremes meet; the negative
requirement passes into the positive fire of judgment.
To refer again to the same pamphlet, woman's intellect
has been always developed, not like man's, in relation
to nature, but in relation to man. She studies the man
" with an interest that he need not devote to her."
" From motives both of love and fear, she absorbs herself
intently in another's life and nature, setting his wants,
desires, and antipathies before her own, and considering
everything in relation to him."
Studying thus the man, she comes into relation with
the personal God,    She brings forth the Son of God.
When Christ appeared, womanhood, as a whole, received
■ the Ideal Man, though man rejected the Incarnate God.
Though Satan moved one woman to sift the unstable
Peter, we can say that no woman was ever found against
the Christ.
Women have fi-om the beginning been exercised not
only in relation to man, but also in relation to especial
men. "Women are intensely personal and special in their
interests." " They devote their attention chiefly to study¬
ing in the individual what distinguishes him from his
felloAvs."
Noble women are requirers not only of the ideal, but
of personal ideals. As long, however, as they are only
such requirers, they are a terror to men. Men hate
George Eliot's Romolas and Dorotheas. They would
like to obliterate such women if they could; unless here
one, and there another feels the hope that he could, in
honesty of purpose and reality of personal aspiration,
desire the contact with their flame, and that he could so
inspire such a woman's heart with personal love, that the
fire of her requirement would be beneficent and uncon-
suming as the light of day. Noble women are requirera
not only of tlie ideal, but of personal ideals; but such
HAY 1S73. S
138 ■ The Attempt.
women end in reaching the goal of utter failure and entire
bitterness, unless their love of the attribute is united with
the love of the personality of some one man. They must
learn to require theii- ideals not from, but for those they
love, else the falsehood of their extreme will have results
more disastrous than those which wait upon the women
who are ready to sink all desire for ennobling attributes
in their touching faithfulness, (like that of the dog), to the
personality of lover and husband. The type of woman¬
hood which has too slight a hold of the ideal gives us
daily revelations of pure, unfailing, domestic tenderness,
refreshes men with a thousand droppings of the dew from
heaven. Such women's placid souls " can accept moment¬
ous doctrines without any eccentric agitation," yet they
fail to satisfy man's immortal j- earnings. Men know their
worth, but they hanker after " Fifines at the Fair." Men
love them as Fred Vincy loved his easy-goiag mother,
but their spirits are neither refined nor at rest in them.
In Middlemarch we have all this brought before us very
vividly, with the vital exception of the Christ. The
only woman who is throughout the book seen to be
perfect in her kind, is Mary Garth. She loves Fred
Vincy as he is. She would always have loved him and
no other, even if he had turned out " a curate in debt
for horse hire and cambric pocket handkerchiefs," but she
loved him also as he ought to be, and never for a moment
flinched from her requirement at his hands of his own
better self. It was no transceudant requirement. It was
simply the requirement of a clear-headed, good-hearted,
sensible, moral woman, without a spark of genius, or any
aspiration beyond the humble confines of the parish of
Tipton. Mary Garth was perfect of her kind, but she was
of a kind which belonged to a smaller sphere than the
more finely touched spirit of Dorothea.
The difference between man and woman is wonderfully
shown in the different results upon Lydgate and Dorothea
in their trials. They both, under the influence of " that
moral stupidity in which we are all born," had taken " the
world as an udder to feed their supreme selves." Lydgate,
with " the selfish imselfishness of man," again to quote
Janus' pamphlet, " thinks of himself first, of his will and
his aims ; he thinks of the woman next, and how these
may affect her. She is a part of himself, and the whole
must have precedence over the part." Dorothea, with
" woman's selfish imselfishness," from woman's " habit of
The Attempt. 139
absorbing herself in the man, losing her identity in him,
and living a land of reflected life," thinks " of the man
first," considers "his acts, his requh-ements, his wishes,
before her own; but she considers him and all that is
known to her of his life, his thoughts, his feelings, and
his occupations, chiefly with reference to herself." *
Both Lydgate and Dorothea make a fatal mistake.
Lydgate found that a woman who is fit only for the
hours of relaxation is truly a basil plant, " a plant
which flourishes on a murdered man's brains." Dorothea,
belonging to that sisterhood " whose great function is
praise," who " enter into no contest, but infallibly ad¬
judge the crown of contest," f found she had flung her¬
self at ihe feet of a failure, at the feet of a man who was
a failure not only to his own ideal, but to all truth of
man's and woman's relationship, who dreamt, in his futile
gropings, that he " could be helped effectively by a
, shadow, or worthily by a slave," % Lydgate, with mans
divine magnanimity, took up the burden of the helpless
creature he had wooed and won, with man's divine con¬
formity to the God in whose image man is made, became
sacrificially involved in that creature's failure and low
estate: all his high ideal was put aside to provide that
bird with a gilded cage. Eis judgment never touched
Rosamond. His bitterness, when it occasionally blazed,
never scorched her. How could it ? That fire of
judgment burns not from without till it is kindled from
within. The goats of the judgment day go not away into
everlasting burnings until their own spirits are enlight¬
ened. The reasoning with them of the Judge precedes
their obedience. They are obedient then, and only then,
to the dread " Depart," when, by force of the awakened
judgment within themselves, they go away, not "are cast,"
but " go away " into everlasting burnings.
On the other hand, Dorothea never for a moment let go
of her requirement, of her demand for the ideal, and old
Casaubon, failure though he was, was man enough to
wince and quail at her slightest touch. He knew right
well that it was a demand for his own ideal. He knew
right well that the quick flame playing about him,  of
• These quotations are all from the aforesaid pamphlet, "Why Women
cannot be turned into Men," by a lady under the name of Janus, published
by Blackwood.
t Ruakin'a Saame and LUies. t Jt>-
140 Jhe Attempt.
that "woman's unerring judgment, was a flame that might
save him, " yet so as by fire."
Men as a rule look upon poor Casaubon with unfeigned
sympathy and pity, and consider him a very ill-treated
individual. " What right," I have heard them say, " had
Dorothea to anything very remarkable in her husband ?
What was she herself? What could she do herself?
Except picking out and altering designs for cottages, we
never hear of any achievement of her own." A woman's
rightful sphere, however, is not judged according to her
achievements, but according to her requirement, and her
power to help and to appreciate.    -^
It is significant that Dorothea's and Rosamond's lives
are brought into contact in connexion with Will Ladislaw.
Dorothea and Rosamond are both of them of the class of
women whose seeking is predominantly after some ideal
which shall stand in true correlation with themselves.
They both belong to a higher sphere than that in which
they are placed; Rosamond to the higher scale of
material surroundings, to the elegance and beauty of rank,
and cultivation, and wealth ; Dorothea to the community
of the great in mind, to the goodly fellowship of the
prophets, or the holy army of martyi-s. They are as far
apart as earth and heaven, yet the circle of both is con¬
centric ; and Dorothea's danger is as great as Rosamond's,
j of becoming a woman lost to  womanhood,  of liasten-
I ing to her fall with " the angels which kept not their
first estate, but left their own habitation."    Such women
never let go their hold of their required ideal; but it is
! very possible that they may, in its pursuit, lose all hold of
chastity, love, and truth.    Theirs is a terrible sisterhood,
\ all alike armed with the sword of an unswerving require¬
ment. Their manifestations are manifold and diverse, but
the spu'it that inspires them all is one. It is the awful
requirement from below. If no personal love tempers
their fire, they are all alike terrible, whether, as having
conceived a high ideal, they search out, like flame, the
weakness of every idol, and bring all the glory of man to
the dust; or whether, as on their lowest plane, they take
the hire of the insatiate. Happily for Dorothea, WiU
Ladislaw, knowing that she would value him at no more
than a dirty feather, if she found him a paltry pretence,
loved her, and desired her, and walked in the light of her
requirement. And he found her richly capable of
merging her whole life in hie, satisfied to the full with
Tlie Attempt. 141
giving him wifely help, satisfied herself, whatever others
said, to be known only in a certain circle, and only as his
wife and the mother of his children.
Will Ladislaw and Fred Vincy were both of them, as men,
immeasurably inferior to Lydgate; still, while Lydgate
sorrowtully and bitterly failed, they both stood and pros¬
pered in their inwara lives, because they both knew man's
deepest secret—the true relationship betAveen man and'
woman. To quote Kuskin again, they knew " that the^.
buckling on of a knight's armour by his lady's hand was^"'*^
not a mere caprice of romantic fashion. It was the type
of an eternal truth—that the soul's armour is never well
set to the heart unless a woman's hand has braced it;
and it is only when she braces it loosely, that the honour
of manhood fails."
Know you not those lovely lines—I would they were
learned by all youthful ladies of England,—
" Oh wasteful woman ! she who may
On her sweet self get her own price,
Knowing he cannot choose but pay,
How has she cheapened Paradise !
How given for nought her priceless gift,
How spoiled the bread and spill'd the wine,
Which spent with due, respective thrift,
Had made brutes men, and men divine."
Middlemarch calls to a nobler, higher view of the value
of woman and the mystery of marriage, with a voice as
earnest as life.
Would God that men and women both would lay its
teachings to heart I     •'  , r- •
Now, sweet friend, I have, for the love of you, written
this letter. Take it, then, as " affection's offering," and
not as a literary attempt; for, as I have before said to
you, my ambition, if I have any, is not literary. If I
write at all, I write because pen and ink furnish, in my
often wandering Ufe, the only available outlet for a
certain activity, and the only opening for the expression
of certain truths, to the passionate love of which my
soul has from my infancy been devoted.—Ever yours,
t^AK^^ -irr>crvvM3i   (p^^j^Jrr^ ^ V^XS^  siJ^^rAr V   K. V* W^»Xi W^ ^^.
v^/^v Km^ «W^, &tt^ e;, 'Vt^4t ej>fWN?J^nLvvL-
142 The Attempt.
Welcome, rejoicing May, glad burst of spring,
Hasting in virgin green to clothe the trees: ^
Hail laughing sunshine, budding flowers, that fling
Sweet odours on the balmy western breeze.
Hail, promise-breathing hours, that bid the earth
Renew its youth, its unsoiled robes, awhile,—
Bid every grove to harmony give birth, _ i
Bid moors with furze, and fields with daisies smile. j
Sweet flowers, and sweeter sunshine, that unite
To deck all nature with delicious green.
Fresh foliage waving in the genial light,—
Charms ever new, though fourscore seasons seen I
I
For e'en the burdened human heart, that aches.
Feels a faint breath as of its youth again.
Answers the music of the birds, that wakes
In city grove as in unpeopled glen.
Why should spring pass ? the tender green depart.
The woods grow silent, and the leaves grow sere ?
Alas I the springtime fancies of the heart,
Why should they die, and leave it voidjand drear ?
Why should the dreams, that spread a rosy light '
O'er all things earthly, fade in gloom away ? j
Why should the hopes, that show the future bright, j
Lie withered at our feet, as soon these^leaves of May "l |
Life marches on : the glory of its morn
Changes to clouds, as sure as flowery spring
Gives place to autumn ; and its visions, born
Of youth and sunshine, fleet on swiftest wing. ,
For life is not a eong, a feast, a dance :
It is the allotted pathway of the soul,
Whose every step, as onward we advance, ^
Conducts us nearer to a changeless goal: ''
The Attempt.
143
Whose sunshine and whose clouds are not in vain
If used aright,—alike in mercy given
For growth, for ripening,—'tis through joy and pain
God trains His wayward children up for heaven.
Wish not that dreams might last: the advancing day
Brings its own good, though dried the dews of prime.
Let the spring pass, the freshness wear away,—
So comes the year's fruition in its time.
Run on, ye months, and bring the richer flowers.
The glorious roses, and the glow of June,
The ripened fruits, the purpling grape, the crowned hours
Of golden fields beneath the harvest moon.
Pass on, ye years, and though youth's dreams must die.
And life grow shaded, and the heart grow still,
Bring strengthened faith, the hopes that mount on high.
The love unselfish, and the chastened will;
The soul that craves not, but gives thanks for all;
The joy of faith that lives through changeful years ;
The trust that wavers not, whate'er befall;
The wisdom that reaps fruit from smiles and tears ;
Bring the deep peace, the heart returned to rest,
From idols weaned, its fevered wanderings o'er;
The calm through sufferings reached, the freedom of the
breast
Whose all is God, whom self enthralls no more ;
Bring, with life's fading glow, the unearthly light
That kindles more and more to perfect day ;
Then bring the " end of faith," the vision bright
Where faith and hope shall melt, in bliss, away.
Omicron.
144 The Attempt.
A TALE OF THE FORTY-FIVE.
CHAPTEE   VIII.
"ood's holiday."
The next morning was Sunday. It dawned one of
those perfect days of early autumn that always remind
one of old George Herbert's lines—
"Sweet day—so cool, so calm, so bright.
The bridal of the earth and sky ;
Soft dews shall weep thy fall to-night,
For thou must die."
All nature seemed basking in a joyful Sabbath rest, as
Barbara opened her window to let in the sweet morning
air.    It seemed to her as if the joyful Sabbath peace of the
outer world were reflected in her own heart, everything
there seemed so happy and at rest, and she looked back
to the terrible yesterday as to some hideous nightmare
already far away.   She dressed quickly and went down to
. the hall.    Her own happiness seemed to have reflected
itself in her dress; somehow she felt as if on this day
everything dark or dingy was out of place, and without
thinking much about it, instinctively, as it were, she had
turned away from the quiet coloured silk she generally
wore at church, and chosen one of those brilliant muslins,
covered  with  bright  flowers  and  gay  butterflies,—the
delight   of our grandmothers  in  their   girlhood, and of
which relics are handed down to us now, with the bright
colours  but little faded by the  lapse  of a century—so
thoroughly did the dyer do his work in these days, ere
this age of cheap tawdriness had begun.  Very gay and
pretty she looked with the many-coloured muslin, looped
up with rose-coloured ribbon over a rose-coloured quilted
petticoat, or kirtle, as they were called in those days, and
a bow of rose-coloured ribbon in her bright  hair.    She
entered the hall humming softly to herself the air of an
old Gregorian chant.  Alaster was standing by the window
in the hall looking out, and he turned as she entered, and
went forward to meet her, an involuntary look of   ad¬
miration lighting up his dark brown eyes.
" Good morning!" he said, as he took her hand, smiling.
" You don't look much the worse of yesterday's vigils."
Tlie Attempt. 145
" Ho"W could any one look ill on euch a morning ? " she
answered, emiliug. " Have you slept off your fatigues % "
"Oh, yes," he said, "I think I did a good day's work
yesterday for king and country, so I consider that I am
fairly entitled to rest and enjoy myself to-day; there's
nothiag makes one enjoy rest so much as the feeling that
one has worked well for it."
" I think I am entitled to a rest to-day, too," said
Barbara. " My yesterday's work was fatiguing, though
only of the passive kind. What a comfort Sunday is,"
she added, dreamily.
"Yes," said Alaster, "if people would only believe that
that is what it was given for, a day of rest, God's holi¬
day to all mankind; but people will insist on distorting it
according to their crooked ideas of what God's holiday
ought to mean, instead of just taking it as it was given,"
Barbara looked up with a quick astonished glance.
" Dear me, Alaster," she said, " I didn't know you thought
about these sort of things at all, I thought you only
cared about shooting and fishing."
Alaster smiled. " I do care about shooting and fishing,
certainly," he said, "but I hope, when my new sister
comes to know me better, she will find I care about other
things too."
" Oh, I am so glad," said Barbara, drawing a long
breath of extreme satisfaction, " it is ever so much nicer,
but I never met with any of the lairds that did care for
anything else before, and I thought you would be the
same, you know."
Alaster laughed. " You don't give the lairds a very high
character, Barbara, but I am afraid there's a good deal of
truth in it. But there's my yesterday's defender, your
own kinsman ,Lord Pitsligo, Barbara, surely he doesn't
come into that category '^"
" Oh no, he's the dearest old man, but he's an old man,
and he's been abroad and knows Feuelon and all these
people, but I never think of anybody being like him,
—he's like the Apostle John, I think."
" Then there is one laird, it seems, in whoso favour
you make an exception; perhaps we should find some
more if we tried. What say you to old Newhaugh, Bar¬
bara?" he added, smiling; "if wisdom lies in wigs, he
should be a wise man, I'm sure."
Barbara only laughed and shook her head as she
answered, "But really, T am so  glad, Alaster, it will be
MAT 1873. T
146 The Attempt.
ever so much nicer for Nancy; and do you know I have
often thought about what you said just now, that Sun¬
day is really just God's holiday, and I said something
about it to Elspet once, but she did'nt seem to hke it, so
I never spoke about it again. Come away to breakfast
now," she added, ae Elspet brought in the tray with hot
scones, fresh-made butter, and new-laid eggs. " Will you
go to church with me ? it's a nice walk up the glen ; and
I was to meet Nancy there."
"Yes,  by  all means,   the  walk up the glen will be
charming."
"The   walk   down   again,  you   mean,"  said  Barbara,
laughing.
" Both," said Alaster, and the tone struck Barbara as
graver than the occasion warranted.
Breakfast over, Barbara dressed quickly, and the two
set out to walk to Carrick to the little chapel there. Like
all the Forbeses, the Milla Forres family were Episco¬
palians, and the chapel at Carrick was their usual place of
worship. Left very much to herself, however, in all her
doings, Barbara had discovered for herself a little Presby¬
terian church, to which she sometimes went during the
short winter days, when the walk to Carrick was too long.
This was the only performance of her young mistress on
which Elspet looked with disapproval. In her eyes it was
quite a derogation from the dignity of " the family " that
one of them should be seen in such an extremely plebean
place as a " Scotch kirk," but on this point she had always
found Barbara inexplicably obstinate. Attached as she
was to her own form of worship, there was something that
attracted Barbara strangely in the very simphcity and
baldness of the Presbyterian worship, and in the simple,
earnest words of the grey-haired old man who preached
Sunday after Sunday to that little band of shepherds with
tartan plaids, and old wives with white mutches. The
curate who officiated at Carrick was a smart young
Englishman, who evidently thought that it Avas a clear
case of "casting pearls before swine," that he should have
to minister to a small rural congregation in a little High¬
land village. Barbara met him sometimes at picnics
or fishing parties in the neighbourhood, and his flippant
manner, and evident self-conceit always jarred with her
idea of what a minister of Christ ought to be. Brought
up as she had been in a mountain solitude, with few
opportunities  of gaining  any knowledge  of the world
The Attempt 147
except from books, Barbara was an idealist of the purest
type, and was probably inclined to exact from "poor
human nature" an amount of perfection to which only
rare exceptions to the general laile of poor humanity have
the least chance of attaining, and too httle inclined to make
allowance for human frailty, especially when such frailty
showed itself in connection with so high an office as that
of a minister of Christ. Therefore, in all probability, the
young curate, who was by no means a bad fellow at
heart, though he had many crudenesses about him, got
scant justice at her hands. The old Presbyterian minister,
on the other hand, answered exactly to her ideal picture—
venerable, benevolent, fatherly, always to be met with in
the humblest cottages whenever there was sickness or
sorrow there ; speaking from Sunday to Sunday earnest,
simple words of instruction and comfort to his simple
flock; and with the added romance of having been himself,
as a child, carried by his covenanting father and mother
to hide in glens and caves in the old persecuting days,
the old man had a strong attraction for Barbara; and
when the time came for her first communion, and she had
felt the impossibility of speaking of the doubts and fears
that beset her to the smart, flippant Englishman, she had
sought out the old minister, and got much fatherly advice
and comfort from him, though she had never dreamt of
deserting her own form of worship for his. This Sunday,
however, she and Alaster were bound for the curate's
chapel at Carrick. The path ran along the burn side.
All nature seemed rejoicing that bright September morn¬
ing, just as it had rejoiced yesterday, when Barbara
sought her heathery refuge in her almost despair; but
how different everything looked to her, now that the
Sabbath peace around found its echo and reflection in her
own breast!
The two walked along in silence for some time; some¬
how both of them felt too happy to care to talk much. All
nature seemed dressing itself in its brightest to their
young eyes, and neither of them cared to stop to analyse
their happiness; it was there, and that was enough for
them, they cared little whence it came. Probably, if you
had asked them what made them so happy, both would
have answered, " Who could be other than happy on such
a day, after the troubles of yesterday ? "
" Do you think it is very shocking to go to a Presby-
148 The Attempt.
terian kirk sometimes, Alaster?" asked Barbara, at last
breaking their long, happy silence.
"A Presbyterian kirk! What on earth would take you
there?" said Alaster, looking up in astonishment. Bar¬
bara coloured and hesitated, and began to repent her
unwary question, for her visits to the little ku-k in the
glen had been kept a profound secret from every one
except Nancy and old Elspet.
" Oh, I thought—perhaps—you would understand," she
said, hesitatingly, and blushing deeply.
"Understand what?" he said, smiling at her evident
confusion.
" Understand that there may perhaps be good people
who are not Episcopalians," she said, and taking courage,
she added earnestly, "There's an old minister that
preaches in the little kirk in Glen Finn, he's ever so much
more like what, I think, the Apostles must have been, than
that Mr Bennett, the curate at Carrick."
"How do you know that, you little heretic?" said
Alaster, trying hard to keep his countenance, and look
reproving; but Barbara caught the amused twinkle in his
eyes, and laughed as she answered—
" How do I know it ? because I sometimes go to hear
him preach."
" Oh, you shocking renegade, so I have forced you to
confess your guilty secret," laughed Alaster.
" No indeed, sir, I confessed it of my own free will; but
seriously," she added, " is it so very shocking after all ? "
" Shocking ? I should think so. I'll tell the Bishop, and
he'll have you excommunicated at once." Barbara
laughed, much relieved that what she had always dreaded
to confess should be received only with banter.
"Ido so hatethat Mr Bennett, at least, I suppose I mustu't
say I hate him, but I hate his conceit and affectation ;
there can't be any harm in hating that, though if I hate
that I don't see very well how I can help hating him, for
that's pretty much all there is of him."
" See what comes of going to Presbyterian kirks," said
Alaster, " why, you're full of ' envy, hatred, and malice,
and all imcharitableness.'"
" That's not the fault of the Presbyterian kirk," laughed
Barbara. " I'm always most charitably disposed when I'm
there, it's the English curate that rouses my natural
corruption; but Mr Mackay is such a dear old man,
and he talks to the people as if he really had a message
7he Attempt. 149
of " good tidings " to them, and was glad to give it; not
like that horrid Mr Bennett, who seems always as if he
thought it was an honour to the Bible and Prayer book that
he should condescend to read them, and quite an absurdity
to talk to the country people as if they had souls at all;
that surely isn't what Christ meant His ministers to be."
" Certainly not," said Alaster. " He who washed His
disciples' feet, cited as one of the signs of His ministry
that ' to the poor the gospel is preached.'"
Barbara's eyes brightened. "I wish you could hear old
Mr Mackay, that is just the sort of thing he does," she
said.
"We will go and hear hun, then, if you like, next
Sunday," he said,
"That will be delightful," she said; "I should so
like to talk about his sermon with some one; but,"
she added, a shade coming over her face, "Nancy
doesn't like the Presbyterian kirk. She says the
service is so ugly; but I don't think it is ugly, though
there's no organ, and no painted window, and the church
is just wliite-washed, and the seats are of common, im-
painted wood. I know it ought to be ugly, for there's
nothing to make it pretty, but somehow it never seems
so to me when I see the shepherds there with their tartan
plaids, and their colhe dogs lying under the seats, and the
old wives with their white mutches, all listening so
earnestly to what Mr Mackay is saying, and looking so,
as if they believed every word; and then the singing,
Nancy can't bear that, she says they sing through their
noses, and all out of tune, and I'm afraid it's true, but
somehow they seem to sing with their hearts, and I can't
help liking it, though it is out of tune now and then."
" Aye," said Alaster, " heart music is better than organ
music, and Pve no doubt it gets sooner up to heaven,
though, of course, it's highly desirable that, if possible, it
should be in tune," he said, smiling.
By this time they had reached the gate of the lovely
little chapel, lying nestling under great trees in the shadow
of the mountains, and the soft strains of the organ, and
the grand words of the Te Deum greeted them as they
entered.
150 The Attempt.
Ironght Irarh  to  (Barth.
How well do I remember, in the happy days of yore,
I sought the trace of fairies oft on hill, and wood, and shore;
All story-laden, wishing so that I might see them play,
Then would they bear me off with them, for seven years
and a day. [see;
The time would seem a little hour, so much there was to
To watch how, in their sunless land, the roots of flower
and tree [flowers.
Were fed by tender fairy's hand, and colours shed on
And how the gems were chiselled out  to grace their
glowing bowers. [quickened beat,
One bright eve, all my pulses leapt and throbbed with
As I saw a perfect fairy-ring before my wandering feet.
I was a child, a very chUd, and childlike I believed
(As is the nature of our soul ere it has been deceived)
These beautiful wild tales of elves and fairies, and their
Queen,
And I knew not why it should not be as it before had been.
So with a childish struggle, and a quivering thought of
home,
I thoitght how happy I should be awhile with them to roam,
And fairly overstepped the ring, and sat upon the ground.
With mind resolved, and beating heart, and eager glance
around.
It was a fair and lovely spot, beneath a tail fir tree.
Where through the neighbouring branches glimpsed the
blueness of the sea, [summits tall,
While weird-like evening breezes breathed amid  their
And uttered sounds that sometimes seemed to be a fairy-
call, [low.
The sun was waxing red and large, his rays were long and
And earnestly I marked his pace, that seemed but all too
slow,                                                                      [star—
For I knew the fairies' trysting-time to be beneath the
Fair star of love, that followed him, and smiled on them
afar;                                                                            [here,
For it was from her silvery fields that first they floated
And found our globe was not so fair, our people not so dear,
And therefore did they upwards steal, to look with loving
eyes, [rise.
Hopeless of all returning where their saddened longings
The Attempt. 151
The sun sank down into the sea, its golden rim had gone,
The solemn time had almost come, they would be here anon.
I often turned and started, sure I heard them drawing near.
The slightest sound in nature rang so changed upon my
ear; [grasp;
The primroses and violets fell crushed from my nerveless
My hands sought from each other strength in a prayer¬
like clasp; [vanished quite.
An awe crept o'er me from the shades; the gold had
I felt a fear I had not felt while yet the sun was bright,—
Yet could not rise and run away, and why I could not tell.
Unless it were that verily they had commenced their spell.
Again I shook and trembled when a startled insect's hum
Thrilled me with mingled feelings, as I thought the fairies
come.
But no I for all unheeding still, slept the calm wood around,
Nought moving in the forest but the shadows on the
ground.
Then came a voice 1 not strange and sweet, but clear and
full and shrill,
It seemed to ring across the sea, and echo from the hill.
My young life curdled in a gasp, upon the awfal sound ;
My blood grew cold, my sense grew dim, my eager hopes
were drowned
In the wild fear of things unknown.    " Quick child, I
cannot stay, [far away 1"
You'll catch your death of cold ; make haste, the rest are
Oh, downfall to my happiness! Rude waking from my
dream, [theme.
When nurse's voice could make an end of such romantic
And yet, perhaps it was as weU that then she forced me
home, [come."
It left a hope of gossamer,—" Perhaps they might have
LuTEA Reseda.
152 The Attempt.
©n titfi djomjjaratice W^tnh of Penta! mi
l^^atural gtiilasaijlrD.
In the few remarks we are going to make upon this
subject, although we may evince more partiality for the
one study than the other, we wish to make it clear how
very desirable it is that both should form a part of every
liberal education.
To begin with MentalPhilosophy, in its principal divisions
of Logic, Psychology, and Metaphysics.
There can be no doubt that Logic, which has for its
founder the great Aristotle, and Avhich has since his time
been studied for two thousand years, must have some
important objects. It will be sufficient to remark here,
that it is absolutely necessary, not only for the methodical
arrangement of scientific knowledge, but what is more to
our present purpose, it is necessary to teach people to
reason correctly in ordinary conversation, to give sound
instead of unsound reasons, and to guard them from falling
into, and being imposed upon by fallacies. The need of
the study is shown by the confusion which often arises in
the discussion of difficult subjects, owing to a deficient
knowledge of Logic.
In Psychology, there is much that is both interesting and
useful. The phenomena which appear at first to be too
various for our comprehension, are found to be the result
of a small number of simple and uncompounded faculties,
or principles of action. These faculties are the general
laws of our constitution, and hold the same place in the
Philosophy of Mind that the general laws we investigate
in Physics hold in that branch of science. In both cases,
the laws are to be investigated only by an examination of
facts, and as long as these facts are unmixed with
hypothesis the conclusions are as certain as in Physics.
For instance, the laws which regulate the association of
ideas can be ascertained, but it is going quite beyond the
boundaries of the science to attempt an explanation of the
association of ideas by certain supposed vibrations in the
state of the brain, or to explain memory by means of
supposed impressions made on the sensorium.
The cultivation of this branch of knowdedge imparts a
habit of reflection, and conduces to clearness of thought,
and the power of making   explanations.    The   common
Tlie Attempt. 153
remark that imperfect knowledge is indicated by an
inability to explain, is, we think, a mistake, and only
shows that a person is not in the habit of communicating
his knowledge to others. In giving explanations, the
difficulty is to remember and state clearly every different
step by which we have been led to form a conclusion.
Nothing contributes so much to form this habit as the
science of which we are now speaking, which has the
operations of the mind for its object. By making us
reflect on the subjects of our consciousness, it enables us
to arrest the current of thought, and to be prepared to
repeat to others the arguments or trains of reasoning
which led us to form such and such opinions.
Besides being a source of increased happiness, this
study should be of great use to those engaged in teaching,
by assisting them to watch over the impressions and
associations which the mind receives in early life, and to
secure it against the infliuence of prevailing errors,—for the
instruction of youth in languages or any acqiiirement is
of little importance compared to the formation in them of
habits, and the training of all their different faculties.
Metaphysics, the science of being or existing, goes
beyond Psychology, as it attempts to explain the nature
of matter and of mind, as well as the union of the two;
also, whether the Supreme Being, the ultimate cause, is
separate from the universe, or connected with it. The
mere mention of these serves to show how very uncertain
its speculations must be, as being concerned with problems
which, from their nature, cannot be solved.
The word Metaphysics was originally due to the fact
that a treatise upon this subject, by Aristotle, was placed
after a treatise by him on " Physics," " Meta " being the
Greek word for " after." The Latin word is more signi¬
ficant, as it means a study of the supernatural. This part
of the subject we think the most unprofitable ; for some
of the conclusions reached, instead of giving the repose of
philosophic certainty, leave the mind in a whirl of wonder
and perplexity; the disputed facts, which are not recog¬
nised as facts, producing only excitement and controversy.
In the infancy of the human race, Plato and Aristotle
interested themselves in the only pursuit then open to
them; but we do not doubt that minds of the highest order
like theirs would, if now alive, devote themselves to the
wonders of natural science, as well as to the unsatisfying
topics of Metaphysics.
MAT 1873, U
lo4 The Attempt.
It may be said of Mental Philosophy, in all its branches,
that it has much to do with general culture, owing to its
connection with literature, enabling the student to
understand a multitude of allusions, which otherwise
would be hke a sealed book. It also throws light upon
many passages in poetry of the highest class. Milton's
Paradise Lost and Dante's Paradiso might be cited, along
with innumerable other instances.
Another advantage may be mentioned, which is, that it
has a tendency to give enlarged views upon religion.
Physics can overthrow some prejudices, and show that
many superstitions, formerly thought invincible, are not
now tenable; and it also emphatically testifies to the
power of the Creator. But it does not teach people to
strike the balance of probabilities, to form a conclusion or
inference from a number of circumstances, or what is caUed
cumulative evidence. Mathematicians are even said to
be credulous, because they start in their science fi'om
assumptions which they take for granted.
Having said so much in favour of Mental Philosophy,
we will now consider the superior merits of Physics; and
we think that it is particularly in contrast with Meta¬
physics that it appears to advantag;e.
For continuous study, we should certainly give the
preference to Physics, for these reasons,—-first, that it rests
on surer grounds; secondly, \h.&.i it is more progressive;
and thirdly, that it has a much larger field.
Metaphysics is the reverse of all this,—it is full of un¬
certainty, is very unprogressive, and has but a limited
field. It is taken up with discussing a number of minute
things which have no importance, and which might almost
be called trifling, together with such uncertainty that, to
this hour, the dispute is raging whether our ideas are
intuitive or not; also as to the foundation of Mathe¬
matics in particular,—Stuart Mill maintaining that it is
based upon experience, whereas others insist that it is
eelf-evolved from a few necessary assumptions.
And, m addition to the strife caused by the topics them¬
selves, there are endless discussions as to the meaning of
this or that author, whether he upheld this or that theory,
so hazy and vague are their compositions; wnile some of•
them alternate so much from one theory to another, that
they may be claimed aJike as supporters by thinkers of
the most opposite kind. In this way, we find Sir W.
Hamilton claiming Aristotle as entertaining Reid's " com-
The Attempt. 155
mon sense" view, while Grote elaborately shows that
this was a mistake. The unfortunate student who
thinks that the misunderstanding and vai-ious inter¬
pretations of the views of Descartes or Spinoza were
owing to the age they lived in, and its remoteness from
the present, and who fancies that the mist will clear
away as he gets on, soon finds himself undeceived, for
the combat thickens, and there is just as much discus¬
sion about the meaning of Reid and Brown as about the
earlier authors. Thus it happens, that theories which
had then- day in early times laid so little hold of the
general mind that they are revived, after the lapse of
ages, as something new.
There is some deception in the imposing definition of
Metaphysics, that it is something "after" or beyond
Physics, as if being different and less intelligible made
it necessarily greater. That it is quite different we
admit, and we would not for a moment deny the
sublimity of its principal topics,—the nature of the
Deity, of the soul, the question of immortality, the deep¬
est thoughts which can occupy the mind of man; but
in regard to these, how very little has it accomplished!
As much was known by Plato and Aristotle as is known
now. Comparatively speaking, it is almost a stationary
science; for although eome new theories have been ad¬
vanced, these have been not merely overthrown by suc¬
ceeding authors, but these authors have gone back to the
earlier views. There is change without advance, like a door
turning upon its hinges—much motion, but nothing more.
All this hardly deserves the name of progress. The
lovers of this study are very indignant at this accusation,
and vehemently protest that there is progress ; but yet
they never name anything that can be called a new dis¬
covery. Even the vaunted theory of Ideal Perception,
about which an ardent votary once said,—"All philosophers
are now agreed that we see only appearances, not real
things," is not new, for Plato helcl it. It is true that his
theory was somewhat different from the modern theory,
but still they have the same essential point in common.
Besides, it may be doubted whether all philosophers
"are agreed" even on this point. Any way, they can
neither prove their views nor show that they accord
with probability, which is indispensably required for
general acceptance by the world at large. There is a
confidence felt in the tniths announced by tlie masters
156 The Attempt.
of Natural Science, greater than any accorded to the
masters of Metaphysics. The results arrived at by a
Newton or a Davy are received with none of the hesita¬
tion which is expressed with regard to Hume, Berkeley,
or Mill's favourite views. Perhaps it will be said that
if the subjects which occupy Metaphysicians are such as
do not admit of proof, it is unfair to complain of its want;
but granting that this uncertainty is no fault of theirs, it
may yet fairly be an argument against the profitable¬
ness and pleasure of the study.
Tiurning to Physics, we feel as if standing on firm
ground instead of a shifting quagmire, so exact are the
results arrived at. As an instance of this, we may name
the Nautical Almanack. This is a yearly record, in which
eclipses of the sun and moon, of Jupiter's satellites,
and a multitude of other matters of the last importance
to navigation, are foretold with the most rigid accuracy.
This book is the Mariner's guide on the trackless ocean,
and daily and nightly its revelations bring safety to
ships in all parts of the world. This mapping out before¬
hand, literally to a hanbreadth, the exact order and track
in which the heavenly bodies wiU run their course through
space, and the precise relative position they will occupy
at any given moment, is a feat which, if applicable to the
present year only, might well fill us with amazement; but
it becomes infinitely more marvellous when we know
that this book is regularly piiblished three or four years
in advance. Even for centuries hence the position of the
heavenly bodies can be calculated. The precision of this
science seems to give a rest to the mind, although it is
not pretended that everything is certain. Many theories
will be superseded by others when clearer light has been
thrown upon some subjects by means of continued experi¬
ment, but we maintain that there is greater certainty
than in Metaphysics, and that there are reasons for the
changes. If there is any progress in Mental Philosophy,
it is of the zig-zag kind; but when we take a survey
of the Natural Sciences from the earliest times, we are
astounded at the regularity of the progress, and how
one thing has led to another, in a consecutive chain.
In these days, an outcry has been raised against the
study of the Physical Sciences, owing to the spirit in
which it has been conducted. It has been said that it
leads to materialism, but this is certainly not a necessary
result; and Sir H. Davy, although he was at the head of
The Attempt. 157
science, thought very much the reverse. In the Sal-
monia, he says, " that which teaches will not be felt, that
which sees will not be visible, that which commands
sensations will not be felt." The highest minds have
come to the conclusion that the results depend upon the
spirit in which the sciences are studied; and here we may
quote some words of Ruskin. " Natural Science, render¬
ing our knowledge fruitful in accumulation and exquisite
in accuracy, has acted for good or evil, according to the
temper of the mind which received it; and though it has
hardened the faithlessness of the dull and proud, has
shown new grounds for reverence to hearts which were
thoughtful and humble." A finer instance of this could
not be found than in Faraday, a mind of the highest
stamp, who would not allow his reason to starve his feel¬
ings ; and Principal TuUoch, in his interesting History of
English Rationalism, holds that the study of nature is
highly religious. It may modify and enlarge our thoughts,
but it has no tendency to shut out from us the presence
of the Deity. On the contrary, all sober and wise minds
feel the necessity of this noble spiritual Presence to
illuminate nature and elevate human life.
And as to encouraging fatalism, that is a charge which
may be quite as well laid to some theories in Metaphysics.
It might at first be thought that the study of the mind
of man would be the most interesting, and that which
would most impress us with its wonderful quahties ; but
so far from that, it tells us very little about it. One soon
perceives how very little the mind can find out about
itself, and comes to be painfuUy impressed with the
limitation of its own powers; whereas the study of Natural
Philosophy, although it does not attempt to explain the
working of the mind, yet discovers its power,—and one is
really filled with astonishment at the marvellous discoveries
which the human mind has made. Physics has a two¬
fold character, manifesting, on the one hand, the power of
the Creator in the wonderful works of nature, and on the
other, the power of man to find out something about these
works. His achievements in doing so strikingly attest
the wonderful faculties bestowed upon him. No one,
until he has studied Natural Philosophy, can have a just
idea of the great things for which Providence has fitted
his understanding, the extraordinary disproportion there
is between his natural strength and his mental power.
The study of Physics seems to enlarge one's mind, and
158 The Attempt.
to prevent one dwelling upon self and its paltry concerns,
and this is partly owing to the great variety of its subjects,
and the immense scale of some of them.
Apart from its evident utility, which is almost too
obvious to dwell upon here, it is a delightful study
considered as knowledge for its own sake, and it leads
us towards a better understanding of the universe in
which it is our lot to dwell. The facts are so curious,
the results so unexpected, that no fairy tale can be more
interesting. It is surely a satisfaction to know, that the
same thing which causes the sensation of heat, causes
also fluidity; that electricity, which is seen on the back
of a cat, when slightly rubbed on a frosty night, is the
same as the lightning of the clouds; that plants breathe
like ourselves, but differently by day and night. Nothing
can, at first view, appear less alike than the processes
of breathing and burning, of rusting (of metals), and the
influence of a plant on the air it grows in at night; and
yet these are the same operations.
Nothing can be less alike than the working of a steam-
engine and the crawling of a fly upon the window, yet
both are performed by the same means, the weight of the
atmosphere.
That the diamond should be charcoal, that water is
chiefly composed of an inflammable substance, may surely
excite interest in any reflecting mind I
And what extraordinary truths are disclosed by Optics I
Can anything surprise us more than to find that the
colour of white is a mixture of all others; to say nothing
of the wonders of Photography, and the interestiug
explanations of reflections, shadows, rainbows, &c.
And while the microscope shows us living organisms,
too small to perceive by the naked eye, the telescope
enlarges our vision in the other direction, and gives us a
knowledge of enormous globes, at enormous distances,
of their magnitude, motions, and perturbations. But the
most curious recent discovery, is that made by Spectrum
Analysis, namely, that we, residents on this earth, can
ascertain the ingredients which compose the sun's atmo¬
sphere, and not that of our sun only, but of those more
remote suns, whose light, despite its inconceivable velocity,
takes years of passage through space to reach us. Of the
total number of elementary substances known in our
globe, nearly one-fourth have been discovered in the solar
photosphere.    Such  facts   establish  conclusions  of vast
The Attempt. 159
importance to all our conceptions of the universe, in
teaching the unity of that Power which acted in the
creation of worlds.
In another line, how curious are the researches which
give fresh proof of the chronological connection of man
with animal species now extinct, and with periods of
time anterior to the latest revolutions of the earth's sur¬
face. The results derived fr'om the limited locahties
hitherto examined in this new path of enquiry, give
good augury of what may be expected from similar re¬
search in other and more distant regions of the globe.
Strange it is that even these more recent remains, and
the innumerable vestiges of far older worlds of life, should
have been so totally hidden from, or misinterpreted by man
until ia our day it became our office to discover and
decipher them.
It is impossible to allude to all the different branches,
but if we mention Electricity, it will be sufficient to name
the Atlantic Cable, a cord of wires stretching from the
Old to the New World, transmitting an invisible agent,
the lightning itself being the messenger of man: this
alone may well move the mind to a mixed feeling of
wonder and awe. In the dominion thus obtained over
one of the most powerfril and mysterious of the forces in
the universe, we are contemplating one of the greatest
triumphs of man.
In every branch of the common and Fine Arts, in every
department of human industry, the influence of Chemistry
is felt, and we may find, in the fable of Prometheus taking
the flame from heaven to animate his man of clay, an em¬
blem of the effects of fire in its application to chemical
purposes, in creating the activity and almost the life
of civil society. Tanning and dyeing of wool and silk
are chemical processes, and almost all the instmments,
necessary for the turner, the joiner, the stone-mason, the
shipbuilder, and the smith, are chemical inventions ; even
the printing-press owes to chemistry its perfection. The
formation of glass and porcelain is a chemical process ;
and the colours which the artist employs to frame resem¬
blances of natural objects, or to create combinations more
beautiful than ever existed in nature, are also derived
from chemistry.
These are a few of the facts. But the highest gratifica¬
tion of all is that of examining the grounds on which the
facts rest, so as to be satisfied that a belief in them is well
160 The Attempt.
founded; for not isolated facts, but principles, are the chief
objects of enquiry to the Philosopher. The student of
Natural Science deserves quite as much the title of " Philo¬
sopher" or " Lover of Wisdom," as the Metaphysician, and
it seems but just that, as in this country, the name should
be given to both indiscriminately. Any one who has read
WheweU's History of the Inductive Sciences, will see that as
much acuteness and accuracy are required for the one as
for the other.
Perhaps one reason that Natural Philosophy is so full
of interest is that it has to do with a multitude of things
with which we are surrounded ia common life. The
pleasures of life are doubled and trebled to him who ia
accustomed to trace the operation of general laws in cir¬
cumstances where the uninformed eye perceives neither
novelty nor beauty; he is, as it were, in an enchanted
land, walking in the midst of wonders, and like the
character which Shakespeare describes, he finds
" Tongues in trees, books in the running brooks,
Sermons in stones, and good in everything."
It is not only the amazing amount of discovery which
makes this study so attractive, but also the possibility of
future achievements; for the discoveries in Physics are
such as cannot be anticipated. Two centuries ago, people
as little expected to be able to rush over the face of the
earth, at the rate of sixty miles an hour, as we expect to
be able to fly at some future time. When Stephenson
proposed his plan to Parliament, they scouted the notion
of travelling at the rate of twenty miles an hour, and
then insisted on his reducing it to ten miles. Lardner
predicted that we should never be able to go to India by
steam vessels.
Our limited space does not allow us to show all the in¬
direct benefits which have arisen from Natural Science,
—such as the increased intelligence of the lower orders,
owing to the facility of locomotion, and their being
enabled to afibrd a better education, owing to many of
the necessaries of life being made cheaper and more
accessible to them by science.
In conclusion, we would remark that both these
sciences reflect light upon each other, and that as there
are so many allusions in Mental Phflosophy to Natural
Philosophy, it would be well for students, who have the
opportunity, to attend first a course of lectures upon
Physics. Elsie.
The Attempt. 161
A TALE OF THE FORTY-FIVE.
CHAPTER IX.
" TIN O' HIS."
Barbara began more than half to repent her Presbyterian
leanings as the grand words of the chant, and the
solemn roll of the organ burst on her ear, and when the
singing was over she knelt down in the dim sunlight
that struggled through the painted window, and repeated
tlie magnihcent petitions of tlie litany, her impressionable
nature went baclv witha bound to tlie old familiar forms that
she had reverenced from her childhood. She looked up with
a penitent look to Alaster, who Avas kneeling beside her,
but he did not seem to observe her. His face was half
buried in liis hands, and it struck her that he was looking
very grave. She saw Nancy in Lady Macdonald's seat,
she had started and coloured up joyfully when her sister
and Alaster came in. They were late, and Nancy had
been watching for them—for her sister, at least, for she
did not know tliat Alaster had spent the night at Milla
Forres, and a vague sort of alarm had crept over her when
the service began and still no Barbara. Light-hearted as
Nancy was, something in Alaster's abrupt departure, and
in Barbara's way of spealdng of it, had made her feel a
vague disquiet, which all the amusements of the picnic
party, and tlie pleasure of spending the night at Carrick
Castle had not altogether dispelled. When the two, on
each of whose account she was uneasy, therefore entered
together, a weight seemed lifted from her heart. Both
Barbara and Alaster noliocd the bright blush of pleasure
that came into the fair young face, and Barbara had
looked round at Alaster with an appeahng look of pride
and admiration of her young sister's beauty. Alaster
returned her smile, but immediately after his expression
settled down into one of more than ordinary gravity.
]\Ir Bennett preached as usual, and the old flippancy and
evident contempt for his audience again grated on Bar¬
bara's high-strung nature, and the leanings towards old Mr
Mackay and his simple kirk, which the Te Deum and litany
had nearly dissipated, returned in fiill force. At the door
of the church Nancy joined them, blushing and dimpling
JONE 1S73. X.
162 The Attempt.
with fun and mischief. She knew her sister's horror of
the smart young curate, and the whim came into her
mischievous little head to tease her, and pay Alaster out
for his desertion of her yesterday by securing- the curate's
escort down the glen; so seeing him coming down the
path from the church towards them, she darted away from
her companions, and, by some pretended anxiety to know
where the tune of a certain chant was to be found, easily
entrapped the by no means unwilling young man; and,
Avith fun and mischief sparkling in her bright eyes, came
forward chatting gaily with him to join her companions.
" How do yi )u do. Miss Forbes ?" said the curate, with
an elaborate bow.
"Mr Bennett, allow me to introduce you to Mr Mac-
donald," said Nancy.
Another elaborate bow, very gravely and somewhat
haughtily acknowledged by Alaster.
" Charming weather this for the moors, Mr Macdonald,
only time the Highlands are tolerable."
" Indeed," answered Alaster, quietly. " I am in the habit
of considering them tolerable pretty frequently."
"Now, Miss Forbes," said Mr Bennett, turning to Barbara,
" I am sure after your late experience in the south you will
agree with me in longing for civilization in these barbarous
solitudes, and for the pleasant interchange of thought
among cultivated people. It must indeed be' a sad change
to you from the courtly society which you are so well-fitted
to adorn, to return to these primeval deserts."
" Indeed, Mr Bennett," said Barbara, " my taste, I fear,
is a very vulgfir one, but I confess to preferring the
deserts you speak of to anything I had the pleasure of
seeing in the south. I had rather a thousand times live
at Milla Forres than in any other place in the wide world,
at least as far as my experience goes."
"Good gracious! Miss Forbes, you can't mean it;
you, with your gTace and beauty, to prefer the society of
boors to that of gentlemen,—the thing's impossible!"
Barbara turned on him quickly, her eye tlashing. " Sir,
you forget yourself, the gentleman is he who is mindful
of the feelings of others, the boor he who forgets them; I
have the pleasure of wishing you good morning," she said,
and, curtseying haughtily, she turned down a little path
which ran along the burn side, followed by Alaster and
Nancy, and leaving the unfortunate curate standing alone
on the high-road.
The Attempt. 163
" Well done, Barbara," laughed Nancy, " you have fairly
extinguished poor Mr Bennett, he wont venture to peep
again for a month, I think. Did you see his look of
blank astonishment and dismay? Alaster, I don't think
you ever believed me when I told you what a terrible
person Barbara can be when she likes, perhaps you'll
believe it now ? "
" It was well deserved," said Alaster, smiling.
" No, it wasn't," said Barbara. " I had no business to
speak like that to him, he can't help it if he is a wretched
little creature, I must go and tell liJm so," And before
either of her companions knew what she was doing, she
had turned back, and was walking rapidly towards the
high-road. Nancy turned to Alaster, a look of comical
dismay on her face.
" She'll mend matters a great deal if she tells him that,
wont she ? " she said. " It's just like Barbara though, she
never could rest if she thought she had said anything
uidiind or unfair till she had gone and unsaid it again. I'm
sorry though, for it would have done the little wretch all
the good in the world."
In the meantime, Barbara had walked back to the road
with rapid steps, and found the discomfited curate stand¬
ing just as she had left him, neither eyes nor mouth
seemed yet to have succeeded in returning to their ordi¬
nary expression of flippant assurance, but remained wide
open in stupid wonder.
" Mr Bennett, I am sorry,—I had no right to say what
I did, I suppose you can't help not understanding," she
said, " wont you shake hands with me ? " And before the
bewildered curate had recovered sufiiciontly for speech,
she had performed the rite of reconciliation, and Avas
again half-way down the path to the burn.
" Well, Barbara," laughed Nancy, as she rejoined her
companions, her face flushed between the excitement of
her late encounter and her rapid pace, " have you suc¬
ceeded in comforting your friend the curate ] I was just
telling Alaster he'll perhaps believe me now when I tell
him what a terrible person Miss Forbes can sometimes
be."
Alaster was watching Barbara's flushed face and still
trembling hands, with a smile, half amused, half tender.
He could not help liking her all the better for her indig¬
nant (mslaught on the curate, and admiring the frank
honesty that made her apology so ready, whenever she
164 The Attempt.
saw that she was wrong. Barbara, however, understood
nothing of this. Deeply humiliated in her own eyes, she
felt as if she must have fallen iiTetrievably in Alaster's,
and she was herself astonished at the pain which the
thought gave her. At her sister's words, she turned
towards him, colouring still more deeply.
" I am always doing these sort of things, and then I'm
always sorry when it's done and can't be undone," she
said.
" Don't distress yourself," said Alaster, the comical smile
deepening round the corners of his lips, " it was only a
necessary piece of discipline, the curate should be greatly
obliged to you. I hope it will teach him discretion for
the fiitxare.    I'm sure he stands much in need of it."
" Well, I hope so; but even then, it's not my calling to
teach him discretion."
"All the more meritorious to give him a gratuitous
lesson, then."
Barbara laughed and shook her head, but somehow the
feelmg that Alaster was not irrretiievably shocked after
all was a great relief to her mind.
" Alaster," she said, suddenly looking up, " I am going
round by old Peggy M'Lauchlan's cottage. You must
tell Nancy all about yesterday by yoin-selves."
Nancy looked up in sudden sm-prise, but before she
could ask any questions, Barbara had turned down a little
path that lead by stepping-stones across the burn, and
left the lovers to tell and hear yesterday's eventful story
by themselves.
Peggy M'Lauchlan's cottage lay in a sheltered nook
under an over-hanging crag, about half-a-mile further
down the burn side. The path to it wound round the
other side of a low heather-covered hill, and emerged
again on the water's edge just where the cottage stood.
So Barbara very soon lost sight of her two companions.
She had made the little detour purposely, for she thought
that after the danger and escape of yesterday, of both of
which Nancy was still totally ignorant, Alaster must have
much to say to his promised bride. As soon as she got
out of view, she saimtered slowly along, rejoicing in the
quiet solitude of the great hills, and now and then stop¬
ping to pick heather, and blue bells, and ferns, and bind
them into fantastic bouquets. Peggy M'Lauchlan was an
old woman of upwards of ninety years, who had nursed
Barbara and Nancy's father when he was a baby.    Her
The Attempt. 165
husband had been the gardener at Milla Forres, and her
son. Colonel Forbes' foster brother, had joined the army
with his young master, and waited on him with true
Highland fidelity; but he had the seeds of the fatal
disease, consumption, of which his father had died while
his son was still a boy, in his system, and, after a few
years of faithful service, came back to his mother's house
to die. She had had but one other child, a lovely young
girl, but her name had long ceased to be mentioned at
Milla Forres. One night she had disappeared, and no one
knew where she had gone. Long and earnest search had
been made for her, dead or alive, for at first they thought
she must have fallen from some clifi', or got lost, and
perished on the mountains. So spotless was her charac¬
ter, that it was long ere the thought ventured to intrude
itself, that she might not be dead,—but worse. When,
however, all search proved unavailing, and some passing
gipsies reported to have seen sucli a girl in a carriage
with a gentleman in uniform, the horrible suspicion,
changing, as one circumstance after another seemed to
confirm it, into almost certainty, arose that it must be
even so. From the moment the widow entertained the
thought, she ceased to speak of her daughter. She forbid
no one to do so, yet few, after having done so once, and
seen the pain that contracted the broad brow, and
blanched still more the pale cheek, would ever speak to
her on that subject again.
Altogether alone now in the world, witli health and
heart both broken, the widow left the gardener's cottage
and went into the little dwelling where sh(3 now lived, and
which Colonel Forbes had built for his foster-mother. To
his children she was strongly attached, in fact she looked
upon them much in the light of grandchildren of her own,
and many a kindly errand Barbara and Nancy made to the
little cottage in the glen. Especially on Sundays, Peggy's
cottage was a favourite resort, for the old woman's eyes
were too dim to read for herself the blessed words that
had always been her comfort in all her afflictions, and the
girls felt it at once a duty and a pleasure to turn in there
on their way home from service, to read a chapter, and
have a chat with Peggy. To-day, Barbara found her, as
usual, sitting by the tidy fireside in her great arm-chair,
with her spotless mutch covering her grey hair, and her
white kerchief crossed over her bosom, and the usual
quiet peace looking out of her dim old eyes.    A comfort-
166 The Attempt.
able looking tortoise-shell cat was dozing on a bit of
carpet in front of the hearth, and the kettle, for the old
woman's evening meal, singing on the fire. A little table
beside her was tidily covered with a white cloth, and ou
it stood the old brown teapot and three cups and saucers,
a plate of scones was browning before the fire, and a pot
of delicious-looking butter, and some rich yellow honey¬
comb stood on the table.
"Well, Peggy, how are you to-night?" said Barbara, as
she entered, coming up and kissing the placid, wrinkled
brow, " you see I've got safe back from the south again."
"Yes, thank the Lord for all His mercies, I'm faiu to
see ye back again. Miss Barbara, ye'll no be sorry to win
liame, I'se warrant, for a' the grandevir o" the south
country ? "
" No, I'm not sorry, ' there's nae place like hame,' you
know, Peggy, the old song's right about that, though I
enjoyed being in Edinburgh, and seeing all the grand
folk too."
" Aye, aye, ye're right to do that, my hinny, though I
hae my doots, I liae my doots o' the company ye were in;
thae Papishers are no to be trusted, I'm afeart; but the
Lord '11 tak' care o' His ain."
" I wish the Prince wer'n't a Papist, Peggy, bi;t what
can we do ? You wouldn't have a Forbes a traitor to our
lawful sovereign. Papist or no Papist, Avould you ? "
" I'm nae sae sure about a Papisher being our lawfu'
sovereign, Miss Barbara, my mind's no a' thegither clear
on that point, but as I said afore, Papisher or no Papisher,
the Lord'U tak' care o' His aiu, an' keep them frae the
evil, even like the apple o' His e'e, an' ye're yin o' His,
Miss Barbara, I'm nane feart for ye."
Barbara flushed up all over at the old woman's words.
Very ^hy in anything that related to her personal feel¬
ings in religious matters, though she had often read to
old Peggy the words of eternal life, she had seldom spoken
much to her of her own religious feelings, and she felt at
once siu'prised and pleased at the old-woman's undoubted
assiirance on her behalf. She answered in a low, hesitat¬
ing voice—
"I'm glad you think so, Peggy, I'm sometimes half
afraid to think so myself."
" Na na, my hinny, dinna be feart, ye're yin o' His,
' predestined afore the creation o' the Avarld, there's nane
sail pluck ye frae His hand,' Papishers or no Papishers."'
The Attempt. 167
Barbara half smiled at the odd ending of the old
woman's speech, and then added, gravely,—
" How do you know that, Peggy? it seems to me almost
presumptuous to dare to think that the Lord could think
about electing me. I know your minister, good old Mr
Mackay, believes in election,—isn't that Avhat you call it i
But I can hardly bring myself to think, that the great
God could so think about poor me."
" If the Lord didna think aboot ye, Miss Barbara, hoo
did ye come to be ava ? An' gin He did think aboot ye,
d'ye think the Lord, wha kens the en' frae the beginnin',
didna ken what was to be the upshot o' the creatur He
had made ? "
"I suppose so," said Barbara, musingly. She sat silent
a minute, and then went on.—" But if it's all arranged
like that beforehand, how can anybody help anything?
How can the people help it who are not elected ? "
" Aye, there's the deefficvilty, I canna tell ye the ' hoos'
o't, that wad tak' man' book learning than the Lord's been
pleased to bless me wi', but it's true for a' that; ye ken
yersel, that ye com help things, that ye can do riclit or
wrang, jist as ye'r ain inclination mak's ye. The Lord's
kenning which ye'll do doesna prevent that, though I
canna explain lioo the twa work thegither."
Barbara sat silently thinking for a few minutes, then
looking up, she said,—
" What chapter shall I read you to-night, Peggy? "
" Read me first the twenty-third Psalm, hinny, I'se ne'er
tired o' hearing that."
And Barbara began to read, slow and distinctly, the
grand old words of strength and comfort that have been
to poor, frail, trembling humanity through all the ages,
like the ' shadow of a great rock in a weary land':—" The
Lord is my shepherd; I shall not want. Yea, though I
walk tlirough the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear
no evil: for Thou art with me; Thy rod and Thy staff
they comfort me." When she had done, Peggy sat silent
a few minutes, and then she said,—
"Aye aye, it's a' true. Pve walked through mony a
shadow i' my day, an' He's aye been wi' me, an' some o'
them hae been blacker shadows than e'er was the ' valley
o' the shadow o' death.' His rod an' His staff' they com¬
forted me." She paused a few moments, and Barbara also
sat, looking silently and reverently at the wrinkled old
face, that bore marks of so many shadows, and yet was
168 The Attempt.
now Hghted up with such a peace, and thought that, in
very truth, it was a "peace that passeth all imderstand-
ing."    By and by, the old woman went on,—
" Aye, ye'r young. Miss Barbara, an' ye've a' the
shadows afore ye yet, my puir lassie, but ye're yin o' His,
and He'll see ye through them a', miu' ye that, my hinny.
I'm nane feart for you. I tell ye ye'U be weel seen to.
He's ne'er forgotten auld Peggy a' these fourscore years
and ten."
They sat silently for a little, and then old Peggy rose
from her arm-chair, and hobbling to the table, said,—
" Noo, my hinny, ye'll hae a cup o' tea. I hae gotten
some fine warm scones ready for ye, and Miss Nancy,—
what's come o' her this afternoon ? "
" Oh, she's otherwise occupied just noAv, you know,
Peggy, I left her and young M'Donald to walk down the
glen together," said Barbara, smiUng. The old woman
smiled too, and said,—
" The Lord bless the bonny lamb. She kens little o'
the shadows yet, laug may it be sae, but gin it comes,
He'll keep her too."
After tea, Barbara once more kissed the old woman's
placid brow, and set out on her way home.
CHAPTER   X.
IN THE MIST.
Six happy uneventful weeks passed over the little pai'ty
at Milla Forres. To all three, perhaps, time never had
seemed to run so quickly. Pleasant morning rides over
the heather, or lazy, happy saunters by the burn-side, or
adventurous scrambles up the rugged mountain paths were
followed by cozy evenings (for the autumn days were
fast shortening into winter), spent in the old hall roimd
the great fire-place, with its crackling wood fire; while
Alaster read aloud, and the girls worked, or all sang
together plaintive Scotch songs or wild Gaelic chants. So
the days seemed to fly with swift and noiseless wings over
these three young, careless, happy heads. It would have
been hard to say which of the three was happiest.
Colonel Forbes had not yet returned home, and no
further arrangements had been made about the the time
of Nancy's marriage, and they were all too happy and too
contented as they were, to wish for any change in the
The Attempt. 169
existing state of things. Alaster was living at Carrick
Castle, but every morning brought him to Milla Forres,
and he never returned home till late in the evening.
One bright day of closing autumn (it was now the very
end of October) the three started early in the forenoon to
climb Benvorlish, the mountain which lay right behind
Milla Forres. They were prepared for a long scramble,
and carried with them a little basket of provisions, mean¬
ing to lunch on the top of the hill, and return to an early
tea-dinner in the evening. The day was clear and cloud¬
less, and the grand old hills stood out in strong relief
against the bright cold blue of the October sky. Laugh¬
ing and chatting, and trying merry childish races, in the
very exuberance of life and spirit, the three made the
ascent, and sat down on the top in triumph to their well-
earned meal. They sat laughing and talking over their
extempore repast rather longer than they had intended,
at last Barbara sprang to her feet with a sudden start.
" Look yonder ! " she said, " there's the mist coming up
the Giant's Gap, we must make haste home, or we shall
get into it."'
Her companions looked, and saw a thin white vapour
spreading slowly through a great chasm, some thousand
feet below them.
" Surely that mist can't do us any harm," said Alaster,
" it's away down in the gorge yonder."
" I know that," said Barbara, " but the mists on Ben¬
vorlish always begin in the Giant's Gap ; indeed, we must
make haste down," and she began hurriedly gathering
together the knives and forks, and stowing them away in
the basket.
" Come quick," she said, beginning to run down the
side of the hill.
Alaster perceived by her voice that she was alarmed,
and, with Nancy, followed her rapid steps as quickly as
he could. In about ten miniites Barbara tvu'ned round
again, to give an anxious look at the ascending mist,
which was now rolling in thick folds through the gap.
" It's got as far as Donald's Rock," she exclaimed, " it
will be here in ten minutes. Alaster, look to Nancy, take
hold of her arm."
" It can't be here this half-hour, surely, Barbara," he
said, " look, it's a long way oflE" yet, you are surely
frightening yoiirself needlessly."
Barbara merely answered, " Keep hold of Nancy," and
.THNE 1873. Y
170 The Attempt.
continued descending as fast as she could. She had got
round the corner of a projecting rock, and was out of
sight for a moment, when Nancy put her foot on an un¬
steady stone, which rolled over with her weight. Alaster
caught her as she fell.
" Are you hurt, Nancy % " he said anxiously.
" Not much," she said. " I think I have Imrt my ankle,"
she added, as she began again to try to walk. " I'm
afraid," she said, looking up piteously into Alaster's face,
as she sat down on a projecting rock, " I'm afraid it's
sprained; what shall we do % Oh, we shall get lost in the
mist!" she exclaimed, beginning to cry between pain and
fear,
Alaster looked roimd anxiously. Already great volumes
of mist were rising all around them ; he could not see ten
paces before him. He strained his eyes in vain to catch
sight of Barbara. He shouted her name at the top of his
voice, but could hear no answer, Nancy began to wring
her hands and weep bitterly, " Oh, what shall we do, what
shall we do, oh Barbara, Barbara!"
" Don't cry, Nancy," said Alaster, " we'll all get home
safe, I've no doubt;" but his voice sounded anxious,
and he still continued shouting at intervals, " Barbara,
Barbara," but there was no answer. His anxiety grew
more and more intense as the mist drifted thicker and
thicker round them, and he felt utterly perplexed and
helpless. He knew there were fearfid caverns on that
side of the mountain, and he dreaded every moment to
liear a shriek which should announce that Barbara had
fallen over some precipice in the darkness. He knew not
which way to seek her, even had he been free ; and what
could he do with Nancy, now, poor child, half fainting
between pain, terror, and anxiety for her sister. He
turned to her gently, " Nancy," he said, " you must let
me try to carry you home ; I'll carry you as gently as I
can; the mist has cleared a little just now, and when
I have got you home, 1 will come back fur Barbara—that
is to say, if she is not home before us."
He spoke cheerfully, bixt his heart was very heavy with
an unspeakable dread. Of his own and Nancy's ultimate
safety he never doubted, it was of Barbara he thought.
He lifted Nancy's slight form easily in his arms, and,
takingadvantage of every momentary clearance of the mist,
made slow but constant progress dt)wn the mountain.
Outwardly  he was  very quiet  and  still, but   oh   what
The Attempt. 171
a tempest was raging in his heart. In every sound ho
seemed to hear Barbara's death shriek, and in his intense
anxiety he ahnost forgot the suffering girl he held in his
arms, and neither heard nor answered her trembling
questions. He was grappling with a great agony, of
which the girl, whose heart was lying so close to his own,
never dreamt. She, too, was intensely anxious about her
sister, but she did not know the dangers of that side of
the mountain as Alaster did, and his cheerful words about
finding Barbara at home when they got there, had greatly
re-assured her. After an hour's silent, stern climbing,
they got safe to the foot of the hill, and then a quarter of
an hour's swift walking brought them to the door of Milla
Forres. Elspet opened the door, anxious about them, for
the nightfall had come on.
" Is Miss Barbara at home ? " said Alaster, in a hoarse,
low voice through his shut teeth.
" At home ? Hoo could that be whan she's been wi'
you a' day. Hech, sii's. Miss Nancy, what's the matter % "
said Elspet, now seeing for the first time that Alaster had
Nancy in his arms.
Alaster made no reply, but hastily striding past the old
Avoman into the hall, he laid Nancy on a sofa, and saying,
in a low suppressed voice, " I'm going to find Barbara,"
he was out of the house again in a minute. The stars
were sinning brightly in the valley, and the new moon was
just rising behind Benvorlish, as he turned from the door
of Milla Forres. If any one had been there to see him as
he strode along, they would have wondered on what
desperate quest the man could be bound, whose face
looked so white and haggard, and whose teeth seemed
clenched in such mighty agony. Through the quiet
valley, sleeping so peacefully in the moonlight, he strode
with wild hurrying steps. At the door of the gardener's
cottage he stopped, and sternly desired Sandy M'Pherson,
the gardener, and his son to set out at once to the moim-
tain, in directions he indicated, to search for the missing
girl, and, taking a lanthorn, he proceeded on another
route himself.
" Will yer honour no let Duncan gang wi' ye, he kens
ilka craig o' Benvorlish as weel's the road to the kirk," said
old Sandy, " an' yer honour's but a stranger in thae pairts? "
But Alaster only impatiently waved his hand in the
direction he had already indicated to the gardener's son,
and strode silently on his solitary way.
172 The Attempt.
" Hech, sirs," said Mrs M'Pherson, " saw ye e'er a creatiir
sae distraught? Keep an e'e on him, Sandy, for I'm
certain sure he scarce kens which end o' him's xippermost,
and Benvorhsh i' the mirk's nae place for fu' men or
bairns."
" Whist ye, woman, an' dinna misca' the lad; i'st no
eneuch to mak a wise man wu,d to think o' our bonny
young leddy i' the mist on Benvorlish, an' him 'neist door
to her brither. Duncan are ye ready, lad ? Guidmfe, keep
a light i' the window to let's see whar aboota we are."
So saying, Sandy took one lanthom, and Duncan the
other, and set out on different routes up the mountain,
leaving the gudewife to attend to the lighting of the
cottage window.
"Neist her brither!" muttered she to herself, as she
placed the solitary tallow candle on the window-sill,
leaving the rest of the cottage in shadow, excepting where
the wood fire sent flickers of hght through the room—
" Neist her brither, said ye ?" she continued, seating
herself on a low stool beside the fire, " weel she's a win¬
some lassie. Miss Barbara, as ony brither micht be prood
o', there's nae denying that, but gin ho hadna said Miss
Barbara wi' his ain lips, I wad hae thocht it was Misa
Nancy that had gotten hersel lost i' the mist, by the look
o' his een, savin' his favour."
In the meantime Alaster strode on his solitary way up
the moimtaiu. He kept as near to the path which he had
followed on his way down with Nancy, as the imperfect
eight which he had got throiigh the mist of its landmarks
would allow. His eye had almost unconsciously noted
everything which he could see in the driving darkness
with a view to returning by the same road, for the last
eight he had had of Barbara, had been as she dis¬
appeared behind a projecting rock just before Nancy
had sprained her foot, and though he trembled to
thuik where she might afterwards have wandered in
her vain endeavours to find a path, that was their only
clue to her whereabouts. He had directed the gardener
and his son to go by two other paths, and to meet him
about the place where he had last seen Barbara. As he
went along, at intervals he shouted her name, but an echo
from the rock, or the quick whizz of wings, as some moor-
fowl was started by the noise from its nest in the heather,
was the only answer. Hour after hour passed, as ho
wandered up and down, searching at the foot of every
The Attempt. 173
precipice, his face getting whiter and sterner, and more
haggard. The moon had ridden half its majestic path
across the heavens, and he had just sat down for the first
time that night on a stone, a feeling of numb despair was
succeeding the wild tumult in his heart, and he felt as if
he could search no longer, when he thought he heard a
distant shout. He started to his feet—yes, there it was
again, clearer than before, he thought he could even dis¬
tinguish old Sandy's voice. He staggered along in the
direction of the sound, for his head was dizzy, and he
could with great difficulty prevent his trembling knees
from giving way beneath him. Now that hope or fear
was to be realised, he felt almost as if he would like to
run away in the uncertainty, rather than face the awful
crisis. As he neared the spot from which he had heard
the voices, the glitter of old Sandy's lanthorn shone before
him, from a sort of crevice under a high overhanging rock.
As he got still nearer he saw the old man on his knees,
bending over a prostrate form, while Duncan held the
lanthorn by his side. She was found then; but was it
life or death ?    He staggered forward.
" Eh, Sir," said Duncan, as he saw him approaching,
" she's faen frae the rock, my faither fan' her lying here."
" Dead? " said Alaster, in a hoarse voice.
" Na, na. Sir," said old Sandy, lifting his bronzed face,
which had been stooped very closely over the prostrate
girl. " She's nane dead, I can hear her heart beating.
Duncan, ye feckless loon, to frichten the gentleman wi'
yer havers; gie's the liclit here. Feel, sir, for yersel, her
heart's beating. The Lord be thankit for a' his mercies,"
said the old man, moving away to let Alaster satisfy him¬
self that the vital spark was not yet extinct.
" Yes, it beats, thank God!" said Alaster, in a stifled
voice, after he had laid his hand on her heart. " We must
get her home," he added, turning to the gardener. " I
will stay here by her, while you and Duncan go and bring
some sort of a litter. I have some wine here," he said,
pulHng from his pocket the little flask, which the merry
party had used at their picnic that forenoon, and in which
some of the wine still remained. What an age it seemed
to Alaster since the rest had been drunk, amidst songs
and laughter on the top of Benvorlish!
The gardener and his son went, as directed, to the
cottage, for means of conveying the insensible girl home,
leaving Alaster alone with her in the moonlight.    Very
174 The Attempt.
gently he raised her head, with its long dank hair, and
laid it on his knees, and wiped the brow damp with dew,
and wetted the white lips with wine, and chafed the death-
cold hands in his own. At last he thought he felt a little
warmth spreading itself through the cold frame, and
bending over her he showered passionate kisses on the
quiet pale brow, exclaiming, " Oh, Barbara, my beloved,
will you not live for me?" Just then the blue eyes
opened tremulously for a moment, and a flickering smile
lighted up the still fiice, then again the heavy eyelids
closed. Jeanie Morison.
(To be continued.)
% S^m Monl^ akuf |aint{it(j k\\& other S^wxt %xi^.
All the arts have something in common, they all
resemble each other in this respect—that their object is
to confer pleasure. Instruction may be indirectly con¬
veyed by art, but the chief glory of the artist is, that he
ministers to the amusements of the community, and this
is a very noble function, far superior to that of minister¬
ing to our necessities or comforts, for it implies an
intrinsic superiority of nature. The gifts required to
make a successful merchant are very inferior to those
required by the artist. To regulate the pleasures of a
community is to have a greater moral influence upon
human beings than is directly possessed by any other
class, except that of teachers.
The importance attaching to the different kinds of
amusement will be at once seen, if we consider the
degeneracy of the Romans at the time when their chief
diversions consisted in the exhibition of the blood-stained
amphitheatre; and of the Spaniards, who still delight in
bull fights.
Vigorous persons require their am^^sements to be of a
vigorous and elevated kind, and such as wiU employ
every faculty. As Professor Seeley well remarks, the
different kinds of arts answer to different faculties, and
there is a likeness running through all.
The primary object is to please, and this object is
effected in all by addressing the imagination.
There are two primary modes or means of pleasing,—
The Attempt 175
1st, Rythm, which is common to all the arts; 2d, Imita¬
tion, which prevails chiefly in poetry and painting.
The first, Rythm, is common to all, for what is music,
but rythmical sound? "What is poetry, but rythmical speech?
And the same principle or mode prevails in painting,
sculpture, and architecture, although it assumes in these
a somewhat different shape,—that of form or symmetry.
Rythm is nothing but proportion, and to say that it is a
primary mode of art is merely to say that human beings
delight in regularity, in pattern, and in arrangement. In
music and poetry, the arts which deal with time, this
principle of regularity appears as rythm; and in the other
arts, which deal with space, form takes the place of
rythm; they differ from each other as the sense of sight
from healing, and the pleasure which the ear receives
from a Spenserian stanza is analogous to the pleasures
which the eye perceives from the spire of Salisbury, or
the towers of Canterbury. But though regularity per¬
vades art, it does not by itself constitute that which is
highest in art.
The second mode, or means of pleasing, which we have
mentioned, namely Imitation, predominates in poetry
and painting, and takes the place of rythm.
We do not here mean the paltry imitation of paltry
things, which is tlie lowest part of art, but the power of
representing, it may be ideally representing, the grandest
works of nature, human beings, or the glories of mountains,
rivers or verdant plains, whether by painting or by
words, as in poetry. For that which is ideal, is still in
one sense imitative of reahty, but it is a choicer reality.
It is this principle of imitation which gives to art its
boundless range. Without it, painting would not rise
beyond arabesque, nor poetry beyond metrical rhetoric.
With it, painting acquires a field as large as the visible
universe, and poetry one even more unlimited, compre¬
hending the world of thought and the world of sense
together. And here the supremacy of poetry is apparent,
because speech is the only mirror in which the whole
universe can be reflected. With colours, or in marble, we
can express only what we see but there is nothing that
the mind can think which cannot be uttered in speech.
The province of the poet is limited only by the variety of
human enjoyments. Whatever is in reality subservient
to our happiness, is a source of pleasure when presented
to our conceptions, and sometimes derives an increased
176 The Attempt.
charm from the heightenings of imagination. To the
poet, all the various charms of external nature, all that is
interesting in human character, all those truths which
make the heart itself feel better and more happy,—all
these supply materials, out of which he forms and peoples
a world of his own.
In the poetry of all ages, we possess, as it were, a
shifting view of the universe, as it has appeared to suc¬
cessive generations of men, because the poetry of each
age is according to the predominant inclination of the
human mind in each age. At one time it is occupied
wdth deeds of bravery, scenes of strife and tumult; at
another, with simple pleasures, country life, and peaceful
existence; at another time, it discourses of cities, gallan¬
tries, and gaieties. And sometimes, as in our own age,
it takes a philosophical tone, delights in the grandeur of
eternal laws, and endeavours to discover, in the struc¬
ture of things, the traces of a beneficent plan.
Faulting is akin to poetry. When the painter forms
new combinations of his own, he avails himself of his
professional skill, as the poet avails himself of language,
only to convey the ideas in his mind. To deceive the
eye by accurate representation is not his aim, but to
speak to the imagination. Imitation is not the end, but
the means, which he employs to accomplish his end. In
painting a beautiful landscape, it should be his object to
convey tlie impression made upon the mind, and this
could not be done by an exact copy; he must make
certain deviations, because, in the works of nature, in
many instances, beauty and sublimity are united with
circumstances, which are either indifferent, or which ob¬
struct the general effect. Experience and observation
enable the artist to make this discrimination, and to form
a creation of his own, more faultless than ever fell under
the observation of his senses. The artist may be called
great, in proportion as he makes these deviations with
skill and feeling.
Although there are some passages in poetry which
could not be expressed by painting, such as many a scene
in " Paradise Lost,"— for instance, the descentof Satan and
his first alighting on the earth, or generally speaking,
any passage descriptive of movement,—yet, on the whole,
painting has the advantage of being able to produce a
more vivid impression, owing to its greater representative
poAver; and it is curious that even the highest flights of
j
The Attempt 177
poetical  fancy  are   compounded of elements  which are
addressed to the sense of vision.
Music is creative, and gives scope for imagination and
fancy, but its most remarkable peculiarity is the way in
which it appeals to the feelings, and which causes it to be,
what maybe called, an efiective accompaniment on a variety
of occasions. A regiment is stirred by the exciting music
of its band, in a way that we should hardly expect a
picture to accomplish, although pictorial aid, even in
this respect, was not despised in the middle ages, when
the pictures of patron saints were carried at the head
of the army, and perhaps if the experiment were tried,
a picture of liis native place, might rouse the soldier to
fight for home and country, as much as " Auld Lang-
syne." That paintings can express pathos, those will
admit, who have seen Noel Paton's " Return from the
Crimea," Faed's " Mitherless Bairn," or Titian's " En¬
tombment."
There is, however, no doubt that music touches the
feelings more intensely. Some persons fainted on hear¬
ing Catalani in the oratorio of the Messiah, and the over¬
powering effect of the exquisite music in St Peter's and
the Sistine Chapel in the Holy Week is well known.
Every one must feel its importance in a religious service,
—the sublimity of the organ peeling through the " long
drawn aisle," while the voices of the white-robed choristers
seem like angels' voices, elevating our thoughts to a
higher sphere. And how it rouses in the heart the feeling
of devotion to hear the chaunting from the top of
Magdalene towers at Oxford on the 1st of May.
But 'after all, the feeling excited by music is of the
vaguest kind. We can tell whether joy, grief, or triumph
is expressed, but what the particular occasion of the feel¬
ing may be, it is impossible to tell. The air of " Farewell
to Lochaber" is most pathetic, but without language wc
could not know that it was intended to represent a poor
soldier taking leave of his house and his wife. When¬
ever we hear an air without words, it can inspire only
general emotion, and the effect is comparatively feeble.
It is said that the " Pastorale" of Corelli was intended for
an imitation of the song of angels hovering above the
fields of Bethlehem, and gradually soaring up to heaven ;
it is impossible, however, that the music itself can convey
any such impression, it can convey only the feeling of
solemnity, of rapture, of enthusiasm ; imagination must do
JOSE 1873. Z
178 The Attempt.
the rest. If another name were given to this piece of
music, and it were supposed to relate to a much less
awfal event, its effects, though still powerful, would be
much diminished.
The principal cause of beauty in music is, therefore, the
facility with which it is associated with feelings, from
its resemblance to tones in which feelings are expressed,
and a great part of its power is derived from its combina¬
tion with poetry, which makes these feelings specific.
At the point we have now reached, we consider
poetry to be first, painting second, and music third, OAving
to its more limited range and its want of connection with
thought, and this corresponds to the test often laid down,
that those arts are the most worthy in which the greatest
mental labour is employed, and the g-reatest mental
pleasure is produced, and in which the manual labour is
the least apparent.
But now, we think it may be said in addition, that
though no doubt music requires the exercise of the
reflective powers in the study of harmony, yet that paint¬
ing is on the whole more intellectual as respects the
amount of knowledge required.
For all kinds of painting, it is indispensible to have a
thorough knowledge of composition, perspective, aerial
effect, and chiaro-obscuro, the subject of light and shade
being of the very highest importance, and having the
interest of an inexhaustible subject, as no principles have
been discovered in regard to it, although there are rules,
and much depends upon the skill and judgment of the
painter.
Then colour is a study by itself, and what a charm there
is in it, and what variety from the deep tints of Titian to
the delicate tints laid on by Correggio, or by Turner in
his water-colours.
For historical painting, whether sacred or secular, accu¬
rate historical knowledge is required; also that of costume,
of architecture, and interiors, so as to give an air of truth
to all the accessories.
Then for landscape painting, besides having poetical
feeling, the artist should be, according to Euskin, a geolo¬
gist, a botanist, and much more besides. He should
have an imitative faculty superior to other men, an
observant eye, a retentive memory for form and images,
and a power of sympathy which carries with it a power of
divination. We can only imitate what interests us strongly;
The Attempt. 179
he, therefore, who can imitate many things, is he who is
interested in many things, and the artist, whose mind
mirrors and reflects everything, has this power simply
because he lives more intensely than others.
Amid all  the varieties we must  not forget  portrait
painting, so feelingly addressed by Campbell—
" 0 thou by whose expressive art
Her perfect image Nature sees,
In union with the graces start,
And sweeter by reflection please !
In whose creative hand the hues
Fresh from yon orient rainbow shine ;
I bless thee, Promethean muse!
And call thee brightest of the nine I
Shall song its witching cadence roll ?
Yea, even the tenderest air repeat,
That breath'd when soul was knit to soul.
And heart to heart responsive beat.
What visions rise! to charm, to melt.
The lost, the loved, the dead are near;
Oh, hush that strain too deeply felt,
And cease that solace too severe.
But thou, serenely silent art.
By heaven and love wast taught to lend
A milder solace to the heart.
The sacred image of a friend."
We need scarcely remind our readers how Olivarez
survives in the canvas of Velasquez and Strafiford in that
of Vandyke. Philip III. of Spain owned that he had been
immortalized by the brush of Titian, and how many of
our ancestral houses are indebted to our own Sir Joshua
Reynolds and Raeburn.
If we now consider the art under a different aspect, that
of being studied, not by the great masters who make it
the business of their lives, but by amateurs, could there
be a more delightful amusement than sketching? for
if figure drawing is grander, yet the other has more
variety, and gives much more room for play of fancy and
creative power; it is also much less mechanical. The
amusement it gives in travelling is almost too obvious to
mention, but at all times it trains the mind to observation,
and causes an increased enjoyment of the beauties of
nature. It is not only an aid to memory, but the habit
gives exactness to one's perceptions. The eye is insen¬
sibly taught to seize on the particular shape and hue of
180 The Attempt.
every object, as if it were about to transfer them to can¬
vas, and so the mind retains a clear and vivid conception
of it, even -ndthout making the sketch. Then the quiet¬
ness with which drawing can be pursued at home is a
great advantage, as it can be carried on without annoy¬
ance to others, and even when there is illness in the house.
The difference between painting and miisic, in point of
sociality, is often remarked; but the difference is really
not so very great, and is partly due to the fact that the
lovers of music are the most numerous, and also that
music can take place by candlelight, at the hour when
social gatherings are going on at any rate. And it must
be remembered that a number of the listeners are quite
indifferent, or only enduring it, for the sake of the con¬
versation, or some other part of the entertainment.
Even the real lovers of music do not care much for the
light music of our musical parties. Supposing that it is
good, which sometimes happens, there are too many dis¬
tractions for the thorough enjoyment of it.
Drawing is sociable so far, that those who have a
mutual taste like to talk about it, and to sketch together;
if a number of persons take sketches from the same point,
it is interesting to compare them, as they will all be
different. Among artists there are drawing clubs which
meet in the evening, and which may be considered to
correspond to musical re-unions. It is not easy for a
number of people to look at the same painting at once,
but many a pleasant hour may be spent with one friend
going through some noble picture gallery, or a modern
exhibition.
We may now mention two reasons for the greater
popularity of music, and shew that this is no good
groxmd for inferring its superiority. One reason for music
appearing to greater advantage, is, that it is carried to
more perfection in this country than the other art.
Consider the complex beauty of the Opera at Covent
Garden, with its threefold attractions of singing, drama,
and scenery; the enormous scale of oratorios in Exeter
Hall, with seven hundred voices in the chorus; and still
more in the Crystal Palace, with five thousand voices,
the grand compositions of the grandest of masters being
performed in the latter case with faultless execution.
Then there are numbers of good classical concerts, not
only in London, but sometimes in Edinburgh, and in most
large towns in  England.    Now, to have anything cor-
The Attempt. 181
responding to this in painting, one should go to the
Vatican at Rome, or the galleries of Dresden and Paris ;
and those who have been to Spain tell us, that wo do not
know here what a Velasquez or a Murillo is like. And
even if a person had these opportunities, it will be^of no
use, unless he has already cultivated his taste, and
acquired great knowledge. For to have a right ap¬
preciation of paintings, the spectator should have all the
qualities or knowledge which we ascribed a few pages
back to the artist himself, almost all, except the actual
power of manipulation. With paintings, not to appreciate
is simply not to enjoy. Not so with music, for although
it may require musical knowledge to enter into
the higher or more subtle beauties of a composition,
and though the mysterious harmonies of Chopin and
Schuman are as great a perplexity to the uninitiated
as the higher beauties of painting, yet there is something
even in the finest symphonies which all can like, passages
which have tune as it is called, whereas pictures, such as
"Peter the Martyr," "The Miracle of St Mark," and
Tintoretto's "Paradise," so much admired by artists,
present no attraction at all to the uninformed eye.
And here we would protest against popularity being
considered at all a test of the grandeur of an art. Surely
no one would say that the genius of Milton or Shake¬
speare is tested or proved by the universal admiration
they now elicit, the fact being, that what is admired in
these authors, is not that for which they are pre-eminent,
but that which they have in common with many inferior
poets, and it is the same with all the fine arts.
Another reason why music is more generally liked,
may be that the great works can be studied at home, and
the ear becomes educated; also it becomes familiarized
with certain kinds of music, although not the best, from
the street music, however indiiferent, and from hearing
music in churches. If there was as much conscious
and unconscious training with regard to the fine arts,
we do not know what might be the result in point of
popularity.
Paintings were formerly used in churches as a vehicle
of religious training; although not now required for that
purpose, it is almost a pity that they should not have a
place in our churches as well as music; as a decoration,
one would think that they might be as harmless as the
carved capital of a pillar.    The objection to them at the
182 2he Attempt.
time of the Reformation was, the fear that pictures and
statues might again become objects of adoration ; but it
would be rather difficult now even to fancy an honest
Scotch wife worshipping a picture. We might trust to
the advanced education of our day, being a barrier to all
such delusions, particularly if the ministers keep true to
the principles and teaching of the reformed faith.
Another barrier to progress in judging of art is, that
people are not aware how much cultivation it requires,
and how much taste can be developed. It is generally
acknowledged that repetition is required for becoming
acquainted with and liking certain pieces of music, but it
is often overlooked, that it is also needed for understand¬
ing paintings. People are apt to give a hurried glance, and
then turn away, thinking that there is nothing to admire.
It is even usual for persons to show, or fancy they show,
discrimination by pointing out small defects, when, in
truth, the highest taste and skill are needed to discover
points of excellence.
With regard to the general culture of those whose lives
have been devoted to the two arts, there have been in
both men endowed with various gifts. Mendelssohn,
among musicians, may be named, but some painters are
pre-eminent, and there is a greater number of supremely
intellectual minds to be found in their ranks. M. Angelo
was an engineer, a poet, and an architect, and Leonardo
da Vinci was the most accomplished man of his day. He
excelled in geometry, poetry, and physical science.
Rubens also owed his high position not only to his
artistic abilities, but to his being a most successful diplo¬
matist ; and the Infanta Isabella, in the Netherlands, as
well as Charles I. of England, found him a most valuable
councillor in his character of ambassador.
We will conclude by remarking that a great interest
attaches to the art of painting from its antiquity. There
may be extant fragments of ancient music, but they are
chiefly curiosities. The oldest music we can make use of
belongs to the end of the seventeenth century, while all the
best music belongs to the last century and beginning of
this; but painting is much older. Without going back with
Vasari to the beginning of the world, and to Adam, who,
he says, was the first model, we may recall to mind that
the most magnificent specimens of painting were pro¬
duced in the fifteenth century, the schools of Raphael and
Michael Angelo being quite unrivalled even now.
The Attempt. 183
The antiquity of sculpture is still more striking. To
say nothing of Greek remains, there is in this city a bust
which is 1800 years old—the bust of Antonia Augusta
the niece of the Emperor Augustus ; its age alone would
make it interesting, but it is also a charming specimen
of the art, superior to anything of modern date, and full
of what it is so difficult to give—repose. Elise.
litt^s uiritti>n (or a 6am^.
The Noun—Tree.    The Q,ucstion—Are you afraid of ghosts ?
What kind of ghosts ? the ghosts of days
Departed with their summer rays i
I fear not these, some are so dear.
Reflected back I cannot fear.
But you, perhaps, mean ghosts like those
That Mr Home, in sober prose.
Has told us of, and bids us see.
Surrounding house and field and tree.
Well, these I do not think I fear,
If they are good they are welcome here.
But you, perhaps, think this a fable,
And scorn to turn a single table. E. H. S.
^\xt  Permatd's  (fountain.
Part 1.
The old Norman farm, which had been sleepy enough all
the hot summer day, was waking up now in the cooler
evening hour. The horses were coming slowly back from
their day's work, their bell-hung harness jingling gaily,
and some last gatherings from the hay-fields filling the
long carts. For the Normandy summer was at its height;
the sky was of that pure, clear tint which, slightly veiled
as it is, lets the eye roam into further depths than the
intense blue of more southern lands.    The sea showed as
184 The Attempt.
a narrow line of glittering silver beyond the sunny fields
outside the farm, which from without, like many in Nor¬
mandy, seemed nothing but a thick wood of four or five
acres, enclosed by a hedge seven feet high, one mass of
tangled bramble, clematis, andbriony.    Let tis pass, as I
have often done, the opening under the trees, and we find
there is an orchard, rich in promise of fruit, where cows
rest on the shady turf; old stone buildings, turreted and
picturesque,  huge   barns with enormous thatched roofs
almost touching the ground, as if they had pulled broad
brimmed hats right over their faces, noble trees every¬
where, and in the middle a pool of water where the ducks
float happily, reflecting buildings and branches and a bit of
sky.   But this is long ago—thirty or forty years ago—that
Mademosielle Gabrielle is sitting dreamily on the lowest
of the flight of steps that  reaches   the  arched door in
the  second   story,  while  all  the   little   world   around
her is astir.    Her uncle  Gaspard, and  her   aunt Marie
Talbot are both busy with the returning hinds, and the
preparations for supper; for though from time immemorial
their family has inhabited the lands adjoining, and been
fairly prosperous, it has never been ennobled, but furnished
good store of curfes, notarys, marayeurs or fish dealers,
and  sea-captains au long cours,—that is   of the  vessels
that go far to sea.    Gabriellc was not  of a nature to
dream about nothing, so we may be sure her reverie has
a cause; her handsome brown lace is full of energy and
decision;   her  bright,  dark eyes have a flash  in  them
which hints of temper, but  the  whole  countenance  is
unclouded,  open,   and  kindly, and  speaks   of  never   a
sorrow, and hardly a care.   But now the light flashes back
into it, as two men pass under the leafy portal from the
evening  sunshine   into  the  shadow of the  wood;   her
cousin, Michel Talbot, no less a person than syndic of
the   district,  and  Monsiem*  Raoul  Wachter, the young
doctor of the neighbouring fishing village of Valmont, but
a native of Alsace.    Michel was a common-place looking
man of forty, closely shaved, precisely dressed, with a
sordid face, big cheeks, and large red ears.    Gabrielle
gave him but a careless greeting, but rose -with a deeper
colour on her bright cheeks, aware of the young doctor,
who also, with mantling colour, said,  " If it is not too
late for Mademoiselle   to   fulfil   her promise   to  show
me the  Fontaine   des   Sirenes,   what   an   evening  this
would   be for  it."     Now   Raoul  had  fair  longish  hair
The Attempt. 185
marked regular features if somewhat attenuated, large
beseeching eyes, and an air of earnestness and seriousness,
far more German than French ; what wonder that
Mademoiselle, who contrasted with him in every respect,
should assent at once, and disregarding the black looks
of Michel, saunter out into the open fields with her lover,
for though, as yet undeclared, it needed no prophet to
foretell what was coming. Happy for Gabrielle that she
wore the costume of the country, then far more general
than now; so she did not need the hideous hat or coal-
skuttle bonnet that disfigured the fashionable young ladies
of the day. So they wandered to a point of the sea¬
shore about three miles distant. Here, by a steep descent,
they clambered down the cliffs, and stood, not long after
sunset, close to the little wavelets which rolled in, tinged
with pink and purple by the evening sky, but breaking in
silver flashes on the deep olive and red-lDrown sea weeds
that edged the shore. And here was the mermaid's foun¬
tain ; but how describe that scene ? The chalk cliff rose
behind to at least 300 feet of perpendiciilar height, the
pure white surface growing shadowy in the twilight.
But in one place a great rich, dark green velvet curtain
seemed to hang from the cliff, it was a bed or cushion of
greenest moss, and over it purled and rippled constantly
a silvery shower of water, never even in little streamlets,
but in separate pearly drops, catching the evening light,
as if the whole dark green canopy was glittering with a
shoAver of diamonds. The pure water collected beneath,
in a little pool, and then rippled down to the shore, whence
a few rough steps had been cut in the rocks to give readier
access to the spring. Out at sea, just beyond low water
mark, stood a great column of chalk 200 feet high, but
only a few feet across, a habitation of sea-birds, who
perched in every ledge, or flew round and round with
unwearied wings and shrill cries, the only sound that
broke the stillness. It was a place of exqiiisite witchery,
and it would have been easy to fancy the mermaids rising
from the deep sea waves, and exchanging strange con¬
fidences with the nymph of the diamond fountain. But
that was not the story of the place.
" And so Gabrielle "—it was Raoul and Gabriello now;
the words which knit lives together had been spoken—
" and so this is an unlucky place. It is too lovely for
that."
" Unlucky only to young meu, to no one else," said
JUNE 1S73. * A
186 The Attempt.
Gabrielle. " I hope it is not going to be unlucky to you;
perhaps you have got charmed by a witch here—who
knows % "
" Who knows % I know for me it is the most blessed
and fortunate of all places, the earthly paradise," and more
Buch nonsense; " but how about that other young man,
Gabrielle r'
*' You should say young men" said Gabrielle solemnly,
" the first one I believe did fall in love with a mermaid,
and they quarrelled and he forsook her; but one night she
rose up and killed him, and then repented,—ah. so bitterly,
and dashed herself off" the cliff there, hoping to die; but
she could not, only she flung herself into the fountain,
and drops away in perpetual tears,—as you see."
" She dashed herself to pieces, en effet" said Raoul; " let
us hope she can do no more mischief."
" Ah, but she can,—since then several young men have
actually vanished from here; she or her sisters drag them
down they say; I do believe there is something queer
about the place, so mind you don't come here without me
to take care of you."
" I don't wish to go anywhere without you to take care
of me, that only is certain," said Raoul, with much more
to the same effect, so that it was not till night had come
and the starlight glimmered on the water that they
wended their way back, and announced their engagement
at the farm. This was considered quite suitable, and
highly approved of Raoul, indeed, was a stranger,
who had only been some months in the district,—an
orphan, whose parents had belonged to Alsace; but he
had a good practice, and was of a social grade somewhat
higher than Gabrielle, who, on her part, could contribute
numerous cousins and friends to their society, and a hand¬
some dot to the manage. Every one was pleased, unless
perhaps Michel, and he might have had his reasons,
purely personal and selfish. Raoul and Gabrielle seemed
as fortunate in their loves as in everything else, not a
cloud flecked their sky, unless indeed it was of their own
bringing. Raoul had some ideas of going to push his
fortune in a less quiet country, of moving to Rouen, to
Paris even, of doing wonders in his profession, while to
Gabrielle any proposal to leave her beloved sea, or to go
beyond the sound of the bells of her own parish church
was simply detestable. Nor did the enthusiasm of having
given her life and heart, as she said, to Raoul, carry her
Tlie Attempt. 187
off her feet in those minor matters in which he wished her
to please him. And so such conversations as these would
arise. When, a few weeks later, the carts were loading
in the harvest fields—
" What a land is tliis," said Gabrielle, " a land to live
and die in."
" And leave no trace behind," said Raoul,—" no, no;
elsewhere one may win something to make the land
happier you see—advance science."
" Advance Dr Wachter,—-that is to say" laughed
Gabrielle. " What, can one be more than happy % What is
the use of being rich and celebrated in a dull street, look¬
ing out on roofs, and cats, and bourgeois f
" Never mind—how you will delight in our little
lodging au quatrieme. When you are Madame Wachter,
you will have flowers in the window—an ivy plant
trained—■"
" A fig for your ivy. I won't go to the little lodging
au quatrierae.    Am I a pigeon—It"
" Quite the contrary, but wives must go with their
husbands,"
" Not if husbands go to the bad."
" No ifs in the matter."
" Well, then, wives may, but I never shall."
And again—
" What corn !    None such to be seen in Alsace."
" Why the Alsace corn is twice the height."
" Oh, I daresay—little boys always think everything
high."
" Little girls, who have seen nothing, can't judge."
" Well, thank heaven, I don't desire to see a better
land than this."
" Why, are you like the church weather-cock, Gabrielle %
Because you are always in the same spot, yet always
changing,"
" It you like me you must like my weather-cock too,"
'' I hke both so well, that if you are such inseparables,
1 shall carry you both to Paris."
" Neither the one nor the other—the steeple as soon
as I," and away she would go with a peal of laughter,
meeting him again next time with an insouciance and
good humour she did not always find in Raoul. " Tiens,
il est ombrageux, ton futur," said her companions, " §e
serait ma mari rigouroux 9a, you are bold to take him,"
One frequent dispute was about the Simday after-Yespc r
188 The Attempt.
dance, which Gabrielle loved to join, and to which Raoul
had a real aversion, " Dancing do you call it, plunging
up and down separately like cart horses; and as for the
music, no wonder the young men here run after the
eiren; to hear good singing for once in their lives, is
enough to make them crazy with delight,"
The harvest being now in, an evening in early autumn
was appointed for a dance at the farm, either in the great
barn, or under the shadowy trees. - The clarionettes and
fiddles were come, and the girls were clustered about the
barn doors, like so much poultiy—as the lads saucily
remarked. They certainly looked as trim as birds, in
their neat summer attire, even when not pretty; some
seated in groups, some standing reflected in the quiet
pool. Raoul came, as in duty bound, to ask his betrothed
for the first dance under the trees, after Avhich he did not
wish her to dance with the peasants now entering the
barn; he wished to steal off "wdth her to the Mermaid's
Fountain, and there present her with the little gold
watch that was burning a hole in his pocket. Gabrielle
and he had a blissful dance, and then he whispered his
proposal, but she was up in arms. Never had such a
thing been heard of—what! lose all the dancing, and
when perhaps, it was one of the last dances she would
have in her "pays," the first time she had suggested the
possibility of her leaving it; a hint which should not
have been lost on Raoul. He might have gathered hence
how much of her contradictiousness was mere froth and
talk.
" But do come, Gabrielle, we shall never be missed, the
evening is lovely, just such a night as when first you
said you loved me."
" On just such a night I would say I loved you no
more, if I were dragged down there," said Gabrielle; " go if
you must, and ask the mermaids to amuse you, while I
have my dance,"
" You love your dance better than you love me."
" Both together best," she answered, with a sunny smile,
" come, then,"
Raoul all but yielded, but some evil fate impelled him
to say, " The dance afterwards—but the walk first—will
you not my own—I wish it so much ? "
"Do you hear me say, no," with a little stamp.
This was said out loud, and even as she spoke, other girls
ran up.    They seized Gabrielle's hands and swept with
The Attempt. 189
her into the barn, where, forming a circle, they swung
round and round slowly, while one girl sang a verse,
then swiftly, while shrieking out a shrill chorus. The
verses, mocking rhymes, were partly improvised, and all
not dancicig paused to listen while they sang.
Vous autres habitans des villes
Ah! ne vous estimez pas tant;
Vous nous traitez tous d'imb^ciles
Je pourrai bien vous en dire autant.
Chorus—Cu tambour violon flutiau
Ca vous enl&ve, ya rien si biau !
S'l y tonne, y grgle y pleut
Pour 9a quittra-t-on 1' assembl§e ?
Si les bourgeois sont ennuyeux
Dansons quest ce qua ja nous fait.
Chorus ~Cu tambour violon flutiau
Ca vous enlfeve, ya rien si biau !
Many eyes glanced meaningly at Raoul as they whirled past,
and his face darkened as he looked.    The delicate ear for
music he had inherited from his German ancestors was as
much offended by the screeching song as was his taste by
the rustic hilarity that seemed to have infected his chosen
lady.    The girls laughed as they saw him turn away and
saunter out of the barn, but Gabrielle soon disengaged
herself, and stood by the unglazed window looking out
into the twilight.    She was ready now to talk to Raoul
as he wished.    Why did he come to the window outside,
and instead of the tender little word that would have
lured  her  away  with   him,   said,   " I leave   you,   then,
Mademoiselle, to the amusements you prefer; h demain."
"Mes amities a la Sirene,  et bon soir  Monsieur,"   said
Gabrielle gaily, but she felt that the pleasure of the even¬
ing was over for her.    To-morrow I shall be so sweet, and
make up for it all, she said to herself.    Ah! how many
good and pleasant things are to happen on that to-morrow
which never comes.    The day after comes always how¬
ever, and Gabrielle hoped for an early visit from Raoul.
She would be a httle difficult at first, for had he not
behaved most rudely ?    But she would soon forgive him,
and that very evening they would walk to the fontaine.
By the afternoon, she was prepared to give him a most
cordial reception; but when evening had come, and the
men were coming home to supper, with no mention of
him, she would have flown into his arms. A cmious kind
of dull ache came into her heart, with an inclination to
start, quite new sensations to her, but destined to become
more familiar.
190 lite Attempt.
" Tiens," said Uncle Gaspard, " ton futur, where is he ?
not coming to-night?
"He has perhaps been called to a distance for a
consultation," said Aunt Marie.
" Maybe," added Michel, who had joined the party, " I
at least have not seen him all day. Paul, the chemist,
saw him going down to the fontaine last night when he
was on his way home from the dance. Look you,
Gabrielle, you should not let yom- man expose himself to
the wiles of the siren. Hoav if she Avere to take a fancy
to him and lure him away. You have no rival on dry
land, no doubt; but in the sea ! ah I aa'Iio knoA\^s. Then
he is a smart fellow, the doctor, too grand for us simple
country folks. I thought he Avas on a high horse last
night.    Perhaps he has ridden aAvay on it."
" He is too good for you all," said Gabrielle, hardly
restraining her tears. This Avas becoming unendurable.
Why had she let the girls behave so Avildly; ah! why had
she joined them herself? Bed-time came at last, and, at
least for the night, nothing more could happen, but the
heart sickness was worse next day, Avhen after breakfast
no Raoul came and no ucaa^s, nothing at all seemed to
happen. She was too shy openly to inquire after him, it
would seem to announce a quarrel; but she made an
excuse to drive down to the village a mile off, and asked
incidentally at the little chemist's shop, if Monsieur
Wachter had been there that morning, " No, nor yester¬
day," said Paul the chemist, " I liaA^e not seen him since
your assemhlee." Gabrielle turned aAA'ay with a sick heart;
something prevented her from asking further. But she
went back to the farm, half hoping to find him there.
No, there AA^as no one, and the day passed heavily on,
ToAvards evening she sat on the door step unable to
settle to any employment. " Had you and Raoul a
quarrel when you parted," said her aunt, as she passed
and looked at her. " No," said Gabrielle, faintly, " we
had a little discussion, but it was nothing." As she spoke,
a young peasant Avoman came up the path. With a sud¬
den shrinking, she recognized Madame Lecoeur, Raoul's
landlady.
" I came to ask if here they kncAv where M. Raotd is—
but, good heavens ! Mademoiselle, don't look like that; he
may be detained by some bad case."
" When did he go ? " gasped Gabrielle.
" He has not been at home since your dance.    What,
The Attempt. 191
then,—a gentleman has his affairs,—he can't always tell
when he will come back."
" Aunt I" said Gabrielle, " come with me to the Mer¬
maids' Fountain, for I must go there ;" and she started off
across the fields. Her aunt sent some of the people after
her; they had to run; she went slower herself. When
she arrived, Gabrielle had already for some time been
pacing up and down between the cliff and the sea, asking
them hopeless questions; for all was as still and quiet as
though no human heart were throbbing so wildly near.
There was no one—nothing; but soon after her aunt got
down, Gabrielle standing by the fountain while the pearly
drops fell thick and unheeded on her, stirred a stone with
her foot, and gave a shrill scream. There was something;
a httle packet addressed to herself. It was damp but
legible, and in his hand. She opened it trembling; there
was no writing inside, only a little gold watch, and within
the lid, which flew open, the inscription A ma Men aimee.
The poor girl sat looking at it with fixed eyes. " It is not
going," she said, "but the fountain is forever weeping.
Oh! tell me, tell me what you know," she said, wildly,
to the spectators. But they knew nothing; nothing then,
and nothing afterwards.
That evening Gabrielle was carried home ; but she was
not ill the following day. She had a resolute spirit; and,
though her blitheness was gone, she was softer and sweeter,
The country-people said, here was indeed a proof of the
truth of the legend of the Siren, and avoided the place
after nightfall. Some said Raoul had committed suicide.
" But no," said Gabrielle, with complete confidence, " that
was not his nature; and, besides, there was no such quarrel.
No, he saw it would not do, and left the little souvenir
where he knew I should find it. If ever he comes back,
I shall be more worthy of him." But he never did come
back, though the years rolled on and on and on.
E. J. 0.
(7b be continued,')
»^oo-
192 The Attempt.
SUBJECTS OF DEBATE
PROPOSED FOR THE
WINTER AND SUMMER TERMS OF  1873-4.
1. Is perfect politeness always compatible with perfect sincerity %* *
2. Is the will free ? * *
3. Is  the tutorial element  to  be encouraged  in the education of  elder
students in the higher branches ?
4. Are excursions in the High Alps to be commended ?
5. Should the Swedish Licence Law be introduced into Great Britain ? *
6. Are the writings of the Lake Poets consistent with the true principles
of poetry ?
7. Ought a promise extorted by unlawful means to be performed ?
8. Does  Berkeley's   component   of   matter   leave   no   residuum  behind
phenomena ?
9. Does the Norman type of mind  predominate  over the Saxon in our
Biodem literature ?
10. Should Ancient Languages be studied before Modem ?
11. Is patriotism radically a virtue ? *
12. Is it the duty of Women to pay great attention to Dress ?
13. Is Darwin's system satisfactory ?
14. Are the beauties of Spenser superior as a whole to those of Chaucer ?
15. Does national character depend more on physical than on moral causes ?
16. Is George Eliot the greatest novelist of this reign ?
*»* Members willing to undertake Debates, are invited to communicate with
The Presidents op Debate,
51 Lauriston Place, Edinburgh.
Those at a distance may send papers to be read at the Monthly Meetings.
N.B.—Both sides of those Debates marked ' *, and one of those marked *,
have been already engaged.
A Prize is offered for the best Poem appearing in The A ttempt during the
months of July, August, and September.
The Attempt. 193
A TALE OF THE FORTY-FIVE.
CHAPTER XI.
ENLIGHTENMENT.
In a few moments more the flicker of old Sandy's lanthorn
coming up the hill towards them announced to Alaster
that help was at hand. They laid the insensible girl
gently on the extempore litter which old Mrs M'Pherson's
skill had arranged for her young mistress. Sandy and
Duncan carried it carefully over the rugged mountain
path, and Alaster walked a few paces before them with
the lanthorn to light their way. Many feelings were
struggling in Alaster's breast, as he walked silently along
leading the little procession. A joy unspeakable that
Barbara was yet ahve, mingled with an intolerable fear
that after all her hurts might prove fatal, and a strange
vague terror at the discovery he had that night made of
the nature of his own feelings towards her, all struggled
together witliin him in that silent walk. Old Elspet's
face was peering anxiously into the darkness from the
kitchen window at Milla Forres. At the first gleam of
their lanthorns coming up the avenue, she rushed to the
door, and out into the night.
"Have ye fand her, have ye fand her?" she gasped,
then catching sight of the litter, she burst into a wild wail.
Nancy, utterly worn out by the fatigue and grief and
excitement of the day, had dozed for a moment on the
sofa, but the wild wail that burst from Elspet awoke her
in a moment, and painfully dragging her sprained ankle,
which had now swelled to an enormous size, she too
stood at the door as Alaster came up the steps. A wild
shriek broke from her as she saw the litter, and she
staggered forward towards it holding out both her hands.
By this time Alaster was close at hand, and passing
his arm round her waist he drew her back into the
entrance hall.
" Don't be frightened, Nancy," he said, " it's all well,
192 The Attempt.
SUBJECTS OF DEBATE
PROPOSED FOR THE
WINTER AND SUMMER TERMS OF  1873-4.*
1. Is perfect politeness always compatible with perfect sincerity ? * *
2. Is the will free ?» *
3. Is  the tutorial element  to  be encouraged  in the education of  elder
students in the higher branches 1
4. Are excursions in the High Alps to be commended ?
5. Should the Swedish Licence Law be introduced into Great Britain ? *
6. Are the writings of the Lake Poets consistent with the true principles
of poetry ?
7. Ought a promise extorted by unlawful means to be performed ?
8. Does  Berkeley's   component   of   matter   leave   no   residuum  behind
phenomena ?
9. Does the Norman type of mind  predominate  over the Saxon in our
modem literature ?
10. Should Ancient Languages be studied before Modem ?
11. Is patriotism radically a virtue ? *
12. Is it the duty of Women to pay great attention to Dress ?
13. Is Darwin's system satisfactory ?
14. Are the beauties of Spenser superior as a whole to those of Chaucer?
15. Does national character depend more on physical than on moral causes ?
16. Is George Eliot the greatest novelist of this reign ?
•»* Members willing to undertake Debates, are invited to communicate with
The Presidents op Debate,
51 Lauriston Place, Edinburgh.
Those at a distance may send papers to be read at the Monthly Meetings.
N.B.—Both sides of those Debates marked * *, and one of those marked *,
have been already engaged.
A  Prize  is  oflfered  for  the  best   Poem  appearing  iu" Tlie
Attempt" during the months of August, September, and October.
The Attempt. 193
A TALE OF THE FORTY-FIVE.
CHAPTER XL
ENLIGHTENMENT.
In a few moments more the flicker of old Sandy's lanthorn
coming up the hill towards them announced to Alaster
that help was at hand. They laid the insensible girl
gently on the extempore litter which old Mrs M'Pherson's
skill had arranged for her young mistress. Sandy and
Duncan carried it carefully over the rugged mountain
path, and Alaster walked a few paces before them with
the lanthorn to light their way. Many feelings were
struggling in Alaster's breast, as he walked silently along
leading the little procession. A joy unspeakable that
Barbara was yet alive, mingled with an intolerable fear
that after all her hurts might prove fatal, and a strange
vague terror at the discovery he had that night made of
the nature of his own feelings towards her, all struggled
together within him in that silent walk. Old Elspet's
face was peering anxiously into the darkness from the
kitchen wuidow at Milla Forres. At the first gleam of
their lanthorns coming up the avenue, she rushed to the
door, and out into the night.
"Have ye fand her, have ye fand her?" she gasped,
then catching sight of the litter, she burst into a wild wail.
Nancy, utterly worn out by the fatigue and grief and
excitement of the day, had dozed for a moment on the
sofa, but the wild wail that burst from Elspet awoke her
in a moment, and painfully dragging her sprained ankle,
which had now swelled to an enormous size, she too
stood at the door as Alaster came up tlie steps. A wild
shriek broke from her as she saw the litter, and she
staggered forward towards it holding out both her hands.
By this time Alaster was close at hand, and passing
his arm round her waist he drew her back mto the
entrance hall.
" Don't be frightened, Nancy," he said, " it's all well,
she is alive."
"Alive!" exclaimed Nancy, "but is she hurt"? Oh,
what's the matter ? I must go to her—don't hinder me,
Alaster;" and shaking herself free of his arm she dragged
JULY 1873. 2 B
194 The Attempt.
herself to the sofa, where by this time they had laid
Barbara. Old Elspet was standing by wringing her
hands, and lamenting alternately in Gaelic and English,
and Nancy threw herself upon her sister's breast.
" Elspet, be quiet, do you Avisli to kill your mistress ? "
said Alaster, with a sternness at which he himself won¬
dered. " Go and get hot-water bottles to put all round her
at once, she is benumbed with cold, and send Duncan for
the nearest doctor. Nancy," he added gently, but firmly.
" You must control yourself, you will harm your sister.
My poor child," he added, raising her tenderly, " you are
not fit for this, let me carry you to your room, your ankle
will be worse in the morning."
*' Do yon think I would leave Barbara ?" she said
indignantly ; " I won't leave this room to-night."
"Very well, dear, let me lay you on the other sofa,
you -vidll see everything done with your own eyes."
She allowed him to place her on the sofa, for the pain
of her sprained ankle was very great; but the instant
old Elspet reappeared with the hot-water bottles Nancy
was on her feet again, placing them round her sister.
Alaster only smiled, he saw that interference was
useless. By and bye the heat began to bring a glow
into the cold limbs, and a faint colour into the deathlike
face. They all hung over her in breathless silence. At
last the blue eyes opened widely, and looking round on
them all Barbara said,—
" Alaster, Nancy, Elspet," and shut her eyes again with
a sweet smile.
" The Lord be thankit I " exclaimed old Elspet.
Nancy burst into tears, and taking up her sister's hand
covered it -mih kisses. Alaster only bent his head lower
over his folded arms. At the sound of his mistress'
voice old Oscar, who had hidden himself under the sofa on
which they had laid Barbara, crept out, and laid his head
lovingly on her knee, looking up in the white face with
great soft longing eyes. Barbara seemed to feel his
caress, for, without opening her eyes, she laid her hand
softly on his rough head.
By and bye Dimcan returned with the doctor, who
pronounced Barbara's injuries to consist of a dislocation
of the right shoulder, and the general benumbing effects of
her exposure on the mountain for so many hours in an
insensible state. He set the shoulder, and had her con¬
veyed to bed.    He attended also to  Nancy's sprained
The Attempt. 195
ankle, and ordered a bed to be made up for her in her
sister's room, as she absolutely refused to leave her for a
moment. And giving Elspet all directions for his two
patients, and promising to call again to-morrow, he was
leaving the house, when Alaster arrested him in the hall.
" She will live?" he said hoarsely.
" Live ?" said the doctor, who knew Alaster's relation to
the family, and at once concluded that his anxiety was
about his bride, " did you ever hear of any one dying of a
sprained ankle 'I it won't even put your marriage off a
week, take my word for it."
" No, no," said Alaster, impatiently, " not Nancy,—
Barbara." The doctor looked up in astonishment at his
wild, haggard face.
" Yes, yes, she'll live too, though I won't promise she'll
be well so soon; a dislocated shoulder, and a night like
this on Benvorlish are no joke; but she's a grand consti¬
tution—a grand constitution—there are no fears for her."
" Thank God!" muttered Alaster, the tears coming into
his eyes. The doctor looked at him keenly. " Ay, thank
God," he said, " it might have been a serious business."
When the doctor was gone, Alaster went back into the
now empty hall, and sat down in the great arm chair
beside the fire. Old Oscar came up to him wagging his
tail, and whinging to be taken notice of, and to offer his
mute sympathy in the family joy. Alaster laid his hand
on the faithful creature's head, and sat silently gazing
into the fire. All was silent now overhead ; he could hear
the faintest movement in the girls' room, for it was
directly above the hall, and now and then he heard the
faint creaking of Elspet's shoes as she moved about the
room attending to the two invalids. Many thoughts
chased each other through Alaster's mind as he sat there.
Now that all immediate cause of anxiety about Barbara's
state was over, his mind sprang back with a sudden
bound to the discovery he had that night ma,de, as to his -
own feelings towards the sister of his promised bride.
Till to-night he had never realized how it was with liim.
They had all three been together, and ho had been very
happy, and he had not cared to dissect his happiness ;
indeed, he had persistently shut his eyes and declined to
do so, when sometimes an unwelcome comparison would
arise in his mind between the sisters. But now, with the
memory fresh in his mind of that terrible agony of
suspense and anxiety, when it had seemed to him that
196 The Attempt.
without Barbara the world would be to him nothing but
a barren wilderness, he could shut his eyes no longer.
He had known Nancy first,—her fresh, umocent, bright
girlhood bad attracted him, and ho had fancied that attrac¬
tion, love; but he knew better now, and he recognized,
with a terrible vividness that left no room for doubt, that
the former love had been but a pleasant dream, a faint
forerunner of the great reality, to which at last his whole
nature had awaked. But what was he to do ? He was
Nancy's plighted husband, how could he turn from her,
and say to Barbara, " I asked Nancy to be my wife in a
mistake, it is you whom I love,"—and yet that was the
truth. lie knew that by the world's code of honour he
was bound to Nancy, but was it true at God's altar to
promise his heart to one woman, Avhile he knew in his
inmost soul that it belonged to another ? Was it true to
himself, to Barbara, or to Nancy ? What was true and
what was false ? What was right and what was wrong ?
—he could not tell. He sat there, rapid thoughts succeed¬
ing each other in his mind, as hour after hour struck on
the old clock on the stairs. And it was only when the
starlight had quite faded, and the morning twilight had
almost broadened into day, and he heard Elspet softly
opening the shutters in the sick room, that he rose from
the old arm chau-, cliillcd and weary, and went to the
room prepared for him upstairs.
CHAPTEE XII.
alastee's flight.
Barbara's convalescence Avas quicker than the country
doctor had dared to expect. Blest by nature with a
constitution peculiarly vigorous, and with the elastic
power of youtli and happiness, she soon threw off the
effects of her dislocated shoulder and night's exposure,
and in ten days was carried carefully down staii's by old
Elspet and Alaster, and laid on the sofa in the hall.
Nancy's sprain had proved also less severe than they at
first feared, and she was able by this time to Avalk about
again, a little lamely, perJiaps, but without any paiufiil
exertion. During Barbara's illness, Alastor had been con¬
stantly running backwards and forwards between Carrick
Castle and Milla Forres; now bringing grapes from
Lady Macdonald's hot-houses, now with stirring news of
Prince Charlie's army in the soxith.     He seemed to be
The Attempt. 197
always on the move, always busy about something to
please the two girls at Milla Forres, but he was so busy
in this self-imposed task of his, that somehow Nancy
did not see very much of him. Barbara was confined to
her room, and Nancy was much there, and he was always
occupied getting things to please them ; so Nancy ac¬
counted for it to herself, when she missed the old constant
intercourse. Yet she did miss it sometimes, though it
never occurred to her that the want of it could be owing
to any fault of Alaster's. When she did see him, he was
always the old, kind, gentle Alaster, and Nancy was
quite satisfied. Confined to her own room, and only
hearing of his kind attentions, Barbara too never dreamed
of any change in him, or of any cloud hanging over her
sister's happiness. She seemed to remember, as in some
far away dream, some passionate words that had fallen
on her ear, and passionate kisses that had been showered
upon her brow the night she was lost on Benvorlish, and
the first time she had seen Alastcr afterwards (on the
evening on which the doctor first allowed her to be lifted
to the couch in her room), the remembrance of what she
deemed a vision of her delirium, came upon her so vividly,
that she was conscious that the hand she put out to meet
his was trembling; but Alaster was as quiet, as gentle,
as brotherly as ever, and the momentary tremor passed
quickly away, and she concluded that what she seemed to
remember was only a phantasy born of her feverish brain.
There was one pair of sharp eyes, however, that was
watching quietly, and one faithful heart that was already
beginning to quake at the " cloud no bigger than a man's
hand," that had appeared on her nurseling's horizon. Old
Elspet noticed how rarely Alaster seemed to find time for
a lover's walk or a lover's talk with Nancy; she had
noticed, too, his wild haggard face the night Barbara was
lost. She said nothing to anyone of her fears, but her
kind old face looked often very grave, and she would
shake her gray head, and mutter to herself, " Aye, aye, I
kent our folk had the second sicht—it's the beginning o'
the shadow, it's the beginning o' the shadow."
The first night that Barbara was able to be carried
down stairs, was one all three long remembered. They
treated it as a sort of jubilee. Elspet had prepared a
sumptuous repast, after the simple fashion of those days,
to celebrate the occasion, and all three seemed to throw
themselves   without   restraint  into  the  delight  of the
198 The Attempt.
passing hour. Alaster, in particular, seemed to have
thrown all care to the winds, and to be bent on nothing
but the simple enjoyment of the present. The hours flew
along, winged with song and laughter, and all tliree were
startled when old Elspet put in her head at the door
wdth the unwelcome reminder, that it " was ten chappit
o' the clock, an' the doctor said as Miss Barbara was to
be i' bed by nine." When Barbara had been safely carried
upstairs, as Alaster was bidding good-night, he said
abruptly,—
" Grood-night, Barbara, and good-bye, I'm going away
to-morrow."
" Going away! where on earth are you going to f
exclaimed both the girls in surprise."
" To Castle Ronald, I have business there," he said.
" Dear me, your business is veiy sudden, Alaster," said
Nancy ; " you never said a word about it before—must
you really go ? "
" I must, indeed," he said, " the business is urgent, my
father needs me at once. Good-bye again, Barbara," he
said hastily, moving to the door, as if he desired no
further questioning.
" When will you be back then, Alaster 1" said Nancy,
as she accompanied him down stairs ;
" I can hardly say, dear," he said; " I will write and let
you know," and gravely kissing her, he left the house, and
disappeared in the darkness down the avenue.
Nancy stood watching his retreating form till it was
lost in the darkness, then she turned back into the lighted
hall with a half sigh, and a look of anxiety on her face.
Something in his abrupt leave taking, and hie grave
gentle kiss, troubled her, she knew not why. As she
turned, she met old Elspet's eyes Avatching her anxiously.
The instant their eyes met the old woman dropped hers,
and turned away. Nancy went back to the hall, and old
Elspet hurried to her own little den down stairs, and
bolting herself in, sat down on a low stool by her bed¬
side, and burying her face in the bedclotlies, cried as if her
heart would break. Alaster, on his part, walked swiftly
away into the darkness without, and as he walked, the
thought was busy within him, that the darkness he was
going into was more than mere outward darkness, that
he too was walking away into the night, and knew not
Avhither he was going. During Barbara's illness he had
felt comparatively at ease; it had seemed so impossible
The Attempt. 199
to leave Milla Forres while she was ill, eo absolutely in¬
cumbent on him to remain and do all he could to lighten
her sufferings, that he had occupied himself entirely with
the present, and resolutely banished from his mind all
thought and care for the future. But now that Barbara
was able again to be down stairs, he felt that he must come
to some decision as to his future course; he dared not let
things drift on in their own way as they had been doing
hitherto, and he felt as if he must absolutely go away for
a while, and look at his life from a distance, as it were,
and note its bearings, if he did not wish to drift on to
absolute shipwreck—a shipwreck which, he realised with
a shudder, must inevitably include more than himself. He
had therefore resolved that, as soon as Barbara was con¬
valescent, he would go home to Perthshire, and think the
matter quietly out for himself. When the doctor had
announced to him yesterday, with an air of triumph, that
Barbara might be taken down to the hall on the following
day, he could scarcely repress a sigh, conscious, as he was,
how unsuited it would seem to the occasion in the doctor's
eyes. He did repress it, however, but still he listened to
the permission Avith such an air of gravity, that the good
doctor was fiiii-ly puzzled.
" What ails the man ? " soliloquised the doctor, as he
jogged quietly home on his old grey cob. " I'm sure he
seemed fond enough of her the night they brought her
home from Benvorlish, and now he seems hardly to have
a smile to give to her recovery." The doctor himself was
greatly elated at his patient's rapid progress, which made
him naturally the more impatient of Alaster's seeming
indifference. Poor fellow! far away as he felt himselt
from Barbara, and utterly hopeless as he knew any such
feeling on his part towards her must be, the utter hope¬
lessness of his attachment had not prevented him from
loving her. He knew well enough that ho might just as
well have loved " some bright particular star, and hoped
to wed it." But when did hopelessness extinguish love ?
So, as he jogged homo quietly on his grey pony, the
doctor's thoughts were anything but charitable towards
Alaster for his apparent insensibility. If he had known the
reason he could have understood it better.
Next morning Alaster set out, as he proposed, to his
Perthshire home. Castle Ronald lay in one of the most ro¬
mantic straths of that romantic county. It was an old cas¬
tellated mansion, with walls six feet thick, an old moat, and
200 The Attempt.
ivy-covered towers, standing on a wooded slope, almost
buried in gigantic fir trees, with the Tay flowing at its feet.
A grand old place, but in great disrepair, for, like most of
the Jacobite families of any pretension, the Macdonalds
had expended their money, as well as their blood, in the
Prince's cause. Just now. Castle Ronald was quite
deserted, for Alaster's father, like Colonel Forbes, had
gone to join the rendezvous of the Prince's troops at
Edinburgh. Its solitude was just what Alaster wanted,
however. At this crisis of his life, he felt tliat he must
be alone, and where could he better grapple with liis fate
than amongst the old woods, that seemed to have known
and loved him from a child ?
CHAPTER   XIII.
Peggy's Lkgaot.
Left to themselves in the still old house at Milla Forres
for the first time after the  excitement of the last few
months, both Barbara and Nancy found the days hang at
first rather heavy on their hands.    To Nancy, it seemed
quite natural that she should miss Alaster sorely, and she
gave way without any compunctions to  the feeling of
dullness and vacuity that seemed to have come over her
life.    Those were not the days of the penny post, or of
the free-and-easy letter-writing which it has produced, so
the lover's letters were very rare, and when they tvere
written, very formal; for a letter was looked upon then as
a grave and formidable  undertaking.    Barbara,  on the
contrary, was angry at herself for feeling the blank made
by Alaster's absence in the way tliat she did.    She tried
to persuade herself that it was the weakness left behind
by her illness that weighed upon her spirits and made her
feel so disinclined for any kind of exertion, and so predis¬
posed to pass the long evenings in indolent dreaming in
an arm-chair over the pleasant days of the last three
months.    Conscientious as usual, she went through all her
household duties as regularly as before; the only difference
was, that now, instead of setting to work at some reading
or painting, or starting ofi" for a brisk walk, or some little
kindly visit, in her hours of leisure, she generally foimd
herself curled up either in the big chair by the fire-place,
or, if the day were bright, on some mossy bank by the
burn-side, busy only in weaving day dreams. Very happy
the di-eams were, so happy that she sometimes felt as if
The Attempt. 201
she did not miss Alaster at all, and almost wondered to
hear Nancy mourning for his departure. About a fort-
niglit had passed in this way, when one morning, just as
Barbara had completed her orders to Elspet, a little bare¬
footed Highland boy knocked at the back door. Elspet
went to open it, leaving Barbara standing before the
kitchen fire. In a minute or so she returned with tears
standing in her kind gray eyes.
" Hech, sirs! Miss Barbara," she said, "here's Donald, the
doctor's laddie, come runnin' frae the doctor's to tell ye that
auld Peggy's had a stroke, an' they're no thiukin' she'll
leeve mony hours, an' she's fain to see ye and Miss Nancy."
" Oh, Elspet, it can't be,—dear old Peggy dying! I
can't fancy Milla Forres without her, she seems a bit of it.
ril go to her at once," she said; then turning to the boy,
who stood with his ragged cap in his hand, she said, "Did
the doctor say there was anything she would be the better
of, Donald ? " The boy tugged the front lock of his red
shock of hair respectfully, as he answered,—
" Aye, my leddy, tlie doctor said gin ye had a drap o'
brandy an' a wee pickle mustard i' the hoos, I was to ask
ye to bring them wi' ye."
" You had better take them, Donald, you'll rim faster
than we can walk. Elspet, give him some of the French
brandy my father brought over, and some mustard; and
don't forget to give him a jelly piece for himself, while I
go for Nancy. Run as fast as you can, Donald, and tell
Peggy, Miss Nancy and I will be there immediately."
" I'll do that, my leddy," said the boy, with another tug
at his red pow.
Barbara went upstairs sadly and thoughtfully. Old
Peggy had always seemed so much an inseparable part of
her life, that old as slic was, it had hardly ever occurred to
her that, in all probability, the time was short in which
she might still visit her, and read to her, and hear her
wise, motherly words on the Sabbath evenings; and
somehow the idea that perhaps she should never do so
again came upon her with a great shock, as if one of the
foundations of lier own life had given way, as if it were
the beginning of the end, and no one knew what might
happen next. Except in the far-away dream-like memory
of her mother, death had never come close to Barbara in the
person of any one very near or dear to hei", and the first
approach of the dread messenger seemed to her to shake
the foundations of the universe. Is it not so with each of
us when first we realise the dreadful truth, tliat deatli is
JDLT 1S73. 2   0
202 The Attempt.
in very deed a great reahty, that the old accustomed sur¬
roundings which make up our little world are not eternal?
Does it not give a great, an u-recoverahle blow to our
confidence in everything, as if the whole system of the
universe were shaken to its centre ?
Barbara found Nancy sitting spinning in her room.
Nancy was very busy just now at her spinning, adding
to the time-honoured hoard of napery which had come
down from mother to daughter for many generations, and
which each new bride felt it a point of honour to take
with her to her ne\v home.
" Oh, Nancy," she said as she entered, " the doctor's
sent Donald to tell us that old Peggy's dying, she wants
to see us, come away quick."
" Old Peggy dying, Barbara !" exclaimed Nancy, start¬
ing up, "oh, don't say that, it cant be true, she was quite
well on Sunday; " and Nancy clung to her sister's hand
with a terrified expression in her soft brown eyes.
" I'm afraid it is true, dear," said Barbara gently, " Don't
cry, Nancy, wc must go to her; " and she reached down
her sister's bonnet from the peg on which it was hanging,
and tied it on, for Nancy's trembling fingers refused to do
it for herself; then putting on her own bonnet, she drew
Nancy's hand through her arm, and led her down stairs.
Very silently the sisters passed through the glen. The
day was bleak and windy, for the autumn had faded into
winter, and the glen looked bare and desolate to then- sad
eyes as they wallced along. By and bye they came in
sight of old Peggy's house. The door, which usually stood
wide open, was shut, as was also part of the shutters in
the little window, and the sisters' hearts beat loud as they
knocked, with the fear that already it was too late even
to say good-bye to their old friend. Donald opened the
door in answer to their knock, and as they crossed the
threshold, the doctor stepped out to meet them.
"Is she alive?" said Barbarba, in an awe-struck whisper.
" Yes, and quite conscious, she was wearying for your
coming."
The two girls stepped noiselessly into the little room,
cosy and clean as usvial, for old Peggy had just completed
her morning's work when she was struck down by the
unseen messenger. On a box-bed in the wall the old
woman was lying. Her right side liad been completely
paralyzed, and there seemed no motion in all the silent
figure lying under the bedclothes, except in the clear
wide-open eyes that Avandered first to one face and then
The Attempt. 203
to another of those around her bed. Very clear and calm
the eyes were, the dimness of age seemed to have
passed away from them, to be replaced by a quiet, solemn
far-seeing look, as of eyes that are gazing behind the veil.
As the girls entered, that solemn gaze gave place for a
moment to an expression of intense human affection. She
moved her head slightly towards them, and Barbara,
stepping forward to the bed, lifted the poor, powerless,
wrinkled hand that lay on the bed quilt, and pressed it to
her lips, hot tears falling over it as she did so. For an
hour or two after her attack Peggy had lost the power of
speech, but it had returned in some measiu*e before the
girls arrived, though her words were still only half articu¬
late, and spoken with a great effort.
" Dinna greet, my dawtie," slie gasped, with long inter¬
vals between her words, as she felt Barbara's hot tears
falling on her face, when she stooped to kiss the cold
wrinkled brow, "yeken what ye read the ither Sunday—
' Yea though I walk—through the valley—o' the shadow
—of death, I fear nae evil—for Thou art with me.'—He's
wi' me noo, dinna greet for auld Peggy, my bairn." She
stopped a wliile, and then she said, looking at Nancy, who
was standing leaning against the foot of the bed and
sobbing as if her heart would break,—" Nor you neither,
my bonny lamb." She paused a few minutes, and the far¬
away look came back into the quiet eyes, as she said in a
solemn, perfectly articulate voice,—"'Daughters of Jerusa¬
lem, weep not for me, but weep for yourselves and for
your children;' aye, aye, the Maister said that when His
course was near its en', an' auld Peggy can say it too.
Aye, bairns, it's no for me ye've got to greet that's got
safe to the end o' the journey ; the Lord be praised that's
led me a' my life lang, an' that's bringing me noo to His
ain Holy Hill; it's auld Peggy that should greet for ye, puir
young things, that has it a' afore ye, but He's bring ye
through,—He's bring ye through."
She stopped speaking, and lay motionless for a few
minutes, then she began to croon over a verse of the old
hymn, of which she was very fond—
" O God of Bethel! by whoie hand
Thy people still are fed ;
Who through this weary pilgrimage
Hast all our fathers led."
" Shall I sing to you, Peggy ? " said Barbara.
" Aye, aye ; sing ' I to the hills.''
And Barbara began to sing in a low tone the triumphant
words of our Scotch version of that beautiful psalm.
204 The Attempt.
" I to the hills will lift mine eyes,
From whence doth come mine aid.
My safety cometh from the Lord,
Who heav'n and earth hath made.
Thy foot He'll not led slide, nor wiU
He slumber that thee keeps.
Behold, He that keeps Israel
He slumbers not, nor sleeps."
" Na, na, 'He slumbers not, nor sleeps,'" muttered the
old woman,
" ' The moon by night thee shall not smite.
Nor yet the sun by day.'
Mind that, my bairns, it'll be a' weel wi' you when ye're
in His good keeping."
She seemed to doze ofi" for a while. The doctor came
and put his finger on the pulse and shook his head—he
could hardly feel it beating.
" Probably she won't speak again," he said, turning to
Barbara. " Miss Forbes, this is a painful place for JO^x,
would you not go home ? "
But Barbara only shook her head, she could not leave
till she had seen the last of her old friend. She sat down
by the fire, in the old woman's low chair, and Nancy set
herself on a stool at her feet, and laid her head on her
sister's knee. They sat so, looking into the fire, for some
time; the doctor went again to the bed-side and laid
his hand on the feebly beating heart. He shook his head
again sadly, and coming up to Barbara he said gently,—
" I fear I can be of no more use here, Miss Forbes. No
human power can save her. I will look in again, how¬
ever, when I have seen M'Lauchlan's wife, at the head of
the glen. I will leave Donald, in case he can be of use; "
and lifting his hat respectfully he left the cottage.
The girls sat on in the silent room, where the only
sound was the regular tick of the old eight-day clock,
and the faint breathing of the dying woman. About an
hour passed so, and then a faint voice came from the bed,—
" Miss Barbara I "
Barbara was at the bedside in an instant, and bending
low down over the old woman to catch the faint whisper
that was little more than a breath. Elspet had followed
hre young mistresses to the cottage, for the doctor had
stopped at MUla Forres on his way up the glen, to tell her
that he feared the end might come before he could return,
and to beg her to go to them. He could not bear to
think of Barbara left there to meet death for the first time,
without some friendly helper near. Poor Dr Brown I his
was one of those silent imtold loves, unnoticed and im-
The Attempt. 205
appreciated, yet always liovering round the beloved one
in unobtrusive and unremarked offices of affection; love
little valued and seldom rcAvarded here, yet surely not
altogether unregarded or unrecompensed by Him whose
name is Love. Nancy held up a warning finger as Elspet
entered the cottage, for she feared her entrance might
disturb Peggy, so she stopped short on the threshold, just
as Peggy called Barbara to her bedside.
" Miss Barbara," said Peggy again, the faint voice
scarcely audible, even to the girl who leant so close over
her pillow, " Will ye do ain thing for poor auld Peggy's
sake whan she's gane ? "
" I'll do anything in the world for you, Peggy, you
know I will."
" Yes, yes, my dawtie, I ken. Pse ne'er spoken to ye
o' my dochter, my puir bonny Maggie, that gied astray,—
the Lord forgie me,—I was ower prood, an' I couldna thole
to speak aboot her, but I ken better noo, maybe the Lord
'11 no disdain to let my Maggie wash his feet wi' her
tears, as He let the puir woman that was a sinner afore.
Ye'll fin' a' the papers aboot whaur she was last seen i'
the drawer i' the table, and ye'll fin' an auld stocking wi'
a' the money I hae gotten at the bed heed. It '11 pay for
my funeral, and maybe a wee thing mair; ye'll keep what's
ower for Maggie, an' ye'll gie it her alang wi' my big
Bible an' her mither's blessing. Ye'U gie me your word,
Miss Barbara, as ye'll no rest till ye fin' my puir mis¬
guided bairn % "
" Yes, yes, Peggy dear, I'll give you my word."
" The Lord bless ye, my bairn. Miss Nancy," she said,
feebly turning the clear eyes that were beginning now to
grow dim with the dimness of death toward where Nancy
eat. She came to the bedside. " Miss Nancy," she said
again.
" I'm here, Peggy dear," sobbed Nancy.
" Are ye, my bonny lamb ? I canna see ye, but it's a'
richt, there's Ain that ' never slumbers nor sleeps,' as '11
keep ye baith like the apple o' His e'e. Guid-bye, my
bairns, the Lord bless ye, an' keep ye, an' cause the
licht o' His countenance to shine upon ye, an' gie ye—
peace,"
The last word was hardly audible, the dim eyes closed
quietly, and old Peggy had entered into " peace."
Jeanie Morison,
(To he continued.)
206 The Attempt.
(B q u a I
I.
He said: I wouki she were a pearl,
Deep hid in Ocean caves;
Light were the task to plunge beneath.
And wrest her from the waves !
I would she were a floweret rare,
Blooming 'mid peaks of snow ;
Soon should I win her for my own,
And all her sweetness know.
II.
I would my love were lone or poor,
So 1 might give her aid;
Only not set above me there.
In light that has no shade.
My life is hers; for her sweet sake
I draw my sword of fame ;
And my reward perchance will be
Her lips may breathe my name
III.
She laid aside her robe of state,
She cast aside her golden crown,
A simple maiden clad in white.
All blushing, came she down.
She said: And if you prize that pearl,
It gleams, it shines alone for you ;
And if you seek that mountain flower.
Your hand must shed the dew.
IV.
0\\, I am poor when near to you;
Your noble constancy
And stauiless honour, far outAveigh
All homage paid to me.
The loyal heart, in silence borne.
The strong arm, smiting sure,
Shall still be held the priceless gifts—
So Love and Truth endure!
Enna.
The Attempt. 207
" I have
In mind the landscape, as if still in sight;
The river glides, the woods before me wave ;
Memory, like sleep, hath powers which dreams obey,
Dreams, vivid dreams that are not fugitive ;
How little that she cherishes is lost."
Wordsworth.
To a title Scot, there is no such moving sight in nature
as a mountain. The hills are his everlasting heritage;
the hereditary guardians of his historic destiny, crowned
with the glories of his national liberties, and rellecting the
lights and shades of his national character. Poetry and
freedom have blossomed with the heather on their rugged
bosoms, and religious and patriotic enthusiasm become
welded in a mould of heroic action to the steadfast and
consistent temper of their rocks of flint. Scottish history
exhibits examples of human endurance, courage and
patience, impressive as nature's own character in her
grandest moods ; and the noblest natural beauties of the
" land of the mountain and the flood " owe their crowning
charm to association with romantic adventure, traditionary
spell, historic deed, or poetic idea.
A native acquaintance with these scenes  of enchant¬
ment   has  been  considered   so   disqualifying   for   wider
appreciation, that the " Scot abroad " is generally assumed
to be placed at a hopeless disadvantage for valuing all
that is foreign to the beauties of his own land, which, on
the other hand, it is the primary part of the enlightened
Englishman's traveUing education, to acquire the rigid to
say he has visited.    True, it may only have been to enjoy
a nap in the Trossachs coach, read the Timet^ on the deck
of the lona, exclaim at the grand gloom of Glencoc, and
vote StalTa an expensive bore ; bnt, in recognilion of the
higher type of Saxon pilgrimage, lately illustrated by this
magazine in certain spirited and discriminating  " First
Impressions of EdinburgJi," which prove their author no
more a " Stranger" to northern scenes, institutions, and
idiosyncracies,  wo  claim   the   vindication  of   our   own
national  character   from  the   assumption,   that   Scotch
appreciation cannot, in its tui-n, travel south of the Tweed.
It has dawned upon the northern intellect that English¬
men  are  not  all  soulless   aldermen,   or   mere  business
automata, alive to the one sense of the practical, any more
than the Scotch are the semi-civilized race, subsisting on
208 The Attempt.
oatmeal cakes and porridge, and—to a man—wearing kilts
and playing the bagpipes, pictured by the cockneyfied
power of idealism.
Reserving supreme veneration for the unapproachable
sublimities of " Caledonia stern and wild," we acknowledge
an attraction in the gentler amenities of southern scenes,
such as lends an endearing charm to the sweet and
home-like aspects of life among the green lanes and
bright meadows of " Merry England." It was the writer's
good fortune to spend a few pleasant weeks of last
summer in the ancient county of Cheshire, which, in
virtue of a rare historic prestige and aristocratic con¬
nection, holds its head high as a representative English
shire, supporting the dignity in the exercise of a gracious
hospitality, even more typically worthy of the national
credit. A discursive record of impressions so agreeably
formed may serve as an interlude to The Attempt's more
able discourse, when the " season's difference" permits the
sweet delusion of summer luxury, to " babble of green
fields," and "fleet the time carelessly under the shade of
melancholy boughs."
Through the busy city of Manchester, a dingier,
clumsier Glasgow, reach we then the sylvan seclusion
of Wilmslow, marked by antiquity, though not of modern
magnitude. Here, on the site of forests primeval, cleared
by the industrious Romans for their time-honoured roads
and Avails, the proud Normans have also left their mark,
and that branch of the Derby family which won their
favourite cognizance of the Bi7'd and Bantling, or Eagle and
Child, reigned the presiding deities of the place. The
church, too, is an interesting relic of the past, its walls
weather-beaten and crumbling, and their interior hung
round with tablets commemorative of the honourable
lives and regretted deaths of the Lord Suzerams and
Lady Boimtifuls of the neighbourhood. About the
whole place there is more than mere rustic prettiness,
there is the stamp of antiquity, which adds an air
(j2 refinement to the sweetness of pastoral beauty, and
completes the gentle charm of an old English village,
with its irregular street, primitive shops, gardened
cottages, embowered inn, shady pond, and sleepy com¬
mon stretching in the sun.
The great city of cotton, like its northern business
prototype, adds to the value and enjoyment of its riches
in the possession of such retreats, to which its care-
striken votaries may retire to re-invigorate their worn
The Attempt 209
minds with the freshness and sweetness of nature.
Of all those we have seen we should award the palm to
Bowdon, which gives its name to little more than a charm¬
ing collection of tasteful villas, crowning one of those
rare eminences which enjoy the singularly fortunate
position of looking down upon the wide extent of
surrounding greenness and flatness. Cheshire's reproach,
the want of good timber, is done away in the adjacency
of Dunham Massey, whose fine trees form a park worthier
of the name than those artificial-looking pleasure grounds
which are so entitled by modern taste. But the grand
glory of Bowdon is its churches, both of which are of rare
Gothic beauty; and the parish church in particular, the
most perfect possible realization of that ideal sacred
edifice, forever associated with the half-angelic, half
child-like musings of " Little Nell" in the touching close
of her touching life. How beautiful, how solemn, the
impressions of such spiritual art! it taxed a Master
Expresser to indicate; and the hand that drew this
living picture of the dying child in the meeting-place
of living and dead is now, alas I cold too as its monu¬
ments. Both churchyards suggested a more cheerful
train of thought in the smiling expanse of pastoral
landscape stretched out to the wandering gaze, much
as Milton describes :—
" Straight mine eye hath caught new pleasures,
Whilst the landskip round it measures,
Kusset lawns, and fallows gray,
Where the nibbling flocks do stray,
Meadows trim with daisies pied,
Shallow brooks, and rivers wide."
A yet more distinguishedpomf devuein Alderley Edge, a
wooded hill commanding seven counties in its prospect, as
" Wider and wider spreads the vale,
Like circles on a smooth canal."
To our eyes, the pleasant coup (TcbU was singularly en¬
riched in effect by the surpassing freshness of the verdure
the sole tribute that we are aware of having been offered
to the persevering genius of a rainy season. " To go on
the Edge " is the great excursion of the neighbourhood ;
and the fresh, free air, the climbing excitement and the
exhilarating view render it a charming one. An unfailing
resort of pic-nic parties, this pretty wood-crowned hill,
(which reminded us somewhat of the GallowHill at MofFat,)
has all the rural essentials of such enjoyment in sunny,
braes and shady nooks, soft grassy walks and quiet rest-
2   D JULYlSTS.
210 The Attempt.
ing-places, a ferny dell with a miniature cascade and
saintly and heathen mshing-weUs, at which we do not
despair of a renewed opportunity of drinking to the well-
being of the genius loci, ancient and modern.
Manchester and Liverpool, as twin cities in the great
English world of commerce, approximate in character as
in contiguity, though individually distinct in their special
celebrities of manufactures and shipping. Both deficient
in sesthetical attractions, Liverpool must, nevertheless, be
considered the finer city of the two. Approached via
Crewe, on the Cheshire side, it may present quite a
picturesque appearance, with the setting sun of a fine
summer evening gilding its usually dusky spires and
glimmering on the restless tides of the Mersey rolling
between the Clieshire and Lancashire shores. The river
is the glory of Liverpool. It is the vein of communication
that introduces the new blood of young America to
stimulate the steadier current of her aged parent; the
first step on the golden highway to China and Japan ; the
grand emporium into which the wealth of the Indies is
poured; a supreme link in which the ends of the earth are
drawn together in bonds of amity. On its broad bosom
are borne abroad, wealth, civilization and religion to all
corners of the world, and the treasures of foreign mines
and the rare products of strange climes are returned to
minister to England's luxury and enrich England's purse.
It would be difiicult to conceive a more wonderfiil
study of human character than that daily presented on the
river landing-stages. There, a never-ceasing stream of
human life flows on, in all the moods of mind and variety
of cu'cumstance possible to the race. Manners, customs,
costumes, tongues are blended in a confused medley of
sight and sound that brings the irrepressible Frenchman,
the stolid German, the loud Yankee, and even the out¬
landish denizens of India, China, and Africa, within observa¬
tion of eye and ear. Some are coming, some are going,
all are huiTying hither and thither, intent on business,
pleasure, care, ambition, weaving each his little individual
thread into the tangled, varied yarn of human life. Hope
is there, on some faces, in all the brightness of aspiration
and resolve combined; disappointment, anxiety, and
failure tell their own tale; while the stolid mien of in¬
difference and the proud stoicism of repressed feeling are
not wanting. How many of life's most stirring episodes
are not thus enacted ? how many crises reached ? how
many careers begun and completed ?    The unwilling exile
The Attempt. 211
here bids a longing farewell to his country and friends, in
small hope, perhaps, of seeing either again; the young
aspirant for fame and fortune sails gaily on his ardent
quest; the mariner springs joyously towards his hard-won
contact with terra firma; and the long-lost, the dear
return to claim the loving home-welcome that is to them
" For all their tears,
The day of woe, the sleepless night,
For all their pain and grief and fears,
An over-payment of delight."
On the Prince's Landing Stage, as spiritedly sketched in
a late number of the GrapJnc, the rich variety of the scene
surrounding the pleasure boats leaving for the Isle of Man,
and the tenders carrying more sober freights to cross the
Atlantic or plough the wearier wastes of the Pacific, might
suggest to Mr Frith a companion, if not a rival, picture
to his " Railway Station."
The sights of such a city of the present as Liverpool
are necessarily confined to the practical adjuncts of a
great commercial mart; but these are most interesting
wonders in their way. The Exchange and Town Hall are
undoubtedly striking as architectural ornaments, both in
size and style; and within their magic precincts is daily
held, that imposing congress of merchant princes that
rules the treasury of the world, and assembles the highest
professional skill to feel the pulse of universal commerce
and prescribe for her continued health and prosperity.
An Edinburgher rarely finds his native ideas of street
arcliitecture improved upon, and Liverpool possesses no
claim to speciality in that respect; but to any one capable
of enjoying a rich and varied display of the wealth of shop
windows, the promenade up Lord Street to the top of
Bold Street is by no means a disagreeable experience.
The tramway system, as in operation here and elsewhere,
if a comfortable means of conveyance, is a public incon¬
venience in confusing the traffic and cutting up the streets
in a way that ofii'ends a sense alike of the beautiful and of
the safe.
St George's Hall, as the great architectural feature of the
city, presents an imposing exterior, appropriate to the
magnitude of the interior arrangements which, above an
underground wilderness of cooking apartments, prison
cells, and machine rooms in connection wdth the grand
organ, comprise the Assize courts, contrastedly shabby to
those of Manchester; a little gem of a muse's temple, of
philharmonic   dedication;   and  that  grand  hall,   wdiose
212 The Attempt.
magnificent propoi'tions and artistic ornament become
minster-like when shaken with a harmony to which all
within those stately walls must throb responsive, or own
" a spirit dull as night," and " affections dark as Erebus."
Mr Best's bi-weekly performances on the grand organ
must realize the softening, humanizing influence of music's
spell to minds dusty with many cares, as the waves of
majestic harmony are rolled out through the "mouth of
gold" in a grand diapason of sound which includes that
most wonderful of stops, the vox humana, truly (as
described to the readers of Good Words in "Debenham's
Vow), a weird imitation of the human voice. As it rose
on our ear, now clear and thrilling, anon reaching a
climacteric of passionate pleading, and then wandering
away, plaintive and indistinct,
" From harmony to harmony,
Through all the compass of the notes, it ran,"
striking key-note upon key-note in the " still sad music of
humanity" with the sympathetic power which " pierces
the meeting soul" of the listener.
After lingering a summer day in the hot, noisy atmo¬
sphere of Liverpool, how thrice welcome is the little river
breeze, which makes the five minutes' crossing in the
well-appointed ferry boat, an invigoration as well as a
repose. To go on ilie river is the relaxation of all classes,
and the most liberal facilities are afforded for the enjoy¬
ment, both as to places to visit and means of conveyance
thither. Uf the Mersey, Eastham's sunny cliffs, clad in
fairy robes of green, and looking across a sky-mirrored
expanse of blue to the smiling vineyards of Garston, are
all-inviting to form tea-parties in the gardens, or wander
through the Aberdour-like woods to rtiral, shady Brom-
borough; while down the river, the sand hills of Egremont
and gay pier promenade at New Brighton attract crowds
of pleasure seekers, who care not to invade the luxurious
seclusion of West Kirby, or breathe the more freshening
sea breezes of Hoylake.
Such are unexceptionable as summer resorts and pic-nic
rendezvous. Birkenhead is the every-day retreat, the
evening home, or, yet more properly, the dormitory of
Liverpool; and thither the jaded man of business nightly
retires to recruit his exhausted energies, which must next
morning be re-immersed in the whirling vortex of mercan¬
tile excitement. Out of a suburb, this resting place has
grown to something of the size and importance of an
independent town, characterised by an unfinished pro-
The Attempt. 213
gressive look, sufficiently suggestive of a Canadian settle¬
ment to testify to the existence of local American relation¬
ships. Beauty of scene there is none, till beyond the
range of villa habitations, extended as these are; but
wealth has commissioned taste to challenge the criticisms
of art on Sir Joseph Paxton's imitations of nature in the
Park, where glades and alleys and sheets of water invite
to worthy outdoor enjoyment.
Nature's most bountiful artificial growths lack, however,
the character of her spontaneous imprints, and' we, who
love the great dame in her stern and reserved aspects
even better than in her prodigal humours, preferring to
tread the greensward solitude rather than the smooth-
turfed pleasure ground, must joy in the walk to Bidston
Hill, which, in its atmospheric unrestraint and speaking
quietude, reminded us of the Brontes' descriptions of the
Yorkshire moors. These girls loved the wide, free moor,
and its yet broader expanse of sky, the heather, the larks,
and the solitude, with a passionate fellow-feeling, conse¬
crated to all of like sympathy with |them for nature.
Bidston Hill expresses something of this tone of natural
inspiration with the quiet reticence of indwelling power;
though in itself but a limited expanse of gentle upland,
crowned on its head acclivity with a windmill, and com¬
manding a sobering prospect of Cheshire champaign to
the sea line.    Climbing to the brow of the flat,
" Sweet was the sound, when oft at evening's close,
Up yonder hill, the village murmur rose,";,
a busy hum of human happin ess, which, in the mellowing
distance, wrought no discord in nature's harmonies, but
Hnked the thought of the poet with the fair scenes of
earth immortalized in waking his inspiration, by the associ¬
ative control of mind over matter. It is, indeed, the
supreme hour of poetic enchantment when comes " still
evening on," and
" Sinks the day-star in his ocean bed ; "
and we who need not to go further than our own Frith of
Forth for magnificent sunsets, almost unsiu-passed in the
Bay of Naples, have acknowledged the dazzling glory of
Phoebus' veiling majesty, as from Bidston Hill we have
watched
" The bright hair'd sun
Sit in yon western tent, whose cloudy skirts,
With brede ethereal wove,
O'erhang his wavy bed,"
till,_on the dipping of the red disk beneath the western
horizon, and gradual fading of the rosy hues of attendant
214 The Attempt.
brightness, the dim blue outline of the Welsh hills looms
out over the landscape in broad shadow, and
" All the air a solemn stillness holds,"
as Eve, o'er all,
" With dewy fingers, draws
Her gradual dusky veiL"
Then shine out the kindling beacon and the lighthouse
twinkle, and the electric communications of Bidston
Observatory reveal the scientific enlightenment of the
present age in pale relief against the picturesque shadow-
land of the past, which yet breathes the spmt of primitive
rurality in the adjoining village " hollows," where
"The rude forefathers of the hamlet sleep."
Following in oui- " views," the dusky genius of bygone
times,   we  find Cheshire's antique prestige embodied in
Chester, itself an independent county palatinate of kingly
creation.    Its name, anglicized from the Latin Castra, the
Camp, grafted on the old British Caerlleon, or Camp of the
Legion, suggests a poetic association with King Arthur,
whether numbered or not among the authentic memorials
of a  history  connected   with  a  long   series   of   time's
mutations.    Their influence is predominant in an air of
conscious   dignity and   subdued   repose,   befitting  the
shadow of a great cathedral, and the breath of ancient
inspiration, which seemed to us to bring Chester marvel¬
lously en rapport with the aesthetic spuit of two Scotch
towns, Ayr and St Andrews.    The former of these derives
even more of its charm from poetic association than from
architectural refinement, Avhile the town of old St Rule,
with its ancient cathedral, tower of St Regulus,  castle
and university, the rocks and the sea, breathes of the
grand serenity of learning; and Chester shows something
of the same ancient air of high-bred superiority, the same
religious calm, the same historic prestige, and the same
atmospheric refinement, with an infusion of less profound
sentiment becoming the difference between Scotch and
English  temperament.    While   the  lively  golfing  links
may bespeak gaiety as well as the stretching race-course,
*' The river Dee, as silver clean
His tumbling billows rolls with gentler roar,"
than the grim sound of the waves breaking on the sea-
worn cliffs; each striking separate tones in the sacred
music of association.
The quaint formation of Chester streets forms an unique
«^tudy in architecture, with the line of shops on the street
The Attempt. 215
level, overbuilt by a covered promenade, with an inner
row of second-floor shops, so that the Cheshire dames
may accomphsh a serious window inspection without in¬
convenience, in the worst weather. Looking up at the
old-fashioned lines of these " Rows," it seemed hardly a
stretch of imagination to picture them gaily filled with
the beauty, fashion and valour of England, to watch
some spectacle in the street below ; as their structure is
commemorative of the grand stands and balconies erected
for witnessing processions and mock tourneys in the days
of Good Queen Bess.
The architecture of the houses is characterized by a
regular irregularity, appearing in all heights of wall,
odd gables and grotesques pilasters; the windows of
multifarious shape and size, curiously shuttered, and the
fa9ades ornamented with the most fantastic devices in
dark woodwork. The interiors of these domiciles are
equally remarkable for winding passages and narrow
corridors, with as many ups and downs on the floors as
vicissitudes in the lives of the builders; so that, on one
occasion of a visitor's introduction to one of those
dwellings, mental bewilderment naturally raised the
question, " Where was this house long ago ? " Of these
ancient habitations, the most notable are the Derby
Palace, Bishop Lloyd's house, and the House of Provi¬
dence, so called from escaping the plague, with a
favoured isolation which lends a touching interest to the
inscription on the facade, " God's Providence is mine
inheritance, 1652."
The four principal streets are Roman roads, diverging
from the ancient site of the Cross in the centre of the
town toward the four city gates. North Gate, East Gate,
Water Gate, and Bridge Gate, which are the historical pro¬
perty of various Cheshire powers, aristocratic and civic,
and command the walls, of serious strength and thickness,
further fortified by watch towers, now degenerate
museums, to captivate the visitor with relics of past war-
Uke history. In particular, the legend of the Phoenix
Tower commemorates the fact of King Charles I. thence
viewing his army's defeat on Rowton Moor; and from
the delightful promenade furnished by the width of the
walls, modern visitors have a similar command of the peace¬
ful Vale Royal of Cheshire. The two miles circuit of the
walls made under a July sun is enough of a morning's
walk, after shopping and gazing, to earn the refreshment
of an adjournment to BoUand's, to taste the cheer of that
216 The Attempt.
distinguished baker of wedding cakes to the Queen and
Royal Family. Thence, the " breathing time of day "
bids us to afternoon service in the cathedral. Much is said
now-a-days of the beauties of foreign churches, to the
ignoring of our fine old English sacred edifices; but the
jealous care of Chester is restoring this great ecclesiastical
ornament to her town at an enormous cost. Its original
construction is of noble magnitude, complete in all the
parts of a great church, including nave, transept, chancel,
cloisters, etc. The Lady Chapel is a little gem of a sacred
retreat, lighted by a brilliantly coloured window of the
Nativity ; the shady ivy-covered cloisters breathe the very
luxury of seclusion; and the choir is a perfect Gothic
church in miniature. In it the service was held with
such impressive correspondence of ceremonial and aesthe¬
tic effect to a devotional toneoof feeling, that, listening
to the plaintive monotone of the chanting, culminating
in a sudden burst of jubilant harmony, soul-stirring to the
very stones and echoing roof, the ideal seemed not far off",
of Milton's
" Service high and anthems clear,
Wliich may with sweetnes, through mine ear
Dissolve me into ecstaciea,
And bring all heaven before mine eyes."
After hours spent in patient study of the deeply
marked features of a town in which we try to read the
half-erased characters of the past, there is no relaxing
influence equal to the sweet society of nature, who is the
same throughout the ages. As a fitting wind-up to our
Chester visit, bend we then our steps to the silver-
flowing Dee; and a row up to Eecleston, and rural tea
drinking in some "cool sequestered spot," are the same to
us as supping in Elysium on nectar and ambrosia. In
tender, gentle farewell to Chester
" Deva spreads her wizard stream,"
under the softening rays of the Evening Star of memory, as
gliding still down the tide of time, our life's music must
be the " sound" of the " many waters" of Eternity, and
catching sight of
" That immortal sea which brought us hither,
Stand like little children on the shore,
To hear those mighty waters rolling evermore."
Elfie.
The Attempt. 217
THIRD DAUGHTER OF KING CHARLES THE MARTYR.
Tread softly, enter reverently.
For death is in this place ;
And breathe one prayer, ere ye fitly dare
To look on that quiet face.
She was only a helpless maiden.
Yet warders you did bring,
And barr'd your doors, and all because
Her father had been your king.
You kept her a weary prisoner,
But at last she reached the door ;
She hath found relief from pain and grief,
She hath rest for evermore.
Did you think you had chained the spirit,
When you held the flesh in thrall!
You forgot that death, to the strong in faith,
Was the surest rescue of all.
Yes, look on her, Puritan jailers.
The captive you could not keep ;
For God's mercy clave the last dark wave.
And gave His beloved sleep. YoLANDE.
Part II.
When the edifice we have fashioned for ourselves as the
happiness and occupation of life has been shattered and
destroyed, we find different kinds of efforts made at a
partial repair of the misfortune. Some, out of the fallen
materials, build up anew a similar but humbler structure,
as men build trim little houses out of the ruins of fallen
palaces. Others rather keep their ruins as ruins, clear
them from all vulgar associations, and guard them from
all irreverent footsteps. Time comes, and with kindly
hand festoons the gaping rents with ivy, and crests the
shattered towers with fern. We live there no more as
once we thought to live, but we visit the places with ever
2 E JULY 1873.
218 The Attempt.
softer recollections and tenderer memories; and life,
perhaps, has nothing more enduring to give, than that
quiet dim ideal of what might have been, treasured away
in a faithful heart. So would Gabrielle fain have treasured
her brief summer engagement to Raoul; but her friends
and neighbours were all agreed that it behoved her at
once to build up another snug establishment out of her
ruins. As a rule, everyone marries in France, unless,
indeed, they enter a religious order, and this had no
attraction for her. Even her uncle and aunt, who would
have, on her marriage, to divide with her the farm or its
products, took it so much as a matter of course, that they
were only anxious she should not choose one of her poorer
suitors, but Michel Talbot, who was aheady a man of
position and consideration, well to do, and Mayor of
Valmont.
So, when two years had elapsed, Gabrielle met on
every side recommendations to leave off thinking of a
lover who was evidently either faithless or dead, and ally
herself, like a sensible woman, with her cousin. To her,
too, duty seemed to point that way, although slie would
fain have remained as she was, treasuring liaouFs words,
his brightness and refinement, of which absence and a
touch of remorse had made her even more aware than in
the old days of teazing and coquetry. In such a mood
one summer afternoon she wandered down to the shore.
The sun blazed above the western waters, the air seemed
trembling with heat. Only the cliffs to the west stood out
in cool blue darkness against the vivid sky and sea, their
shadows stretching far across the golden sands. Gabrielle
seated hei-self on a low rock almost circled by a clear sea
pool, in which the oar-weed and dulse trailed and waved
in the slow pulsation of the water, already responding
to the rising tide. Old Franfoise Corvet, wading back
from the low-water fishing with her heavy basket and
iron hook, came bare-footed tlirough the weed and shallow
pools and sat down with a sigh beside her.
" Tired, Fran^oise ?" said Gabrielle kindly to the old
woman, " the day is hot, and you have worked long."
" Yes, cliere demoiselle," said the old woman, " you may
well say I have worked long; quarante ans de menage;
ah, but it is with me now as with the little crabs and
fishes down there in the pool; they have been very
languid at times during the long hot day, but now they
begin to shine and glance and rejoice again, because they
feel the coming of the great sea; a few minutes more and
'The Attempt. 219
it will be up and over them, and they need stay no longer
in the poor little narrow pool, they will be out through all
the waters. I feel like them the rushing of the great sea
drawing near, to which all goes, to which we all belong.
To think that I will soon go, moi gui vous parle, after these
many years. I shall see Martin again, and my son
Amadie, who sailed away and never came home."
" Martin, you say; but you have had another husband
since ? how did that happen if you have thought so of him
all these years ? "
" Que voulez-vous, ma chere; il faut vivre. We poor
folks, if the man is gone, must be thankful if the boat is
left, and some other man will marry us and work her.
Jules was younger than I, but the deep sea has him too.
I served him well, but oh, I loved Martin, and his and my
Amadie. But even rich women, who need no bread¬
winner for themselves and their little ones, ought not to
stop their life's work beside a grave. If love is over till
the next life, one may be a good wife, and a good mother,
and a useful woman, as we all hope our Mademoiselle
Gabrielle mil be yet."
" But ah, Fran^oise, how when there is no grave !" said
Gabrielle.
" Yes," said Frangoise. " I have felt that too ; quand
on n'a pas vu mourir, c'est affreux. Some one comes
down the cliff—it is he ! A strange boat comes in—
he i8_ there 1 the voiture de Rouen—some one just like
him_ is on it! and then the first pang comes all over
again. At Valmont we understand all that; we know
that our own dear sea is the cemetery of half our
young men, and no one knows but God the moment
when they go to Him. But Avhen we have let go of
hope, after the messe des morts, believe me something of
their eternal rest descends also on our anxious, restless
hearts. Here comes the sea ! we must go. Never mind
about being happy, be of use, chcre demoiselle, and when
you are as old as I am it will all seem pretty equal."
_ So saying, Frangoise shouldered her hotte and plunged
vigorously through the pool. Gabrielle smiled, but dwelt
on the advice ; it seemed as if marriage need not put her
further aAvay from Raoul. Fran9oise was much respected
as a shrewd and hard-working woman, who had ruled
both her husbands and all her children greatly for their
own good, and her advice just turned the wavering-
scale ; that very evening Gabrielle wrote at length to
Michael.    She told him how she still loved Raoul, and
220 The Attempt
could not believe he was to blame, but had made up her
mind that he was dead. But if Michel could be contented
with the friendship she had to offer, she consented to
become his wife.
That same evening she told her uncle and aunt of her
decision, and all was satisfaction at the farm. But she
was wrong, though she acted from high motives of self-
sacrifice; it was all very well for old Fran9oise, who
needed a man of some sort to work for and scold; it is
best for all women to marry, even without love, whose
instincts are stronger than their reason or their affections.
But not for Gabrielle, a fine nature, wdiat the French call
an dme d'elite, who, failing true companionship, could be
self-reliant, and who, if mated and not matched, would be
miserable,
Michel, the mayor, got two letters the next morning.
Though he had first turned his thoughts towards
Gabrielle because of her money, all the vicissitudes of his
pursuit of her had awakened in him a strong passion for
her, and he now wished to possess her even more than
her land. He was a man slow, secret, dogged, persever¬
ing, but not deficient in the kind of good-humoured good
sense that makes the average Norman a livable compan¬
ion. He tore open Gabrielle's letter, and realized as he
read how small had been his hopes, how intense the
pleasure, nay, rapture, of their sudden fulfilment, " She
is mine—mine at last!" he said again and again; her
reserve of affection for the lost Eaoul displeased him not
a whit. His nature was not fine enough to concern itself
with such subtleties. Gabrielle, with her rich beauty and
sunny acres was his, and he would almost have liked the
finiken doctor to come home and find him in triumphant
possession. Quite half an hour of delightful reverie had
gone by before he took up the other letter, a long foreign
one, addressed to M. Paul, pharmacien a Valmont, a man
who had been dead a year, leaving no heir, and so this
letter had been brought to the mayor. He opened it, and
glanced down the closely written sheets to the signature,
upon which he paused, as if turned to stone, for many
minutes; for the letter was signed Raoul Wachter.
What a plunge from paradise to purgatory! Avitli the
cup at his lips to have it dashed down like this—it was
too cruel, too bad for endurance. But was there no
remedy, no chance for him ? None for a man of honour,
nay, of common honesty, certainly. Michel, as he sat and
reflected, distinctly told himself he was not a man  of
2 he Attempt. 221
honour;   he was a man who wished for one thing so
intensely, that he cared not what he sacrificed to gain it.
And a scheme suggested itself to him, seeming more and
more practicable as he thoiight it out.    He would i-isk all
rather than lose Gabrielle, but the risk in the plan he was
concocting was not, he   told himself, very great.     He
might fail, and then he would have to leave the country;
otherwise, if he went to announce the return of the hated
rival, should he not still have to leave the country '? could
he bear to see Raoul the husband of his love, the possessor
of the old   Talbot lands.    Of all of them,  perhaps, for
Gaspard had no surviving child.    Never!    All was fair in
love and war; he would play high for so great a prize, and
Gabrielle should still be his.    He wandered from his house
up the road behind Valmont.    There stood the lonely old
grey church, its solemn massy tower telling of centuries of
storm that had battered without changing it.    The round
arches of the windows rose above the lowly graves   of
many generations; there  were  many  little   churchyard
crosses decorated with  wreaths   of immortelles,   or   gar¬
landed with fresh flowers.    The great portal arch was like
a deep cavern, fretted with strange mouldings, and worn
ancient carvings, designed, perhaps, and cut by some old
converted sea-king; the church, so old yet so strong, was
itself a sermon in stone on the mutability of human affairs,
and the unchangeableness of the  faith  it  typified  and
sheltered.    And in the porch stood Gabrielle, all in black
and white, a sweet seriousness on her finely-moulded face.
" I have ordered a messe des m,orts for Raoul to-morrow,
will you come %" she said, stretching out her hand to
Michel, who felt for the moment unworthy to touch it.
Should he say the word that would irradiate the sad
face with delight ? almost he framed it, and then suddenly
straining her in his arms, he exclaimed, " Gabrielle, mine
—mine only now, oh! what joy—but now I cannot loiter
—I am sent for; I will be with you this afternoon at the
farm." Freethinker as he was, at that moment he would
not have dared to enter a church, and he dashed past.
All his words jaiTcd on Gabrielle, there seemed some¬
thing greedy in this eager clutching at her half aflection.
They met again later in the day, and she thought she
had never liked him less; there seemed something furtive
about him, and an eagerness to hasten their marriage she
did not like. He had indeed taken one of those irrevoc¬
able downward steps, that are apt to mark the counte¬
nance and bearing.    Tlio following d;iy after the requiem
222 The Attempt.
mass for Raoul, which was largely attended, Gabrielle
lingered still in the old chur(;h. The weather had
changed, and two or three anxious wives of men out on
the stormy sea knelt here and there under the dark
arches. One little lamp burned before the high altar;
above in the great central lantern tower, where tall
pointed windows marked a later date than the heavy
round arches below, the wild wind made a music of its
own, a low continuous booming, like a far echo of the
rising tumult of the sea. Two or three little models of
ships, dusty old votive oiferings that hung suspended
from the roof—
*' Sailing in air these hundred years,
Safe smiling at old hopes and fears,"
were swaying slightly in the wind, which had found its
way into the church. Gabrielle looked at them ; if Raoul
came back, what offering could they bring; then like a
sudden pang came the thought, that soon she would not
have the right to wish him back. She could not believe
that he had lightly taken mortal offence, and gone away
without a word; but it was possible, and then, why
should she spend her life waiting for him ? She longed
and prayed for guidance, and felt ever a growing distrust
of Michel, and confidence in Raoul, yes, even if that boat
should have gone on the voyage Avhence they never
return. More unsettled than ever in her mind she left
the church, and sped along the top of the cliffs in the
fierce wind. Once more would she visit the Mermaid's
Fountain, and see if some token would come to point out
her way. But she could only get half-way down the
steep path, to a little refuge cave hollowed out in the
rock. What a scene of tumult and terror I The wind
flattened her against the rock where she stood, the sea
was grey and foamy ; but in shore the water was all one
mass of white boiling surge. As the crested waves came
thundering in, each in turn dissolving against the chff, all
their dark greys and purples flushed into white, with a
boom and a roar that made the ground tremble; while
cliff, sea, and sky were lost for a moment on the foam-
cataracts, that sank again as baffled into the swirl of
waters below. The rocky pinnacle out at sea was
marked by the leaping white surges that darted far up
its steadfast sides, scattering foam-bells over the sea-birds'
nests on the high summit. Gabrielle dared descend no
further, but cowered into the far corner of the hollowed
The Attempt. 223
rock. That mighty resistless sea seemed to her to bo
telling Raoul's story in clear words. He had sailed away
meaning to write and to return, and the sea knew the
rest. Behind her, in a dark nook of the cavern, some
letters were cut; she looked at them with idle indifference,
then suddenly with intensest interest. " R. W. G. T.—A.
E. I." That was all. " A. E. I. veut dire toujours,"—he had
once said to her. Possibly he had carved that the night
he disappeared. At any rate, th.at it was thus he thought
she knew well, and her whole heart turned to him with
intense affection. At any cost she resolved to free her¬
self from the new entanglement, and she was amazed at
the positive pleasure the thought gave her. She sped up
the cliff, and returned over the windy fields to the farm,
her mind made up. She came out of the wild weather
into the large farm kitchen, where the wood fire sparkled
brightly on the dark oak beams and panels. It shone on
her smiling, glowing face, all dishevelled and wind-tossed
as she was.
" Ohe, notre fiancee," said Gaspard, " well, it is some¬
thing to see the child look like herself again,—hein,
Marie r'
" That is because I am no fiancee—because it is all
quite the contrary," said Gabrielle; " dear old uncle,
1 am so happy, because I am quite determined that it is
all over, I shall never marry—never."
" What next!" groaned Gaspard, " certainly you were
born for a cross; always just the contrary of whatever
is,"—and he scratched his puzzled head.
But Gabrielle drew Marie's hands within her own, and
told her tale. " Never ask me to leave you," she con¬
cluded. Marie, a delicate woman, far younger than her
slow-witted husband, responded warmly.
" Mignonne, should I ever know how to spare you ; to
me this is nothing but good news."
" Well, we shall have the mayor thundering at the door
directly, and what then I " said Gaspard.
" Not he, uncle, I will write him the prettiest letter, no
one knows yet, and he wont care long."
" I am not so sure of that," said Gaspard,—and there¬
with came a knock at the door. Gabrielle stepped forward
with her head up, and something of the look of a defiant
young thorough-bred, who will not be caught, in her bear¬
ing. But in came only a good-looking, sturdy fisherman,
Jaques Lecoeur by name.
" Good evening! mesdames  and  monsieur,"  he  said
224 The Attempt.
" There is a wild wind out there on the falaise. I had to
tack to get across to your trees. But I am going to St
Jean; so Monsieur le Maire, he says to me, " it's not
twenty thousand fiends blowing, nor the siren herself
running up the cote, that would keep him away from
here; but business, you understand—business of the
state—has called him off to Rouen for three or four days
at most; so he asked me to call in passing, and here's his
note; and we all present our felicitations to Mademoiselle."
No circumstance could have occurred more embarrassing
to Gabrielle.
" My dear Lecoeur," she said, "some talk there has been
of this; but consider yourself perfectly well informed when
I tell you it will neyer be. I wish Michel were not from
home, that he might help in contradicting the report."
" Ma foi, demoiselle, he was spreading it. Every one
at Valmont has it to-day; but it is something to know
more than others; never fear but I, or my wife rather,
will repeat what you say. It is certainly strange that the
mayor should be oif; she will say that the siren is at the
bottom of it."
" Madame Lecoeur's head is always running on the
siren," said Marie.
"That it is," laughed the fisherman, "she can't bear me
to stop there for a drop of water. At any rate, she is no
witch, la bourgeoise. She always shook her head about
our good lodger. Monsieur Raoul,—one may speak of him
here now, n'est-ce pas'? that he had only one fault,—he
was too fond of music, always playing, just the man to
fall a prey to the siren. Only just before he went, he was
playing so beautifully, that we asked him what the music
was, and said he,—' It is all called Gabrielle.' Ah, he was
a man. Adieu, demoiselle, I don't think you will regret
your last decision."
Gabrielle felt sure she would not, as she wrote the
letter which was to await Michel's return.
" After we have got over seeing him," she said to Marie,
" we will go off to Rouen for change of air and ideas."
E. J. 0.
{To he continued.)
A Prize is offered for the best Poem appearing- in " The
Attempt " during the months of August, September, and
October.
The Attempt. 225
Delivered at tJie General MesHng of the Royal Geographical Society of Italy, the
2d day of Fehniary 1873, at the Univeriity of Rome, by t/ie Vice Preiident,
Count Miniscalchi Erizzo, Senator.
Teanslated from the Italian.
We have a great misfortune to lament. At Naples, on
the 29th of November, died Mary Somerville, quietly and
peacefully, with no previous illness, approaching her 93rd
year. Her investigations in astronomy, mathematics, and
physical sciences, were not only clear and profound, but
almost unique. In her, our Society loses one of its greatest
and most illustrious ornaments; science a follower so
remarkable and eminent, as to awaken admiration rather
than excite hope of emulation.
She was born at Jedburgh, in the county of Roxburgh,
the 26th of December 1780, of an old illustrious Scotch
family. Her parents were Admiral Sir W. G. Fairfax and
Margaret Charters. She was brought up at a school in
Musselburgh, near Edinburgh ; married, while yet young,
Captain Greig, Russian Consul, by whom she had one son.
Left early a widow, she married, after some years, her
cousin Dr Somerville, by whom she had three daughters.
Two only, Martha and Mary, survive to mourn the griev¬
ous loss, having been the comfort of her hfe by their
affectionate and attentive care, and having received lier
last breath yielded up in their arms amid words of blessing
and of love.
Almost as a child she showed her singular disposition
for physics and mathematics, and ingeniously found oppor¬
tunities of cultivating it, by being present at her brother's
lessons on geometry; and while she seemed absorbed in
some feminine work, she followed actively and attentively
in her own mind the solution of the various problems.
When she met with difficulties, she used her father's nau¬
tical books to clear them up, for an explanation she dared
not ask, as those were times, especially in Scotland, when
it was thought almost unbecoming for a woman to take
an interest in literature or science. Not only had she no
help or encouragement, but opposition and obstacles were
placed in the way of her cultivating those sciences in
which, self-taught, she attained to such eminence that it
has been said of her, justly and truly, " however difficult
AuoreT 1873. 2 F
226 The Attempt.
to decide, Avho, in the middle of our century, deserved
the title of King, there could be no doubt who was the
Queen, of Science."
In 1811 a medal was presented to her in Edinburgh for
the solution of mathematical problems.
In 1826 she sent to the Royal Society a work on the
" Magnetic power of the more refrangible of the Solar
rays." In it she minutely described trials made from the
experiments of Morichini of Rome, and Berard of Mont-
pellier, with the object of proving that solar light is the
source of magnetic poAver. By means of a prism, the rays
composing a solar ray were separated, and those now known
as chemical or actinic rays, thrown on needles of various
sizes delicately balanced, and first ascertained to be free
of magnetism, after exposure for some hours to a strong
light, the steel invariably showed a true magnetic cha¬
racter. Unmagnatised needles were then covered Avith
glasses of blue crystal, and by exposure to the sun, became
magnetic. From these experiments, Mrs Somerville con¬
cluded that the more refrangible rays of the solar spec¬
trum, have, even in English latitudes, a strong magnetic
influence. Her papers on this subject were reprinted in
the Philosophical Transactions, and gave rise to many
discussions on these difficult and delicate experiments,
which Avere finally settled by the researches of Riess and
Moser, which proved that the action on the magnetic
needles was not caused by violet rays.
She made the acquaintance about that time of Lord
Brougham, who, percei\'ing the strength of her intellect,
and her deep knoAAdedge of mathematics and astronomy,
encouraged her to write the " Mechanism of the Heavens,"
for the " Society for the Diffusion of Useful KnoAAdedge."
She soon began and accomplished the Avork, but the size
of the book, and the Avidth and depth of matter contained
in it, were such, that in 1832, it was published separately.
This magnificent work, founded on the "Mecanique
Celeste" of Laplace, is the only strictly astronomical book
she published. On it rests her reputation as a mathema¬
tician. It is indeed reported that Laplace, when speaking
of mathematical studies then carried on in England,
declared that " only tAA'o in that country could thoroughly
understand his book; these two were ladies, Mrs Greig
and Mrs Somerville," in fact one and the same person.
Scarcely two years elapsed before she published in 1834
her   " Connexion   of   the  Physical   Sciences,"   the   first
Tlie Attempt. 2^21
attempt yet made towards drawing the various branches
of science into that close relation to one another which
tends more forcibly than any detail to give unity and gran¬
deur to the whole. Taking as her text the prophetic
saying of Bacon, " that no natural phenomenon can be
adequately studied by itself, but to be rightly understood,
must be considered in connection with all nature," she
shows how the progress of modern science, especially in
latter years, is remarkable for its tendency to simplify the
laws of nature, and reunite its different branches by general
principles. This has in some cases proved identity, as in
electric and magnetic influences, while in other instances,
as in light and heat, it has led to the discovery of so many
analogies, that there is reason to hope they will one day
be referred to the same agent. All sciences are so bound
together, that it is impossible to make progress in one,
without a knowledge of others.
The theory of dynamics founded on terrestrial phe¬
nomena, is indispensable to a knowledge of the revolution
of celestial bodies and their reciprocal influences. The
motions of satellites are influenced by the form of their
primaries, and the shape of the planets depends on their
rotations. The symmetry of their internal structure proves
the stability of the rotary motions, and the immutability
of the length of day, while it affords us an invariable
measure of time, and teaches us the actual size of the
terrestrial spheroid, is the means of ascertaining the di¬
mensions of the solar system, and furnishes a sure basis fur
weights and measures.
The reciprocal attraction of celestial bodies disturbs the
surface of fluids; from thence arises the theory of tides
and of the oscillations of the atmosphere. The density
and elasticity of air, varying at every change of tempera¬
ture, lead us to consider barometric variations, measure¬
ment of heights aud capillary attraction; the theory of
sounds, including music, must be referred to slight undu¬
lations of the ethereal medium.
A knowledge of the action of matter on light is needed
to trace the curved passage of rays through the atmo¬
sphere ; by its means the true position ol distant objects is
determined in the heavens and the earth,*
Thus we learn the nature and properties of the solar
ray ; its passage through ethereal fluid or into the interior
of bodies; the origin of colours. From the echpses of the
satellites of Jove is calculated the velocity of light, this
* See Connexion of Physical Sciences.
228 The Attempt.
velocity in the aberrations of the fixed stars, gives us the
only direct proof of the real motion of the earth. The
effects of invisible rays of light are nearly connected
with chemical action; heat forming part of the solar ray
is so essential to animate and inanimate life, that whether
considered as invisible light, or distinct, it is too important
an agent not to have a marked place amongst physical
sciences.
Then follows its distribution in the interior and on the
surface of the globe; its force in the geological convulsions
of our planet; its influence on the atmosphere and on
climate ; its effects on vegetable and animal life in earth,
air, and water. The connection of heat Avith electric
phenomena, the electricity of the atmosphere and its
powerful effects, its identity with magnetism, the phe¬
nomena of terrestrial polarization, can only be understood
by means of theories on those invisible agents, probably
identical, or at least the principal cause of chemical
affinities. The common bond of analysis is such, that it
continually extends its reign, and will at last embrace in
its formula almost every subject in natiire.*
This original work is as faultless in conception, as, from
the vast number of facts collected and diffused, it is per¬
fect of execution. It does not even fear the tremendous
comparison with Humboldt's Cosmos, which it rivals and
sometimes surpasses, treating with a master-hand the
same subjects.
It is written in a simple and clear style. It has been
often revised to keep pace with discoveries in science,
and has passed through nine editions. It has been trans¬
lated into several languages. It is certainly the most
mature fruit of her meditations, the best work that has
come from her pen, and by its circulation has much in¬
creased her fame.
Here I consider it my duty to record a fact much to her
credit. In the early editions of her work, she expressed
a doubt whether the aberrations in the tables of Uranus
proceeded from the recent discovery of the planet (1781)
not having given time for its motions to be precisely
determined, or were owing to disturbances caused by
some planet yet unseen rotating round the sun beyond
the limits of our system.
" If after a certain lapse of years," she said, " tables
* See Connexion of Physical Sciences.
The Attempt. 229
drawn from many combined observations were still found
inadequate to represent exactly the motions of Uranus,
they ought to reveal not only the existence, but also the
mass and orbit of a body placed for ever beyond the
sphere of vision."
It so happened, whim publishing her eighth edition,
that both Adams and Le Ferrier, unknown to each other,
determined by ingenious and exact calculations the orbit-
position of the new planet Neptune, found by Dr Galle
of Berlin in the spot indicated by them, on the very
same night he began to seek it.* A wondrous example
of the power of the human mind, which can find by induc¬
tion what is still undiscovered by means of the senses or
of instruments.
The " Connexion of the Physical Sciences" was fol¬
lowed in 1848 by her " Physical Geography," in which
she describes earth, sea, and air, with their animal and
vegetable inhabitants, regarding the distribution of organic
beings, and the cause of this same distribution.
Neither political nor arbitrary divisions are taken into
account, but sea and earth are considered according to
those great limits marked by God; and man himself,
only in his relation to the other created beings who inhabit
the globe; over these, however, he exercises by his
actions a certain degree of influence, and is, in return,
influenced by them. The effects of his intellectual supe¬
riority on mferior animals, and also on himself, by sub¬
jecting some of the most useful agents of creation to his
will, as also other causes, which have the greatest influ¬
ence on his physical and moral state, are amongst the
most important subjects of this science.
She notices the position of the earth in the solar system,
draws a rapid sketch of its geological formation, describes
-the great Continent from the ocean to Behring's Straits,
the table lands, the primary and secondary systems of
mountains, the southern lowlands of Manciuria, of Amur,
of China, of Siam, the plains of Hindostan, the valley of
the Ganges, the table land of Deccan, Ceylon, the Punjaub,
the great deserts of India, the Arabian Peninsular, Syria,
Lebanon, the Jordan and Dead Sea; then she passes to
Africa, North and South America, the Pacific Islands, and
examines the coral formations, the action of volcanoes and
earthquakes in  the  Indian  Ocean.     She describes  the
* Connexion of the Physical Sciences.
230 The Attempt.
Arctic and Antarctic regions. She studies minerals, the
ocean, the rivers of the various Continents, lakes, atmo¬
spheric phenomena, vegetation; the distribution of insects,
fish, molluscs, infusoria, terrestrial and marine mammalia,
reptiles and birds, and ends by the distribution, variety,
and probable progress of the human race, if man will but
remember that his power is of the mind, that his intellect
alone gives him dominion over the earth and its inhabi¬
tants, many of whom could overcome him by physical
force.
Man, she concludes, has made many attempts to domes¬
ticate certain animals with problematic result; his efforts
to improve species, on the contrary, have been crowned
with success. His wants and pleasures have caused great
changes in animal creation, and his propensity to destruc¬
tion perhaps still greater; but the works of the Creator
are wisely balanced, and man cannot with impunity break
the laws of equilibrium.
May the increase of riches, luxury, knowledge, and civi¬
lisation, induce man to preserve the equilibrium which
exists in meteorological forces, and in the vital condition of
countries when in their natural state, by favouring a just
proportion of woods, save from destruction those myraids
of most beautiful living forms which have shared with
him the inheritance of this wonderful world.*
This book, the first perhaps which elevated geography
above the modest aim of describing the various quarters
of the globe to the height of true science, embracing with
wide synthesis all that composes, lives, and inhabits our
earth, met with very great success in England, where it
became popular. Six editions came out in rapid succession.
To each she made the additions and corrections rendered
necessary by travels and the progress of science. It was
translated into many languages ; into Italian, by another
Scotch lady, the Countess Elizabeth Pepoli. In 1869 it
was rewarded with the Victoria Medal by the Royal
Geographical Society of London.
One of the many strange facts regarding the power of
human genius, is the lucidity and vigour of mind which
the veterans of science preserve to the most advanced
age ; but biographies do not perhaps record a more won¬
derful example than that of Mrs Somerville, who, full of
years and of knowledge, already past eighty, published in
two volumes, her " Molecular and Microscopic Science,"
* Physical Geography.
The Attempt. 231
which thoroughly collects and contains the most abstruse
and patient researches, modern discoveries not only in
physics and chemistry, but in a special manner whatever
secrets of the vegetable and animal kingdom the micro¬
scope has revealed.
" Microscopic investigation," she says, " of organic and
inorganic matter, is so peculiarly characteristic of the
actual state of science, that she ventured to give a sketch
of some of the most prominent discoveries in the life and
structure of the lower vegetable and marine animals, in
addition to a few of those regarding inert matter."
" These investigations which have revealed the most
refined and wonderful relations between light, heat, elec¬
tricity, and highly elastic media; the relation of those
powers to the particles of solid and liquid matter, new
methods of analysis, and the microscopic examination of
that marvellous creation, animal and vegetable, which is
invisible to the unaided eye of man, have brought a new
accession to the indefinitely small within the limits of
modern science."
We know nothing of the forms either of atoms or of
molecules; but we are sure that an atom never changes,
it never wears or alters, it is indestructible even by fire,
the same now as when created. Matter is liable to per¬
petual change of place and combination, the amount
remains the same; " the bed of the seas may be changed
to dry land, and the ocean may again cover the lofty
mountains, but the absolute quantity of matter changes
not."
The various forces of nature constantly change their
form of action; their total sum is never changed. " It
may be dispersed in various du-ections, and subdivided, so
as to become evanescent to our perceptions; it may be
balanced so as to be in abeyance, or it may become poten¬
tial as in stalic electricity; but the instant the impediment
is removed, the power is manifested by motion."
In the first part of her book, she gives a clear idea of
the actual state of molecular science, enough to show the
present opinions on the forces of nature, atoms, and the
general laws which result from the phenomena of
their reciprocal action. By means of spectrum ana¬
lysis, she proves not only that much terrestrial
matter in an extremely attenuated state is a consti¬
tuent of the luminous atmosphere of the sun and
stars, but that nebulae in the most   distant regions   of
232 The Attempt.
space contain some of the elemeritary gases which we
breathe.
She then proceeds to prove that the atmosphere is
teeming with microscopic germs of vegetable and animal
beings, awaiting favourable conditions to call them to
life, and to perform their part in the economy of the world;
and this is the triumph of microscopic science.
" Not only were the most wonderful organisms dis¬
covered in the ostensible tribes of the Cryptogamia, but a
new and unseen creation was brought under mortal eye
by the power of the microscope, so varied, astonishing,
and inexhaustible, that no limit can be assigned to it.
This invisible creation teems in the earth, in the air, and
in the waters. These beings have a beauty of their own,
and are adorned and finished with as much care as the
creatures of a higher order. The deeper the research, the
more does the inexpressible perfection of God's works
appear, whether in the majesty of the heavens or in the
infinitesimal beings on the earth."
Here she enters the field of biology; relating the pro¬
gress  made  in  the   science   of life.    She describes  the
functions of animal structures, of sarcote,  of muscle, of
blood, " that ultimate result of the assimilation of the food
and respiration, which conveys nourishment  to  all  the
tissues during its circulation, repairs the  waste   of   the
muscles and nerves," nourishes the muscle and restores
strength to the nervous system,  on which all our vital
motions depend; " for by the nerves volition acts upon
living   matter."     She  then  continues  to   explain   how
" the perpetual combustion of the oxygen of the air with
the carbon of the blood derived from the food, is a real
combustion, and the cause   of animal  heat,"   not  more
essential  to   animals   than  to  vegetables;   " but  if the
carbonic acid gas produced by that chemical union were
not continually given out by the respiratory organs, it
would become injurious to the animal   system."    How,
upon the expansions and contractions of the heart, depends
the cu'culation of the blood; how the mechanical  and
chemical forces follow the same laws that they do in inert
matter, but neither mechanical nor physical powers could
create a germ, nor give it life, " unless a vital  power
existed in it, the  origin of which is beyond the reach of
man."    She investigates the nervous system, the electric
currents in the muscles and nerves, the functions of the
brain and spinal cord, and quotes the saying of Sir Charles
The Atlempt. 233
Bell, that " we are placed between two worlds, the invisible
and tlie material," our nervous system is the bond of
connection. The connection, however, between the mind
and the brain is unknown, it has never been explained,
and is probably inexplicable.''
The molecular structure of vegetables and animals has
been so studied by men of science, that a fragment of
tooth, bone, or shell, recent or fossil, is sufficient to deter¬
mine the species to which the animal belojigs : if fossil, to
point out the geological period in which it lived, and
whether it was an inhabitant of earth, air, or water. She
observes how the microscopic examination of a small
foraminifera has proved beyond doubt, that Eozoon exist¬
ing in a geological period too remote for our imagination
to calculate, differs only in its size from a species of our
seas. The simplicity of its structure preserved it through
all those geological changes, which for millions of centuries
caused myriads of much more highly organized beings to
disappear. It is the most ancient living form known, and
probably inhabited the primitive ocean. Carbon, which in
the form of graphite, is disseminated through the same
strata, indicates that vegetation in that extremely remote
epoch of the earth had already begun ; that the vivifying
influence of the sun, the constitution and movements of
the atmosphere and of the ocean, the alternation of day and
night, of life and death, were the same as at the present
time.* Thus reviewing the wide field of modern science,
from the heavens to the earth, from the stars to micros¬
copic beings, from algiB to exogenous plants, from protozoa
to molluscs, from geological formations to the laws of life ;
never yielding to flights of the imagination or to the
fascination of new systems, she proceeds boldly and
surely on the arduous road, she unravels with a master
hand the most ingenious theories, the most difficult and
intricate arguments, in a simple, lucid, and elegant style,
with lively and picturesque descriptions, with that clearness
only to be obtained by a complete mastery of the subject in
question; and, with a power peculiar to herself, she groups,
digests, condenses facts, experiments, and theories, giving
breadth and imity to the whole.
She is as firm in her principles as she is deep in her
learning.   Science being the search after truth, offers her an
* Molecular and Microscopic Science.
ACOL-si 1873. O  rj
234 The Attempt.
occupation of immense interest, and a subject for sublime
meditation. The contemplation of nature raises her mind
to admire what is noble and great, and makes her repeat
with Sir James Mackintosh, the object of every study is
to inspu'e the love of truth, of wisdom, and of beauty, and
especially of goodness, which is the highest beauty; and
of that eternal and supreme Intelligence, which contains
all truth and wisdom, all beauty and goodness ; and thus
the mind of man, by the love of these sublime aims, raises
itself above low and perishable objects, and prepares itself
for those high destinies which are reserved for all who can
render themselves worthy of them.
However great might be the power of her mind, and
the immeasurable breadth of her learning, her goodness
and the exquisite womanly feelings of Iter heart were not
inferior. One coiild not say which was greatest,—the
power of her genius, the goodness of her heart, or the
array of her domestic virtues. Humble and modest,
decorous in her habits, courteous and dignified in her
manners, always equal and pleasing,—a tender and loving
mother, an obedient and devoted wife, a sincere and con¬
stant friend. She had a peculiar gentleness of character,
a grace and simplicity, which were sure signs of the good¬
ness of her soul. Her conversation, when using her own
language, in which she expressed herself elegantly, though
always with a slight tinge of her native Scotch accent,
flowed easily and naturally ; without a shade of pretension,
she could speak on the most arduous and elevated subjects,
revealing the clearness of her mind and her deep know¬
ledge.
She was of middle height, of a slight and delicate but
healthy figure; capable of enduring immense laboiir  of
mind.    Nature had endowed her form with no less beauty
than her mind with talent.    When she spoke with her
intimate  friends  of the wonders of nature, even in her
latest years, there shone on her countenance that ray of
divine intelligence, which the study and the love of good¬
ness and truth ever mark with an indelible seal on the face
of their worshipper.    This remarkable woman, who passed
the early hours of the day meditating on the mysteries
and laws of nature, who exercised her mind in the most
abstruse and siiblime  calculations, who,  as a relaxation,
read Sophocles and Herodotus, Virgil and Horace, in the
original, cultivated music and painted particularly well,
read all the books of the day, even the lightest literature,
The Attempt 235
took an interest in politics, and sitting with her daughters
in the evening hours, often with work in her hand, fulfilled
the social duties of a refined and polished lady, with the
grace, and dignity, and charming manners, that all who
knew her admired. She could speak on the most
ordinary subjects, even on fashions; she shared in the
amusements of life at parties and assemblies; never showed
that, under those easy and courteous manners, there lurked
something greater than a gentlewoman in high society.
Her excellence in feminine work is described as so
great, that she could darn old lace so neatly, that it was
impossible to find out where she had repaired the ravages
of wear and time.
Having left England on account of the delicate health
of her husband, she dwelt amongst us thirty-four years,
at Turin, Genoa, Spezia, Bologna, Venice, Florence, liome,
and Naples. It can thus bo said that in Italy she composed
the greater number of her works.
She followed attentively the progress of science; when
I saw her last year at Naples, for the last time, I asked
her what then particularly engaged her. She answered
me, " The Quaternions of Hamilton," the most recent and
remarkable kind of mathematical calculation, sent to her
expressly from England.
Great was her fame, not only in her own country and
amongst ourselves, but in America, France, and Germany;
indeed, wherever deep studies are cultivated and admired;
and the most superior men of the age, Lord Brougham,
Sir James Macintosh, Sir Humphrey Davy, Sir John
Ilerschel, Sir David Brewster, Sir Charles Lyell, Sir
Roderick Murchison, Faraday, the Napiers, Lord Minto,
the Marquis of Northampton, Layard, Pentland, Humboldt,
Airey, Plana, and Arago, were her friends and admners.
She received honours from the Royal Astronomical and
Geographical Societies; our Government offered her a
medal, our Geographical Society uiscribcd her amongst
its honorary members. Queen Victoria, when Sir Robert
Peel was in power, settled on her a pension of £300
a-year; and her country, a severe and unimpassioned
judge of the merits of her sons, placed in the Hall of the
Royal Society her bust by the side of Newton.
To the end of her life, except a slight difficulty of hear¬
ing, she did not suffer from any failing of the senses, and
she retained at that great age a true appreciation of the
beauties of nature, and a power and activity of mind as
236 TlLe Attempt.
clear and as pure as the bright sky under which she ended
her days.
In tlie hard study of mathematics we also can boast of
the Agnesi, Malvasia, Bassi, Borromeo ;but they are all
lesser planets when compared to this great Scotch woman.
On me, her old and familiar friend, whose guest she
was on the banks of the Benaco, has devolved the melan¬
choly, but welcome and honoured duty, of recording her
glories and her virtues. In the fulness of my affection
and my grief it comforts me to fulfil it, and record that,
without neglecting a single gentle and affectionate do¬
mestic duty, she has raised to herself a monument are
perennius. She has shown by her example to Avhat a high
degree of knowledge and of fame the fair and gentle part
of the human family can attain. Hilda.
I
-fi0^t<>&-
(i 11! tt r 0 r a.
I CHANCED to hear a poet tell,
" The Muses in Glencora dwell,"
In his enraptured dream,
The burn that muj-murs down the glade,
Beneath the leafy, beechen shade,
Is the Castalian  stream.
Yet I have wandered through the glen,
In summer's noontide glow, and when
The west was all aflame :
But never in Glencora yet.
My rambling steps the Muses met,—
No inspiration came.
Why no response to nature ?    "Whence
The strange, mysterious influence.
That stirs the soul to song ?
A deeper touch its depths must thrill:
Powerless the glen, the lake, the hill,
Loved by the Muses long.
Why doth the self-same moonlight shine.
Rapt minstrel, on thy eyes and mine !
Yet / am not inspired'?
How comes it, that the sunset's gold
Unmoved this evening I behold,
The next,—my soul is fired ?
The Attempt. 237
The spring of poetry is deep
Within the poet's soul,—asleep
For many a day it lies.
What potent charm can reach it there 1
No outward scenes, sublime or fair,
Can bid its waters rise.
Like the wild harp, that yields its tone
To touch of wandering winds alone;
Such is the poet's breast.
Let some strong passion sweep the strings,
And forth the hidden music springs.
Not now to be repressed!
It comes, the inspiration! then,
Go wander over hill and glen.—
Where'er thy footsteps turn,
All is with poetry aglow !
Unsought, the rushing numbers flow,
The flashing fancies burn.
Thou canst not help but sing ! 'twere vain
To check the upward-gushing strain.
Till thou hast poured the whole.
Now Nature speaks, and thou canst hear !
Nor come her tones to eye and ear.
But thrill within thy soul.
Omicron.
A TALE OF THE FORTY-FIVE.
CHAPTEK XIV.
Peggy's   Geave.
Old Peggy's death made a deep impression on both the
girls at Milla Forres,—and on each, according to their dif¬
ferent natures, it had a powerful hifluence. Nancy cried
herself ill, and was in bed for a week; then rose and went
about her usual avocations with as gay a step and as light
a heart as ever, thotigh the slightest allusion to Peggy
238 The Attempt.
\vould always bring a shade oyer the bright face, and the
ready tears into the soft brown eyes,    Barbara, on the
contrary, after the first uncontrollable burst of emotion,
seemed to have laid the matter aside.    She did not cry
like Nancy, nor was she ill, but the spring seemed to have
left her, and more than ever she was inclined to spend
the long evenings in indolent drcamings by the fireside.
This first approach of the dark messenger to then- little
charmed circle, seemed to have made Nancy cling more
closely to the dear ones who remained; to her sister,
and  Alaster,   and  old Elspet, she  had never  clung  so
fondly.  To Barbara, on the other hand, the foundations of
all those home affections seemed to have been shaken by
the dread realisation of the truth that they might pass
from her grasp.    She was more silent, more sclf-contamed,
andmore abstracted than before, and took oftener than ever
long solitary rambles by the burn side, with no other com¬
panion than old Oscar,    One day, about a fortnight after
old Peggy's death, she  set  out  on  one  of her  lonely
walks.    The day was sharp and bright, Avith a cold, cloud¬
less, blue sky, and the grass in the glen was stifi^ and
sparkling with frost.    Half unconsciously she foxuid her¬
self following the path that led to the little presbytcrian
kirkyard, where old Peggy's remains had been laid.    It
was a quiet spot in a nook among the hills, where the
little, loAV-roofed, white-washed church stood, amongst a
few white gravestones,   and  very many an  unmarked
grassy moimd.    Some large birch trees grew inside the
little enclosure, and under one of them, they had laid all
that was mortal of old Peggy.    As Barbara swimg open
the wicket gate, she saw the figure of an old man, in a
black coat, leaning against one of the birch trees.    His
clerical habit and stooping form, at once assured her that
it was the old minister, standing by the grave of the
beloved Avife, who  had been  his   companion for  thirty
years, and for whom he mourned still with as fresh a
sorrow as when God took her to Himself, now nearly
twenty years ago.     Two little children, who had died
some forty years ago, slept under the same stone, and the
old  white-haired  man   came  often  there,   not  now  to
moiu-n for them, but to think of the time, which could not
now be far distant, when the family, so   long  divided,
shovdd be re-united in a better country, " where an enemy
never entered and from which a friend never went away."
Barbara Avould have turned away reverently when she
'llie Attempt. 239
saw the old minister at his household grave, but he had
caught eight of her, and turned to meet her. Seventy-
five years had left their marks on the strong, weather-
beaten face and long grey hair and stooping figure, but
old Mr Mackay's eyes were as bright and penetrating
to-day, as he raised them to the fair young face before
him, as they had been when he wooed his bride on the
bonny braes of Aberfeldy fifty years ago.
" How do you do to-day. Miss Barbara?" he said
in a kind fatherly tone, holdmg out his hand as
Barbara approached. " You, too, have come at last to
seek ' where they have laid ' her. You are looking for
Peggy's grave f
" Yes, Mr Mackay ; but I know the place. It is under
yon old birch tree,    I have been here before."
" Aye, aye, my dear ; the time is pretty sure to come to
each of us, when the kirkyard becomes hallowed ground;
it's been that to me this forty years, ever since my wife
and I laid our wee Jeanie here. I mind we thought our
hearts were broken. It's a sore thing, the first hallowing
of the kirkyard." He paused a minute, and Barbara stood
looking reverently on the lonely old man, to whom the
kirkyard had become a family altar.
" Aye, it's a sore thing, my dear," he went on; " but it's
a blessed thing too, when we've got the first sheaf of
our harvest safe housed up yonder. Its the foretaste of
the harvest-home. You're young, my dear, and I daresay
you hardly understand it yet, but it's true for all that—it's
well for us, poor earthly creatures, to have even our
earthly treasure in heaven, for ' where the treasure is,
there will the heart be also.' "
" Mr Mackay," said Barbara, in a low voice, " it seems
to me as if old Peggy's death had shaken my confidence
in everything, as if everything might tremble to pieces
any day, and there was nothing firm to lay hold of at all."
" Aye, aye, my dear. I daresay—I daresay—when death
first comes near us, it does make us feel like that; but
you know. Miss Barbara, who says, ' / am the same, and
my years shall not fail.' I mind Avhen my dear Betsy
died, and the world seemed turned upside down, and I
felt like a drowning man, tossed on the dark waters,
that verse came to me like ' an anchor of the soul, both
sure and steadfast,' and brought a great calm."
" Yes," said Barbara, drawing a long breath ; " it is a
rest to think of that."
240 The Attempt.
" Good-bye, my dear," said the old man, holding out
his hand; then laying it solemnly on her head, he said,
" God bless you, my child ; we do not know what may be
before you yet, but ' commit ye your way imto the Lord,
and he shall bring it to pass,' and remember, if ever old
Dugald Mackay can help you, you must come to him as if
he were your father."
" Thank you, Mr Mackay ; I will indeed," said Barbara,
earnestly. The old man shook her warmly by the hand,
and went out at the little gate. Barbara stood still a
few minutes after he was gone, watching the stooping
figure on its Avay to his desolate home, then she turned
towards old Peggy's grave. She sat down on the grassy
mound, and her thoughts wandered away to the sad story
of the woman's life that lay beneath. The cheery home,
that first death, and then sin, had desolated ; the solitary,
yet happy years, in the little cottage under the cliff, and
the sudden, yet triumphant end. And she tried in
thought to follow the released spirit in its flight, to those
"many mansions," in which she had so confidently believed,
and tried to imagine Peggy, old no more, nor sorrowful,
but an inhabitant of that blessed country, where none
shall say any more " I am sick." And then the thought
would come, what if all that beautiful faith should prove
to be only a dream; and if the dust, sleeping so quietly
under the grassy mound on which she was sitting, should
turn out after all to be all that remained of old Peggy ?
Barbara struggled against the unwelcome thought, and
called herself wicked for letting it even pass through her
mind; and yet, though in her deepest lieart she firmly
believed in that heaven of which the old woman had
spoken so confidently—so difficult is it for us, poor
material creatures, to realise the unseen and eternal—that
ever and anon, in spite of all her efforts, it would recur.
Then her thoughts wandered away to the daughter who
had been siich a grief to Peggy, and she speculated on her
unknown fate, and how she should keep her promise of
giving into her hand, if she were yet alive, the few pounds
that had remained of Peggy's little hoard in the old stock¬
ing, after paying for her funeral, and the old, well-
thumbed Bible, Avhich had been committed to her care.
Then, from speculating about Peggy's daughter's xmknown
past, her mind went on to speculate about her own equally
unknown future, and she fell to wondering how her life
would look when she came to look back on it from the
The A ttempt. 241
borders of the other comitry, as old Mr Mackay was
doing. She was jnst beginning to think that it was time
for her to be turning her steps homewards, when she was
startled by a footstep close beside her; she turned round,
and saw—his face, strangely wild and haggard—Alaster
Macdonald standing before her.
CHAPTER  XV.
THE EEVELATION.
" Alaster !" exclaimed Barbara, starting up from her
seat on the grassy mound that covered old Peggy's grave,,
" where on earth have you come from ? I thought you
were in Perthshire ? Have you been at Milla Forres'l
Have you seen Nancy ?"
" Barbara," he answered, in a low husky voice, " I have
come to see you, not Nancy. Listen to me," he said, seiz¬
ing both her hands in his; " I must speak to you. I can
be silent no longer, Barbara ; it is you I love, not Nancy."
He held her hands as in an iron grasp while he spoke, his
burning eyes looking straight into hers. The fierce pas¬
sion in them, and his white, haggard face frightened hf r
for a moment. She staggered back, silent and trcmblmg,
with a face as white as his own.
"There!" he said, suddenly dropping her hands and
turning away drearily; " the murder is out. I suppose
you will never look at me again. I can't help it. 1 have
told you the truth; now despise me as much as you like."
He leant his arms on an upright gravestone that stood
near, and buried his face on them. Barbara stood silent
and trembling by him; the man's wild passion had almost
stunned her.
" There," he said, after a minute or two, lifting his
head fiercely, " why don't you go away ? I tell you I
have perjured myself. 7, Nancy's phghted husband, love
you, Nancy's sister. Don't you hear ? Why don't you
go away ? I am a villain, 1 tell you," he said, his voice
dropping almost to a whisper, in which he seemed to hiss
the words from between his clenched teeth. Then he
dropped his head again upon his arms, still folded on the
top of the gravestone.
The utter dejection and misery of his tone and atti¬
tude roused Barbara from the half trance of fear that had
come over her. She stepped towards him and laid her
hand hesitatingly on his arm.    " Alaster," she said, in a
AUG. 1873. 2 D
242 The Attempt.
faltering voice, " I don't quite understand     You don't
love Nancy!—you can't mean that!"
" I do mean it; it is true —I tell you, it is true. Why
don't you go away and leave me ?"
Still she did not move, nor take away the trembling
hand that lay iipon his arm. He turned round on her sud¬
denly, and seizing her in his arms, pressed her wildly to
his heart. " You do not go away! you stay with me I
you love me, Barbara ! Oh, say that you love me, and no
power on earth shall part us!"
For a moment her head lay upon his heart, as if it had
found its proper resting-place; then, with a sudden start
and a great cry, " Oh, no, no, it cannot be!" she wrenched
herself from his arms and fled down the hill. He did not
follow her; he stood gazing after her a minute, while the
wild passionate glow on his face faded into an expression
of blank dejection; then he sat down on old Peggy's grave,
and buried his face in his hands.
Barbara, meanwhile, fled homewards like a hunted
thing, and never slackened her pace till she got
within the door of Milla Forres. It was dusk by the
time she reached home, and she gladly slunk upstairs in
the darkness, thankful that under its cover she might
enter unobserved. She slipped into her own room, bolted
the door, and threw herself down on the bed. The room
was full of weird shadows in the deepening twilight of the
short winter's day, and Barbara felt as if she had attained
a haven of refuge in its stillness and gloom. She shut
her wearied eyes and began to try to think—to try to
realise what could be the meaning and the bearing of the
scene she had just passed through. In her flight from
Alaster back to the old house, she had simply followed an
unreasoning mstinct to run away from it all, and hide her¬
self in the familiar, safe old home. She had thought of
nothing but the desire to seek the old well-known refiTge,
just as a womided animal flies back to its lair, with an
unreasoning feeling that it will be safe there, and that
amid the old familiar surroundings, it will awake to find
the fear and pain of the present only a feverish dream.
But now that she had got home, and was lying in the
stillness and twilight on her own familiar little bed, in her
own well-known room, where every chair and table seemed
a part of herself almost, she shut her eyes and tiied to
think what was this new strange thing that had hap¬
pened to her.    But her mind was all in confusion, and she
The Attempt. 243
covld not think. Alaster's wild, white face and burning
eyes seemed to be scorched into her very brain. She saw
them when her eyes were shut, and they looked at her
out of the gathering twilight when she opened them. His
passionate words of entreaty and despair seemed to ring
in her ears through the silence, and her heart throbbed
with the recollection of that one moment of strange deli¬
rious happiness, when he had held her in his arms, and her
head had rested on his heart. What did it all mean?
What was to be the end of it all ? She could not tell; she
could not think; she could only feel. She heard Nancy
singing at her spinning-wheel in the hall below. The
hall door was open, and she heard snatches of the song in
her sister's clear young voice. She was singing a plain¬
tive old ballad of a lady wooed and then deserted; and
always at the close of every verse the refrain rang out
more clearly:—
" Oh, fause, fause was the ladye's knight,
An' waner aye grew she,
Till Death he preed the lily white
O' fair Kirkconnal lee."
Somehow, the refrain sung in that clear young voice sent
a shiver to Barbara's heart. When she had finished her
ballad, Nancy began to croon over the grand words of the
Magnificat, " My soul doth magnify the Lord, and my
spirit hath rejoiced in God my Saviour, because He hath
regarded the lowliness of His handmaiden; and behold
from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed; for
He that is mighty hath magnified me, and holy is His
name. And His mercy is upon all them that fear Him, from
generation to generation." The grand old words of faith
and triumph seemed to calm the tumult in Barbara's heart;
and, utterly exhausted with the day's excitement, before
they were done, she had dropped into a quiet sleep. She
slept on for several hours. Nancy came upstairs shortly
after, wondering that she had not returned, and was quite
surprised to find her lying asleep on her bed. She did not
disturb her, however, but went down stairs again. She
was tired of her spinning-wheel, and the great empty
hall looked desolate in spite of the roaring fire of peat
and wood that blazed in the huge fireplace. So Nancy
took refuge, as was very common with both of the sisters
when they weai'ied of the solitude of the empty old house,
in Elspcth's bright cosy kitchen.    The kitchen was bright
244 The Attempt.
with fire-light and candle-light, and with its clean, well-
bricked red floor and wooden dresser, where the rows of
plates and jngs reflected the glow of the fire-light, looked
by no means an uninviting retreat from the chill vacuity
of the hall. Elspet was sitting on a low chair by the fire¬
side. She was " redd-up " for the afternoon, and her
mutch, and kerchief, and apron, were all as white and tidy
as hands could make them. She was knitting the coarse
blue worsted stockings generally worn in those days, and
her bright wires glittered in the fire-light under her rapid
fingers.
" I've come down to keep you company for a while,
Elspet," said Nancy, " the hall's so big, and cold, and
empty."
" tias Miss Barbara no come hame ?" inquired the old
woman, looking iip anxiously; " it's ower late for the like
o' her to be stravaging i' the glen."
" Yes, she's come home, but she must have gone straight
upstairs. I found her lying fast asleep on her bed," said
Nancy.
" Is there ocht wrang, think ye. Miss Nancy ?" said
Elspet. " Think ye she ha'e gotten ony hurt that the doc¬
tor does na ken o', that nicht on Benvorlish?"
" Oh, no; Barbara's quite well. What makes you fancy
that, Elspet r'
" Just she's no a'thegither like herself sin' syne. She
docsna spin half sae muckle as she used to do, and she
doesna gang aboot sae muckle ; and when she does gang,
she gaes her lane, an' she just danders aboot—she doesua
walk wi' a spring in her fit like a young fallow-deer, as
she did afore."
"Nonsense, Elspet; I'm sure there's nothing wrong
with Barbara. She never complains of anything; it's just
your auld-farrant fykes, you dear, old, anxious thing," said
Nancy, sitting down on a low stool, and leaning her head
against her old nurse's knee.
" Ah, weel! ah, weel I I hope sae, my hinny. It wad
be an ill day for us a' if ocht were wrang wi' Miss Bar¬
bara."
" I think Peggy's death has vexed her very much. She
didn't get ill like me; but I'm sure she felt it, thoiigh she
didn't say much.    Barbara never does," said the girl.
"Aye, aye; 'still waters rin deep.' The grief that rins
out at the een is no the warst kin', an' it's her first trouble.
I dinna Hke whan troubles  begin, Miss Nancy;  it's no
The Attempt. 245
aften that the first's the last—there's aye a second and a
thh'd ahint it."
"Oh, Elspet, don't be superstitious!    See, here comes
Barbara, to tell us she's all safe and sound."
Jeanie Morison.
{To be continued.)
-'r-^--sz§j:^ki5i::^3-s-9^
"Wlx([ larger '§o^tJ*
'Tis lovelier than the rosy flush of morn,
That ushers in the glorious day,
'Tis sweeter than the primrose and the song
That gladden us in month of May.
It has a music, passing words to tell
How rare the beauty, rich the tone,
A music meet for every human ear.
Which each heart listening, makes her own.
It came to us when weary in that night
Whose darkness had made sick our soul,
We hailed it as a beam of quick'ning light,
Whose living radiance made us whole.
I have not speech in which to clothe this Hope
In height, in depth 'tis so divine,
I almost tremble as I touch the chords
And sing to them in words of mine.
" So far"—you say, " restrain th' ambitious gaze.
Such distance makes thy vision dim;"
Nay, for the soul gains blessing as she looks,
Midway, her eyes do rest on Him,
The Christ who holds the "Keys of Hell and Death"
Within that wounded human Hand,
AA'^hich touched with love the tender infant's head.
And has all worlds in Its command.
He knows the anguish which our bosoms bear.
He knows this Hope which makes us strong.
Seeing Despair and Death our conquer'd foes.
And Right triumphant over Wrong.
246 The Attempt.
And should the voice of conscience speak to us,
And send a tear to dim our eye.
Reproaching thus—" How faltering thy steps
Though lighted by a Hope so high."
Then thinking how a touch, like mother's touch,
Hath met iis in past hours of woo.
Again we'll look towards that Sacred Face,
And o'er His Feet our tears shall flow.
Then deem it not a dream that profits nought,
Since strength with it to us is given,
And ardent inspirations after God,
To know Whom makes this Earth a Heaven,
A dream ! sweet Hope, I cannot name thee thus;
Hast thou not reached us from above ?
God's messenger, I paint thee in my heai't
Clothed in Justice, crowned with Love.
A Dream, 0 God! if with the daion of Life,
Thy children find a bud so fair,
Beyond, where their sun reaches fuller height,
Shall they not see fruition there ?
Frucara.
^\\t  ^tnwniV^   (^fountain.
Part HL
OXE little letter—a few hours of acquiescence—had woimd
a chain round Gabrielle she found hard to break. She
forgot how different was the value of her hardly extorted
consent to her lover and herself. Michel was a fortnight
away, and meanwhile the village talked. At the fountain,
at the fish-market, at the cafes, the affairs of the Talbots
were freely discussed, some siding with the lady, some
with the gentleman. At last Michel retm'ued, and curtly
refusing to accept Gabrielle's change of purpose, appointed
the following eveniug for an interview at the farm. He
came, accompanied by several of the notables of the
village, and was received with some ceremony by the
Talbots, who had assembled various friends of their OAvn,
headed by  the  Cur6, Avho  was  known  to  approve  of
The Attempt. 247
Gabrielle's resolution. When all were seated, Gabrielle
walked into the room, and there was an unconscious
majesty in gesture, as well as in words, as she began.
" Monsieur et mon cousin, I ask your pardon for having
deceived you as well as myself, in believing I could be¬
come your wife. As soon as I had written the letter I see
in your hands, I became aware that I had made a great
mistake, and that I can never marry, unless my affianced
husband, Raoul Wacliter, should return. Of this I have
no expectation. I believe him to be dead, but I belong to
him still. Be generous then, and let us be good friends
as before."
Gabrielle seated herself in perfect stillness, and waited
for a reply.
" I quite see the difficulty," answered Michel, who Avas
red and excited, "Mademoiselle cannot persuade herself
of the death of Doctor Wachter. I come prepared to
show that we have every proof of it but the knowledge
of how it happened. Be pleased to look at these papers.
Here you have the receipts for 3000 francs, produce of the
sale of his effects here. Is it likely that a young pro¬
fessional man should thus lightly abandon his property %
Here you have his college and hospital diplomas; his
certificates of character, all those papers, without which a
medical man can practise in no country. Monsieur Wacli-
ter was devoted to his profession, and a rising man in it.
Do you suppose he would abandon it also, as well as his
bride, were he still alive % No; Wachter is dead, and
Gabriclle merely yields to a not unnatural but passing
scruple when she will not accept the situation she has
herself arranged, and content herself with the devotion
she has inspired, yes, and encouraged in me."
A sting lurked in this last sentence.
"No ; I never loved you. I told you so often," flashed
back Gabriellc, and at once ceremony and civility went
to the winds. No man can well endure being told such a
thing publicly, and Michel's real, fierce, coarse nature broke
out. What! was he to be cheated like this ? He would
drag them all before the tribunals,—he would show the
world what Gabrielle really was. Gaspard endeavoured to
put in that if the mayor sought for money compensation,
the matter should be considered. Gabriclle, her head erect,
said, " I will not be threatened." But Michel stormed on,
and at last arrived at—" And what should you say, sup¬
posing that after all Monsieur Raoul were comfortably
248 The Attempt.
married to some one else; suppose I could find out and
prove that ? " and there he stopped short, and turned as
pale as he had been red.
" Monsieur," said the Cure, " you used words almost
implying you had some grounds for supposing Wachter
to be alive.    If you have, I charge you to declare them."
*' None, none, whatever," faltered Michel. " A man does
not know what he says at a time like this. I ask your
pardon, Gabrielle, we shall speak of this later when we
are calmer," and he hurried away.
That evening something occurred, which made a good
deal of talk in the neighbourhood. Several boats wore
going out to the night fishing, past the Fontaine des
Sirenes, and the water being high, they sailed between
the detached rock and the shore, and afterwards many
of the fishermen declared that they saw the mayor stand¬
ing beside a lovely lady, who was sitting on a rock. She
was beautiful, and a stranger, and her long fixir hair fell
down to the rock on which she sat. Monsieur le Maire
might assert what he chose about its being only a friend
from Eouen, the country were agreed that it looked ex¬
tremely like most questionable dealings with the Siren.
" And I Avish there Avere siich things, that Ave miglit ask
them AA'hat has happened to my Raoul," said Gabrielle.
But there are such things still, although there be no
Avitching song stealing over the sea, luring mariners to
their destruction.    Are there not sweet spells cast by fair
enchantresses, that yet are full of CAal power to those who
yield to them. For smoly all beautiful things that beguile
but do not ennoble, are but the song of the siren, luring
the unwary to the prison caves beloAV.    Plad Raoul been
fascinated by such a spell ?    We must go back two years
to folloAV his story.
* * * *
On the CA^ening of the dance so long ago, Raoul had
hurried doAvn the cliff above the fountain with rufiled
temper; but by the time he had reached the little cavern
half way doAvn, his vexation had died aAvay, and he felt
his annoyance was absurd for such a trifle. Sweet
Gabrielle, \\diy shoiild she not dance with the clowns,
Avho, at least, had the merit of admiring her intensely !
He chipped idly at the rock beside him, carAang out their
initials, but growing ever dreamier, till he dropped asleep.
He slept till the night A\'as deep, Avhen a shght noise
woke him; and peering over the edge of the cliff, he saw
a pretty sight l>y tlie  moonlight.    A short way out  a
Tlie Attempt. 249
eea,  a trim fore-and-aft vessel was hove to ; her boats
were plying to the shore, and a few dark figures were in
line between the fountain and the sea.    Evidently a ship
come for water.    There was, however, something peculiar
in the whole appearance of things, that made him hurry
down the rocky stair, which he had hardly left before
two or three oddly dressed men  hastened  up  to  him.
" What ship is this " he began; when, to his intense amaze¬
ment, he found himself, without a word, seized, gagged,
and di*agged away.    There was not a moment for resist¬
ance, but in one of those flashes of thought, quicker than
all action, he remembered that it was important to leave
gome trace of his presence there ; and he threw the little
racket containing Gabrielle's watch, the fii'st loose thing
le could find, unperceived into the shadow.     He was
mrried into a boat, and his captors, now taking some
pains  to   secure  him   safely,   rowed  with  him  to   the
schoonei', shoved him into a little state cabin, and left
him to his own reflections.    These were more of amaze¬
ment than anytliing else.    He could not conceive what
had happened to him, and why ! -, Though no unnecessary
force had been used, he felt sure his captors were adepts
at deeds of violence.    Their language, too, was utterly
strange.    Day  had  long  dawned,   and  the vessel  was
rapidly  forging  through  the  sea,   when  the door waa
unlocked, and an elderly sailor-like man entered.     He
greeted Raoul civilly, and then pulling out his knife, cut
the cord that fastened his hands, with some muttered
oaths and exclamations in English.     Raoul, who spoke
English fairly well, at once asked him a dozen questions
in a breath.    The old man's face showed a comical mix¬
ture of awkwardness, cunning, and a touch of kindliness
too, as he began—" No pirates are we, but an honest
enemy of France ; the Ziama—Captain Perez, Spaniard by
birth, in command.    From Algiers, bound for somewhere
on the Flemish coast, to pick up arms.    The Flemings
are making muskets for us, but it's not easy to get them.
No land carriage, and your fleet blockading our whole sea-
line.    I am the mate, by your leave, Tom Elliot from
Berwick on Tweed; and right vexed am I to be the cause
of your detention.     I'm the only man among them who
knows these waters well, and as we run great danger of
capture, and can't put into a port, being short of water I
advised watering at the moss spring there.    When you
came jumping  down the   cliff",  the fools  took you  for
AUGDST1873. 2    I
278 The Attempt.
honour to do it to the best of her ability; so, when
Alaster's half-trance of grief was over, he found himself
safe within a mile of the little inn where he had passed
the night. The sonsy gnidwife came out to meet him as
he rode up, bustling and eager to know what the stranger
" shentleman " would be pleased to want for supper, and
hoping for a friendly crack and gossip while laying the
table; for Alaster was a great favourite with all those
humble folk with whom he came in contact, hie frank,
courteous manner, courteous ahke to high and low, no
less than his handsome person made him many friends
among his humbler neighbours, especially among the
women part of them, most of whom were accustomed to
describe him in their highest manner of approbation as
"a rael bonny mon." So the landlady of the Cross Keys
was sorely disappointed when Alaster seemed deaf to her
hints at conversation, and peremptorily declared that he
should set out on his journey immediately, and without
waiting for supper. " It's a clean temptin' o' Providence,"
muttered the good woman, as she turned away baffled
from her attempts to alter his resolution, " the lad maun
be fey riding atf that gate, wi' an empty stamach, an' no
sae muckle as a di'ap o' Glenlivat to Avat his whistle.
Guid kens whaur he's been the day, I misdoot he's been
after nae guid." Jeanie Mokison.
(7o he continued.)
All secrets lie Avithin his downcast eyes.
All silence sitteth on his quiet mouth;
Cycles of years, which pass o'er Paradise,
Have left no trace upon his wondrous youth;
His brows are crowned with the poppy wreath,
The asphodel he beareth in his hand,
A dark-browed angel, and his name is Death,
Yet brings he tokens from the sunlight land.
His dusky wings are folden, and his feet
Are swift and soundless, as they pass along
The chequered shade aud sunshine of the street.
As bells are chiming unto Evensong.
Tlie Attempt. 251
breakfast. Except in-shore you need not be a prisoner;
only don't vex the old man—that's Perez—nor any of the
crew; foi% except myself, they are as nasty a lot of mur¬
dering thieves as you will ever see together."
Raoul followed the talkative old man into the chief
cabin, where chocolate and breakfast were laid out. There
sat Perez, a sulky and silent renegade Spaniard, and
Jussef, the second mate, a young Algerine. " I'll tell
them you are a German British subject, and they had
better take care what they are about," said Elliot, con¬
tinuing in Arabic to the Captain, who replied in the same
language. " No harm is meant you, if you will stay quiet,
till you are put ashore," said the mate—" if not," and he
made a significant gesture of a plank being tilted into the
sea. Raoul forced himself to eat while thinldng over his
situation. France had lately declared war against the
Bey of Algiers, who, after a brief respite, won by the
British bombardment of Algiers, had fallen back into his
former piratical ways. The French fleet maintained a
strict blockade of all the Barbary coast, but this schooner
had run the blockade, and stolen north to get contraband
fire arms from the Belgians, always ready for any profit¬
able market.
Biit there semed no reason for Raoul's detention when
once they had their cargo and were well to the south,
and so he resolved not to make himself unhappy about a
passing inconvenience; and as he lay on deck, under the
shadow of a sail, while the vessel slipped swiftly through
the water, he looked round him with some interest and
curiosity. He soon perceived the vessel was much over-
manned for her size, and the surplus members of the crew
usually lay about on deck smoking and chatting. They
took some pains not to show over the gunwale, when
eighted by other ships, but allowed the few seamen of
more European aspect to appear most. For they were
chiefly Africans, well-armed, impleasant barbarians, who
looked askance at their own captain for allowing such free¬
dom to a '• dog of an infidel" lil<;e Raoul. Elliot was very
kind; he shared his cabin with Raoul, where, however,
only one could sleep at a time, and often exhorted him
for this voyage to take their oath of allegiance, and enter
himself on their books as surgeon, for they wanted one;
good pay seeming to him to compensate for any little
drawbacks of their situation.
The third night Raoul's sleep was broken by the cessation
252 The Attempt.
of the motion of the ship.    He heard the anchor dropped
and the boats lowered.    No doubt they were going to
take in their cargo.    What an opportunity for escape 1
The cabin door was bolted on the outside, but a small
case of surgical instruments was still in his pocket, and it
only needed a little time  to pare away the wood and
shove back the bolt.    He went stealthily into the empty
chief cabin, where were stern windows large enough to
pass through.    A clear moonlight shone on the sea, and
on a flat line of coast only a quarter of a mile off, boats
were plying between;  evidently they were fetching the
muskets in.    The moonlight was against him, but the
craving for liberty Avas so strong, that, slipping off his coat
and boots, he cautiously opened a window, and with no
audible splash, dropped into the sea.   He made for a point
on the shore some way down, sAvimming low in the water,
and reached the edge of the high dyke evidently imob-
served.    Peering carefully over the top of the dyke, he
found his difficulties had only begun.    The hideous coun¬
try was so flat and bare, that this dyke commanded it for
miles.    Near the vessel a file of people were rapidly pass¬
ing packages from hand to hand.    The worst was, that a
little further down than where he landed, a couple of
sentries were planted on the dyke.    He could not hope to
pass them unobserved, nor cross the open in the moon¬
light, nor stay in the shadow where he was, because they
would miss him in the schooner.    There was nothmg for
it but passing, or mastering these sentries, and then trust¬
ing to speed.    He might run too far along the line of the
dyke for it to be safe for the contrabandists to pursue
him.    He crept up to Avithin a couple of yards of the sen¬
tries before they saw and challenged him.    One remained
above, the other began to scramble down the dyke, hold¬
ing on by one hand.    Raoul sprang on him; wresting a
horse-pistol out of his other hand, and discharging it into
his body, thi'ew him violently doAvn.    The other man fired
aimlessly, and Raoul, springing up the dyke, felled him
Avitli the butt-end of the pistol, and then tore aAvay at the
top of his speed doAvn the shadoAV of the dyke.   The alarm
was given to the men about the boats; but they were so
far off that no doubt he Avorild have escaped, had he not
run suddeidy into a group of peasants Avith a cart-load of
muskets, Avho AA'cre creeping slowly along the sand in the
shadoAv.
The Attempt. 253
"Let me pass," panted Raoul; "I am a Christian escap¬
ing from the Moors."
Alas! stupidity is as dangerous as malignity at times.
These dolts understood no French, and had but one idea
in their addle heads—money.    No doubt this was an in¬
former, and they might lose the high profits of their night's
work if they let him go.    So they hustled and impeded
Raoul, Avithout daring to attack him ; for the Flemish lout
has no extra valour in his composition.    He could ahvays
clear a space round himself, but the precious moments
flew by; some of the swiftest sailors dashed up and found
him still hampered by the peasants.    Raoul,  now tho¬
roughly roused, and a fine specimen of the noble Alsatian
race, which unites much of the firmness of the German and
brilliancy of the French nature, seemed, however, actually
to cowe the crowd of low-type Flemings and Africans
round him.    His eyes blazed like blue fire, and in his torn
shirt his finely-made frame showed to such advantage,
that Perez, when he arrived, knowing well the money-
value of a man, was the more anxious to take him alive—-
yes, though Raoul, seeing his chief enemy, turned upou
him, knocked him down, and in the confusion which fol¬
lowed, once more got off".    All was now, however, hope¬
less ; the brave Belgians were bold enough to run after
him in a mob, and, breathless as he was, he was soon re¬
taken, and  brought in triumph to the Algerines;   then
back to the hated vessel, where he was rudely thrust into
a little dark storage closet for ropes, and securely puiioned.
Presently came the reaction of all the excitement, and the
intense first disappointment of a man whom continued
good fortune had made unusually sanguine.  As his wrath
died away, his grief grew overwhelming.    Was it dciatli
in his young prime, or a hideous, hopeless slavery, that
awaited him ?   Was it only a week ago that he had not a
trouble in the world! only a Aveek since he was wandei'-
ing in the g<ilden harvest-fields with Gabrielle !    What
was she thinking now %    Looking out seawards with sad
wondering eyes, waiting in vain for him.    No sweet last
words to treasure, only that wretched little bickering dis¬
pute—parted without a parting.     The thought of her
brought at last a rush of tears, the first shed since child¬
hood, and he sobbed himself wearily to sleep.    He Avas
woke by the mate with a lantern.    " Now, my lad," he be¬
gan, "1 am heartily sorry for you, but there is nothing
left but to be guided by me.    You are in a scrape.    Perez
254 The Attempt.
dare not land you now if he wished. Why, you deserve
to be the Britisher I swear you are," and the old mate
chuckled. " To see you knocking about these Flemish
boors like nine-pins! and there's two of our villains badly
hurt—shouldn't wonder if they died of it—and the old
man himself, with a tooth knocked down his throat, raging
about in a fury. But it is against his interest to harm you.
He can't get on without my seamanship, and, indeed, my
boy, I've stood by you. I never thought to like any one
so much again, and can't afford it. But you must sign our
articles, wear a fez, and doctor our rascals—never mind
about cimng them—till we get to Algiers, where all will
soon go rightly ; for the old hornet's nest will be harried in
good earnest this time, and you will get back to France."
" No," said Raoul; " they may kill me, of course, but I
will do nothing for them."
"Do you know what that means?" said the mate,
grasping his arm. " They won't kill a fine young man
hke you if they can help it; such fetch their price in Algiers.
But it means real slavery; the worst work, blows, torture,
and that from any nigger on board. Had you seen what
I have, sights to make a hard old felloAv like me sick, you
would sign a bit of paper and be done with it. Here, let
me cut your hands free, and come back with me to the
cabin." So saying, he led him out by the arm, and along
the crowded deck.
" I am a Frenchman," he reiterated, " and I will not
serve on board an Algerino ship." Luckily, no one under¬
stood, and Elliot brought him safely to his own cabin,
where he began carefully to wash away the blood from
some slight hurts Raoul had received. His mood softened
under the old man's officious kindness, and he dropped his
head wearily in his hands.
" Is there no Christian here on board," he sighed. " Oh,
if I could but see a priest."
"Christian, indeed!" qiioth Elliot, "I would have you
know that I am a better Christian than any of you be¬
nighted Papists can be !—poor lad—craving after their
blind superstitions. And me the son of a minister, who
well could have told you that there is no getting past
what's foreordained. Kismet, say the Musselmen, we do
Avhat we must do ; and so far they are true believers, better
than the papists with their dirty works and ordinances
any day. Meanwhile, here's food and clothes, eat and
wash and rest, and we will talk later," and off he went.
The Attempt. 255
Half mechanically Raoul followed his advice, and the very-
fact of being restored to his usual aspect had something
soothing in it. There lay his dainty little case of instru¬
ments, given by a great surgeon in Paris. He began
dreamily to handle it, when he was startled by a groan,
rising to a shriek of pain. He opened the door into the
chief cabin, and saw Jussef, the second mate, lying on the
settee, while Elliot and another were about to dress an
ugly wound on his shoulder. Their bungling was exas¬
perating, no wonder the man cried out; indeed, the mate
afterwards confessed, he did let the fellow's shoulder fall
with a good thump to wake up the doctor. Raoul looked
on till professional instinct was too much for him. " Leave
the man to me," he exclaimed, and, in two minutes, Elliot
had the satisfaction of seeing his protege absorbed in his
patient, and delicately handling the shattered shoulder
that was his own handiwork. The man, a young and
handsome Arab, turned his languid eyes gratefully on him,
and a mutual good understanding at once began. The
case was so anxious, that Raoul half forgot his own troubles,
and Elliot judiciously bringing the oath to subscribe at a
critical moment, he signed it, in presence of the captain
and others, describing himself as Walter, a Hanoverian
subject, and feeling rather like an imposter and a deserter,
yet too weary and pre-occupied for further resistance.
Jussef got better, and sedulously taught Raoul Arabic, in
exchange for his cure. And so the voyage went on pros¬
perously for the schooner. After some fighting, which
gave her suigeon employment, and many narrow escapes,
she anchored at last in the harbour of Algiers ; and Raoul
heard he was to be landed, and given over to Mustapha
bou-Mezrag, Bey of Tittery, who had long desired to have
a European surgeon in his suite. Gabrielle and liberty
seemed further off than ever! E. J. 0.
{To he continued.)
%   I 0 H's   ^ 1? 0 I 0 0 IT.
We all receive some sense of poesy.
Each open soul cups dew-drops from above,
Greater or less the portion sent may be,
Greater or less it waxeth as we love.
256 The Attempt.
And he that hath, receiveth ever more,
Till the full measure runs beyond the brim;
Then he would give his neighbours of the store,
And bless them, with what giveth joy to him.
He is more blest that gives than that receives;
(We know 'tis ever thus upon the earth)
Because the heart from which the gift has birth,
Values the thing it gives, and so believes
That men might joy for even a few drops given,
From the full tide whose fountain is in heaven.
n.
Pure, as the spring of poesy must be,
Is every drop from such a source distilled.
The darkness in the stream we often see,
Lies in the vessel that the dews have filled—
Lies in the atmosphere itself exhales, [go—
Through which the drops  pass, gathering as they
Lies in the breezes that its neighbours blow.
Athwart its little storm of passion gales.
And soon the smoke-taste of the city rain.
The smoke-hue of the murky atmosphere
Distinge the dew-drops that God sent so clear.
And that so clear Avill rise to Him again;
Yet some would blame the source whence they
[were given,
As aught impure could leave or enter Heaven.
m.
A little vessel easily may fill,
Far sooner than a well more broad and deep,
Whose rugged sides let the clear liquid steep
And drain forth verdure in soft secret rill.
But the cup filled, though from the dews of heaven,
Is early satisfied, and pours away,
Flashing upon the air its sparkling spray,
Rejoicing in the treasure freely given.
While the deep well, waits till the thirsters come
To cast in vessels, drawing for their drink,
Lets no stream ooze above its stony brink.
Contents itself to store up and be dumb.
Hence the mere fact that men may have to give,
Is no sure test that they most richly live.
LuTEA Reseda.
The Attempt. 2")7
potes on some futures in i^t ^crnal ^ratjcnt!).
I HAVE heard it said by more than one person, that the
Exhibition for this year is scarcely up to its usual average.
Certainly there is no one single great picture to make it
memorable; but there are many pictures scattered through
the whole, so exceedingly attractive and artistic, that to
study them is a real delight; and I am going to try if I
cannot so reproduce my impressions of some favourite
pictures, as to impart to others a share of the pleasure
which 1 have found there. I do not presume to speak as
an art-critic, nor have I always chosen the pictures which
are most sought after; but have merely attempted to
describe those to which 1 always returned with fresh
pleasure, and to describe them as they appeared to an
ordinary observer.
Following the order of the catalogue, one of my earliest
favourites was No. 114, "Hay-time,"—V. Cole. A wide
English landscape—in Surrey, perhaps—stretching far
away over woodland and plain, till the distance is lost in
faint blue haze. In the foreground is the grand wreck of
a noble old tree ; its trunk, all knotted and gnarled, is
almost ba re of branches, only a few leaves tell there is
life in it yet. Some little children, in brilliant kerchiefs
of orange and scarlet, play beneath; while to the right
the long swathes of rich grass fall beneath the mower's
hands, and the sweet meadow-flowers groAv close up to
our feet. The picture is not perfect. There is especially
a want of atmospheric effect in the distance ; but it is a
beautiful subject, and painted with much true feeling for
nature.
In the same room, I lit by chance upon three small, but
very pleasing pictures. "Not at Home" (No. 167,—F. D.
Hardy), represents a painter crouching behind the door
of his studio. The door is locked, doubtless ; still the
artist can scarcely overcome his terror, for underneath
appears a hand, pushing into the room a paper with
the ominous words, " Income Tax ! " The colouring is
quiet and harmonious ; the painter wears a purple doublet,
pleasantly faded, and his rainbow-tinted palette, and
vermilion tipped brush, supply warmth and brightness.
The other two are even more fascinating; they are called
" Sera-t-il pris ?" and "II est prisi" (Nos. 174, 182,—E.
SEPTEMBEE 1873. 2  K
258 The Attempt.
Frere). The subjects are very simple ; there is snow on
the ground, and in the first, three eager children are
watching the movements of a bird, which is approaching
the snare. In the next, the same group, reinforced by a
comrade, are gathered round the httle captive, and are
cautiously raising the edge to see if their prize is really
safe within. Tliere is to me a special charm about these
pictures; the children's faces and attitudes are admirable,
the colouring very true to nature ; they would always be
pleasant to look at and to possess.
And now we come to the large gallery; and here,
indeed, it is difficult to know what to prefer. Let ua
pause before No. 254, "The Bonxie, Shetland,"—T. C.
Hook. We are grateful to the artist who has brought
back for us this perfect bit of coast scenery from the
far-off Shetland Isles; and every one who knows any¬
thing, even of the more accessible Hebrides, "wall
recognise its truth and beauty. Just so does the sea
break in eddies of clear and translucent green round the
cliffs of Staffa ; so the tide comes rushing and curling over
the rocks, to fall back again in jets of foam. And the
tender herbage grows to the very edge of the precipice,
and the sea-pinks wave over the dizzy height; and far on
the horizon the sun's rays glitter on the sea, and each
separate wavelet reflects the light wdth diamond lustre.
All this we have seen ; what is more seldom met with is
the adventurous party of boys, of whom one reaches
forward to seize the coveted prize of eggs, while another
holds him firmly from behind, and the eagle hovers scream¬
ing above. One wonders, so fresh and cool is the general
atmosphere, where these boys have got the lurid flush
which glows in their complexions. Perhaps danger and
excitement have brought the colour to their cheeks ; and,
indeed, we should scarcely recognise the artist, but for
this touch of his usual manner.
There are several interesting pictures in this corner.
No. 247 is to my mind the best of the four subjects ex¬
hibited by Faed. No. 91, "After the Victory,"—widow
and mother mourning their slain, is very touching; why
is it that we are not more affected ? No. 55, " Happy
as the day's long," is far too suggestive of washing,
brushing, and strict injunctions that the little one is by
no means to move, to make us believe the title. No.
222, " A Lowland Lassie," though pretty, is refined till
all   character is  smoothed  away.    But  the  bare-footed
The Attempt. 259
" Skye Lassie," (No. 247), resting her basket of peats on
the bank beside her, who has not met her hi the High¬
lands ? who does not know the picturesque wildness of
her appearance, or what shy dark eyes will be raised to
greet the passer-by who accosts her ?
Close by (No. 246), is a fine picture by H. O'Neil,
" Tintoretto painting his dead daughter." Very sweet is
the white head reposing on the pillow, with its wealth of
auburn hair, such as Italian painters loved; white flowers
are scattered round her; and her father, his task
abandoned for the moment, has fallen into a sad reverie
as he sits by her side. But I think the painted head on
the canvas behind him destroys the unity of effect.
The idea would have been quite sufficiently indicated by
the brushes and palette in Tintoretto's hand. The living
colouring (for he has painted her as asleep), seems harsh
and crude after the fair dead face; and above all, the
tints are too rosy, almost florid, to harmonize with the
red-gold hair, which in nature is generally found with a
complexion of a delicate and pecuhar paleness.
On the opposite wall hangs a picture by E. W. Cooke,
(No. 419), " Steeple Rock, Kyuanee Cove, Lizard; Low
Water," to me one of the most beautiful in the whole
Exhibition. It is a real poem, and as you gaze at it, its
surroundings seem to fade aivay and leave you alone on
the shore. The scene itself is before us. Almost we
could walk on that firm smooth sand in the foreground ;
then how grand is the rugged mass of serpentine that
rises in the centre, with all its rich tints varying as the
light or shadow falls upon them. Out in the bay the
great sea-horses are racing in, all life and stir. Soon the
first ripple will creep round the further side of the
pinnacle, and the tide will be on us before we are aware.
To the right—sinister object—are the great bare ribs of a
wreck, like the bones of some extinct animal; and a
touch of life is given to the scene by the birds collected
in the sand searching for food.
One cannot help being struck with the very strange,
unsuitable subjects chosen by some artists.- Such a
picture is " Brothers of the Brush," (No. 234,—Eyre
Crowe.) This represents a London shop front, against
which is poised a tall ladder, occupied by no less than six
painters, one above the other; the whole looking so
absurdly like a pantomime when the " comic business "
has begun, that we quite expect to see the clown appear,
260 The Attempt.
the painters to turn into acrobats, and the shop-front to
part in the middle and disappear from the scene. Of the
same class is the banquet scene from the Tempest, (No.
286,—P. F. Poole,) " Thunder and Lightning. Enter Ariel
like a Harpy," etc. Sure enough, we have the long table
with ample table-cloth—black • thunder-clouds in the
distance—the harpy alighting on the table, and the feast
breaking up in most admired disorder. But the subject
is quite unsuited for pictorial effect; nor is Shakespeare
honoured by having his airy conceptions thus materialized.
Of the Gadarene Swine, (No. 988,—V. Prinsep), I really
cannot speak. Such an extraordinary piece of grotesque
irreverence (irreverent, from the utter and glaring im¬
possibility of the whole scene), was surely never before
perpetrated.
Lady artists hold a very creditable place in the Exhi¬
bition. ]\Iiss Starr's rendering of Sintram's interview with
his mother (No. 311) must be pleasing to all lovers of
that grand romance. I think the architecture and per¬
spective are open to criticism, but the figures are life-like,
and without exaggeration, and we may well accept the
conception of the black-haired young knight, kneeling
before the grating, "silently weeping," feeling "as it were
in Paradise, where every wish and every tumult is
hushed." "Do Doggies Gang to Heaven?" (No. 391,
—]\li8s G. Martineau), attracted me by its title, and I
found it, a small oval, badly hung, the boy's face, and
the wise, loving attitude of the dog expressing its
question well.
A more important picture than either of these is No.
1096, " Hero-worship in the 18th century," by Miss
Osborne. Its motto is from Boswell. "Two young
ladies who were warm admirers of his (Johnson's)
Avorks, went to Bolt Court, and were shown upstairs
where he was writing; .... one of the females
repeated a speech of some length, .... which
when the speaker had finished, she panted for her idol's
reply. What was her mortification when all he said was
' Fiddledee, my dear I'" In quoting these words I have
described the picture, for it tells its story admirably.
Johnson's heavy, large-limbed figure is full of expression;
he has flung himself back in his arm chair with a look
which exactly says, " Fiddledee, my dear!" and the
young ladies, pleasing, intelligent girls, in spite of a touch
of affectation, seem scarcely to realise what a rebuff they
'I he Attempt. 261
have met with. I do not believe it was thrown away
upon them, they look as if they had quite sense enough
to profit by it.
Two very striking pictures are to be found together in
gallery No. VII., and here, I think, the hanging is unques¬
tionably in fault; for tliese pictures destroy each other's
effect, and are as incongruous as a mixture of orange and
silver, or flutes and trumpets. No. 677, ''Borrowdale,"
(G. E. Hering), is a lovely painting of serene evening
twilight. The stately mountains group themselves round
the still lake; the sun has left the lower levels, but his
light yet lingers on the distant ranges, and the clear sky
is dappled with flecks of cloud of the most delicate gold
and rose. The motto chosen for this is not particularly
happy, as neither floAvers, leaves, nor birds form an ele¬
ment in the landscape:
" When evening's twilight gathers round,
When every flower is hushed to rest ;
When autumn leaves breathe not a sound,
And every bird flies to his nest."
To me it much more expresses the spirit of these lines of
Wordsworth—
" It is a beauteous evening, calm and free ; >
The holy time is quiet as a nun
Breathless with adoration ; the broad sun
Is sinkiag down in its tranquillity."
In startling contrast to this, you look directly under it,
and your eye meets " The Vocal Memnon; Sunrise, Plain
of Thebes, Egypt (No. 676,—A. Macallum.) This is a
noble transcript of a scene which few of us can hope to
see in reality; we feel, as on looking at a speaking
portrait of an unknown face, this must be true. The two
gigantic hewn figures, deeply impressive in their power
and massiveuess (uncouth though they be, with scars and
rents in their outlines), stand erect befi)re us ; the upper
part has caught a flush so intensely vivid, that no words
seem strong enough to give an idea of its brilliancy : it is
like lambent flame. The rocks in the background are
suffused with it, the sky is kindling likewise; while far
away stretch the tawny desert sands,—
" The ever-silent spaces of the east,
Far folded mists, and gleaming halls of morn."
The time-olden legend lives again : fitly is Memnon said
to be the son of Aurora, when her rosy fingers touch his
290 The Attempt.
Certainly not enough to attract any one to come who
prefers to eat the bread of idleness. Small, however,
as this payment seems, it is more in proportion than
many of the women could make were they paid by piece,
as most of them can do nothing but the roughest kinds
of work. A few workers, however, sew remarkably well,
and under the guidance and instruction of the super¬
intendent, some beautifully finished work has been done
in the workroom.
In addition to the payment of the provision orders
niven to the women, there are other expenses in con-
gection with the workroom. These have hitherto been
met by a yearly grant of £15 from the " Association."
This has paid the rent of the room and the superintendent's
wages; the cost of materials etc., is paid by the sale of t
clothes made, and by payments for work sent to be done "
in the room.
The numbers of those who have received employment
have varied each year. In 1871, 156 women were em¬
ployed; in 1871-72, upwards of 60; and during the winter
of 1872-73, between 60 and 90.
The first year the room was often inconveniently
crowded, and forty is about the largest number that can
well be accommodated at one time. No woman is em¬
ployed for more than three months, unless under special
circumstances; as the help thus given is not intended to
be permanent, but just sufficient to keep them from want
and despair, till they find some proper means of sub¬
sistence. Those who apply for admission are of all ages,
varying from 16 to 60.
As to the results of what has been done;—it is not easy
to speak with much confidence as to any decided
" Improvement in the Condition" of all of these poor
women, but this much may be said, that in many cases
valuable temporary help has been given; for a few, per¬
manent steady employment has been found, and there is
no doubt that, in all cases, the hours spent in the work¬
room brought a little brightness into lives otherwise sad
and lonely enough.
Every day, one or other of the ladies forming the com¬
mittee spends an hour or two in the workroom to read or
talk to the women, and to assist the superintendent. In
this way they can make acquaintance with the women,
and find out if they are fitted for other better employment,
or how they can otherwise be helped.
The Attempt. 263
High on the jagged peak, that sheer o'erhangs
The pool where curves the eddy's backward sweep,
And stirs the long sea-weed that waves far down
Where star-fish wander o'er the trembling sands,
She stands, the fisher's bride, to watch the sail
That, brown against the sky, and growing less,
Glides round the distant hill.
Where, through the lonely lea,
The winding brooklet, murrn'ring, flows to meet the sea I
Then from her misty home the twilight comes
And wraps the waiting world in tender gloom ;
And flick'ring lights from out the hamlet peep,
And weary babes are lulled, and warm hearths glow ;
And slow the round moon, climbing up the sky.
With silver flecks the clouds and strews the wave,
And tips the distant hill,—
As through the drowsy lea.
The winding brooklet, sighing, steals to meet the sea !
But ere the night her silent watch hath passed.
Up from their ocean bed tlie wild winds spring.
And fierce before them drive the leaping waves,
And dash them, white and death-fraught, 'gainst the cliffs !
And all the sky is blackness—and afar
Th' uprooted trees crash through the forest lone
That skirts the distant hill,—
And on the storm-swept lea
The winding brooklet, shudd'ring, starts to meet the sea !
The dawn has come, and on the jagged peak
That overhangs the pool, the fisher's bride
Stands watching for the sail will bear him back ;
But where the rising sun shines on the bay,
Far out, there floats a spar—dark mid the gleam,'—
Lone remnant of the boat that never more
Will pass the distant hill,
Whence through the weary lea
The winding brooklet, moaning, sweeps to meet the sea!
Clear is the sheltered pool beneath the peak.
Though swift and strong its foam-flecked eddy whirls.
And deep and far below, where white sands gleam,
Amid the tangled weed, she sees—she sees—
264 Tlie Attempt.
Him—him—for whom all through the night she prayed!
Him—him—she loved o'er all the world beside !—
Ah me ! the dreary hill I
Ah me ! the desert lea!
Oh, winding brooklet, wailing, creep to meet the sea I
Melensa.
A TALE OF THE FORTY FIVE.
CHAPTEK XVI.
A  BLAST  O'  THE  WIND.
AVhen Barbara awoke from her sleep of exhaustion, the
first idea that succeeded the bewildered one of wondering
how she came to haA^e gone to bed with all her clothes on,
was, that whatever came of this strange episode, Nancy
must not know. She lay still a fcAv minutes, trying, in
the stillness and darkness, so to steady her nerves that she
might meet her young sister with an untroubled foce.
Then she rose up, and kneeling for one moment at her
bedside she put up a swift, silent prayer for help and
strength in this ncAv emergency; and then groping her way
through the dark room she went qriietly down stairs. By
little and little, through the long, solitary years passed in the
old house, there had been growing in Barbara's mind the
sense of .an unseen, ever-present Helper, to whom she
could turn alike in joy and grief. I think it was the
intense human need for some one to go to who should
understand, and her instinctive shrinking from opening her
heart to any sympathy that did not so understand, that
had first driven her to that invisible, unchanging, all-
comprehending Friend. As we have seen in our conversa¬
tions with old Peggy, Barbara had hardly yet dared to
acknoAvledge to herself that she was " one of His," and
yet it was to Him she now always instinctively turned in
her hours of need. Those few words of prayer,—hardly
more, or more explicit than the " Lord, help me," of the
blind man of old, calmed and strengthened her, and she
groped her way down the dark stairs with a feeling as if
some mighty voice had spoken above the tumult of her
The Attempt. 265
heart, as it spoke of old to the stormy waves of Galilee,
saying—" Peace, be still! " She went first into the hall,
expecting to see Nancy there, but finding it deserted she
at once surmised that she had taken refuge in old Elspet's
kitchen, and thither she followed her.
"Well, Barbara," said Nancy, as she entered, "you've
had a nice nap. When did you come in % I found you
fast asleep on your bed an hour ago; you must have tired
yourself out with your ramble, you naughty girl."
" Aye, and ye're looking as white's a ghaist," added
Elspet. " I'll hae nane o' thae goings on, Miss Barbara.
The Colonel 11 be flightin' on me like wud, when he comes
frae the south, gin ye misguide j^ersel that gate."
Barbara smiled gently, as she sat down on the old-
fashioned fender; "Don't scold, Elspet," she said, "I
believe I did tire myself a little too much with my walk,
but I've had my nap, and I'm all right again."
" You must have gone a long way to tire yourself so,"
said Nancy, " you who are such a good walker ; if it had
been poor silly me, I shouldn't have wondered. Where did
you go to ? "
" Only to the kirkyard, to see old Peggy's grave."
" Only to the kirkyard! why, that's nothing of a Avalk
for you. I suspect you've been sitting thinking on
Peggy's grave, and that's tired you, not the walk," said
Nancy,—" now, confess."
"I did sit there a while; old Mr Mackay was there, and
I had a chat with him. Wliat a dear old man he is ! I
think he looks upon that kirkyard, where his wife and the
little children he lost so long ago are lying, as his only
home, till he gets to the Home where he believes they
are."
"There, now! I told you, it's the thinking, not the
walking, that tired you."
" I'm feart ye hae gottin a blast o'the win,' sittin' there
on the cauld yearth, Aliss Barbara. It's a clean temptin'
o' Providence. Ye'U just tak' a cup o' marjoram tea, and
pit yoTir feet i' het water afore ye gae to your bed the
nicht," said old Elspet, looking up anxiously from her
knitting.
" Indeed, I don't need it, Elspet, I don't feel as if I had
taken any cold."
"'Deed but ye'U just do't, IMiss Barbara; them kirkyards
is ill-faured places, mony a yin'e gotten his death there;
SEPTEMBER 1873. ^   L
266 The Attempt
my gude-sister's cousin cam' by his that gate, stannin'
wi's hat off his heed, a guid half-hour by the clock, wi' an
ill-faured loon o' a presbyterian man, that had mair win'
nor wits, pray'in ower the puir lad's grandfaither."
Barbara smiled, she saw it was no use protesting, so
she submitted quietly to her old nurse's nursing, and
drank the hot marjoram tea as she was bid, and allowed
her feet to be steeped in hot water, to Elspet's heart's
content. The old woman fussed about, quite in her
element, till she had seen Barbara safely stowed away
tinder the blankets, with a hot-water bottle at her feet,
and an untold accumulation of bed-clothes, to counter¬
balance the supposed " blast of the wind;" then, with a
contented heart, she went away again to the kitchen.
To say the truth, Barbara was not altogether unwilling
to take advantage of the old woman's anxiety, to creep
quietly aAvay back again to her own silent room, where
she need no longer wear a mask or act a part, bvit, now
that the first Avild tumult of feeling had partly subsided,
might quietly face the naked truth. A bright fire of
wood and peats, piled and tended by Elspet's careful
hands, was burning in the old-fashioned grate, and thrcAv^
its weird flickering shadows through the otherwise dark
room, Barbara watched them, half unconsciously, as they
rose and fell, now throwing up little bright jets of flame
that lighted up all the room, and anon sinking down into
red embers, and leaving it in shadow. Very much the
same struggle was going on to-night in Barbara's heart
as had rent Alaster's on the night she was lost on Ben-
vorlish. Like him, she had wandered vmconsciously to
the brink of a precipice, and her eyes had opened to her
danger, only as she stood on the very edge. Like him,
she recognised at last, that what she had dekided herself
by calling sisterly afl^ection for the man who was to be
her brother, was nothing less than love. To her, the
discovery came with oven a greater surprise and horror
than it had to Alaster. She, Barbara, who had promised
her dead mother to be a mother to the motherless yoimger
sister, who had watched over Nancy all her life, to whom
the tender, loving, trusting child clung as to a rock of
refuge, that she should be capable of doing her such deadly
wrong! She shuddered as she thought of it, and even alone
in her darkness the crimson blood flooded her cheek. There
was no doubt in Barbara's mind, as there had been in
Alaster's,  as to what her course should be.    The idea
The Attempt. 267
never once crossed her mind of the possibility of purchas¬
ing her own happiness at the expense of her little sister's.
Whatever came of it, that could never be. Her whole
soul seemed consumed with the bitter shame that she
should have so far forgotten herself as to let, however
unconsciously, any such feeling towards her sister's
lover creep into her heart. And yet, amid all her self
reproach, a strange feeling would steal over her some¬
times, of the sweetness and the fitness of this thing which
could never be, and a strange throb of pleasure, mingled
with the shame and the pain, as she recalled Alaster's
passionate words, and felt again, in fancy, his passionate
embrace. Then she tried to think of the future. There,
all seemed perplexity, one thing only stood out clearly in
her mind's eye as a fixed, unalterable resolve, however it
was to be managed ; whatever might happen—though
her own heart broke in the struggle—God helping her,
Nancy should never know. But how was it to be done ?
For herself she could promise, but how could she promise
for Alaster? She remembered the wild passion in his
face; how was she so to curb his love as well as her OAvn,
that her little sister might go on in peace % What if he
utterly refused to listen to her, and told Nancy himself?
Her heart thrilled with fear at the thought, and yet
mingling with the fear came something that seemed
almost like a wild hope;—if he did—if she could not pre¬
vent him—then, then, might it not be possible?
CHAPTER XVII.
A    TAP    AT    THE    WINDOW.
In the meantime, Nancy slept on in peace. Is it not
often so that we pass through the very crises of our fate %
close to mighty forces and strong passions which are
working for our weal or woe, and ourselves utterly
unconscious of it all; as unconscious as the babies of
Bethlehem were of the fear and rage working in Herod's
heart—what did they know about it? and yet how fraught
it was with terrible consequences to them ! So that night,
while Barbara tossed on her feverish pillow, Nancy slept
on, the sleep of youth and innocence. About midnight,
the thought seized Barbara, that if she could see Nancy—
the child she had brought up, and watched over, and
268 The Attempt.
cared for, tlie Httle sister who clung to her as to a guardian
angel—the sight would kill for ever this wild longing
Avhich was tearing her heart to pieces ; so she rose softly,
and wrapping herself in a plaid, slipt quietly from her
own room to Nancy's. It was a bright moonlight night, the
shutters in her sister's room were wide open as usual, and
the white moonlight lay in long streaks on the floor, and
flooded Avitli its quiet light the little white bed where
.Nancy was lying. The bright young head, with its
masses of floAving chestnut hair, stood out in strong relief
on the white pillow, and tlie moonlight formed a sort of
halo round the sweet, childish face, where a half smile
lingered about the rosy lips. Barbara stood silently
looking down on the quiet, happy, sleeping face, and the
old motherly feeling for the motherless child rushed over
her heart, and seemed to drown in its generous flood the
passionate longing for personal happiness that was strug¬
gling for life within her. By and bye the rosy hps opened,
and a sweet srnile broke all over the sleeping face, and
Nancy said quite distinctly—
" Oh Barbara ! I am so happy—Alaster has come back."
The words sent a guilty pang through Barbara's heart as
she remembered what his coming back had been, and she
sunk on her knees, by her sister's bedside, and, burying
her face in tlie clothes, prayed long and earnestly for
strength so to act, that, after all, her young sister's sleeping
words might prove true, and that Alaster might really go
back to her, and the sweet, childish heart never have its
liappy sunshine clouded by the knowledge ho^w far away
he had been. Her j^rayer over, Barbara still continued
kneeling by the bedside, half-dozing, half-dreaming, for a
great peace seemed to have crept over her wearied soul,
till she heard Nancy moving in her sleep, and fearing she
might wake and find her there, she rose and crept silently
back to her own room.
When the sisters met the following morning at the
breakfast table, and exchanged their morning kiss, Nancy
remarked that Barbara's embrace was tenderer than usual,
and that her kiss lingered longer and more lovingly on
her brow; she was quieter too, but wlien she did speak,
there was something in her manner gentler and sweeter
than usual.    Elspet looked at her anxiously, and said—
" Ye're no lookin' yersel yet, ]\Iiss Barbara, ye've no
gotten quit o' that blast o' the win', I'm thinkin'."
"I'm sure I was very dutiful,  Elspot," said   Barbara,
The Attempt. 269
smiling gently, "I drank every drop of your marjoram
tea, and I'm sure it was quite bad enough to have cured
me if I needed curing."
"Bad eneuch! quo' she?" exclaimed Elspet, indignantly,
" ye're sainted mither, God rest her soul, wad ne'er hae
misnamed my marjoram tea that gate. Miss Barbara, she
aye said, ' Gie me Elspet's marjoram tea, she's the best
hand at it i' the country-side,'"—and Elspet turned her
back in offended dignity.
" No, no, Elspet, I didn't mean to doubt your mirjoram
tea being the very best of its kind; all the old folk know
you're the best doctor in the country-side,—it was only to
marjoram tea in general that I objected."
" Aye, aye," grumbled Elspet, in a somewhat milder
tone, evidently considerably mollified by Barbara's adroit
compliment to her powers as a doctor, "it's the tea itsel'
ye're findin' faut wi', is it? that's the way wi' a' the
young folk, they're that wise i' their ain conceit, its noclit
but new-fangled medicines for them, wi' fine French
names to them ; the auld drugs that their forbears used
to drink ilk evening for a nicht-cap afore they gaed to
bed, and bonny men an' braw leddies they were, and
leeved out a' their days, an' ne'er an ache or a pain till
fourscore an' ten, are no half guid eneuch for them, I'se
warrant." Elspet stopped, out of breath with her long
harangue, and Barbara went up and kissed the old woman
kindly.
" No, no, Elspet, you know better than that, I'm not
doubting the great benefits of your marjoram tea, only 1
don't like the taste much, you know." Elspet shook her
head, evidently mollified, yet doubtful whether it were
consistent with the proper upholding of her testimony, to
be satisfied with such a qualified acquiescence in the
virtues of her favourite drug.
After breakfast, the sisters sat down to their spinning
Avheels in the hali. The bright hoar frost was glittering
on the grass and trees outside in the chill winter sunshine.
Nancy sat singing at her wheel, snatches now of an old
ballad the sisters had often sxmg with Alaster, these last
happy autumn evenings, now of some grand old clia7it
they had practised together for the service in church.
The table-cloths their hands were busy spinning were for
Alaster and Nancy; everything seemed connected with
him, Barbara thought, as she looked silently across from
her own work to the happy, bright, little face bending
270 The Atteynpt.
over the wheel on the other side of the great fire-place.
Many thoughts were struggling in Barbara's heart that
morning,—fear,  and shame, and  perplexity,  and under
them all a strange, wild throb of happiness which, much
as she tried to keep it under, noAv and then would force
itself to the surface, and threaten to drown them all in its
overflowing flood.    In her inmost soul, she recognised the
fact, that it was a great misfortune which had befallen
her—a misfortune which she dimly foresaw stretching on
through all the coming years—a dire misfortune to her¬
self, threatening the utter ■wi-eck of all her personal happi¬
ness, even if she were strong enough and brave enough
so to control herself and others, that the wreck should
include no happiness but her own.    This morning, as last
night, only one resolve was firm within her—that come
what would, Nancy should be taken care of, Nancy should
never know; and she   quietly faced the truth, that in
order to do this, she must lay down all hope of personal
happiness for hei'self, not for a time only, however long,
but absolutely and for ever—for ever, at least in this world
—in another, who shall say how " the crooked shall be
made straight, and the rough places smooth ?"   Yet under
it all, under all the pain and the perplexity, whence came
that strange throb of happiness ?    Barbara's was not a
nature to shrink from a great sacrifice, qnd as she sat
there that ■s\nnter morning over her spinning wheel, with
no word of pain on her lips, and no visible emotion in her
face, just as usual, only perhaps a little quieter and paler
than her wont,   she was nerving herself for as true a
martyrdom as any covenanter who had walked singing to
the stake.    There are many such martyrs in the world,
noble men and women who have laid their life's happi¬
ness down at the call of duty, and said no word, from
whose faces the gentle smile has never faded, on whose
kindly tongue the loving word has never faltered, as tliey
" buried their dead joy, and lived above it with a living
world,"    There  are  many such sacrifices,  even in this
commonplace " work-a-day world," unknown and unnoticed
here ; yet I think that by and bye, when we come face to
face with the " noble army of martyrs," we shall recognise
many a face that we little thought to find in that glorious
band.
By and bye, Nancy got up from her spinning, and went
upstairs to get some more yarn. She had scarcely left
the room, when Barbara heard the tap of a riding whip
The Attemj)t. 271
against the window, and, turning round, she saw Alaster
standing outside. He beckoned to her to open the window,
and, trembling all over, she rose to do so.
" Barbara," he said, in a hurried whisper, " I have
waited all morning to get a chance to speak to you; I
have been watching at the window for an hour and more.
I must speak to you. Come and meet me at the stone
under the birch tree; I will wait there till you come."
Barbara hesitated; she did not know whether or not
it was right to go, but before she had time to decide, she
heard Nancy coming singing downstairs; and with
another emphatic " I will wait till you come," Alaster had
disappeared behind the corner of the house.
"Dear me, Barbara," said Nancy, as she came in, " you
must be in love with Elspet's marjoram tea after all, she'll
be sure to give you another dose of it to-night if she sees
you standing at an open window this cold day."
Barbara muttered something about feeding the robins,
then, shutting the window hastily, she went upstairs.
Though she had hesitated at Alaster's request to meet
him in the glen, a moment's tlionght convinced her that
an explanation with him was absolutely necessary, and
she felt instinctively that the sooner it was over th.e
better. So, though her hands trembled so that she could
hardly fasten on her thick winter shoes, or tie the strings
of her broad straw hat, and made the operation of dressing
a much longer one than usual, she managed to get them
on at last, and after one hurried moment of silent prayer
at her bedside, she slipt quietly downstairs and out of the
house. She feared that Nancy would miss her, and
wonder that she had gone out without telling her of her
intention to do so ; but that seemed preferable to the risk
of Nancy's offering to accompany her, should she tell her
she was going for a walk. Once clear of the house, she
walked rapidly on towards the burn-side.
The place Alaster had chosen for their rendezvous was
the very spot to which Barbara had been used to come to
weep by herself over her childish sorrows. She had told
Alaster once of that sanctum of hers, though she had
never spoken of it to any one else, for somehow she
always felt as if there were very few things which she
could not say to Alaster; not that she piuposely made a
confidant of him, or formally told him what she made a
secret of with others, but she had always felt that she
could let herself out to him in a way she had never been
272 The Attempt.
able to do to any one else, and this possibility of being
herself with him had been perhaps what attracted her
more to him than anything that he actually said or did.
It was with some dim instinctive idea of this, I think,
that Alaster had chosen this spot for their meeting-place
at this crisis of their fate.
CHAPTEK XVIII.
UNDER    THE    BIRCH    TREE.
As Barbara came in sight of the place of rendezvous, she
saw Alasters tall figure leaning against the stem of the
old birch tree.    She was trembling all over with excite¬
ment, and her heart was throbbing so that she could hear
and count its beats, but she never hesitated in her rapid
Avalk.    She was close beside him before Alaster seemed
to notice her approach, then, at the sound of her step, he
turned   round   towards  her.    His   fece   was   pale   and
haggard as though he had not slept; the wild passion
that had burned io it yesterday seemed to have faded
away  into   a  sort   of dreary   despondency  much  more
painful  to look at.    He put out  his hand  to   Barbara
without speaking, and she laid hers hesitatingly in it.
Somehow,   yesterday's   revelation   seemed  so   to   have
changed the relations of these two, Avho had been before
as  intimate  as  brother  and   sister,   that  now  Barbara
aUnost felt as if she were guilty of a  crime in shaking
hands with him.     He felt how the little hand she gave
him was trembling, and a great tenderness flooded his
heart and looked out of his dark eyes, as he closed his
fingers tightly over the trembling little capture.    He held
it fast—she could not draw it away from him had  she
wished to do so, and she was not unwilling to feel that
she could not.    He looked long and earnestly into her
eyes before he said a word, then Avhen the  sweet eyes
dropped under his gaze, he drew the xmresisting girl to
his heart and held her closely there.    She could not free
herself from his arms—I think she did not wish to do so.
She had made up her mind this was to be their first inter¬
view and their last of this sort—only this once in all a
life time—then she must brace herself up for the dreary
future.    It would be something to think of then that once
he had held her to his heart.    True and simple to the
core, the idea never entered Barbara's mind that it was
The Attempt. 273
possible for her to deny her love for Alaster.    Ashamed
and pained as she was that such a feeling should have
entered  her  heart  towards  her  sister's  betrothed, her
simple, truthful nature at once recognised the fact that it
was so, and the idea of denying it never once crossed her
thoughts.    The   path  of duty,   the only possible path,
seemed to her mind's eye quite clear at that moment, she
had no doubt about what it was, her only doubt was as
to her own courage to follow it.    She could not buy her
o^vn happiness at the cost of her little sistei-'s—the thing
was simply an impossibility not for once to be thought of.
She   must   learn   to   be   brave   enough—Alaster   must
learn   to   be   brave    enough—to   put   this   passionate
love of theirs quietly behind them, and go on as if it had
never been.    She did not see koto it was to be done, that
was all dark to her,   only one thing stood out strong
and clear as daylight, however it was to be, it must be
done ; but this once—on this first and last meeting, her
love should have its way, once in a whole long life-time
she would let Alaster know what was  burning in her
heart, and then for evermore she would keep  silence.
One draught she must  have   of that  intoxicating  cup
before  she   dashed  it  for   ever  in   pieces.    So  she  let
Alaster hold her to his heart.    For some minutes neither
of them spoke.    Life's STipreme moments are generally
Bilent, and eo these two, with so much to explain of the
past, so much to arrange for the future, such a strange
mingling of passionate pain and pleasure in the present,
stood  there   silently heart to heart.    Perhaps the two
hearts so beating against each other explained more to
one another in those silent moments than tongues could
have done in many an hour's discourse.  At length Alaster
broke the silence.    It did not seem to him, as it did to
Barbara, that the thing was settled and irrevocable.    He
thought of this as the beginning rather than the end.    If
Barbara loved him, and he loved Barbara, then whatever
came of it, it seemed to him that he and Barbara belonged
to each other, and nothing in heaven or earth should be
allowed to part them.    What was a foolish former promise
—a boyish fancy—that it should stand in the way of this "?
Poor little Nancy! he did not forget her—he was very
Borry—he thought   of her  tenderly and  pityingly, but
would it be true even to her to marry her when he loved
her sister?    So Alaster reasoned with himself, and I am
SEPTEUBEB 1873. ^   M
274 The Attempt.
not prepared to say that his reasoning was false, nay, I
^hink it was true—only the thing was impossible. How
could these two rejoice in their own happiness, when to
buy it they had destroyed little Nancy's 1 Would not the
whole of their future hves be but one long remorse?
Alaster had got hold of one side of the truth, and Barbara
had got hold of the other—for both sides were true—
what was to be the upshot then between them ? What
was wholly true? How were these two conflicting
truths to be reconciled ?
" You do love me then, Barbara % " said Alaster at last,
breaking the long silence. A scarcely audible " Yee "
came from the fair face hidden on his breast. He bent
his over it and covered the broad white brow with kisses.
" My darhng, my darling," he murmured, " then come
what will you are mine, nothing in heaven or earth shall
part us."
Then Barbara raised herself from his breast, and looked
him full in the face, the bright colour that his passionate
words and kisses had called into her cheek fading suddenly
to a deadly paleness, and an expression of amazement
filling her soft eyes.
" Alaster," she said, " I do not understand you, what do
you mean ? " Alaster was staggered by her words and
tones—he had failed to follow the workings of her mind,
and he could not understand how loving him as she had
just confessed she did, she should answer him thus.
" What do I mean, Barbara ? " he said, " what should I
mean, what could I mean but that you and I belong to
each other, and that no one on earth has a right to come
between us ? You are my wife, Barbara, you and I are
one already." She started from him as if his words had
stung her.
" Your wife, Alaster?—never—Nancy is your wife," she
said, and her tone sounded hard and cold, as she turned
di'earily away.
" Barbara ! Barbara I" he exclaimed, seizing both her
hands, " what do you mean I do not di'ive me mad I I
tell you I love you, not Nancy—you have just told me
that you love me, then is it not true that we belong to
each other ? in God's sight you are my wife now.
Barbara, what is any foolish boyish fancy that it should
stand between those whose hearts He has joined ? "
"But Nancy? "she stammered. His words took her by sur¬
prise, she had never looked at that side of the question.
The Attempt. ' 275
" And Nancy, too," he answered, " would it be true to
her, Barbara, that I should marry her, when 1 know in
my heart that it is you I love ? "
She was silent—this was altogether a new view of the
matter. Could it then be, that after all, this great sacri¬
fice, for which she had nerved herself, was not required
of her—that after all it would be the truest and the kindest
thing, even to Nancy, to prevent her marrying this man
who loved another? For one moment she felt as if a
great load had been lifted from her heart as she thought
of this possibility, the possibility that after all there might
be this great happiness in store for her; all life seemed
brightened up as with a sudden burst of sunlight as she
thought of it, but in another moment the clouds closed
round again, and the sudden light of hope died out in her
heart.
" No, no, it would break her heart, Alaster,—it cannot
be," she said, drawing away her hands from his.
" Barbara, Barbara!" he pleaded, " I beseech you think
what you are doing—if you will not think of my
happiness—or of your own—think of Nancy's ! Is it fair
to her that I should perjure myself at God's altar by
promising to love her while my heart is full of another
woman % Would it be true, would it be right, would it be
even Mnd to her, Barbara ? " She was silent for a few
minutes, looking down at the burn that ran at their feet—
he stood watching her anxiously. By and bye she
raised her eyes again to his face.
" I do not know, Alaster, I cannot tell—it seems to me
that what you say is true—there is a great wrong some¬
where, and I do not know whether marrying Nancy will
right it—we have been very wicked, I am afraid," she
added simply, looking up at him with her clear truthful
eyes, " and we have done Nancy a great wrong, whether
she ever knows it or not. I do not know what is right or
what is true now, I only know that I cannot do it, I cannot
take Nancy's happiness from her and be happy with it
myself. I should hate myself if I did, and perhaps I
should come to hate you too—if Nancy is not to be happy,
nobody must be happy." She paused a little, and then
when Alaster did not speak, she went on, almost in an
apologetic tone,—" I am very sorry, Alaster, for you, but I
can't help it—you see you don't know what Nancy and I
have been to each other; our dead mother left her to me
to take care of,—how could I meet her in heaven if I had
276 The Attempt.
robbed Nancy of her happiness?" Alaster had turned
away, he was leaning against the great stone with his
face buried in his hands; the despondency of his attitude
touched Barbara, she went a step towards him, and put
her hand on his arm.
" I am very sorry, Alaster," she said, imploringly, " but
you see I can't help it."
" Then what is to be done ? " he said, turning drearily
towards her. She had no answer ready, and he went on,
" I can't stay here and pretend to make love to Nancy,
and see you every day and say nothing—I cant do it,
Barbara, I must go away." She paused a moment before
she answered, and her face grew very pale ; then she said
in a low voice,—
" Yes, Alaster, I think it will be better so—for a little."
"For a little I" he said scornfully, "is that all you know
about love like mine? How can I ever come back? How
can I ever think of you as a sister again? " She was silent.
She felt in her own heart how hard this thing would be
of which he spoke, and yet if she was to keep her vow
that Nancy should not know, it must be even so.
Alaster went on—" I will join the Prince's army, it is
going to move south ; perhaps there may be no need fur
me ever to decide about coming back." A thrill of terror
shot through Barbara's heart at the words, and banished
every shade of colour from her cheek, but she said no
word of opposition. " Good-bye, then, Barbara," he said,
catching her once more in his arms and covering her face
with wild kisses, then loosing her suddenly he strode
off down the glen, leaving her standing, half stunned,
under the birch tree.
CHAPTER XIX.
Barbara's    crossness.
The Jacobite army were at this time on their disastrous
march to Derby. Alaster's father was with them. He
had left his son to keep alive the Jacobite feeling among ,
his people in Perthshire, and to be ready at his call to
join the Prince's force, with those of his clan who still
remained in their native glens. But noAv Alaster felt
that this life of inaction would be intolerable to him, and
he resolved, as he strode rapidly down the glen after his i
interview with Barbara, that  he would  not  await  hisl
The Attempt. 211
father's orders, but would himself at once proceed to join
the invading army.    He knew that his father would be
displeased, but he must brave that; with this wild passion
raging in his heart he could not remain inactive, if he
did not do something he felt he should go mad.    His
mind was all in a tumult.    As to the future, one thing
only seemed evident to him, that if Barbara was not to be
his wife, he must never see her again.    What then was
to be done about his promise to Nancy?    That question
he put aside for the present, he saw no way to answer,
and he would not trouble himself about it in the mean¬
time ; he was   going to join  the  Prince's army on   an
expedition full  of danger, it might be, I think he almost
hoped that it tvould be, unnecessary ever to answer it.
On coining to Aberdeenshire at this time, he had not gone
to Carrick Castle; he wished his interviews Avith Barbara
to take place without any one knowing, and he could not
have  trusted  his  kindly,  gossiping  cousin.  Lady Mac-
Donald, to keep his secret; so, for the two nights which
he had spent in the neighbourhood, he had put up at a
little roadside inn, twenty miles  on  the   other side of
Milla Forres, where he was comparatively little known.
He had tied his horse to a tree at the foot of the glen,
before watching at the window of Milla Forres for a word
with Barbara, and there he again found it when his inter¬
view was  over.    He mounted and rode rapidly away.
As he passed the last turn in the road where he could get
a glimpse of the old house  peeping out from its thick
environment of ancient trees, he drew in his horse, and
stood looking at it long and earnestly.    There was  a
misty film before   his   eyes, when at last, with a long
drawn breath, and a deep sigh, he turned his back upon
it and rode aAvay.    Hero  had to   do  both   rider's and
horse's work for a mile or two, for her rider neither saw
the road she was going, nor heeded where her head was
turned.    Alaster was a strong man and a brave one—
a man who could have walked calmly up to a cannon's
mouth, or cheered on a forlorn hope—but as he turned
his back that afternoon on Milla Forres, in the gathering
gloom of the wintry twilight, the mist that blinded his
eyes gradually changed into great tear drops, that fell
slowly one by one on Hero's neck.    Hero seemed to feel
that  something was wrong with  her  master,  and  she
picked her steps carefully over the uneven road, as though
she knew that she had to take care of him, and Avas on
278 The Attempt.
honour to do it to the best of her ability; so, when
Alaster's half-trance of grief was over, he found himself
safe within a mile of the little inn where he had passed
the night. The sonsy gnidwife came out to meet him as
he rode up, bustling and eager to know what the stranger
" shentleman " would be pleased to want for supper, and
hoping for a friendly crack and gossip while laying the
table; for Alaster was a great favourite with all those
humble folk with whom he came in contact, hie frank,
courteous manner, courteous ahke to high and low, no
less than his handsome person made him many friends
among his humbler neighbours, especially among the
women part of them, most of whom were accustomed to
describe him in their highest manner of approbation as
"a rael bonny mon." So the landlady of the Cross Keys
was sorely disappointed when Alaster seemed deaf to her
hints at conversation, and peremptorily declared that he
should set out on his journey immediately, and without
waiting for supper. " It's a clean temptin' o' Providence,"
muttered the good woman, as she turned away baffled
from her attempts to alter his resolution, " the lad maun
be fey riding atf that gate, wi' an empty stamach, an' no
sae muckle as a di'ap o' Glenlivat to Avat his whistle.
Guid kens whaur he's been the day, I misdoot he's been
after nae guid." Jeanie Mokison.
(7o he continued.)
All secrets lie Avithin his downcast eyes.
All silence sitteth on his quiet mouth;
Cycles of years, which pass o'er Paradise,
Have left no trace upon his wondrous youth;
His brows are crowned with the poppy wreath,
The asphodel he beareth in his hand,
A dark-browed angel, and his name is Death,
Yet brings he tokens from the sunlight land.
His dusky wings are folden, and his feet
Are swift and soundless, as they pass along
The chequered shade aud sunshine of the street.
As bells are chiming unto Evensong.
Tlie Attempt. 279
He pauseth at the gate, gay voices cease,
His hand is on the latchet of the door,
He standeth on the threshold, sajang, "Peace,"
And peace, in coming, comes for evermore.
Our heart beats faint, our breath grows chill with fright,
The other world doth touch us fearfully—
As those who saw, i' the first watch of the night,
A spirit walk the Galilean sea.
We fain would stay awhile to work and weave
The web of life, which promises so fair—
The little ones cling round whom we must leave,
The sun sheds golden kisses on their hair.
He bids us rise, he brooketh no delay,
Though the glad spring is waking o'er the earth,
With faint pink flushes on each apple spray,
And the sweet treble of the wild birds' mirth.
We fain would see the summer, we would fain
Comfort ourselves on mother earth's warm breast;
We hear the summons with a sudden pain—
" Arise and go, for this is not your rest."
So at the last lay we our hand in his.
Content to go, if it must needs be thus;
Hushed to our ears are earth's sweet melodies.
And her fair sights are dark for aye to us.
We go with him, from out the noise of Hfe,
Unto the silence of the other shore—
From stirring sounds of motion and of strife,
Where strife and motion cease for evermore.
We go with him,—ah, happy if at last,
When fear is hushed in awe and mystery,
With voice we loved and longed for in the past,
Our Guide, at Heaven's gate, saith, " Peace, it is I."
R.
Part HI.—{Continued).
Algiers, as Raoul saw it in the last days of its independ¬
ence, was not the modernised half-European city of the
280 The Attempt.
present time. It was then, with all its beauty, the gloomy
gateway of a mysterious land, chiefly known in Europe
by legends of Moslem cruelty and Christian suffering and
slavery. The grim windowless liouses, so secretive and
forbidding without, were within rich with all the wealth
of the East, the luxurious homes of the fierce pirates, who
had for the last 300 years desolated all the neighbouring
lands. Raoul, in his capacity of doctor, was taken to see
some Christian slaves, who worked in chains under a
burnmg sun on the fortifications; the last of a long suc¬
cession of obscure martyrs, who for centuries had toiled
under the lash of their hard task-masters, the Turks. A
renegade was there to watch that Raoul had no unnecessary
communication with the slaves; such perverts there always
were, but how few compared with the thousands who
had remained firm to their faith through a hard captivity.
The French blockade, which was drawn ever tighter, was
filling the minds of the slaves with hope. Algiers had
hardly any communication with the outer world. Raoul
could not profit by what there was, for he was speedily
taken by his master, Mustafa bou-Mezrag, to his own
government at Medeah, a town on the slopes of the Atlas,
some sixty miles to the south. Here he lived for some
months in the Bey's palace, finding his only interest in
studying Arabic, and curing Turks and Arabs.
Then came a day in June when he was recalled to
Algiers, where his services were needed by the wounded ;
for the French army had landed, and was besieging the
town. Great was Raoul's disappointment when, about
the tenth day of the siege, the wily Bey of Tittery,
seeing clearly what the result would be, left Algiers with
all his fi)llowers, and while fixing his own headquarters at
Medeah, sent his wives, treasures, and household—Raoul
among them—to the oasis city of El Argouath, far in the
south. For Mustafa, while determined not to submit to
the French, reahsed better than they did what a stu¬
pendous conquest they had made, and how all Algeria lay
in their hands had they but known how to grasp it, when
once they had seized the centre of government.
El Argouath was a ten days' ride from Algiers, an
island of verdure, palms and orange woods, watered by
abundant springs. Around it lay on every side the sandy
desert, taking strange impressions and varieties of colour
from the light which there is lord of all, transforming and
illuminating with a magic power the dim local colouring.
The Attempt. 281
Among the sombre Arabs Raoul lived a silent, lonely life.
There was little for him to do, and his active northern
temperament could not attain to the oriental calm of the
Arabs, who would sit meditating, or rather vegetating, in
the same picturesque attitude for hours, quite content to
do nothing at all. Raoul would pace uneasily the limits
where the sand actually bordered the oasis as a sea edges
the shore. That waste of sand, with an occasional low
rock glimmering with white salt, seemed waiting and
pining for the fresh sea waves, as he did for life, for com¬
panionship, for Gabrielle. Even she would have been
satisfied could she have known how he dwelt on her saucy,
wansome ways, her loving, truthful nature; not unmixed
with a harassing fear that their last dispute should be
counted by her as a serious quarrel, and that he should
find himself forgotten when he returned. That little dis¬
pute, like a gnat in the lens of a telescope, now loomed
as a kind of monster in the eyes of both E-aoul and
Gabrielle, marring the shining landscape of their loves,
and proving that imaginative people, who care for each
other, should never leave a difference unadjusted. Raoul
could get little information from the Arabs, but he rightly
conjectured that the conquests of his countrymen had
caused the Bey to send him so far off", and when the
autumn and winter had passed by, and he was told that
with a small escort he was to ride back to Medeah, he
guessed the truth that they had met with some reverses.
It was now February, and pleasant travelling in South
Algei'ia. Something of enjoyment came to Raoul, as he
paced along on an active barb; he was dressed much as
we are accustomed to see the Zouaves, in bournous and
fez; his close-clipped hair, long moustache, and bronzed
face making him not unlike the Moors and Turks in his
company, among whom, however, he was always known
as the German doctor. One evening they rode late,
hoping to reach Medeah without bivouacking again. The
night was cool and calm; in the spacious sky the stars
were scintillating with wonderful brilliancy, and the planets
seemed suspended like round silver lamps. Southwards
lay the changeless waste of the desert, a few palms drawn
in silhouette against the far horizon ; to the noi'th were the
woodlands and rugged rocks of the Tell; and the deep
roar of the lion, or sharper cry of the panther, roused by
the tramp of horses, told how wild was the land. Then
they were met by a party of horsemen, headed, as it soon
8EPTBMBKE 1873. * N
282 The Attempt.
ap])eared, by the Bey himself, who presently called Raoul
up alongside of him.
" My son," he began in Arabic, which Raoul now spoke
with ease, " I have seen your skill in fetching back men
from the very gates of death, therefore I have recalled
you to Medeah where we have many wounded men. But
they, as well as the brave who have been slain, have their
reward. The Franks are in full retreat, and will soon be
driven into the sea. Now mark what I say. Our physicians
were once the best in the world, but we have stood still
while in Europe the multitude of diseases has led to
many discoveries; here you can make your fortune, and
teach others; fi"om me, you shall receive horses of good
race, and a wife as fair and docile; only conform to our
faith, and the thing is done."
" Turn Mussulman !" said Raoul.
" Outwardly," answered Mustafa. " The ^\^se man
knows that religion, as concerns man and God, lives in
each man's heart alone; each must think what he thinks.
Bi;t, as it concerns man and man, it is the strongest of
outward links, and demands the submission of the man to
the nation. Our faith is good for us ; yours may be good
for you in Germany, but you have lost your country;
adopt ours—your thoughts are still your own. If
Mahomet was no prophet, his name is noAv a power; own
that truth, and it is enough."
" Those who change their faith for wordly advantage
are called by us renegades ; a word of shame, my lord,"
said Raoul.
" Those who deny the prophet, are called slaves by
us," said the Bey. " They are slaves, by Allah, a bad
thing—not a bad name. The men here murmur at my
indulgence for you ; submit to some, if you will, unmean¬
ing forms, and they shall kiss your hand and hold your
stirrup—for I like you, you shall be as a son to me, and
riches and power shall be yours."
" My lord," said Raoul, " spare your offei's. I am a
Christian from belief—not merely because T was born in a
Christian land "—and as he said so he felt it; the old
teachings of his mother in Alsace seemed to live again,
free from the passing cloudiness of the Quartier Latin, and
the bustle of a busy life. In the vast spaces and solitudes
of the desert, men learn to think, and the essential fidelity
of Raoul's nature had had time to assert itself. " And
further, my lord," he continued, with heightened colour,
The Attempt. 283
" put me in chains, and you may get a slave's work out of
me, but the free art of healing I will abjure—I will never
in that case advise or tend your people more."
" How hot are these young men I" said Mustafa—" go,
you shall have the freedom of the town as before, only
beware how you leave it."
Raoul, as he reined back his horse, resolved to bend his
mind seriously to plans for escape, fearing further restraint.
Now a flush stole over the cold blue of the sky, and in a
few minutes the first sunbeams lit the sqxaare piles of
masonry upon the height which formed the town of
Medeah, and threw the shadows of the aquaduct arches
far across the plain.
The town was full of wounded, and Raoul, after a hard
day of attendance on them, a work he always enjoyed,
had stretched himself in his bournous beneath an arcade
of the Bey's palace, when he was roused by an old Arab
woman, who touched him on the shoulder, and implored
him to come and see two more sick men in her house.
She led him to the door of a little mean house, through a
small court, and then lifting a curtain disclosed a little
dark room, where two men lay on cushions on the floor.
" I ought to kill them, or bring some one to do it—but I
cannot—they begged so hard for water, and now I have
given them drink, I cannot kill them—you, great doctor,
cure  them,   and  send   them  away."    8he   spoke   as  if
confessing  an  unamiable  weakness.     One  man  was   a
Kabyle in the French service, sufl^ering from an open gun¬
shot wound—the other was a bright-eyed French gamin
hurt in the foot.    Raoul was soon in eager conversation
with the latter.    Algiers had fallen, of course ; also several
toAvns  to   the  south ;   the  French  had   even   occupied
Medeah, but had been   compelled to  withdraw hastily,
leaving  some   of their  wounded  behind.     Those   were
generally despatched by these useful drudges, the Arab
wives ; but the bold widow, who had found the two men,
was making great efforts to save their lives.    Further, the
Frenchman told Raoul that the tricolor was once more tlie
nationalflag—andof the glorious accession of the citizen king,
—"of whom," remarked the little soldier, "I am the equal."
Six busy weeks for our young doctor now slipped by;
he organised an hospital,   and worked indefatigably  at
training the Arabs in practical surgery,  for amid all his
longings   for   liberty  he  was  keenly  interested  in  his
patients.    The two French ones he visited with all the
284 The Attempt.
precautions of a plover watching over its nest, not for
their own sakes only, but because he saw in them guides
to freedom and France. But one day he found both his
birds were flown; the little Frenchman calculated he
could better escape without the well-known German
doctor; the Kabyle, more grateful, had got employment
in tending horses, that he might find an opportunity of
securing two for their escape. One night's ride across the
Atlas by defiles he knew well, would bring them the
following day to Blidah, where the French had a garrison.
All was at last arranged; Raoul one afternoon feigned
illness, and desired he might be left undisturbed in his
room till the following morning. The old Arab woman
had furnished him with a complete Arab costume—and so
attired, with blackened hands and a bournous over his
head, he slipped out into the street with her, and together
they passed through the gate, she explaining that this
was her son with whom she was going to the date harvest
on the Tell. They walked to a little Marabout temple,
three miles beyond the town, and there waited till dark¬
ness fell. The welcome sound of rapid hoofs soon told
them the Kabyle had succeeded in bringing off the horses,
and Raoul, bidding farewell to the old woman, mounted
and felt himself free once more. They rode all night as
fast as the darkness and wdld mountain tracks permitted,
and next morning "were descending one of the last spurs
of the Atlas, where the mountains sank into the plain of
the Metidja. llaoul reined up his horse with a cry of
delight. The flat country stretched away northwards
interspersed with bushes and rocks, and darkening into
forest on the horizon. The mountains lay behind them
now; not flir oft" a river left their shelter, and its silver
course trended away to the west. But more than the
fair view in the April sunshine to Raoul, was a little square
white block-house on a rock, just where the pass debouched
on the plain; for on it waved the tricolour. Moreover,
that plain was no solitary landscape, but alive with the
glitter of a most picturesque warfare. Far and wide a
goum, or body of irregular Arab cavalry, were scattered ;
now drawing together in a column, again scattering like
an opened fan; sometimes a single cavalier would dart
out, suddenly stop his horse in full career and discharge
his piece, and then scour away swiftly to a safe distance :
from what ? Raoul saw by degrees more distinctly a
compact column of French light cavalry moving steadily
The Attempt. 285
towards the block-house. Only about a hundred strong;
but they had their own Arabs hovering in their rear, and
charging the others at intervals. They paid little heed to
the demonstrations of the hostile horsemen, whose balls
seemed to fall short of their ranks ; only once while Raoul
watched, they halted and charged a compacter body of
Arabs than usual, which however dispersed before them
like a swarm of flies, when one tries to grasp it. One
thing was very strange; immediately in the rear of the
block-house, but concealed by it and the gorge from the
French, a number of Arabs were gathered, as if in
ambuscade. Why did the garrison not notice them ; was
their ammunition all expended 1 As Raoul puzzled over
this circumstance, he suddenly perceived that he and his
Kabyle were surrounded by mounted Arabs. For this
contingency be was prepared, and the Kabyle was already
explaining that they were bearers of a message from the
Bey of Tittery to Ben Zamoun, then commanding in the
field. Raoul showed a letter addressed to the latter, an
innocent forgery, which was beheld by the Arabs with the
respect which writing wins, where it is an unknown art.
Ben Zamoun they explained was now at Blidah, whence
the French garrison had retreated. This was bad news,
but as the Kabyle said when the Arabs had left them,
it was only making a detour to avoid the skirmish, and
then pushing on at night for Algiers.
" I rather think of stopping here, and at night going to
the blockhouse,'' said Raoul.
"They have just told me," answered the Kabyle, "that
the block-house is taken too. The flag is left up as a snare.
When the Franks come within gunshot, the marksman
within will pick off their men. They hope to shoot down
the officers, and then they can surround the men in a
moment with their ambuscade; it is said without their
officers they often lose heart    We shall see all well here."
Raoul's indignant answer, couched in strong language,
drew from his guide a deprecating—" What will my lord;
Allah Kerim! we can do nothing ; it would be too danger¬
ous to ride across, but to-morrow we can get to Algiers
and give information."
" Go to Algiers, then, I am going to warn the cavalry,"
answered Raoul; and, dismounting, he began to scramble
down the gorge, leading his horse. This was no case for
deliberation, whatever the risk he must have tried it, but
disguised as he was, he thought he had a fair chance of
28G The Attempt.
riding safely to the French column. He was unarmed,
but breaking a stick out of the brushwood, he tied on it a
shred of his white bournous, and when he reached the
plain, he remounted, and i-ode in a nonchalant manner
through the crowd of horsemen. Happily, he attracted
no attention save from an old Sheik, Avho rode alongside
for a little way, recognising him as the Bey's physician,
and who, on hearing that he was the bearer of an urgent
message, actually offered to change horses with him—
" Mine is quite fresh, and as good as yours, which is
spent," he said. Raoul accepted with many grateful
thanks, which he thought with amusement would make
the old Sheik furious on the morroAv, and was soon cara¬
coling on a fresh horse among the cavaliers of the goum.
There was not a minute to lose; the French were getting
near the blockhouse. Eaoul galloped off straight towards
them, and soon found himself free from the ruck of Arabs,
and close to the flank of the French column. A puff of
smoke in front warned him that they might mistake him
for the boldest of the Arabs; so reining up, and waving
the improvised white flag over his head, he shouted,—
" Prisonnier." The nearest officer rode towards him, and
Raoul dashed on. A discharge of fireams behind him, and a
sharp tAvinge in the side told him tlie Arabs had detected
the trick; but in another moment he had cannoned in among
the French horsemen, and was safe. Voices sounded round
him—"Vive le deserteur;" "tiens, il a le mors aux dents;"
" Reudez vous ;" " Can you speak French, I'ami."
" I am a Frenchman ! " he shouted, somewhat hurt at
this reception. " Where is the commandant i you don't
know where you are going."
" Pardon mo, but you have the air of an Arab to the
tips of the fingers," said the lieutenant, as he made way
for the captain to ride up, to wliom Raoul eagerly gave
his information. For a moment he looked hard at Raoul,
then saying simply, " Many tlianks, sir, stay near me,"
gave the necessary orders for reversing the line of march.
No sooner did the Arabs perceive the manoeuvre than
with Avild shouts they hauled down the French flag on
the blockhouse, and the horsemen behind it joined the
others in a disorderly charge. The French rei^elled it
with little loss, and tJien retreating by alternate squad¬
rons, soon extricated themselves from the enemy; or
rather the Arabs, from some unknoAvn reason, turned
northwards, and in a short time all had disappeared.
The Attempt. 287
" They are off to amuse themselves at Blidah," the cap¬
tain remarked, " evidently Ben Zamoun is not here." He
now divided his little force, giving the lieutenant the
charge of a party, who, with Raoul, rode straight for their
garrison. Late in the afternoon, after a long silent ride,
they reached the Bordj, or fortified farm, for which they
were bound—a large, white-Avalled enclosure, with one
high tower. Here Raoul was taken to the commandant's
own room, and sedulously waited on by a cheery soldier
servant; soon he was resting in a comfortable camp bed,
too tired to think or speak, but with a delicious conscious¬
ness of peace and satisfaction after long suffering, losing
itself by degrees in a sweet and dreamless sleep. Even
when he woke the following morning, it was to a sensa¬
tion of bliss he scarcely cared to disturb by recalling the
reasons. He was in a small, somewhat dark and lofty
room; from a narrow, unglazed window in the thick wall,
could be seen a glimpse of sunlit plain and serrated
mountain, framed in intense shadow; a gaily striped cur¬
tain hung in the doorway ; weapons decorated the walls ;
a lion skin the divan; moorish cups and vases of shining
illuminated metals, strewed the tables; but the pleasantest
sight of all was the person whose entrance had awakened
him from his morning slumbers, and who indeed was
destined greatly to influence his future life.
{To he continued.^
E. J. 0.
i^K^atr and   ^aith.
A LONELY mere—a vast expanse
Of leaden waters, where no lights dance
To the music of ripples along the shore.
Or the measured plash of the silvered oar ;
Where no life stirs : e'en the breathless air
Is dense with the curse o'erhanging there ;
Where the reeds which cling to the slimy bank
Are broken and leafless, and brown and dank ;
Where the birds flitting over it stifle their song,
Nor dip in their wings as they flash along;
Where a brooding shadow seems ever to lie
Like the midnight gloom of a moonless eky.
288 The Attempt.
A loveless life, where the ebb and flow
Of morning and evening come and go
With an aching weariness worse than pain,
Throbbing upon my troubled brain.
A joyless life, with the sun gone down,
And my hope like the reed-tops broken and brown.
With the youth crushed out of a heart too young
To be slain by the power of an evil tongue,
Turned from life and its pleasures to stone.
What is aught to me who am left alone ?
Hopeless and godless; they speak to me
Of a Light in the darkness I cannot see,
But I have no guide, and I drift away
Further and further from day to day,
Till I reach at last that sunless shore,
Where I shall not awake to my misery more.
Broodeth a gloom on the ocean wide.
The sullen swell of a heaving tide,
A ragged rift in the mist that sweeps
The cloud that veileth still blacker deeps ;
A broken boat—to whose mast there clings
A weary hand; while like darkling wings
Of some evil spirit of fell despair.
The sails flap loose in the laden air.
Oh life, that hearest, and hearest alone
The surf-like beat of grief's monotone !
The swell must die as the storm subsides.
And the morn will bear thee on silvery tides.
Oh hand, nigh hopeless ! cling on through the dark,
Tho' lost be the tract of thy rudderless bark ;
Oh God ! let a ray from Thee, faint though it be,
Shine out from the shore where " there's no more sea."
The rift it widens, and shimmering pale
A star strikes down on the tattered sail,
The hand still clings, but how strained the grasp—
When lo ! it meets with a loving clasp,
And One AVho walketh the waters o'er
Saith, " I am with thee, so fear no more.
And pastures green I've prepared for thee,
In that land of Mine where " there's no more sea."
Martyn Hay.
I
The Attempt. 289
% ^lulrh  qI the  ^«u!i«ig-|loom,
In connection with the " Edinburgh Association for Improving the Condition
of the Poor."
This account of the sewing-room, at 5 Roxburgh Place,
is written in the hope that some of the readers of the
" AttemjA" magazine may be interested in it, and may be
induced to give some help in carrying on its operations.
About three years ago, some of the members of the
" Edinburgh Association for Improving the Condition of
the Poor" thought that something should be done in the
way of giving employment to the very poor women Tvho
applied for relief, not only as a .test of their being really
necessitous, but to encourage those who had fallen out
of industrious habits, to make a new effort after self-
support.
For the carrying out of this idea, some ladies who are
interested in the association work, formed themselves
into a committee, and a plan was suggested which had
been successfully tried by Miss Octavia Hill in London.
The women who most require assistance are just
those who are the most helpless, and who in many cases
could not be trusted to undertake any work at their own
homes, and who would require constant encouragement
and supervision. It was therefore necessary to open a
workroom under efl&cient direction, where the women
could come to work.
A room was hired in a central position on the south
side of the town, and the services were secured of a
person, well fitted for the situation of working super¬
intendent and sewing-mistress. The plan adopted for
the admission of the women is this : The " Association,"
instead of giving an order for food on one of the provision
merchants who supply these orders, gives an admission
to the workroom, authorizmg the applicant to receive
work to a certain amount, or for a certain time. No
payments are made in money, and this is a great test of
the necessitousness of each case; but at the end of a week,
the woman receives her order for food to the amount
for which she has worked.
The workers are paid by time, at the rate of three-
halfpence per hour, and as the workroom is only open
during four hours five days in the week, the most any
one can earn is two shillings and sixpence  per week.
OCTOBEE 1873. ■" (^
290 The Attempt.
Certainly not enough to attract any one to come who
prefers to eat the bread of idleness. Small, however,
as this payment seems, it is more in proportion than
many of the women could make were they paid by piece,
as most of them can do nothing but the roughest kinds
of work. A few workers, however, sew remarkably well,
and under the guidance and instruction of the super¬
intendent, some beautifully finished work has been done
in the workroom.
In addition to the payment of the provision orders
niven to the women, there are other expenses in con-
gection with the workroom. These have hitherto been
met by a yearly grant of £15 from the " Association."
This has paid the rent of the room and the superintendent's
wages; the cost of materials etc., is paid by the sale of t
clothes made, and by payments for work sent to be done "
in the room.
The numbers of those who have received employment
have varied each year. In 1871, 156 women were em¬
ployed; in 1871-72, upwards of 60; and during the winter
of 1872-73, between 60 and 90.
The first year the room was often inconveniently
crowded, and forty is about the largest number that can
well be accommodated at one time. No woman is em¬
ployed for more than three months, unless under special
circumstances; as the help thus given is not intended to
be permanent, but just sufficient to keep them from want
and despair, till they find some proper means of sub¬
sistence. Those who apply for admission are of all ages,
varying from 16 to 60.
As to the results of what has been done;—it is not easy
to speak with much confidence as to any decided
" Improvement in the Condition" of all of these poor
women, but this much may be said, that in many cases
valuable temporary help has been given; for a few, per¬
manent steady employment has been found, and there is
no doubt that, in all cases, the hours spent in the work¬
room brought a little brightness into lives otherwise sad
and lonely enough.
Every day, one or other of the ladies forming the com¬
mittee spends an hour or two in the workroom to read or
talk to the women, and to assist the superintendent. In
this way they can make acquaintance with the women,
and find out if they are fitted for other better employment,
or how they can otherwise be helped.
The Attempt. 291
The visits of one yonng lady were especially looked
forward to, because, as well as reading, she often sang to
the women, which afforded them much enjoyment, and
they did not hesitate to criticise her performances, and
to express their opinion freely as to which songs they
liked best. One old woman occasionally volunteered to
assist her. They liked, too, occasionally to talk about
what was read to them. The story of a girl, whose
refractory temper caused much unhappiness to herself and
her friends, called forth the exclamation,—" Eh, but that's
awfu,' but surely she'll come to before it's a' dune!"
The following cases will serve to show something of
the sort of help given:—E. M., a poor girl of sixteen, was
obhged from ill health to give up her work in a factory ;
she was suffering from disease of the hip joint. When she
recovered sufficiently to be able to walk with the help of
crutches, she gladly accepted the offer of admission to the
workroom, and although her home influences were not
good, she was very patient and industrious, and came up
to the workroom day after day, and in spite of often being
in much pain, she said she " liked fine " to come, and she
did what work she could. After she left the workroom,
we heard she was well enough to take permanent work,
and that she was employed in a chignon manufactory,
where she earns from three to four shillings a week, and
has the promise of an increase to her wages. M. C. was
living in one of the lodging houses near the Grassmarket
when she applied for help through the sewing room. She
had been a lady's maid for many years, but through
intemperance, had fallen very low, and into great
poverty. During the time she was employed at Rox¬
burgh Place, she kept perfectly sober, and was able
gradually to get her clothes out of pawn. She at last
got a situation as housekeeper in a tradesman's family in
Fifeshire. She has now been there for two years, and
continues to give satisfaction.
Of course, in some cases, help is given where the results
are not so satisfactory. Mrs R. also lived in one of the
Edinburgh lodging houses. She was a widow who had
evidently been in respectable circumstances. She had a
small government pension, which was sufficient to keep
her with the help of what she earned as a sempstress, but
for some reason she had fallen out of employment and
came to us for help. During two winters she came to the
workroom, but she  was always in trouble, and in deep
292 Tlie Attempt.
waters; why, we could not understand, because she
certainly did not drink. At last we foimd the poor old
woman ate opium. It seemed useless to do anything
more for her, and she was recommended to give up her
email pension and go into the poorhouse. To this she
strongly objected at first, as she was too deeply in debt
with her lodging-house keeper to leave; but, on the
promise of her debts being paid if she gave up all her
pawn tickets, which represented all her- available pro¬
perty, she consented to go out to Craiglockhart. As was
expected, the pawn tickets were mostly overdue, and
were taken in every possible name, in nearly all the pawn¬
shops in the neighbourhood of the Grassmarket. All the
articles pawned within the time of her coming to the
workroom had been given in the name of one of the ladies
she saw there. When asked why she had used this name
and not her own, she replied,—"It was from delicacy
of feelin', mem. I couldn't use my own name for such
transactions !" Her affairs being settled, she went out to
the workhouse, but at the beginning of last winter she
appeared again, saying, "a country residence" did not
suit her, and that " for an aged person, the wide stair¬
cases were very cold and draughty." However, she was
told no further help could be offered her, and she was
recommended to return to her " country residence," where
she was when we last heard of her, and to which we hope
she is now reconciled.
There are many improvements which might be sug¬
gested to make this workroom much more useful than it
is, especially if the visitors under the Association would
take more interest in the women sent to it.
Much might be done by any one who would undertake
to visit, in their own houses, those women who are absent
even for a day, during the time they are entitled to
receive admission, as in many cases orders have been
given to women who were unable to avail themselves of
them either from illness or from home duties, which pre¬
vented their coming out to work.
Help might be given by procuring work to be done in
the room, or by gifts of clothing to be re-made, as such
things are often taken by women ia payment, instead of
their provision orders.
Suggestions as to suitable books for reading aloud in
the room would also be very valuable.
F. C. S.
The Attempt 293
a^duf's   ^atJ^.
0 HAE ye heard o' Earl Macduff,
How he fled frae fierce Macbeth—
The fause, red-handed, traitor king,
That had sworn to be his death %
The lone rock-cave aneath Kincraig
Looks out owre the sant sea-faem.
An' it's there, where the waves and the winds
mak' moan,
MacdufF has found a hame.
The white waves thunder on the shore,
Ye could hear them ten miles round;
But of him that lies in the lone rock-cave
They tell not by sough nor soimd.
The sea-birds scream frae the jagged rock,
Ye can hear them far and wide ;
But they tell nae tale o' wha sits there
An' watches the rising tide.
* * * *
Oh! Eire's castle stands on the hiU;
It looks owre sea an' land,
An' it hears the sough of the silver wave
That washes the gowden sand.
The ladie sits in the topmost tow'r,
An' she looks out owre the sea,
Wi' mony a pray'r on her white, white lip,
An' the saut tear in her e'e.
The sun comes up, the sun gaes doun.
The waters rise an' fa';
0 for a sicht o' the kindly bark
That's to bear her lord awa' 1
The ladie looks to east an' west,
An' syne to north an' south ;
Heav'n grant Macbeth an' his mailed men
Be na first at the rock-cave's mouth!
0, what's yon licht 'neath the castle wa'.
Like the gleam o' sword an' spear ?
An' whose yon voice at the castle gate,
Micht wake the dead to hear?
294 The Attempt.
" Come forth, an' yield thee to thy king.
Thou haughty rebel thane.
Or by my royal crown I swear
'Twill cost thee bitter pain.
" Come, yield thee, yield thee, haughty thane,
Thy castle an' thy lands,
Or by my royal throne I swear
To tear them frae thy hands."
The ladie hears in the topmost tow'r,
An' she hies her doun the stair ;
Oh! but her bonny cheek grows wan,
An' oh I but her heart grows sair.
She's met the king at the castle gate,
An' wi' mony a cunning word,
She's wiled the bloodhounds for a day
Frae the life-track o' her lord.
Macbeth has turned frae the castle gate.
To bide till anither day.
An' the ladie's gane to the topmost tow'r
To watch, an' weep, an' pray.
The sun comes up, the sim gaes doun.
The waters rise an' fa';
0 for a sicht o' the kindly bark.
That's to bear her lord awa' I
Syne day by day Macbeth comes back,
Withouten stint or rest;
An' day by day the ladie's wit
Has wiled him frae the quest.
But aye the sairer grows her heart,
An' the wanner grows her cheek.
An' the slower come the cunning words
That her weary lips maun speak.
Till out an' spak' the fierce Macbeth,
" Nae langer will I bide;
Your lord maun meet me face to face
On the morrow, at evening tide.
The Attempt. 295
" Or, by my halidome I vow.
Ye shall rue it lang an' sair;
For I'll rend yonr castle stane frae stane,
Till I find the rebel's lair."
0, sair the ladie weeps an' prays.
As she sits in the topmost tow'r,
An' heavy, heavy grows her heart,
As it hears the deadly hour.
But, oh! what's yon 'twixt the sea an' sky,
That glimmers sae snawy white 1
Is it but the sea-bird's eilv'ry wing.
That shines in the gay sunlight ?
Now, God be praised, who hath sent His help
In the hour o' sorest need I
For yon is nought but th e fisher bark;
Heav'n grant it double speed !
The sun is sinking in the west.
It is near the evening tide,
An' Macbeth is back at the castle gate,
But the ladie flings it wide.
And mickle marvels the fierce Macbeth
At the Avords her fair lips speak ;
" Come in, my liege, and follow me,
I will show you him ye seek."
She's ta'en him up to the topmost tow'r.
An' there, 'twixt the sea an' sky,
She's shown him the gleam o' a snaw-white sail,
That shoots like an arrow by.
" There, fause Macbeth,, is the Thane o' Fife,
To the English host he's gane ;
He will come again to his ain countrie.
But he will not come alane.
" For young Malcolm an' an English host
Will march beside him then ;
An' they'll pu' thee doun frae thine ill-won throne.
Though thou fence it wi' armed men."
Meigeag Bheag.
296 The Attempt.
Ilia (Jfarrp:
A TALE OF THE FOETY-FIVE.
CHAPTER ^YS..—Continued.
Barbara's crossness.
When Alaster had left her, Barbara stood for some time
half stunned, leaning against the old birch tree. It was
all over then—this was to be the end of it all. I think
she felt as if her life was over too—ae if what days and
weeks and years might still remain to her in this world,
would be so long of simple passive existence, not life at all.
She caught herself wondering by and bye what she was
to do with those days and weeks and years, that seemed
as if they never more could have anything in them for
her. In her simple, trusting way, Barbara was a Christian
—she knew that there is a higher will than ours, to which
our wills must learn to bend; but she was young, with a
strong, deep, passionate nature, which was stirred to its
very depths, and it takes many a lesson, painfully taught
over and over again, before the young and strong can
learn to let go their vehement, instinctive clinging to
personal happiness, before they can come to recognise
that it is indeed possible " to do without happiness, and
instead thereof find blessedness."
For a long while Barbara stood there without feeling
the cold north wind that was whistling about her, but by
and bye she began to perceive, half mechanically, that
it was cold, and that she had better go home; and half
unconsciously she drew her plaid closer round, and began
to move homewards. She had not wept or lamented, as
many a girl would have done; she only felt as if her heart
had died within her, and lay in her bosom as cold and
heavy as a stone;—but now that she began to move home¬
ward, and to feel the chill air of the "wdnter's afternoon,
slow tears began to roll quietly one by one down her
cheeks. It was not for Alaster she cried, nor for her own
yoimg blighted life, nor for anything in particular, but she
was cold and desolate, and the tears would come. She
checked them, however, before she reached the house.
When she got indoors, she went straight upstairs, and
took off her hat and plaid. She did not lie down on her
bed to think of her perplexities to-day as she had done
The Attempt. 297
yesterday. There were no perplexities now to think about
—it was all over and settled, Alaster was gone, life was
over for her, she must just go on existing as best she
might, what did it matter about anything any more ?
She just took off her hat and plaid, she did not smoothe
her hair or look in the glass, or change her walking dress
—Avhat was the use ? everything was alike to her now.
Then she went down to the hall, with an instinctive
longing for the warmth of the fireside. Nancy was still
at her spinning; she was hurrying on with those table
cloths to have them all ready for her marriage. She
looked up with a bright face as Barbara entered.
" Dear me, Barbara," she said, " Elspet will be in
despair; what could take you out in such a cold day,
after all her doctoring last night? You really do look
cold, too," she added, anxiously, noticing the pallor of her
sister's face, " indeed you will make yourself ill, Barbara,
with those long rambles of yours ; do come and sit by
the fire and get yourself warmed."
Barbara sat down on a low stool close to the fire, she was
shivering all over, and the warmth was grateful to her,
though she caught herself wondering why she should
care about it. Nancy looked at her anxiously ; she saw
there was something the matter, but her fear was only
that Elspet had been right, and that her sister had got a
stroke of the wind sitting on old Peggy's grave; never¬
theless the thought brought a shade into the bright face
bending over her spinning wheel. Barbara sat watching
her sister's busy fingers. Nancy's thoughts had flitted
ofi" again to the happy past days, when Alaster was with
them, and on to the still happier days to which she looked
forward, when they should not be separated any more,
and unconsciously she kept humming a merry tune.
Barbara sat watching her, her nerves were all unstrung
with the strain that had been put upon them for the last
two days, and the busy fingers and the happy face and
the merry tune seemed to torture her very soul. By and
bye the torture seemed to reach such a pitch that she
could endure it no longer, and suddenly starting up from
the stool on which she was sitting, she exclaimed, angrily,
" I do wish, Nancy, you would stop that eternal spinning,
and smiling, and singing, it's enough to send a person
crazy!" and went hastily out of the room. Nancy looked
up in amazement. That Barbara, who was usually so
equable in temper with every one, and who never, as
OCIOBEB 1873. 2 P
298 The Attempt.
long as she remembered, had said one unkind or hasty-
word to her motherless little sister, should speak so, and
apparently without the slightest cause, was more than
Nancy could understand. She tried to reason to herself
about it, but she coiild only come to the conclusion that
Barbara was very ill, or else she could never have spoken
eo to her; and appalled at the possibility, Nancy sat down
and began to cry.
CHAPTER XX.
"laying  the  wood  in   ordee."
Nancy was so little used to ebullitions of temper on
Barbara's part, and so much accustomed to get help
from her in all her difficulties, without the idea ever
entering her head that Barbara might have difficulties of
her own, in which slie, Nancy, might help and comfort
her, that when Barbara spoke so crossly that winter's
afternoon, she felt simply stunned and helpless, and sat
down on the hearth-rug and cried. It never occurred to
her as a possibility that this strong, brave, elder sister of
hers, who was always so ready to bear her burdens for her,
might, perhaps, have burdens of her own, which she in
her turn might lighten by loving sympathy. Somehow
Barbara had always seemed to Nancy so far above her,
something like a bright, strong, pitying angel, who always
came to comfort her in her poor, childish, human needs,
but to whom it would have been presi;mption to offer
sympathy or help, or even to imagine that such sympathy
and help might be needed. And yet how that brave, strong
heart had often longed for human sympathy in the days
that were past! how it was breaking for it at that very
moment! I do not suppose that Nancy's sympathy could
have been to Barbara what Barbara's was to her; it could
not have rested and satisfied her as her's did Nancy, it
was not understandmg enough; but still it would have
been much to her, not to have told Nancy what grieved
her, that she could not have done, but just to have laid
her head on any loving Iraman heart and wept her fill.
But Nancy did not know, nobody understood, and so
Barbara had to turn from human sympathy to poor old
Oscar's, whom she found watching for her at her bedroom
door, and whom she took into her room with her, and
locking the door, sat down on the floor, and put her arms
round his shaggy neck, and cried as if her heart would
Tlie Attempt. 299
break. Poor old Oscar, he did not understand of course
(though perhaps he understood more than many a
human comforter might have done), he only knew that
Barbara was sorry, and that he was sorry she was sorry;
and so he looked in her face with his great, loving,
pitying eyes, and laid his paw upon her knees, and licked
her cold hands; and somehow the mute sympathy soothed
her. There was something, too, in Oscar's perfect incap¬
ability to talk about what he saw, or to betray her hours
of weakness to others, that soothed Barbara's proud
nature with a sense of security and abandon in his
presence; she might be as foolish as she liked, he would
not blame or laugh at her, he would be sorry, and he
couldn't tell. So, on the whole, Oscar was not so very
bad a confidante.
Old Elspet put her head m at the hall door Avhile
Nancy was sitting crying on the rug. It was supper
time, and she was coming to lay the table. A look of
great amazement and consternation came over her kindly
old face as she caught sight of Nancy's bleared face and
Bwollen eyes.
" Guid guide us, Miss Nancy, what's gaen wrang wi'
my bonny bairn 1" she exclaimed, coming close up to her,
and laying her big work-hardened hand on Nancy's
chesnut hair. " Your een are ower young to be greetin'
that gate, my hinny, what's wrang % tell auld Elspet, my
bonny lassie," she said, gathering the sobbing girl into
her kindly old bosom.
" Oh Elspet, dear," sobbed Nancy, " I don't know what's
the matter with Barbara, I'm afraid she must be very ill,
she came in so cold and white, and she spoke to me so
crossly, and I hadn't done anything;" and poor Nancy
stopped, her voice choked with sobs.
" Guid preserve us !" exclaimed Elspet, holding up
both her hands in amazement; " heard a body e'er the
like o' that % Wha could be cross wi' my bonny lamb %
Whist ye, my hinny, naebody shall be cross wi' ye gin
auld Elspet can help it! "
" It's not that, Elspet," sobbed Nancy, " but I'm afraid
Barbara must be ill. She never said a cross word to me
that I can remember before, and, indeed, I hadn't done
anything," and the poor child hid her face again on
Elspet's shoulder.
" Whisht ye, my bairn, whisht ye," said Elspet sooth¬
ingly, but her kind old face had grown very grave, and
300 The Attempt.
she said no further word of blame of Barbara, for some¬
thing seemed whispering in her ear, " The shadow, the
shadow!"
In the meantime, Barbara had sobbed her griefs ont on
old Oscar's neck, and a sort of qniet, blank, dreary de¬
spondency had succeeded to the petulance of her sorrow.
She was thoroughly ashamed of her crossness to her
little sister, and in her generous, impulsive way, she had
made up her mind to apologise for it at once; but no
feeling of warmth, or comfort, or human affection followed
this resolution. She had been imjust to Nancy, and she
would tell her so, she thought; but it was only justice,
not love, that prompted her. She felt as if she cared for
nothing and nobody, as if she were cold to the heart, and
Avould never be warm again, as if, since she must not
love Alaster, she could never care for Nancy or anybody
else any more. As she rose from the floor, she felt as if
she was quite a different person from the warm, impul¬
sive Barbara, full of high hopes, and noble aims, and
pitying tenderness, that she had known of old. She felt
cold, and hard, and dreary, and old; and she wondered
to herself whether her hair had grown suddenly grey, as
she had heard of people's doing. She felt as if, whether
it had done so or not, it shoiild have done so; such a
change would only have been, she thoiight, the fitting '
outward sign of the inward fact; and she looked in the
glass with ahxLost a sort of expectation of finding that it
was so. But the bright golden brown was as lustrous
as ever, and she turned away with a half-impatient sigh.
She bathed her face to take away the trace of tears, and
then she went drearily down stairs. She was paler than
usual, that was all that Nancy noticed, as she looked up
wistfully as Barbara entered the hall. She went straight
up to Nancy, and kissed her very gravely, saying,—
" I am sorry I spoke so crossly to you, Nancy, will you
forgive me ? " She spoke quietly and drearily, without
any warmth or impulse in her voice. Nancy turned and
threw both her arms round her sister's neck.
" Oh, Barbara, dear," she said, tears coming again into
her bright eyes, " never mind that; I Avas only so afraid
that you were ill, and you do look ill. Oh, Barbara, what
is the matter ? "
" Nothing is the matter, I am not ill, do not trouble
yourself about me, Nancy," said her sister, and in spite of
all her efforts, she could not keep a touch of pecAnshness
The Attempt. 301
out of her voice. She did not return Nancy's embrace
either, though she did not repulse it; she received it
passively, as if she put up. with it, that was all. Nancy
felt the coldness of her manner, and felt vexed and
puzzled as she turned away, tears standing in her bright
eyes.
Next day it was much the same, and the next and the
next. Everybody said how changed Miss Barbara was,
and everybody about Milla Forres felt vexed and puzzled
about it. She had grown listless, and cold, and indif¬
ferent ; she was often peevish, and sometimes petulant.
All sorts of reasons were assigned, but no one guessed the
right one. They thought she was ill, and would have
tended her with all loving offices, but she put them from
her impatiently ; she was quite well, she said, and needed
no doctoring—so by degrees they came to leave her alone.
Old Elspet shook her head, and muttered under her
breath about " the shadow," but even she never dreamt
of the real cause of the sad change in her young mistress.
Poor Barbara, how miserable she was in those days I No one
felt the change in her so acutely as she felt it in herself.
She hated and despised herself for it, and often, when she
had been petulant and peevish during the day, and vexed
the kind hearts around her, she spent the whole night in
grieving over it, and making good resolutions for the
future, and many and many a morning her pillow was
quite wet with tears. But all her tears and resolutions
over-night seemed to have no effect in keeping her from
doing exactly the same next day, and then followed
another night of tears and repentance. She felt as if her
whole heart had been scarified, and the lightest touch on
the raw flesh made her wince to the core.
Poor child, she could do the grand part of the sacrifice,
and give up her life's happiness at the call of duty and
sisterly affection, but the details were too much for
her;— she could offer her Isaac, but the " laying of the
wood in order" was beyond her powers.
Week after w^eek passed in this way. A short note
had come to Nancy from Alaster, merely announcing the
fact that he was on his way to join the Prince's army,
and that, as letters might be delayed and lost, she must
not be anxious should they fail to reach her. The note
was very brief, but both its brevity and its formality
seemed excused by the haste with which it had been
Avritten on a hurried journey southwards, and the danger
302 The Attempt.
in those troubled times of its falling into wrong hands.
Alaster did not even sign his name, that would have
been too dangerous, so Nancy was not much disap¬
pointed at the absence of lover-like phrases, or the formal
tone of the epistle. She carried it about with her in her
bosom, and cried over it, and the dangers to which its
writer was exposed, many a time—poor, trusting little
Boul,—without one doubt of the continued love of the man
who had asked her to be his wife.
CHAPTER XXI.
THE    CALL    TO    BATTLE.
The spring flowers were coming out in the little patch
of garden ground which the girls cultivated at Milla
Forres. It was Nancy who had done all the gardening
work this winter, for Barbara seemed to have lost all
interest in it, and not in it only, but in all the other
innocent, happy employments that the sisters had all
their lives followed together. Nancy had put in the
young plants, and cleared away the fallen dead leaves,
but she had done it wistfully and sadly; she was not used
to working alone, and it seemed dreary and desolate to
her. Now and then, indeed, Barbara would seem to be
seize^with a sudden fit of energy, and she would rise at
her old early hours (she had grown very late in the
mornings in these dreary days, that always seemed as if
they were too long), and set to work at her old occupa¬
tions witli a sort of feverish eagerness; and then Elspet
and Nancy would rejoice and think that she was getting
well again and like her old self, and that everj^hing
would soon be again as it had been in the happy old days,
when Barbara was the old, kind, cheery Barbara. But
alas! the sudden energy soon faded; sometimes it lasted for
a day or two, sometimes it scarcely outlived a forenoon,
and the listless indifference and despondency gathered
round her as before. Elspet was beginning to be
seriously alarmed about her health, she could not under¬
stand the change, excepting on the supposition that there
was some secret, insidious disease at work, which baffled
even the virtues of her favourite panacea of marjoram
tea; and yet Barbara did not seem to be ill. She never
complained, indeed  she put away all idea of illness with
The Attempt. 303
petulant impatience, if at any time it was suggested to
her, and when she could be induced to exert herself, she
seemed quite capable of taking as long a walk, or doing
as much work as ever—more, in fact, for in her brief
spasmodic periods of energy, Elspet marvelled at the
amount of work she accomplished, and the immense
exertion of which she seemed capable. So things went
on till the spring flowers were out in the garden, and the
young leaves were beginning to bud on the birch trees.
One Sunday morning in the early spring, the idea seized
Barbara that she would go and hear old Mr Mackay.
She had not seen the old man or heard him preach since
she had parted with him at Peggy's grave. Somehow she
had felt too listless and indifferent about everything to
care to go in any way out of the beaten track, it was too
much trouble, so she had gone submissively with her
sister and Elspet, Sunday after Sunday, to Carrick chapel,
and sat patiently through the cui'ate's maundering dis¬
courses, with her great deep eyes fixed upon the speaker,
but without one idea of his discourse entering into her
mind. She had rather avoided old Mr Mackay, the
associations of their last meeting were still too freshly
painful, and she shrank from anything that would arouse
them. However, this bright spring Sunday morning a
great longing seemed to have come over her to see the
old man's kindly face, and perhaps get a word of fatherly
comfort from him which might soothe the pain at her
heart. Nancy and Elspet exchanged looks of pleasure
when she announced to them abruptly that she was
going to hear Mr Mackay. In the old happy days, both
of them, Elspet especially, had objected to Barbara's
patronage of the little Presbyterian kirk, but now her
wish to return there seemed like a coming back to her
old self, and they both hailed it as a good omen.
The service was begun when Barbara entered, and she
crept noiselessly into the seatnearest the door. Theopening
psalm was over, and the little congregation were standing
at prayer. The first words she heard in Mr Mackay's
quiet, earnest tones were, " Holy Father, keep through
Thine own name them which Thou hast given me, for
they are Thine." The words sent her thoughts back to
old Peggy, and her confident assurance that she, Barbara,
was "yin o' His," and that "He would tak' care o' His ain,"
and a sudden pang came to her heart as she thought how
little through these past miserable months she had been
304 The Attempt.
acting like   " yin   o' His."     Barbara  had   not   thought
much of  Peggy, or  of Peggy's commission to find  her
wandering,   lost    girl,   during   these   months;   the   one
absorbing thought and pain seemed to have driven all
other thoughts away, not from her mind only, but even
from her memory.    It was not only that she did not think
about them, but that they seemed to have been blotted
out altogether from her mind, she could not remember,
even when she tried to recall  them.    The prayer was
ended before she had recovered  from the   reverie into
which   its  first  words   had   thrown   her,   and  she   sat
down  with  the  rest   of the  worshippers.    Mr  Mackay
opened the big Bible and began to read the seventeenth
chapter of St. John, that wonderful prayer in which our
Saviour committed the disciples He was leaving behind
Him  to His  Father's  care.    Mr Mackay chose the last
verse of the preceding chapter, " Be of good cheer, I have
overcome the world," as his text, and in simple earnest
words, that kindled as they went on into a glow of quiet
enthusiasm,   he   told  his   simple   hearers  how  Christ's
parting  words  had   been  fulfilled  in  all  ages,   in   the
experience of every true disciple; how it was a prophecy
of the history both of the Christian church and of every
individual Christian man  and woman, a summary of the
whole Christian life.    " Distressed, yet not in despair, per¬
secuted, yet not forsaken, cast down, yet not destroyed."
A conflict always, but a conflict in which the victory was
secure.    The old man glowed into eloquence as he told
of the days he remembered as a boy, when the Church of
Scotland had been visibly fighting in this conflict, and
when the words of his text had sounded like an invigor¬
ating march   of battle,   an assurance   of triumph in the
thickest   of the  fight.    And  then  he  turned  from  the
church's warfare to the fight of faith in every Christian's
heart, how it is always going on, and how we are often
tempted to lay doAvn our weapons and to say, " I can
fight  no  longer, let  me  lie   down and  die," and  how,
through the despondency of our hearts, these triumphant
words  of Christ's should sound, " In the world ye shall
have tribulation, but be of good cheer, / have overcome
the world."    " My dear friends," he went on, " you see
our Saviour tells you the truth, He doesn't want to enlist
His soldiers on false pretences of having an easy time of
it and no trouble, and a fine dress to go about in, as his
Majesty's sergeants do when they want poor, silly lads for
the Attempt. 305
recruits. He tells you the trath at once, ' In the world ye
shall have tribulation.' You must make up your minda
to that, but you are not to be afraid or discouraged;
you are to 'be of good cheer, for I have overcome the
world.' Was there ever such a fight as this, my friends ?
A battle ynih the victory secured. And then what a
victory, ' He that overcometh shall inherit all things; and
I will be his God and he shall be my son,'—is not the
chance even of such a victory worth any battle ? And
it is no mere chance that you are offered; your great Cap¬
tain has won it for you already. Fight on, then, fellow-
soldiers I there may be tough work before you, but the
battle is short at the longest, and the victory is sure,
and all through the fight, if you will but listen, you may
hear your Captain's voice sounding above the din of the
fray, ' Be of good cheer, / have overcome the world.' "
Barbara listened to the inspiriting words, and for the
time the weight seemed to be lifted from her heart, and
a new and stronger purpose rose like day-dawn over the
night of her misery. It was only the first ghmmer of
dawn yet, only a flickering hope that after all even for
her, life might yet be worth having—not for happiness,
but for work—that her empty life might yet be filled
by a noble purpose—^it might still be worth her while to
live for the sake of Him who died. It was not clear to
her how she could do this, much was dark to her still;
but " the day-star had arisen in her heart," and by and
bye its dim twilight would broaden into "perfect day."
She did not hear much of Mr Mackay's concluding
prayer, she was too busy with the new thoughts that
were surging up in her mind, but before it was ended
she had put up a little silent trembling prayer of her
own, that strength might be given her also to " over¬
come."
The prayer over, Mr Mackay gave out the beautiful
words of the psahn that she remembered singing to old
Peggy,
" I to the hills will lift mine eyes,
From whence doth come mine aid,"
and Barbara, as she joined her voice to the homely
music, felt the triumphant words thrill through her soul.
Then came the solemn, simple, parting benediction, and
she bent her head low as the venerable old man raised
his trembling hands and repeated the words—" The
grace of our Lord   Jesus Christ, and the love of God,
OCTOBEB 1873. *   Q
306 The Attempt.
and the fellowship of the Holy Ghost be with you all,
now, henceforth, and for ever."
Barbara did not stay to speak to the old man as her
custom was after service, her heart was too full; so she
slipped quietly out among the little crowd of shepherds,
and old wives with white mutches, and httle rosy-cheeked
children, and bonny country lassies, many of whom
curtseyed low to the " young leddy o' Milla Forres " as
she passed, and went swiftly on alone down the glen.
She walked on with the old rapid step, which had grown
strange to her of late—a ste]) with hope and purpose in
it—and as she walked, she took a rapid review of the
last few months. She was filled with shame as she did
so, to think how she had allowed this personal sorrow
of hers to interfere with all her duties, and with the
happiness of those around her, and she called herself a
selfish coward that it had been so. She tried to resolve
that for the future it should be different, but she remem¬
bered her many nights of tears and good resolutions, and
how soon they had vanished; and so her resolutions now
were taken very humbly and self-distrustingly—I think it
was rather a prayer that it migJit be so, than a resolution
that it should. The last psalm they had sung had set her
thinking about old Peggy's death-bed, and the thought
flashed across her for the first time aU these months, of
the commission she had undertaken to find her daiighter,
and she felt a keen sting of self-reproach that she had so
long neglected to redeem her promise. In her present
state of mind, too, it was a relief to have some positive,
definite work to set before herself It would be easier, she
thought, to fight with her own heart when her mind and
energies were actively engaged in some definite pur¬
suit, than to carry on the warfare with nothing more to
distract her from her pain than the ordinary routine of
quiet daily life. So before she reached the gate of Milla
Forres, she had made up her mind at once to set about
making such inquiries as might lead to the discovery of
old Peggy's wandering daughter.
Jeanie Morison.
The Attempt. 307
I soul d^sird i\\t jirst-riij^ fruit/'
I.
Into the world he came—a sweet white life.
With feeble breath and tiny helpless hands,
That in far days should have to bear the strife
Of anxious earnestness in distant lands.
Into the world he came, and by and bye,
With all the precious wonder of his birth.
While, though sweet summer lingered in the sky.
Autumnal breezes fanned the languid earth.
His mother took him, clad in simple'white.
And offered him to Christ that He would bless,
And keep him through the darkness and the light.
Within the shelter of His Righteousness.
And holy water sprinkled on his brow
Made trebly certain for the little one
That Father, Son and Holy Ghost would now
And evermore protect the life begun.
They gave him to his mother back again,
Who watched (herself all but a child in years)
Upon her baby's brow the cross of pain
Dry slowly, leaving only trace of tears.
"'Tis well," she whispered humbly, "I am glad.
Ah, thankful, too, that in that other land
Angels will know my child and wish they had
His voice to mingle in their choir-band."
II.
Years wandered onwards and the cross was there,
Sin-stained and shadowed, but existing still
Upon the self-same forehead, where the hair
Grew darker than at first had been its will.
Through fire and passion it had led the way,
Guiding the stormy heart to rest in peace,
Out far beyond where in this tempest day
All fears are calmed and weariness may cease.
308 The Attempt.
I
But on the young boy's soul a weight of sin
Fought with the better spirit, that as yet
Knew well the right and wrong that was within.
And panted for the freedom to forget.
Then, though he wished it not, there came a day
When even boyhood waned before the years
Of perfect manhood, that in time should lay
Exhausted with the burden of its tears.
A day when murmuring with tender strain
The organ notes fell softly on his ear.
As he walked up the old church aisle again
With doubting heart between its love and fear.
To kneel before that dear and holy Lord,
Who years ago unwearied trod our land,
And there himself to buckle on the sword.
And fight the battle with his own right hand
m.
Years wandered onwards. Underneath a sky
Whose burning breezes make the twilight seem
Like that soft night hour, when asleep we lie
And lose our sad existence in a dream,
A man, with anxious face that told of care,
Lived toiling for the good in heathen lands,
Content to strive if only he might bear
One soul to heaven in his dying hands.
A man, whose earnestness seemed thrown away
Among the men where he had willed to dwell.
Yet who would teach him in a far-off day
The power of the truth he had to tell.
He loved with all the passion of a soul
That has no greater masterpiece to give,
But which would rather die before the goal,
Than own it, thongh the owning was to live.
Ah me 1 this is the saddest pain of all,
It creeps into the fibres of the heart.
It mingles with the very rains that fall.
And with each daily trifle has a part.
The Attempt. 309
The cross had gi-own up to its fullest trial,
In its deep shadow he was called to sit.
The cup was holden to his lips meanwhile,
And to the very dregs he drank of it.
IV.
Years wandered onwards.    He whose life had been
One struggle for the rest that had not come.
Who long had prayed, but yet had never seen
One glimpse within the chambers of his Home,
Began to learn a lesson which did show
That perfect peace must come from God alone.
Without the forms by which we here below
Believe we gain our pardon from His Throne.
Not in the virtue of Baptismal Dew,
Or in the loyalty of any Rite
Does perfect pardon make our errors few,
Or wash us pure in His most holy sight.
It comes by little acts of daily life :
By simple trust: by kind and humble heart:
By gentle calmness in the midst of strife :
By being in the world and yet apart.
By thought and care for other creatures' good :
By showing Christ in every little deed :
His Presence as our necessary food :
His love the highest favour that we need.
And so, while busy life still hurried on,
And when the burden of the hill was past.
When many weary days had come and gone.
The poor sheep knew his Shepherd-King at last.
Naomi S. Smith.
310 The Attempt.
^\\t  P^rmaid's   Jfountain.
Part III.—{Concluded).
Leon de Frajou, commandant of the fort of Sidi-Rhean,
captain in the Light Horse, and Vicomte de Frajou
Rocheambeau in Languedoc, had he chosen, -which he
rarely did, to assume the title, was at this time a hand¬
some, dark, refined looking man, rather past thirty. Every
one liked him, for he radiated kindliness on all sides, and
if a touch of personal and national vanity proved him to
be mortal and a Frenchman, still a more brilliant officer,
and a cheerier companion it would be hard to find.
Raoul looked at him with an air of such complete satis¬
faction that he began to laugh, as he said, " Welcome,
Monsieur le docteur to Sidi-Rhean. You rode so well
yesterday, and slept so well to-day, that you e-vidently
always do the right thing; we only hope you wiU stay
with us some time."
" For a little while you must be troubled with me,"
said Raoul, " the ball which spent itself against my rib
yesterday has, I think, fractured it; but it is an excellent
case—the bone is not displaced; I only need quiet for a
week or two ; but how do you know I am a doctor ? and
what is Sidi-Rliean, or as I would translate it, the Lord¬
ship of Myrtles?"
"Sidi-Rhean may be called an island, entirely sur¬
rounded by revolted Arabs; lately it was a peninsula
connected with Algiers. As to you, we have read the
livraison on your person, describing you as a Hanoverian
doctor, Raoul Watcher—besides we have heard of the Bey
of Tittery's wonderful physician—not a renegade?" he
added, with a sharp glance at Raoul.
" Certainly not—and no Hanoverian, but a Frenchman,"
answered Raoul, giving a brief account of his adven¬
tures.
" I am glad indeed you are a countryman," said De
Frajou, " and it is all right; but if you take my ad-vice,
till you have fully reported your case at head-quarters,
do not bring your nationality much en evidence. Your
hospital at Medeah has been a good deal talked of, and
what does not matter for a German, needs full explan¬
ation in a Frenchman. Meanwhile, shall we have break¬
fast here together ?"    He clapped his hands and summoned
The Attempt. 311
a negro, who brought coffee, breakfast, and chibouques
—and then continued, " I have only just got home, and
dressed, you see : we had a sharp brush in the night.
Pensez done, I took the Blockhouse after all, and partly
destroyed it; we did not want to keep it now Blidah is
gone. Yesterday when you gave us such good help, T was
only going to bring the garrison off. I have'only got two
of the poor fellows alive. These Arabs ought to have
cut us to pieces yesterday, they have no tactics, civili¬
sation has done nothing for them but giving them bad
muskets, otherwise they are just the troops that fought
under Saladin. But if ever they get a good leader—
well, qui vivra verra." The two chatted over their coffee
and pipes, till they felt like old friends. There was a
letter addressed to Mademoiselle Talbot that Raoul had
long carried about with him, waiting for an opportunity.
He now requested that this, when he had added to it,
might be sent off with the dispatches ; and then, feeling
that he could do his new friend no higher honour, began
for the first time for so many months to talk of GabrieUe.
It must be owned he made up for his silence, but he had
found a most sympathetic listener, for when at last he
began to apologise for so long a story, De Frajou assured
him they had a strange leisure in their lonely life, " we
have war, illness, and besides, nothing at all; long tales
of love and adventure just suit us—here one quite under¬
stands the spirit of the mille et une nuits. You shall talk
of your Promise for many an evening—conceive what
that little letter will be to her 1 Who's there ? 0 ! Lieu¬
tenant Legros,"—as a square, stiff youth looked round
the curtain.
" He seemed hardly civil to me yesterday," said Raoul,
" I don't know why."
" I do," answered the other,—" Ah I Legros, come in,
I was just telling monsieur le docteur, what a rigorous
orthodox catholic you were, a sort of inquisitor: how
alarmed that there was a flavour of Mahomet about him ;
nothing of the sort, mon cher—as Christian as yourself."
" You know I don't like superstitions, not even yours,
mon capitaine," answered Legros, " and when I heard that
Monsieur had an hospital la-bas, and was in high favour,
what was one to believe 1 "
De Frajou laughed. " He believes nothing at all, doctor;
he did not believe the Arabs had taken the block-house
when you told us."
312 The Attempt.
"And why did you believe me? " said Raoul.
" Oh 1 he will tell you I am so credulous ; I looked at
your face; yes, lieutenant, I follow you,"—as Legros with¬
drew—" he believes in just and merely what his horse
does—fodder ; du rests like it, a good animal, honest,
courageous, patient. So you lie still for a day or two;
when you are about again you must put our hospital to
rights, unfortunately we need it."
Raoul was soon able to make himself useful in the little
garrison, where fever was on the increase. He and the
captain became fast friends, and beguiled many an hour
in talk on the terrace. It was diflScult to find cheerful
occupation for the men. De Frajou often made daring
expeditions in the neighbourhood to employ them and
obtain fresh food and cattle. After one of these he was
criticised by the other oificers for j>ersonal rashness, and
Raoul, as they smoked together on the terrace in the
Bweet May night, asked him if this were so.
" I hope not," said he, "but if it were, what have I to care
for ? Ma foi, I remember when life was pleasant enough
to make it somewhat creditable to risk it. But now, que
voulez vous ! Since mob-law has again dictated to France,
I have too little hope to serve her as a citizen; I can only
be a soldier. Then, again, I represent an old noble
family whose name is left to lands, of which not an acre
belongs to them, and a castle the peasants avoid after
nightfall, and I am of their opinion; supposing they do
return, there are few of my recent ancestors I should care
to meet. Then all my life I loved Clemence, my cousin ;
for years we were engaged, yet her parents, after much
resistance, forced her into a rich marriage. Two years
ago I saw her on her death-bed, for she died of it. Poor
dear, she thanked me for never coming near her since her
marriage. She had a hard fight. She died as a saint,
and I keep her little crucifix still. Never tell me love like
hers for me is not immortal. I have no family but the
regiment, to see that the men are cared for, and the
barracks neat, and a few days of glorious battle excite¬
ment ; voila tout I "
Raoul leaned silently over the parapet, and looked into
the vast still blue of the night. The fragrance of myrtles
and orange-trees rose to where he stood. The country
seemed some happy valley guarded by those looming
purple mountains, rather than a desert wasted by pestilence
and war.    Did the life of De Frajou resemble it, outwardly
The Attempt. 313
so fair, and really so desolate ? In the distance sounded a
rough soldier chorus,—
Le vin, le jeu, I'amour et le tabao,
VoO^, voila, le refrain des bivouacs.
How arid and devoid of true joy was the drifting military
life. Oh, well for him that Gabrielle was fermiere, with no
parents to force her into some hated alliance. Michel was
a safe rival; soon they would meet, and all would be well.
But why did she not write % He did not know that the
courier who carried the letter had been killed on the way.
The Arabs seldom made prisoners, thus giving the war a
character of exasperation too common when one of the
belligerents is only half-civilised.
Raoul had meant to return with the relief party soon
expected from Algiers; but meanwhile sickness increased
on his hands. Under the vine-wreathed Moorish arches
the fever-stricken men lay panting their lives out, obscure
sacrifices for their country. Eaoul toiled night and day,
lamenting for drugs he could not get, and driving the
poor little routine-led assistant surgeon half Avild by his
original devices and bold experiments. He certainly
was rewarded by a larger percentage of cures than most
could show, but then the sick were so numerous;
and even De Frajou's heart sank when, one hot June
day, it became evident that Raoul had the fever.
Meanwhile the convoy arrived from Algiers, and with
it a wandering English baronet, an old acquaintance of
De Frajou's. Sir James Eltham had left his yacht in
Algiers harbour; before he owned her he had suffered
much from having nothing to do ; now his chief occu¬
pation was to find something for the yacht to do. The
captain received him cordially, but marvelled in his heart
over the English eccentricity which had led him to ride
two days across a hostile country, to visit an acquaint¬
ance in a fever-stricken garrison. However, Sir James
seemed quite satisfied with his expedition, and interested
in everything, especially in poor Raoul, who lay with
wide eyes, sometimes talking in his delirium of Gabrielle
and the Siren, then again imploring to be taken to the sea.
" As they stood looking at him," De Frajou explained that
before his illness he had advised that the convalescents
should be sent thither as the best cure, and several were
to go with the convoy; but it was too soon to move the
poor doctor. He endeavoured to satisfy him by assuring
him he should go to the sea; and, as if the assurance had
OCTOEEK 1873, ^   ^
314 The Attempt.
reached his mind, he turned round and fell into a sound,
refreshing sleep. Sir .James determined to try and get
him on board his yacht, and said he would bring her
round to the nearest point on the coast to the Bordj.
" It will go hard but we will get across that twenty
miles with an armed escort, then we can fetch him
back with us; you see I have nothing else very pres¬
sing to do just now,"—said this useful tourist, and so
took leave, promising to return in ten days. Raoul
woke from that sleep weak bi\t conscious, and continued
to improve. One morning, a week later, as De Frajou
entered, he said, " You have had a good night, I see."
" Yes," said Raoul, " a better night, but a strange dream.
You will laugh at the impression it has left. 1 was
feeling very uneasy, when a cool hand seemed to clasp
mine. I said, ' take me to the sea,'—and fancied I woke,
but the dream must have grown deeper, for I saw a fair
woman with large strange eyes looking at me. She
seemed fresh risen from the sea, and I knew she had come
from the Fontaine, and that she was the Siren."
" She has come," said De Frajou, " and perhaps she is
the Siren."
British eccentricity had seemed to him to have reached
its climax, when the previous evening he had seen, with
Sir James, who had returned to the Bordj ■s\atli an armed
escort, an Amazon, as he expressed it, i.e. a lady on
horseback. Sir James explained that this was Mrs
Eltliam, his brother's widow, whom he was bringing home
to her father from the East. She said the expedition
would be good for her spirits, and "with her it is a case
of volonte de femme, volonte de Dieu, I assure you," said
the brother-in-law, shrugging his shoulders. She was,
though nearly forty, still a handsome woman, with almost
flaxen hair, and large greenish brown eyes; a weak
character herself, she could bend strong ones to her will;
she was not exactly false, because she could persuade
herself whatever she said was true, nor precisely un¬
principled, for she believed whatever she wislied to do
was her duty; she followed her strong instincts wher¬
ever they led, wdth a pertinacity, aided by a certain
feminine softness and tact, that gave her for a time great
power over men. The daughter of a clever surgeon in a
cavalry regiment, she had eloped with Captain Eltham,
one of the officers. The love that years of poverty had
somewhat  cooled  had  revived  during his   last  illness,
The Attempt. 315
when she had shown herself a kind nurse. Now, after
his death, his eldest brother was fetching her home, when
this new excitement offered itself. She was much feted
for two days at the Bordj, and then with a good escort
they made their way safely to the yacht, taking Raoul
and another invalid in ambulance cacolets. Raul and De
Frajou took an affectionate leave, and the yacht sailed.
The weather was splendid, there was every comfort on
board, and Raoul lay under an awning on deck, drinking
in health and strength from the fresh breezes. Mrs
Eltham, or Millicent, as she taught him. to call her, was in
her element. She waited on him assiduously, talked to
him by the hour ; she was the first woman he had spoken
to for years, and soon won his confidence. The mention
of Gabrielle was a blow to her, but she perceived it was
evidently her duty to break off so ill-assorted a match
between a farmer's daughter and the clever cultivated
doctor, who was rapidly becoming the hero of her
thoughts. Shake his fidelity she could not, but she
succeeded in making him very anxious as to the effect of
that last dispute, coupled with his absence. She also
persuaded Raoul to land first in England, the rather that
in his weak state he was still unfit to travel alone ; and
when they despatched their post at Bordeaux, and
another letter was written to Gabrielle, she quietly
dropped it overboard. " The longer she waits the
better," thought she.
The voyage was over, and Raoul was hospitably
received by old Doctor Holt, her father, who now lived in
a pretty villa near a sea-port town, where he had some
superintendence over the hospital. Thither the old man
took Raoul, and was delighted with his fresh science and
bright intelligence. Indeed he conceived the idea of
getting for him an excellent medical appointment at
Montreal, which had been offered to himself, but which he
feared to undertake, and where native French would be
invaluable. A pity he was ten years younger than
" Milly," who had evidently set her heart on him, or
what an excellent husband for her he would be, thought
the old man. Meanwhile, Raoul, disappointed at finding
no letter from Gabrielle, and fearing he knew not what,
wrote to Monsieur Paul the letter which fell into the
hands of the Mayor of Valmont. In a few days a letter
came from France, which he took to his room to read.
It was from Michel Talbot, dated from Rouen, and first
316 The Attempt.
informing him that, owing to the death of Monsieur Paul,
he, the mayor, had opened the letter, it went on—
" Gabrielle is now my wife, but only because she believes
you to be dead, for she still loves you ; as you value her
peace and future happiness, I implore you let no one here
know you are alive for a year or two, when her mind
will be settled." He promised to send Raoul his
papers, and property, and enclosed part of a letter
from Gabrielle to himself, which ran thus :—" Never
blame Raoul to me, I still love him and you must
be content to know it. I feel sure death only would have
kept him from me, and I hope death will reunite us, but I
will try to be a pleasant, useful wife to you."
Here the fragment broke off, but it was enough. Eaoul
knew Michel to be his rival, and never doubted his letter.
It has happened to men in the full security of home, that
a sudden earthquake has split the roof and hurled down
the walls, and they have found themselves be"v\ildered
under the sky, with dust and ruins only left of the
familiar rooms. So it was with Raoul; eveiythingseemed
to have fallen to dust round him, and he was left
" alone in a land of sand and thorns;" his heart seemed
physically to die away within him, and instinctively he
lay down on the bed, and pondered till the full meaning
of what he had read came to him. He was a man, patient
and placid to a certain point, but capable of strong
passions when roused. First came fierce indignation
against Gabrielle. Why could she not have been true
when he was so faithful ? Then her o\m mournful words
caiised his anger to melt into an agony of grief and com¬
passion. It was partly his own fault; had he but gone at
once to Algiers and home when he was free ! Why had
it all happened? and that fierce questioning of Providence,
which is apt to come at times of great calamity, racked
him with a kind of wild despair, till it had spent itself and
and a new passion took its place. It was as if a wave
rose, first of bitter thought, increasing to a pain too strong
for thought, and subsiding, from very exhaustion of siifFer-
ing, only to siu-ge up again, the same yet different—like
a stormy tide rolling in on a dreary shore. At last he
sprang to his feet, feeling he must stun the agony by
physical exertion. He hurried down to tlie shore, and
began pacing to and fro in a manner which was violent
exercise for a convalescent. Evening drew on, Millicent
came to the sands and entreated him to come in, but he
The Attempt. 317
shook her roughly off. Later he wandered to a little
chapel of his own faith attached to a convent. There
were only three or four people in the little dark nave, and
the nuns were singing Compline in the choir. He took a
chair in the corner, and listened to their sweet voices.
"Cum invocarem," they sang, and "In te Domine speravi,"
and the peaceful versicles that at the end of the service
seem to soothe the cares and troubles of the day to rest.
" Be the day weary,  or be the day long,
At last it ringeth to even-song,"
and life was but a longer day. Raoul had found the calm
he needed, not only from the direct influence of the
service, but because he began to recollect how his pro¬
fession was left to him, in which he was becoming aware
of exceptional abilities. He would try for the Montreal
appointment; and see Gabrielle once more. Better face
this dreadful misfortune with no concealments. When
he got home, he briefly informed Millicent of the facts ;
she seemed in no wise astonished, but, trying to hide her
own great satisfaction, she combated strongly his idea of
gomg to Valmont. It was mere cruelty to the girl; she
could go there herself and bring Raoul all the news, if as
he said, he wished to hear about her from some one besides
Michel. For the next few days his going proved to be
impossible, for he had a feverish relapse confining him to
his own room. Meanwhile Michel wrote again, thank¬
ing him for his silence, enclosing drafts for £200 which
belonged to Raoul; also his other papers of which he had
been making copies, and these copies he afterwards
showed to the Talbots as proofs of his death. Raoul had
grown strangely acquiescent and indifterent, so Millicent
had her way ; she was well used to travel, and one after¬
noon rattled up in a little carriage to the mayor's door at
Valmont.
Valmont, nestled in its grassy basin, with its two white
headlands ruimiug far out to sea, seemed to her very
rustic and remote, a mere cluster of cottages and gardens.
Even the mayor's smart house, with more window than
wall, was smothered up in mignionette and re allow, and
roses growing rankly. " Can I see Madame Talbot," she
inquired of the bonne who came to the door, for she had
a story ready for Gabrielle. " Pardon, not for a few days
yet, she is stfll Mademoiselle Gabrielle, but Monsieur
Talbot is within; " and the consternated Miflicent was
shown into the presence of the yet more consternated
318 The Attempt.
Michel, when   she  introduced   herself as  the  friend  of
Doctor  Wachter.     When he had written to Raoul, he
thought his speedy marriage was certain.    Since then he
had received from Gabrielle the letter which announced
her change of purpose; but he could not now go back.
The strange lady's visible discomposure gave him con¬
fidence,  he saw  her wishes   were his,   and  he  blandly
explained that though the civil marriage had taken place,
the  non-essential church ceremony, which was   all im¬
portant  to  the  peasants,   would  not  be  till  the  week
following.    He had to settle the day that very evening,
at the farm ; if Madame would so far honour him as to
accompany him and explore the celebrated Fontaine des
Sirenes while he called there, he would himself drive her
on to Grandport, where was a good hotel, and whence
the English boat sailed next day.    In such a crisis of his
life he did not dare to show hospitality to so beautiful a
lady, whose connection he could not explain, for fear of
the qiien diva fon; Valmont gossip was incredible.    So
Millicent  was escorted  to  the  Mermaid's  Fountain  by
Michel,  and  there  waited  his return from  the  stormy
interview already mentioned.  Michel had spread a dainty
little repn st for her in a great dry cave in the cliff not far
off; still his absence seemed long as she sat on the rocks
outside, no feeling of the beauty a round winning her
thoughts  from  their   habitual   subject,   herself.     Some
mystery she shrank from investigating, there evidently
was, though she did not acknowledge to herself that she
feared Gabrielle might still be free.    A boat passed by,—
" suppose they should land and talk to me "—she thought,
and she shook down her long fair hair, and laughed aloud
to think they might take her for the Siren.    And the
passing fishermen, who crossed themselves as they saw
her, and believed some evil influence lurked in the grace
she added to the lovely landscape, were not so far wrong
after  all.     And then  Michel returned,   and  the   astute
knave drove the artful simpleton to Grandport, having
much conversation by the way.    She pressed no incon¬
venient questions, heard with complacency that Gabrielle
was too rustic for Raoul, and of quite another class ; that
they were always quarreling Avhen engaged, and what
had happened, though painful for the moment, Avould in
the end be best for all parties, " especially," added the
Mayor with a bow, " as Doctor Wachter is evidently so
much more fortunate in his present society, it was well
The Attempt. 319
he should be freed from an unsuitable entanglement."
They parted the best of friends, and Millicent returned to
England.
Raoul was downstairs again, though very white and
wan, when in the evening twilight she reached home. She
looked at his clear-cut intellectual face, and thought what
an escape he had had of marrying the peasant girl she had
indeed seen in the far distance. A vague hope flushed
his cheek as she entered, and he exclaimed—" Eh bien,
you have seen her."
" Yes, and she was well. I believe she will be very
happy."
" Where was she ? did you speak of me ?"
" No, no, I did not speak to her at all, and Monsieur
Talbot implores your silence. 1 saw her leaning on a
gate leading to the farm."
" Where she used to wait for me—poor child! Then
they are at the farm, that was what Michel wanted."
" And she was dressed hke a peasant."
" Was she, ma cherie, how lovely she must have looked.
I must see her once more," he said fervently.
" You would only make her wretched. Why, they had a
requiem for you. An old fisherwoman, Corvet was her
name, told me all Valmont was there."
" Old Fran^oise still working! ah! I used to tell her
we ought to move, Valmont was no place for a doctor;
les centinaires ny meurent que par imprudence; how
gaily she would laugh I well, the requiem may not be bo
much too soon after all; if I do not recover you must tell
her I was true to the last; I will leave a letter that will
please her then."
" You must take heart," said the old doctor, " you are
well through the fever, and no one knows better than you
that men don't die of a love disappointment."
" Quite true, doctor, but they do die of not caring to
recover. N'importe, I shall be better when I have work;
to-morrow you shall take me to the surgical ward again."
"And, Raoul," said Millicent, "it may all be for the best.
She is but a peasant, and as Monsieur Talbot says"—.
Raoul started up. " I do not wish to hear what Talbot
says, and, Millicent, you mean well, but you know nothing;
never mention her name to me again, if I don't go at
once to Valmont, I shall go there no more, but there is
no use talking about it;" and he hastily left the room.
" That will all pass, Milly, and leave him in need of a
320 The Attempt.
wife," said Doctor Holt, " but she must never expect to
be preferred to a surgical ward! ah I he's a born doctor—
such an intuition, such manual dexterity I I wish he were
my son,"
Kaoul did indeed after this seem indifferent to every¬
thing but his profession; he was very grateful to the old
doctor for introducing him to men in power, and pro¬
curing for him the Montreal appointment; grateful to
the widow also for her care of him, and when in autumn
he sailed for Canada, it was not alone. He married
Millicent and she had her wish, yet it was not really ful¬
filled ; her silent pre-occupied husband, who found his
chief interests apart from her, was not the bright sym¬
pathetic Raoul she had first met. He threw himself heart
and soul into his profession, becoming distinguished in it.
and stifling weary cravings in scientific pm-suits and work,
Millicent's character, as he knew it better, never attracted
him, and she was to him at best the mother of the
boy born the following year, in whom his warmest
affections centred. And he was called Gabriel, after the
Norman maiden so tenderly remembered still. Thus
Doctor Wachter's life and interests drifted far apart from
Valmont, where Gabrielle lived on and thought of him
as dead; and though a vague hope, that was almost a
pain, still thrilled her at times of his reappearance, he
did not return, and the years went on and on.
E. J. 0.
(7b be continued.)
The Attempt. 321
A TALE OF THE FORTY-FIVE.
CHAPTER XXII.
LIFE   FEOM    THE   DEAD.
Nancy and Elspet rejoiced in the change which, it soon
became evident, had passed over Barbara. She was
quiet that Sabbath evening when she returned from
church, and seemed much occupied with her own thoughts,
but when she did speak to them, all the petulance and
impatience of her manner of late seemed to have passed
away. She was like one recovering from a severe illness,
—weak still, but convalescent,—and beginning again to
take a quiet, peaceful pleasure in the things and people
about her. The next morning she was up at her old
early hour, and Nancy was sm-prised on coming in to
breakfast to find a bouquet of early spring flowers,
evidently of Barbara's arranging, on the breakfast table.
She looked up with quiet pleasure.
" Why, Barbara," she said, " you have been in the
garden already, 1 am so glad; it is quite like old days."
Barbara smiled and coloured. Nancy had been too
kind to say much to her sister about the change that had
come over her, and Barbara blushed to think how very
apparent it must have been when her sister could be so
much surprised by such a simple return to the old ways.
" Nancy," she said, as they lingered over the breakfast
table, " you remember the commission old Peggy gave me
on her death-bed, do you not ? "
" Yes, to find her daughter and give her her Bible, was
it not % "
" Yes, and her mother's blessing, and what remained
over of her savings in the old stocking, after paying for
her funeral. I have been too long of beginning to keep
my promise, but I mean to begin now."
" But what will you do, Barbara ? It is so many years
ago that she disappeared, and, I suppose, they searched as
much as they could for her at the time, did they not % "
" I suppose so, and yet I do not know; old Peggy was
so broken-hearted at the disgrace, that I daresay she sat
down in a sort of stunned way and didn't do much; besides,
you know, she never would let any one speak to her about
NOVBMBEE 1873. ^ S
322 Tlie Attempt.
her daughter, and that wasn't the way to hear any
rumours that might have thrown light on where she had
gone,"
" But what will you do. Barbara; how will you set
about it r'
" I don't know yet, but I think first I will go and
speak to old Lauchlan M'Lauchlan; he was in the glen
■when it happened, and he was very fond of Peggy's
daughter. I have heard that he was almost broken¬
hearted about her. I will go to his cottage after break¬
fast. Will you come with me ?" Barbara added the
last question somewhat timidly. She was conscious
that of late she had rather repulsed her sister's ofl^ers
to accompany her on her rambles, and she felt
half-ashamed to ask her now. Tears of pleasure stood
in Nancy's eyes as she said heartily,—
" That I will;" then coming up to her and throwing her
arms round her neck, she added, wistfully, " I am so
glad you want me again, Barbara." The words sent
a pang of selt-reproach through her sister's heart.
She could not deny that it was true that of late
she had not wanted her sister's company, nay, in her
secret heart I do not think she wanted it now, as far as
her own pleasure was concerned, but she had resolved
that this secret pain others should no longer stand in the
way of her plain, every-day duties—that, God helping her,
in small things, as in great, she would be a " good
soldier of Jesus Christ." She did not answer her sister's
words, she merely fondled the pretty head that had taken
refuge in her bosom. Nancy looked up by and bye with
pleasure shining in her bright eyes.
''It is so nice to be made of once more," she said.
Another pang to Barbara's heart; she had been missing
it then, the old sisterly fondling. Poor little Nancy!
Barbara's thoughts during these past months had been
sometimes almost hard about her little sister. Somebody
says, and says truly, "all creatures are angry at torture;"
and, in the bitter torture of her own heart, Barbara had
sometimes felt almost cruel towards the unconscious cause
of her suffering. She knew it was not Nancy's fault, and
yet the pain was so terrible, she could hardly help
turning on its unconscious instrument. Besides, what
need had Nancy of comfort, slie thought bitterly to
herself. She had a right to think and dream about
Alaster as much as she liked, and to speak about him too.
i
TJie Attempt. 323
It was true that it was all a fiction and a delusion.
Alaster did not belong to Nancy, and Barbara exulted in
her heart as she thought how much more really and truly
he belonged to her; but then Nancy did not know—Nancy
should never know—and as Barbara reasoned, what
one doesn't know can't do one any harm ! She haJf-
despised Nancy, I think, that she had not found it out;
she thought, if she had been in her place, she would
have seen it all; nothing and nobody could have kept
her from feeling that his heart had gone from her,
and yet she was glad that mercifully her little sister
was so blind. But, as she was so blind, what need
had she for comfort or caresses from her ? Had she not
already enough and to spare ? So she thought in her
hard, black moods of suifering, and now it came to her
with a pang, that after all the little sister had longed,
and longed in vain, for kindness and sympathy from her.
Barbara felt ashamed and humbled as proof after proof
came before her, how, during these last months, she had
been neglecting the plain every-day duties that God had
given her, how much of a coward she had been, laying
down the weapons of her warfare, and saying—" 1 can
fight no longer, let me die." It was not in the
least that the battle was over for her now, and
peace and victory won; the battle was as sore in
her heart as ever, and the pain not one whit less tortur¬
ing. The only difference was (what difference could be
greater) that she had recognised at last that she liad a
battle to fight, and a victory to win, and that, God
helping her, she meant to do it. She would have
many relapses into the old hopelessness, many a weary
hour of struggle in the old slough of despond, but she had
caught a ghmpse of the light over the wicket gate, and
in the main her eyes were directed thither.
After breakfast the two girls set out on their walk to old
Lauchlan's cottage. The day was bright and frosty, and
Nancy's spirits rose to exuberance as they walked smartly
up the glen. It was so long since she had taken a walk
with Barbara, and it was so like old times that she forgot
her anxiety about her absent lover, and everything but
her pleasure in the present. It took them a good hour's
quick walking to get to the little cottage where Lauchlan
lived. Their knock was answered by a bonny, tidy
Highland lassie, with a sweet, modest face, and soft fav/n-
like   eyes—old   Lauchlan's   grand-daughter.     To   their
324 The Attempt.
enquiry, if her grandfather was within, she answered with
a bright smile and a low curtsey.
" Ay, my leddies, will ye please to come in." Her
manner had all that curious in-born Celtic courtesy, which
gives the poorest Highlander a manner hardly to be
rivalled at the most polished court of Europe. The girls
entered, and found old Lauchlan sitting by a blazing peat
fire. He was a stately-looking old man, with long white
locks and a snow-white beard, and the sort of composed
dignity so often seen among men of his age and race. He
had been lame for many years, and unable to do anything
for his own support, excepting to weave willow baskets,
which he sold for any trifle he could get for them. He
lived with his daughter and her husband (Phemie's
parents), hard-working people, who had quite enough to
do to keep bread in the moiiths of their own large family,
but who never grudged "the bit and the sup" to old
Lauchlan—a thorough Highlander, and an enthusiastic
Jacobite. It was he who had warned Alaster of " the
bloodhounds watching the reefer's rock."
He rose with the help of his crutch as the young ladies
entered and saluted them with the stately coui'tesy of an
old courtier.
" You're brawly welcome, my leddies," he said, " old
Lauchlan's a prood man that ye should sae honour his
humble roof. Come your ways ben, my dears; Pliemie, set
seats for the young leddies close by the uigle nuik, for it's
the bieldest bit this frosty weather."
" I am glad to see you looking so well, Lauchlan." said
Barbara, " your rheumatism hasn't been troubling you
this winter, I hope ? "
" Whiles, my leddy, whiles, but I hae many mercies to
be thankful for. And when heard ye frae the Colonel,
and what news hae ye o' the cause ? "
" Bad news, I'm afraid, Lauchlan; the Prince's army has
been obliged to turn back from Derby; my father writes
that Pitsligo begged the Prince to go on, lout he listened
to other counsellors; my father fears the cause is lost in
England."
" Say ye sae, my dear ? Wae am I that my auld ears
should hae lived to hear it, but we'll hae a tuzzle for our
richtfu' sovereign in auld Scotland yet. What thinks
Milla Forres o' oiu- chances here ? "
" Indeed his letter is very gloomy, but 1 trust it may
turn out better than he fears."
The Attempt. 325
" Ay, ay, my dear, I trust sae, but he sud hae hearkened
to Pitsligo, he's a wise man an' a good, a prince could hae
nae better counsellor."
" I came here to-day, Lauchlan, on a special errand. I
want you to tell me all you can remember about old
Peggy's daughter, and the time she disappeared," said
Barbara, beginning a new subject.
" About auld Peggy's dochter, my dear? " said the old
man in a surprised tone, " it's a lang while sin' syne, an'
a sad story; but I'll do my best to remember it gin it 'ill
please ye to hear it; but it's a sad, sad story," and the
old man shook his head gravely.
" I know it is, Lauchlan, but I would like very much to
hear it, if you will tell it me," said Barbara.
" Aweel, Miss Barbara auld Lauchlan wad do mair nor
that to do you a pleasure. Ay, she was a bonnie lassie
an' a blythe, there was nane like her i' the country side.
I mind her when she was but a toddlin' bairn, just like yin
o' the fairy-folk 1 used to think, wi' her bricht een and
her lang gowden curls, an' it wad be ' Lauchlan, is at on' 1
gie wee Maggie a ride on ou's back,' every nicht when I
cam' hame frae my wark. Auld Peggy and me were
near neebors then. Ay, ay, she was a bonny bairn an'
a winsome, I ne'er likit ane o' my ain sae weel as I likit
wee Maggie; but its fifty year sin' syne, my dear, its fifty
year, she'll be an auld woman noo, gin the Lord's no
ta'en her oot o' this weary waiid lang or noo, puir wee
bonnie Maggie!' and the old man drew the sleeve of his
coat over his eyes as he spoke.
" It is forty years, is it not, since she—went away,"
said Barbara, hesitating as to what word to use, yet
anxious to bring the old man back from his remin¬
iscences of Maggie's childhood to that point of her
history.
" Ay is it, forty lang years, gin she's leeving yet, forty
lang years o' sin and sorrow I puir, bonny Maggie I"
" Will you tell me all you can remember about that
time, Lauchlan? and when she was last seen, and who
with, and what people thought had become of her ? I
want very much to know, I have a reason for asking,"
said Barbara, colouring. Somehow she was shy about
this quest of hers, it seemed such a wild undertaking,
and she did not like to take even old Lauchlan, interested
as he was in Maggie, fully into her confidence.
The   old   man   looked   surprised,   but  his   Highland
326 The Attempt.
courtesy prevented his asking questions which he saw
would be unwelcome.
" I'll try an' mind, my dear, I'll try an' mind, but my
memory's sair fallen off these late years." The old man
paused a little and then went on. But we must keep his
story for another chapter.
J
CHAPTER XXIII.
"PUIR   BONNY   MAGGIE."
" I MIND fine  the   morning  Peggy  tell't  me   that ' wee
Maggie was missing," continued old Lauchlan.    " It was
ae bricht day i' spring, April it was, for I mind I had been
at the Aberdeen market the day afore wi' a lot o' Hielan'
etirks, and the market day was aye the second week in
April, an' I mind fine the sun was shinin', and the bit burn
was sparklin', and the birdies were siugin', and the cow¬
slips and violets were a' out i' the grass.    Ye'U think it
queer, I'se Avarrant, that I should mind a' thae wee bits o'
things, Avhen my mind Avas sae ta'en up aboot Maggie,
but that day, an' ilk thing aboot it, just seemed to be
hrimt into my brain.    Weel, as I Avas saying, I had just
finished my breakfast an' was setting aft' to my wark,—I
mind my Avark that day should hae been to pleugh the
high mains o' Milla Forres,—weel just as I was setting
aff, Peggy cam' to  the door.    I thocht she lookit  xmco
Avhite, an'   scared   like,    so    says    I,    ' What's    AA^ang
wi'   ye,   Peggy,   my   woman?'      An'   says   she,   in  a
half-Avhisper like,   ' Lauchlan,   Maggie's no   come hame.'
' No    come   hame,'   says   I,   'whar's   the   lassie   been
till ?'     I   spoke    licht-like,    for   it   ne'er    cam'   into
my head that ought coiild be wrang in Maggie.'    ' She
gaed   oot   yestre'en,'   says   she,   ' to   see   her   cousin,
Bess   MacDougal, that's   gane awa' to service  in Glen
Ross, and she's ne'er come hame yet.'    I begood to be a
bit   frichted then   mysel',   for  the  road  to   Glen   Ross
was unco lanely i' thae days, and I tliocht the bit lassie
micht  hae  met in   wi' fremyt folk that  had  done her
mischief—or maybe she micht hae Avandered on the hill,
for there had been a mist on BeuA'-oirlish the day afore,
an' she had to cross a bit o' the hill on her way, but I
didna  let  on   to   Peggy  that   I  was  frichted.    'Hoot,
Avoman,'   says I,   ' the   lassie's been  ta'en   up   A\'i'   the
The Attempt. 327
new braws her cousin's gotten to gang tae her
new place wi', and she's stayed ower late an' they've
keepit her a' nicht, the days are no that lang yet, she'll
be here i' no time, I'se warrant.' Peggy didna answer,
but her face looked sma' an' anxious, and I couldna help
feelin' mair anxious mysel' than I likit to let wit on, so
says I :—' I'll no gang to my wark for a while
yet, I'll wait wi' ye, Peggy, till the lass comes hame.'
' Thank ye, Lauchlan,' says she, an' I thocht there was
a tear i' her e'e. Sae I went ^\^! Peggy to her cottage
an' we sat there an' waited. I'll ne'er forget that waitin.'
For awhile we talked, and I tell't Peggy about the
Aberdeen market, an' the gran' price I had gotten for my
stirks—I had gotten ten poun' Scots of ilk ane o' them,
—but by an' bye we didna speak ony mair, an' just sat
an' lookit at the clock, an' ilk hour it struck Peggy gied
a start. At last when it had chappit twelve, I couldna
wait ony langer, I had gotten that feart aboot the bit
lassie. So says I, ' Peggy, my woman, I'm feart. there's
something wrang, I'll gang ower to Glen Ross.' She
just sat quiet, and let me gang—I never was sae sorry
for man or woman as I was that day for Peggy ; she just
seemed stunned like, for Maggie was the very licht o' her
een. I walked owre the hill an' across the moor, an' lookit
down every precipice for fear the bit lassie micht hae
fallen ower in the mist. It was bricht clear sunshine, and
I could see to the foot o' them a', but there was nae
trace o' Maggie. Its but barely four miles to Glen Ross,
an' I got there aboot yin o'clock. My heart was beating
sae that I could hear it when I chappit at the door, and I
think it near loupit out o' my mouth when ]\Iaggie's cousin
Bess opened the door, and said she hadna seen Maggie ava
yestre'en, nor for mony a week afore. I could mak'
neither head nor tail o't, for I ken't that Maggie had
been going ilk twa or three days to see her cousin, and
help her wi' the new claithes she needed to gang to her
new place, and noo Bess said she hadna seen her for
mony a week! I gaed back again to Peggy wi' a heavy
heart. A horrid thocht had come into my mind that
Maggie must hae been deceivin' us, an' pretendin' to go
to see her cousin, when she was after some errand she
didna want her mither to ken o'; but I put it out o' my
head, I couldna thole the thocht o't—that the bonny
bricht lassie wi' her innocent face should hae been leeing
to her mither a' the time I    No that I thocht, even if she
328 The Attempt.
had been leeing, that there was ony ither harm in't be¬
yond the lee, for I wad hae ta'en my Bible oath ony day
that Maggie was as an angel in heaven,—but I  thocht
maybe she micht hae gotten a lad that her mither didna
think guid eneuch for her, an' she miclit be keepin' it frae
her mither, and gaein' oot to tryst wi' him when she said
she was gane to her cousin's, but ony thocht o' ither ill
ne'er cam' across my mind.    Weel, I gaed back to Peggy
wi' the ill news,—I'll ne'er forget her look till my dying
day, when I tell't her Maggie hadna been to Glen Ross
the day afore, an' that Bess said she liadna seen her for
mony a laug day.    She lookit just as if the life had been
ta'en oot o' her, an' frae that day Peggy was ne'er like
her auld sel' again.    She used to be a cheery body, Peggy,
wi' a blythe blink in her e'e, an' a sharp tongue o' her
ain, wi' aye an answer at the tip o't, but after that day
she was   sort o' quiet-like—I ne'er  heard her  speak a
Bharp word again.    Weel, we set a' the neebors to look
through the country side for Maggie.    An' a' the young
men i' the village searched every fit o' Benvoirlish—there
was mony a sair heart amang them, for Maggie was just
the   pride   an'   the   pet   o'   the   country.      Puir   Rab
MacDougal was waur nor ony o' them.    He was Maggie's
cousin,   Bess   MacDougal's   brither,  and   he   had  lo'ed
Maggie frae the time he had pu'ed nuts and brambles
for her  when  she was  a bairn.    They werna plighted,
but I think a' body tliocht they wad come thegither i' the
end, and when Maggie was lost, he was just lilce ane fair
distrackit.    I think that frae the time that Peggy heard
that Maggie had been leein' to her, an' no wi' her cousin
at Glen Ross, she just gave up hope.    If Maggie, that
she had aye lippened to frae a bairn, an' had never fand
tell her a lee as lang as she could mind, had been leein'
to her aboot this, she could believe onything, there was
naething ower bad to come out o't.    But Rab wasna like
that,  he   flared  up  at onybody  that daured  hint   that
Maggie micht hae gane awa' o' her ain will.    She had
been kidnapped, or she had been murdered, he said, an'
lang after everybody else had given up lookin' for her in
despair, he spent a' his hours, afore and after his wark,
on Benvoirlish, and on the road to Glen Ross, looking at
ilka craig-foot, an' in ilka ditch to find her bod}^     He
ne'er gied ower lookin' till ae day, a good month after
Maggie was lost, he met wi' a band o' gipsies, and begood
questioning them, as he qiiestioned everybody, gin they
The Atteinpt. 329
had seen onybody like her, and they tell't him that they
had seen a bonny country lassie, the day she gaed
awa', wi' a red cloak an' hood, like the yin Maggie had
on, and a striped blue petticoat, in a braw carriage wi' a
gentleman in a red coat, aboot five miles on the ither
side o' Milla Forres. If I mind richt, Rab gaed to the
place, and trackit the carriage wi' the gentleman in the
red coat, and the bonny country lass as far as Aberdeen,
and then he lost sicht o't, and though he tried lang, he
ne'er could get anither trace o' her. He came back here
for a few months, an' then he gied up his farm an' moved
into Perthshire; he said he couldna live i' Milla Forres
where a' thing minded him o' Maggie. An' that's a' I
can teU ye o' puir Maggie, my leddy; it's a sad story, a
ead story I " said old Lauchlan.
" Thank you, Lauchlan," said Barbara, " it is indeed a
sad story! Is Rab MacDougal living yet, and can you
tell me where his new farm was 1
" I kenna gin he be lee\au' yet, they went clean awa'
frae the country side, and gin he is leevin', he'll be an
auld man, no far aff seventy, but I mind the name o' his
farm first seemed to me as if it had been ca'ed for
Maggie, it's name was Margaret's Cleuch, an' I think I've
heard tell it was no that far frae the place whaur the
kings were crownit, when auld Scotland had a king o'
her ain." Jeanie Morison.
{To he continued.)
—^^^
P a t h « r    (B tic.
Oh, Mother Eve, the years have rolled,
And thou on high art set:
Thy brows are crowned with burnished gold,
A radiant coronet.
And pleasant is the sunny steep.
Where heaven-white lilies grow—
Thy children toil, thy children weep,
Thy children sin below.
Oh, Mother Eve, thy heart must bleed,
Even on that happy shore.
To see thy children's bitter need,
And all their anguish sore,
K0VE5IBEE 1873. ^  T
330 I'he Attempt.
To think upon that fruit which grew
Beside Euphrates' tide—
That bitter fruit whose ashes strew
Our Knowledge, and our Pride.
Poor Mother 1 lost thy Motherhood—
Thy children look to see
In that supremest land of good
A mother, and not thee!
But Mother, still thy Motherhood
Is worth thy Mother pain,
For One, through cradle and through Rood,
Hath bought it thee again.
The promise, given in utmost need.
Has never been gainsaid ;
In latter days the woman's seed
Has bruised the Serpent's head.
And if the angels all rejoice
Throughout the jasper halls
When first the Prodigal's faint voice
Upon the Father calls,
Oh, Mother I how thy harp must wake
The echoes round the sea.
In praise of Him, who, for love's sake,
Hath done great things for thee.
R.
Part IV.
Ten years had come and gone since Raoul Wachter's
disappearance from Normandy. It was August again,
when one lovely afternoon the Vicomte de Frajou Roch-
eambeau was lying on the shingly beach of Valmont,
under the shadow of an old battered boat drawn up
just beyond reach of the tide. De Frajou was as
battered as the boat, he was lame from a wound,
rheumatic from exposure, and wasted by fever ; how¬
ever,   as   he always   expected  to be   used   up   in   the
Tlie Attempt. 331
service, at least he was not disappointed, and kept up a
good heart still, and a keen eye for all around him. Now,
the steep shingle gave him a luxurious support for his
back; the little tide waves that broke close to his feet,
each with its own murmurous roll of pebbles and plash of
falling waters, soothed his nerves; the bright sea, and
high white cliffs enclosing the bay, and the sea-birds sail¬
ing by with wide wings, delighted his eyes, and he
thrilled with an unexpected sensation of possible recovery.
He had only arrived the day before at Valmont, and
already, as he told his landlady, Madame Lecoeur, he had
become reconciled to his health, (with which he had
before quarrelled a Toutrance) for bringing him to so sweet
a place. She and her fisherman husband were now
approaching him, and with them was a handsome
brunette, dressed in a modification of the costume du pays,
whose gold ornaments and rich lace bespoke her a person
of consideration. Madame Lecoeur explained,—"It is
Mademoiselle Talbot, who has just been asking us to the
harvest-home supper and dance at the Grande Ferme,
and 1 said I would not leave Monsieur le Colonel's
supper; but Mademoiselle thinks perhaps Monsieur would
come himself, it is such a pretty sight."
De Frajou had his kepi off to Gabrielle as he answered,
—" I should be charmed ; I am of no use at a dance, but
if Mademoiselle would allow me to drive up and see the
others."
'• If Monsieur le Colonel would so far honour my uncle
and me, it would make our assembl^e a certain success,"
said Gabrielle, with a bright look, as she turned away;
and De Frajou hunted his memory for some half-forgotten
names, till he suddenly asked Dame Lecoeur the Christian
name of the lady.
" Gabrielle," she replied, " an angel's name and nature;
she is like a mother to the country-side, rich, and good,
and generous.    Ah! if there were more like her!"
" And was she the fiancee of Doctor Raoul Wachter ?
And is the Mermaid's Fountain here "?"
" Ah, Monsieur knows the whole story. It was much
talked of at the time; it is now ten years since the
young doctor vanished—no trace—never a word more
heard of him.    Ah, la sirene !"
De Frajou kept his counsel, and heard all that she had
to tell. Gabrielle was still unmarried, though she had
once been engaged to the Mayor Michel Talbot, and that
332 The Attempt.
might be a marriage yet. She had of late been in
Germany with her aunt Marie, whose health had failed,
and who had died about a year ago ; a great loss to
Gabrielle, who now lived with her uncle only, who was
getting old, and never had more than a calf's head on his
shoulders. But the Mermaid had become more rampant
than ever; two or three young men had vanished since
the doctor's time, " one was wrecked," put in Jaques, " and
one had gone with the smugglers."
"N'importe, fearful noises were often heard there, yells
and cries and strange songs, and the mayor himself had
had a narrow escape. Eight years ago the Siren had
actually caught liim, but, on his saying an Ave, with a
wild shriek she had leapt into the sea. Many had seen
her then."
"You rouse my curiosity delightfully," said the
Colonel. "Look here, Jaques, this very evening, let us
have the boat out and row round there, and then go up
the cliff to the farm."
"Monsieur knows the way, and everything," gasped
the hourgeoise.
" Perhaps I have seen the Siren."
" But the cliff is too steep for Monsieur, and then it is
still a long way to the farm," urged Jaques.
" No fear," said the Colonel, " Joseph can help me any¬
where, and we can have a carriage at the top of the
falaise."
By sunset De Frajou and Joseph, his devoted valet,
arrived in a little sailing boat, close under tlie fountain. The
tide was high and the sea was calm, and the boat slipped
alongside of a rock, washed by water two fathoms deep,
yet BO clear, that the waving weed and glancing fish cast
shadows on the sunny green of the sand far below. The
high cliffs descending like walls of ivory in straight
precipices to the water, but worn where they ran into
headlands, into fantastic arches and spires, the dark green
moss canopy in front, ghttering with water drops, the
lonely column reflected in the clear wavelets, and the
silver sea sweeping round the whole northern and western
horizon—all solitude, yet all alive with the stir of ocean
life, moved De Frajou strangely. He could hardly help
expecting some old poetic wonder to meet him, as he
scrambled to the high narrow cleft which formed the
mouth of the neiglibouring cave, the spot Avliich the
boatman considered to be especially haunted.    One in-
The Attempt. 333
deed implored him not to enter, under the pretext that
the walking was bad, but with Joseph's arm he got in
and found it dry and large. The chalk and flint vault
was worn into the strangest shapes, columns and fretted
spires; and the last glimmer of light in the inner dark¬
ness showed a fantastic form, huge and veiled like some
shapeless giant brandishing a skeleton arm. The bad
reputation of the cavern, and the evident desire of the
boatmen to hurry him away stimulated the Colonel's keen
wits, and he sought about like a terrier on the scent of
an otter, till the suspicion was confirmed in his own mind
that the Mermaid patronised smuggling.
It took him so long to mount the steep cliff, that it was
moonlight  as he  drove  across the fields to   the grove
which enclosed the farm.     The higher notes of fiddles
and  clarionettes  reached   him,   lights  twinkled   in   the
greenery;   and then in a moment he passed from the
quiet open fields, to a scene of animation under the trees.
A noble supper was spread in the brightly-lighted barn,
whose wide doors and windows displayed it temptingly
to the people who passed outside.    Some were dancing a
great ronde under the chestnut trees, and singing too as
they   swayed  to  and   fro,   while   the  instruments   sup¬
ported the voices.    There may have been roughness in
the song, and rusticity in the dance, but the outer air,
and solemn trees, and great spaces, lent to all a touching
naive charm.    It seemed so suitable, that while the young
people were moving hand  in hand to the music, their
elders should be busy with their prosaic cares about food
and  entertainment,   while   the   old   people sat chatting
cosily  together, idle  again because their day was also
waning, and the time of rest was near.     Gaspard and
Gabrielle  left  the  supper table  when the  Colonel was
announced; he declined supper, but drank the health of
the company, and with Gabrielle  on his arm, sauntered
down towards the  dancers.    He found her a charming
companion; her beauty, if a little worn, was more refined
and winning than formerly ; indeed she had cultivated
herself for Raoul's sake, till she was too superior to the
people with whom she usually lived, to run much chance
of a new attachment.    Only she had been very lonely
since her aunt's death, and Michel founded some hopes
on this, for he had over her a certain influence which a
clever man of steady purpose seldom fails to obtain.
" Listen to the words they are singing," she remarked
334 The Attempt.
to the Colonel, " strange that they should dance to them,
when one thinks how sad a meaning they may have for
so many here."
The tune was an old sea song, and sounded like an
accompaniment to the hauling of ropes, and dashing of
waves.    Some of the words ran thus:—
"II ^tait une barque a trente matelota,
Sur le bord de I'isle, sur le bord de I'eau.
Qu' avez vous la belle que vous fait tant pleurer,
Pleurez-vous votre p^re, ou un de vos parens ?
Je pleure une brigolette partie la voile au vent,
Le perroquet en I'aire, le vent en arrifere
Est parti pour la traite avec men bel amant."
" Well, all is not lost that is in danger," said the
Colonel, " and if a sailor is lost, it is in the way of his
trade; let him be merry till his time comes. Made¬
moiselle, I call this charming; how much more deliglitful
than a stifling ball indoors; I declare I should like to
stop in this country like one of the worn-out old boats I
see hauled up hereabouts, getting overgrown with
creepers and flowers, all their wanderings done, spending
a fat old age among those pleasant people."
"Monsieiu- amuses himself with our rusticity," she
replied ; " to me, indeed, Valmont is pleasant at all times
—the season of the mackeral, the season of the herring,
haytime and harvest, but you others, when the saison des
bains is over, comes the saison des ennuies for the strangers."
" Ennui, indeed I " said De Frajou, " I never felt it in all
my life, not in a fort in Africa, where the post was the only
event, and that once a month; and I do not feel myself a
stranger here, I assure you."
At this moment Joseph came up, much gravity and a
shade of of reproof in his tone,—" Had I not better bring
the carriage round here for Monsieur; it is late, and after
the long walk"—
" Joseph, if you say a word more, I shall give you in
charge to the strongest danseuse in the ronde. What,
have we not liberty here ? A has les tyrans," and he drew
Gabrielle aside with him into the solitude of the orcliard
wood. " It is nevertheless true that I must be tyrannized
over by Joseph, and by a doctor too, now; is there a
good one here at Valmont ?" He glanced at Gabrielle's
face,—do you still care for the former doctor, was his real
question.
She coloured as she answered " One like the others;
nothing remarkable, I believe."
The Attempt. 335
" I said just now I did not feel like a stranger here,
continued De Frajou, in a graver tone, " do you know that
I seem to myself to have seen all this before ? I have
only, however, heard it all described, and you too.
Mademoiselle, by a dear friend of mine who has vanished,
I fear, these many years,—Raoul Wachter I "
Gabrielle dropped his arm, but clung to the tree beside
her as she said,—"Not here,not now,Monsieur, as you know
what he was to me, don't speak of him now ; and yet, how
should you, how did you know % You never were here
before.   Oh, de grace, speak."
She sat down on the gnarled tree-root, and he threw
himself down at her feet. " It is eight years since I have
heard of Raoul—a man who for some months was like a
brother to me; but in my profession we are used to part¬
ings ; we are true friends, but do not pretend to regret
each other long. I will tell you all I know, more,
evidently, than you do."
" Tell me, then," and her soul was in her voice, " Why
did he leave Valmont, and why did he never write I "
" He was made prisoner by an Algerine cruiser, and
was long detained by the Moors ; one letter at least did
not reach you, because our courier was killed. It was in
Algiers I knew him, and how fondly he talked of you, and
how he feared you might have been offended at that last
dance," and he briefly ran over Raoul's story, ending by,
—" Now you should go in, you have heard enough for
to-night, and I am quite tired out. Would you meet me
to-morrow in Valmont, say in the church porch, and I will
give you all details."
Gabrielle seemed almost incapable of speech or motion,
but she rose mechanically and walked with the Colonel to
the house door. " Enfin, enfin des nouvelles," she said,
dreamily, pressing her hair back from her forehead, " yes, I
will come to-morrow—so, many thanks. I feel quite
confused, tell them all; good night," and she disappeared
indoors, while De Frajou asked for his carriage.
Gaspard and Michel hastened up to say good-night, and
as he prepared to drive off—"Mademoiselle has gone in,"
he explained, " she was a little overpowered, and no
wonder, for I brought her news, alas I eight years old,
but still news of my friend Dr Wachter." He told it in a
few words; Michel turned aside, and the darkness con¬
cealed that he was as pale as death; Gaspard was keenly
excited, and the news was echoing among all the guests
336 The Attempt.
as De Frajou drove away, though damped by the mayor's
remark that all the same the Doctor was faithless or dead,
as eight years had to be accounted for.
Next morning found Gabrielle, at the appointed hour,
seated in the deep church porch. Here the Vicomte soon
joined her, and told her all: Raoufs dashing escape,
the military expeditions, the quiet evenings, when they
chatted about her and Valmont on the terrace, the weary
days of labour and sickness, Raoul's departure—" and
then I only heard once more, from Bordeaux, a most
cheerful letter. He was almost well then, and I never
doubted but he had rejoined you, and was living too
happily to have a thought to spare for a pauvre diable at
the wars; besides I soon left Sidi Rhean, which confused
my address. Still I did think he might have wi-itten,
and now I don't know what to think. I fear the fever
may have taken a bad turn, or something else might
have occurred," and his thoughts recurred to Mrs
Eltham ; " at any rate I shall write to English friends and
get some light thrown on the matter."
"I will not encourage myself in false hopes," Gabrielle
said at last, " this long silence looks like death;—but
how much of happiness you have brought me. The
hard doubt is gone from my mind, and Raoul seems
brought near me again, with so much more about him
to think of.
" And well you may think of him," said De Frajou
warmly, " his was a loyal heart; and he was such a
clever surgeon too; I wish I could see him now; not that
anything could make much difference. So this is the
old church he described to me," he added, as they passed
through the door and stood under the massive stone
vaulting of the Norman nave in the dim light. One
sunbeam had found its way through a high lancet window
in the central tower, and stained the pavement Avith
crimson and gold. The church in its graceful strength
of line and proportion seemed in harmony with the
French gentleman of chivalrous bearing and long descent
who was looking at it with attentive admiration. Alas !
that both types belong to the past, and the stucco glare
of modern French architecture seems more in accordance
with the present national character.
" And there is the one vitreau in the lantern that
sur\4ved the Revolution ; I think, dear Demoiselle, if I find
Raoul for you, you might put in another with the De
The Attempt. 337
Frajou blazon on it, which will soon exist only in ancient
records and on old tombs."
" No, no, he shall cure you, and you will restore the
Chateau de Rocheambeau," said  Gabrielle;  then with a
i sigh, " but these are sweet foolish dreams, here I dare to
face the reality."
De Frajou, who was much excited by the conversation,
which had lasted two hours, gathered some hope from
the improbability of Raoul's death having occurred with-
■ out being reported;   and now leaving Gabrielle in the
church, he hurried straight off to the mayor's house, and
requested to see his papers, of which he understood
M. Talbot was the custodian. Michel produced them and
the colonel looked at them carefully.
" This one have the kindness to lend me," he said,
taking up a certificate from a leading Parisian surgeon,
" I shall send it to Dr D. to guide our enquiries."
" Pardon, Monsieur," said Michel, " biit we dare not
give over deposited papers to the premier venu, not
even to ofJficers of distinction, without—
De Frajou looked keenly at Michel.    His acute   per-
' ception of character was a by-word in  the army,   and
he at once conceived a strong though undefined suspicion
of the mayor. " Without a formal receipt. Monsieur
doubtless wishes to say," he replied, " Well, I will give it
for all the papers of my friend, while mentioning that
I think an extraordinary supineness about enquiries after
Doctor Wachter has been shown in this affair. The
innocence of this little town is charming; strange dis¬
appearances, and appearances that elsewhere would be
attributed to smuggling, are here accepted as the work
of a siren! I have the honour to wish Monsieur good
morning."
Michel trembled with fear and rage. Would the news
of his own treachery or of Raoul's marriage come first?
The latter he expected, as Raoul was probably in Canada,
lie might yet have time to play a last card which might
I enable him to secure the heiress, and he wrote at once to
a friend and associate whom we have met before. Captain
Elliot, formerly mate of the " Ziama," now commanded a
trim little yawl, of which he was chief owner, which did a
pretty piece of business in "the free-trade," as smuggling,
then a good deal practised between England and France,
was euphoniously called. About a year previously, Elliot
seemed likely to be brought into collision with Michel in
MOVEMBEB 1873. *   U
338 The Attempt.
his official capacity ; and he had then, hoping to pro¬
pitiate him, mentioned that he could throw some light on
the fate of his missing fellow-townsman. He soon, how¬
ever, perceived that the secret, on the contrary, was a
trump card in his hand against the mayor, and he used it
with much address. Michel did not dare to move against
him, and therefore determined to profit by him. The
cave by the fountain, with its haunted reputation, and the
great farm above, with its ample barns and cellars, were
an excellent landing-place and depot for smuggled goods.
Gaspard, dull yet grasping, had been drawn into their
transactions by Michel, and even more deeply committed.
Gabrielle had some suspicions, but every eff"ort was made
to keep all from her knowledge, and the smugglers took
care that unexplained sounds and strange lights should
keep up the bad name of the cave. Now Michel wrote to
Elliot's English address, requesting him, whenever he
received the letter, to come in ballast to the fountain, so
as to take off, without any delay, the goods in store; for
he feared a meddling colonel at Valmont had some sus¬
picions of their trade. He also wrote to resign the mayor-
ship of Valmont and his other offices, feeling his character
might be affected by coming disclosures; and made
arrangements for placing his money in English invest¬
ments. Like a prudent general, he arranged all for defeat,
while still hoping for victory.
De Frajou also had letters to write, one to Raoul,
detailing his meeting with Gabrielle, which he enclosed
to a friend in the French Embassy in London, asking him
to find out what he could, through Sir James Eltliam, of
the fate of Dr Wachter. Another letter he sent to the
great Dr D. in Paris, enclosing his own certificate, and
asking if, in the medical circles of Paris, anything had
lately been heard of this " remarkably promising pupil."
So all the letters were in the post, and to some at
Valmont the moment of the postal delivery became one
of thrilling anxiety. Raoul had become once more the
chief hero of Valmont gossip, and the Colonel, as he rested
on the beach, or sat on a capstan among the brown fish¬
ing boats, fresh drawn from the sea, had many questions
to answer about the popular young doctor. Most days
Gabrielle came down and met him on the plage, drinking
in eagerly all the little details he had to tell. She felt as
if she loved Raoul better than ever, and latterly each post
with no letter brought on a sort of nervous agitation she
1
The Attempt. 339
found it hard to master. Any certainty would, she
thought, be welcome, after ten years of anxiety and doubt;
but she was mistaken. More than a fortnight had passed,
and the silence of Dr D. at last was becoming strange.
Then one morning Joseph brought two letters together to
his master, one from Bareges, the other from London.
Eagerly the Colonel opened and read, first, apologies from
the great surgeon for the delay in answering, caused by
his Pyreneean tour. Then, " Dr Raoul Wachter has been
for some years resident in Montreal, Canada, but his adop¬
tion of the name Walter may have caused his former
acquaintances to lose sight of him. He has amply
justified my former good opinion of him, has won a high
reputation, and among other things, has initiated a new
way of performing an operation which has been generally
adopted. I have been in correspondence with him on
professional subjects, and am now in hopes of inducing
him to return to France. He married several years ago,
and, I think, has a family, but I am not sure. I shall have
pleasure in recalhng you to him when next I write, and
meanwhile, enclose his Montreal address."
The other letter from the Attache mentioned that Sir
James Eltham was cruising somewhere, but, through his
people, there had been in no difficulty in ascertaining
that Raoul Wachter or Walter had, eight years ago,
married Mrs Eltham, and gone out to Canada. The letter
addressed to him had been sent to Dr Holt, his father-in-
law, who would know well where to forward it.
There could be no doubt about the truth of the
intelligence, unexpected and utterly inexplicable as it
was to the Colonel. " He has been fool enough to
surrender a discretion to the Amazon; never trust the
best of men with any woman on board ship," he said,
as in vexation he crushed up the surgeon's letter. A
postscript caught his eye, and he read,—"I return the
copy of the certificate 1 really did give Wachter; but as
it closely mimics my handwriting, it ought to be marked
copy; for as it stands, it is a clumsy forgery." The
Colonel's busy brain began to work on this new mystery,
with an ever-deepening suspicion of Michel. Meanwhile
he had before him first the wretched task of telling
Gabrielle that the hopes he had so rashly excited were
doomed to bitter disappointment, and he started on his
distasteful errand for the farm. E. J. 0.
{To be continued.)
340 The Attempt.
%i  lomi^  and   Jfar  Jlujag.
They slowly walked together o'er the hill,—
The wooded hill that sloping high and steep
Throws far its purple shadow o'er the moor,
And overhangs the river dark and deep.
And o'er their heads the listening leaflets stirred,
And at their feet their green reflections flung,
And all the air was filled with sunset sheen
And rich with softest lays by soaring wild-birds sung:
And ever as the shadows longer fell,
And deeper grew the piu-ple of the hfll.
And darker o'er the river swept the boughs,
And one by one the warbling birds were still,
They slowly onward went with lingering pace.
And thought to thought responded, each to each,
For in their hearts was gladness ftiU and sweet.
And on their lips the words that love alone can teach.
But when the summer's flower-crowned youth was o'er,
And autumn's golden reign in heav'n rode high,
And russet heather clustered on the hill.
And leaves blushed red to know the winter nigh.
Along the wonted path she wandered lone.
Her thoughts with him who where the soft winds fail.
And hot suns blaze, and fairy islets glow,
On orient ocean's breast, spread wide his shining sail.
With spring I will return," he said, and she
Lived only on those words, and hope made bright
Her waiting life, as rolled the season on
From autumn's eve to winter's dreary night.
But with the snows a way-worn letter came.
Its border and its seal were black—Ah me,
For her, for her now all the world is dark.
Its life, its love, with him lie buried in the sea I
Melensa.
The Attempt. 341
>ome §tftch in (B&nCiiiion,
There can be little doubt that of all the questions of the
day, Education is that which  excites  the most general
attention.    All feel that even if they themselves are past
the age at which new conclusions on the subject can have
any very definite importance to them, it yet touches, or
must one day touch them in their families, their friends, or
thek dependants ;   besides the indirect  influence which
their own convictions in regard to it must ever have on
their opinions on other topics.    I do not now refer to the
various views on   compulsory education,   to   the   vexed
question as to what forms the rightful scheme of educa¬
tion for women, nor to the difficulty of judgment as to
the best means of imparting knowledge.    Independent of
all this, I have a deep conviction that there are certain
neglected   elements  in education,   the   consideration   of
which is a subject almost equally worthy of attention;
that  there  are   defects in   education,   even  in some   of
the best schemes now advocated, which the growth of
intelligence and an appreciation of the true aim of educa¬
tion will, Ave may confidently hope, ere long to a greater
or less extent remedy.
In a century like this, bursting with the importance of
its newly ripened schemes of education, and thirsting for
the results of their trial, it is but natural that the energetic
minds of the reformers should overlook some subtler ele¬
ments ; and in their zeal for the practical results of their
more enlightened schemes, forget the delicacy and com¬
plexity of that infinitely varying instrument, the human
mind, which, do and say what we will, we shall in almost
every case find it both impossible and injurious to
mould to a prescribed pattern, for the mechanical attain¬
ment of prescribed ends.
It will be apparent from what I have said, that I accept
the word education in a somewhat different signification
from the common and superficial one, which includes
simply the acquisition of knowledge. It is, therefore, neces¬
sary for me to show what I mean by education, as
distinguished from the modern schemes of education, which
last I have already said I believe to possess several distinct
defects; and I must first observe that I take it in its widest
342 The Attempt.
sense, as including both the acquisition of knowledge and the
cultivation of the faculties. Its widest sense ; for the latter
named division of our education (i.e., our education apart
fi."om the conception of any scheme of education) embraces
all the influences of life. The first division is that in
which we are personally and actively acquisitive; and the
second is, for the most part, that in which we are
passively affected—we the passive recipients of influ¬
ences external to ourselves. The cultivation of the mind
is, of course, furthered in a mechanical way by our per¬
sonal study, as well as by outward influence ; but we are
even then in a manner passive under the means by which
such cultivation is brought about. The two are, in fact,
always found in juxta-position,—so intimately and con¬
stantly blended that it is often difficult to tell how far our
culture or our knowledge is due to active or passive
influences; though I believe it is possible to distinguish
them.
I am aware that in this conception of the two factors
in our education, in the distinction between ourselves as
active and passive, between personal and external influ¬
ences, there is nothing very new. Notwithstanding, to
the misapprehension or partial ignoring of this dual
influence, 1 must attribute some defects I cannot but note
in the majority of the various attempts which are made
towards the education of youth. The two are closely
allied; but the separate treatment each requires, the
training of the faculty which energises for improvement
or knowledge, and the training of the faculty which is
passively recipient of outward educational influences, is
not recognised.
Now, in the training of the second of these two factors
lies the first defect I shall speak of. It is this. The
education of the majority of children is destitute of any
eff"ort to awaken a, feeling for art. The capacity to receive
the influences of art is not aroused. Art, in any and all
of its branches, music, literature, painting, sculpture, is to
them, as a direct educational influence, a dead letter.
At first sight this may seem a startling assertion—
that the want, in the majority of people, i.e., the ordinary
beings we meet in every-day life, of a, feeling for art, is due
to a defect, a remediable defect, in their education. But
that it is so, and to a very large extent, I would try to
show. And first, I believe that the feeling is to be, can
be supplied by education.    I argue this from the premiss
The Attempt. 343
that the capacity for the appreciation of art is latent in
the mind. Like all our tastes and talents, it requires to
be called forth and exercised before it will develop. I do
not, however, presume to argue for its strictly universal
latency; I limit my theory to the great majority. And
yet, inasmuch as no one is, I think, exempt from the
inflxience of art in some of its forms, it seems almost a
legitimate belief that all must have, in some degree, the
capacity for appreciating it.
As an argvunent that this capacity is at any rate very
generally latent, may we not take the fact that the
feeling for, the appreciation of, art, so often comes to us
of itself (when it does so at all) in later hfe. Thought
and the experience of life seem to show us, to awaken us
to the conviction of an aesthetic side of things, besides
helping us to assimilate the influences of the arts them¬
selves, properly so called. This aspect of our sur¬
roundings begins to wear for us a visage of attraction
and reality; and we then sadly recollect our wasted
opportunities, and heedless, though perhaps not culpable,
neglect (for we knew no better) of much that, if it had
received our attention, would have raised the normal tone
of our feeling, and so given us a higher personal pleasure
and satisfaction, as well as enabled us to help and
advance the higher life of the world.
Now, by this feeling for art, I do not mean genius, or
even talent, in any department. Tliat is the special gift
of the few. And further, those who do possess talent
(for I will not talk of genius) in any one department, too
often suffer, with ordinary mortals, from neglect of the
training of their feeHng for and appreciation of the others.
This neglect reacts, and must react, to the detriment of
their own special subject; for the wider our sympathies,
the more enlightened and just our views in any particular
department. Special talent will generally make itself
felt; it is not the neglect of the active, constructive part
of the art faculty that I lament, it is the apathy under
which so many lie as to what is done in art by its
expressers. Yet we cannot blame them so much, for
the country to be explored has never been shown them.
To return to the premiss. I think all our experience
goes to show this latency of a feeling for art in most
people. We see its manifestation in the almost universal
love of what is beautiful in nature. This is its natural
source; and if this love of the beautiful in nature were
344 The Attempt.
cultivated, both itself would be increased, and a compre¬
hension of its intellectual equivalent, art, would be
generated. Both the love of nature and of art is the
love of what is beautiful, best, enduring, and therefore
divine, perfect, and true. I do not attempt to prove
that all have naturally, if but in the germ, a belief and love
of these principles. I take this as long since proved; and
I think the whole course of the world, and all that has
been accomplished by the human mind, show that art
does really participate in these fundamental principles,
and that the love and pursuit of art will help them to
prevail.
That the want of this feelinq for art is a want, much of
what I have already said in arguing that the want is to
be supplied by education, goes to show. Let me, however,
again state what comes to be the main argument against
its omission. If it be true that a training to appreciate
art is a means of awakening or strenglhening the love of
the beautiful and the perfect, then it cannot be denied
that the omission of such training is a want of real im¬
portance. It is a want to the individual; for the purest
pleasure of which man's intellect is capable, the partici¬
pation in and possession of these high principles of
beauty and truth, is thus awanting in its fullest extent,
i.e., in all the provinces which these principles animate.
It is a want to the community; for according to the
spread of a knowledge and love of these principles may
we expect results in the various fields of art. If the
creative and irrepressible work in art is not affected by
it, it yet influences the attainments of the interpreters
and encouragers of the works of genius.
To sum up. I lament the v>^ant of any attempt at
training in the love, and appreciation, and principles of
art, because one of the greatest sources of mental culture,
a means of bringing the mind in contact with the elevat¬
ing principles of beauty and truth, is thus neglected. And
again; because the knowledge and love of these principles
form one of the best antidotes to the exclusive pursuit of
what are called practical aims—too often only another
name for those that are petty and selfish. The highest
object of education is not to acquire success in any par¬
ticular line,—this, though necessary, is subordinate,—it is
the elevation of tone and character, the education of
sentiment; and to this indubitably have we shown the
pursuit of art to conduce.
The Attempt. 345
Nor are we even, on the other hand, entirely destitute
of practical reasons for this education in art. The
immense number who have leisure, and are yet pre¬
vented fr-om having any fixed definite occupation, form an
army of volunteers whose time, devoted to study of
art as it has been put before them, would doubtless
accomplish much. Often they do not think of such a direc¬
tion for their energies as possible; it has never oc¬
curred to them. Were these scantly tenanted fields
pointed out to them in their early training, they could not
complain of ignorance. I feel that it is indeed in these
multitudes of unemployed that the training I advocate
would bear fruit. It might not bring many more to swell
the traiu of genius, but may we not believe, according to
the beautiful theory of George Eliot's Dorothea,—" By
desiring what is perfectly good, even when we 
cannot do what we would, we are part of the divine power
against evil,—widening the skirts of light, and making
the struggle with darkness narrower."
Not to give a handle to those who vaunt " practical
education," let me say a few words as to how this training
is to be supplied. And I must here return to my first
remarks, as to the relative value of the acquisition of
knowledge and mental culture. It would be in the
highest degree impracticable to expect girls and boys to
be all trained in the details and technicalities of the arts.
I write of those who have not talent, and to whom, there¬
fore, such training would be wearisome, perhaps un¬
intelligible. It is not that faculty which acquires a know¬
ledge of facts, but that which is passively recipient
of outward influence, which is the medium of such training
as I speak of. The young mind must be subjected to
influences which shall awaken in it its latent feelings.
Remember it is the feeling for art, as the exponent of what
is true, beautiful, perfect, that I wish to be trained and
developed. And no amount of knowledge of technicalities
will arouse this feeling ; though, where attainable, it may
strengthen it. In this way it is seen that I do not
advocate a more universal teaching of the practice, say
even of music and painting; the reverse rather. I do
not wish an increased mediocre execution. My aim
rather comes to this ;—that the feeling for art, with what
amount of study circumstances and tastes will permit,
should arise from, and be engendered by, the sense of
obligation to know the good, perfect, enduring, and there-
NOVKMBER 1873. *   X
346 The Attempt.
tore divine. It resolves itself into a moral duty. The re¬
sponsibility then of the teacher is to awaken this sense
of obligation; to present to the pupil the results of art,
and to show how they, like moral rectitude, after which
all are endeavouring, are the results of these eternal
principles of perfection.
Lastly, we must not dogmatize. Strong feeling or
tastes in one direction may exclude interest in others,
may annul any influences exerted in favour of art in
general. The sad experiences of life may destroy the
power to aim at the cultivation of what is abstractedly
great and true. The bent to the practical may be too
strong for the latent emotional principle. And I cannot
say that it should not be well for the world for such
exceptional instances to be always found.
I purposed, in this paper, to speak of some other and
kindred defects in education; but my subject has so grown
upon me, that I must reserve meanwhile what I have to
say in hopes of returning to it at some future time.
Noli-me-Tangere.
Shi  C0nsi£rat£d  fni^hi
He rose up from the dreams of youth, and braced
His armour on, and took his lance in hand,
Untried, and parted.    Morning broke and blush'd
Her rosy greeting to the violet hills ;
And the sweet lark's jubilant anthem rose
Over the dewy earth.    Thro' the still woods,
Odorous with blooms of summer, rode he on;
Over the sunny uplands, by the streams
That murmur'd, many-voic'd, towards the sea.
And as he went, it seem'd that all the way
Broke to new beauty at his very feet.
He pluck'd the fairest flowers, and wove of them
A chaplet for his casque, which hid the bough
Of laurel he had chosen for his crest;
And bound bright blossoms round his sword, and rode
Radiant and careless.
With the noon-tide came
A storm.    The flowers he erst had pluck'd, all bruis'd
And faded, fell from off" his helm and sheath;
His arms were rusted, and the way was long.
The Attempt. 347
Now as he journey'd on, and yet the rain
Rush'd down, and thunder darken'd all the sky,
He spied a wayside chapel, all alone,
Rais'd on a rocky place, of stone unknown.
And there he lighted down, and enter'd in,
And laid him down, all weary, on the floor
Before the altar, and he dream'd a dream.
It seem'd that all the place was fill'd with light;
And thro' the open doois came in a crowd
In long procession; and they fill'd the church.
All there were sad and weary, wounded men
And women weeping, and they rais'd their hands
And wail'd—"Lord, give us help, for sore on us
Prcbses the foe ; we know not where to flee."
Then from the Rood there came a sweet low voice.
And the sad cries were hush'd, and all were still.
" Where is the champion I sent forth to-day,
To battle ? where the consecrated knight.
Who vow'd himself to Me ?"    The voices rose
Once more, " He sleepeth, Lord, behold and see.
And all this day he passed and saw us not.
And all our prayers and tears were vain to him ;
He saw us not because he sought not.    Now
We perish!"
Then the young knight look'd and saw
Himself, with rusted mail, and wither'd flowers.
Asleep ; and yet an elder self, whose face
Show'd signs of years, and the sad stamp and seal
Of faded hope and wasted days in vain.
And round him plain'd the voices, all unheard,
Save by that One, W^ho answer'd yet again:
" Awake, arise, 0 sleeper 1 and be strong.
Learn, that thy armour was not given for this.
The toy and brightness of a summer day,
Not for the sunshine only, but for storm;
Not for thyself, but for these suffering ones.
And so for Me in them.    Know that thy hope
Must not be happiness, or even rest,
Till work be done, and labour ended well."
Then silence.
And he rose and took his way
From out the church, and rode into the storm.
348 The Attempt.
And all the way it seem'd as if in truth
His eyes were open'd, and he saw the weak,
Oppress'd, and sorrowful about his path.
For where the flowers had bloom'd and birds had sung
They were no more, but pain, and tears, and care.
And all cried wearily to him for help,
" 0 thou, who art our champion, give us aid !
So press'd he on and fought; and from his mail,
And from his blade unsheath'd faded the rust.
Until the sunset splendour emote his brow.
And lo, where the poor flowers he erst had pluck'd
So eagerly had faded long ago.
Upon his helm there shone a goodly wreath
Of amaranth and of asphodel.
And when
Night fell, it brought him endless peace.
YOLANDE.
dh 0 s ts!
AVho does not welcome a ghost story ? except those,
indeed, who feel the excitement to their imagination too
great to be pleasurable; and even those, with very few
exceptions, enjoy a startling story which ends in being
clearly explained away.
I confess to a distinct preference for those stories which
admit of, or at least ofier, «o explanation,—such as the
capital one of a Swiss ghost, to whom we were last
Christmas introduced by E. J. 0.
Exactly such a ghost should I like to see—a mysterious,
interesting-looking ghost, so sociably disposed as to visit
a considerable circle at once; for I do not profess any
inchnation to engross the society or conversation of a
ghost at midnight, in a secluded chamber, after the gas
is out, and the room merely lighted by a gleam of firehght,
or—oh, horrible 1—the blue light of its own countenance !
Not at all. I should much prefer that a few strong-
minded friends should share the pleasure with me. There
Avould be this advantage, too, in such an arrangement;—my
friends to whom I told the tale in after days could not
say it was a dream, a nightmare, a freak of an excitable
imagination, and explain it away, as we so readily do
our neighbour's wonderful experiences.
Tlie Attempt. 451
But one word clearly from them fell
Farewell, for evermore farewell I
My spring-time has departed,
And this is why it fled. Veronica,
OUR LIBRARY TABLE.
Two Musical Memoirs.*
Miss Kay Shuttleworth, in her abridged translation of
the work of C. H. Bitter, has here set before us all that
is known of the life of Sebastian Bach; and, after all, it
is disappointingly little. Only the external records of
his life seem to have been preserved; a life marked by
few and simple incidents, the greater part of which was
passed at Leipzig, as Choir Master and Musical Director.
Yet we may form for ourselves some idea of the character
of the master; an idea in harmony both with the mighty
works which he has left us, and with the fine expressive
features of the portrait prefixed to this volume. We may
imagine him of a calm and even temperament, which,
however, could be raised to indignation at times, but
could never descend to littleness, nor conceive of the
spirit of petty intrigue that surrounded him. His mind
was so entirely fixed on his own sublime art, that it never
occurred to him to measure himself with common men;
to enquire whether his compositions were merely for the
advantage of his churches and pupils, or were destined
to live for ever. He reaped but little fame or reward
during his lifetime. Frederick the Great, indeed, did
honour to himself by his cordial and graceful recognition
of Bach; but the officials with whom he more often came
in contact, seem to have played the usual part of medio¬
crity, and took advantage of their position to thwart and
confine the impulses of genius. It is a remarkable coin¬
cidence, that Bach was born in the same year as Handel,
1685. His active and fertile life came to a close July 28,
1750.
There could scarcely be a greater contrast than that be¬
tween the book just mentioned, and the light, agreeable
gossip opened to us in the life of Moscheles. It is a pleasant
glimpse of the world of music in the times immediately
preceding our own, and as Moscheles lived for many years
in London, we get amusing sketches of society there:  of
* Life of Sebastian Bach.    Life of Ignatz MoBcheles.
452 The Attempt.
those young ladies whose mammas begged forj" something
with a pretty time in it, brilliant, and not too difficult, and
to whom the unhappy Moscheles in one year gave 1437
lessons :  of the earher days of the Philharmonic Society,
and the difficulties under which he succeeded in bringing
about the performance of the ninth symphony, " rehearsing
every difficulty with each individual player," and being
rewarded by a complete success:   of concerts so badly
organised that he writes "anyone less thick-skinned than
I was would have died straight off, but I could  listen
without so much as a fainting fit."    He himself seems to
have had no mean share in the improvement which, -odth
all our shortcomings, has undoubtedly come to pass.    He
was   a   genuine   musician,   a  brilliant   pianiste,   full  of
generous   enthusiasm  for  those  whom   he  rejoiced   to
acknowledge as his superiors.    It is difficult to judge of
his compositions, they  are  now so seldom heard;  but
probably his special gift was as an interpreter of music,
and he had also a rare talent for improvisation.    He was
of a most amiable disposition,  beloved by   his contem¬
poraries, and though he criticises freely, and with much
point   and   humour,  there  is  not  a  single    ill-natured
remark tliroughout the volumes.    A more abiding interest
is lent to the work by the letters and particulars relating
to the death of Beethoven, and still more by the charming
picture of Mendelssohn in all the genial ease of friendship.
It is truly  a  privilege to be admitted into the  bright
cordiality of that artist life, in its best and highest form.
We learn with interest that Mendelssohn's " Cradle Song "
was written on the occasion of the birth of his godson,
the eldest son of Moscheles, and was sent to him with a
delightful picture of all the instruments of the orchestra
gathered round the cradle of the music-heralded babe, as
Mendelssohn himself explains it:—" the trumpets when he
wants to become famous, the flutes when he falls in love,
the cymbals* when he gets a beard; the pianofore explains
itself, and should people ever play him false, as they will
do to the best of us, there stand the kettle-drums and the
big drums in the back-ground."
The Prize offered for the Best Poem appearing in the
August, September or October number of The Attempt,
has been awarded to " R," for her poem entitled " They
were troubled, saying, It is a Spirit."
* German " Becken,"—Cymbals or Baaon.
The Attempt. 353
Part V.
(^Conclusion.)
It was grey, melancholy weather at Valmont. There
was rain in the sky, and wind on the sea, which was
rough and gloomy without being positively stormy. De
Frajou sat at the window of his little salon, looking out on
the tossing waves, each with its cap of Avhite foam, that
tumbled in the bay, where the brown-sailed fishing boats
were plunging and rolling out to sea. Since a week ago
he had told Gabrielle the news of Raoul, and she had gone
away with white lips and a set face ; he had seen nothing
of her, and had shrunk from going up to the farm. He
felt her confidences to him might be painful to recall, and
had also recommended that the news should at present
only be mentioned in the family. He might soon hear
from Raoul, and, meanwhile, though there was nothing to
say, he had a strong suspicion of Slichel, which came very
near the truth. Jacques Lecoeur, who was passing the
window equipped for the sea, paused, loaning on the sill,
to announce that his nephew's wife was to come as honne
into the house, for "Madame Lecoeur is to accompany
Mademoiselle Gabrielle on a little journey. Monsieur
Gaspard thought she would attend her better than a girl,
and then she is so devoted to la demoiselle.'^
" Are they going to-day % " De Frajou enquii'ed; and on
his answering, probably yes, he ordered the dog-cart, and
set off for the farm with Joseph. Gabrielle was sitting on
the door-step, looking straight before her, her face grey
and cloudy as the weather. She received De Frajou with
instinctive courtesy, asked him to come in out of the cold
September breeze, and then sat silently in the salon gaz¬
ing at the leaden sky.
" I hear you are going on a journey."
" No—yes, I did hear my uncle talk of a little voyage ;
now harvest is over we are more free.''
" Madame L ccoeur is going with you ? "
" Is she ?    I had not heard."
" I hope you will send me your address. I may
liave something very special to write to you. I think F
have hardly sufficiently shown you how very remarkable
it is that those papers of Raoul's should not be originals."
DECEMBER 1873. ^   Y
354 The Attempt.
" I don't see that," said Gabrielle, " probably he meant
to leaye Valmont suddenly, and took the real ones with
him."
" That is impossible ; he told me of those papers being
left here, which would have been necessary to him had
he, as I much wished, applied for a superintending
appointment in the hospital at Algiers; but he was too
eager to return to you."
" Neither you nor I, M. leVicomte, have been successful
in guessing Dr Wachter's arrangements."
" Pardon me if I tell you I feel sure you are misjudging
him now. I myself have such reason to regret hasty
condemnations. I count on your friendship, so will confess
to you that I was most indignant once with the lady whose
true attachment to me was over-ruled by circumstances—
by filial duty. When I knew all, how I regretted my ill-
timed judgments. Raoul is a man Avho might be too
sensitive and easily hurt, perhaps; but deliberately un¬
faithful, never I it was not in him, and he was devoted to
you. Something we do not know yet lies behind all this.
Meanwhile, pray beware of your cousin M. I\Iichel."
As his name was pronounced, Michel entered the room,
and the Colonel rose to go. Gabrielle, somewhat cheered,
gave him her hand, saying, " At all events. Monsieur, I
shall never forget yoiu* kindness ; " and Michel jealously
escorted him to the door.
" I have just been saying," he remarked, '■ how very
strange it is that Wachter's papers are all copies, and in
the same hand, too, I think; hardly worth returning to
you, sir."
" I wonder, sir, you do not avoid a subject which so
evidently distresses my cousin," said Michel.
" Did you perhaps have them copied and send Wachter
the originals," said the Colonel, glancing up at Michel, as
he lit his cigar.
He changed countenance as he answered angrily, " How
could I, without knowing his address ? "
" You are right, sir," he answered in an indifferent tone
—"how could you without knowing AVachter's address! "
Joseph remarked as they drove off,—" this place does
monsieur no good now—il ne faut pas tant se meler des
affaires dupays"
" Don't take me away yet," said his master, " we are
only in the second volume of the romance."
Michel gazed after them, and if wishes could have flung
The Attempt. 355
the Colonel over the precipice, he would never have
reached Valmont alive. Given an opportunity, and he
felt he could himself stamp out that feeble but active
vitality that crossed all his plans; but now he returned
to Gabrielle. "My very dear Gabrielle," he began,
" there is something which deeply concerns your uncle,
and through him yourself, Avhich has, I think, been too
long kept from you. Gaspard is waiting for you on the
shore ; will you come out with me, and I will exjolain all
as we go % Oh! Gabrielle, be ours again, now you have
wakened from this dream that for so long has made you
careless of the interests of youi- best friends."
'• I will go with you, Michel, as you wish," she replied
coldly, leaving the room, where she soon reappeared,
wrapped in her dark cloak, clasped with a handsome
wrought silver ornament, and wearing a most becoming
little red hood. But her face never changed; she felt
deceived, humiliated, and yet somehow turned to stone.
The Raoul of her fancy, had existed, she now believed,
in her fancy alone; but the years during which his
memory had been treasured by her, and the weeks which
of late had recalled his image with fresh vividness, were
so much part of herself, that there seemed not enough
left for deep feeling; only a hard dry sensation was hers,
that everything was a mockery and a cheat. So she
walked by Michel's side over the wide stubble fields, and
reached the top of the cliff above the Mermaid's fountain
late in the afternoon.
"Gaspard is down below waiting for us; will you
descend % " said her cousin.
" Why should I ?" she answered. " I hate the place.
Yet if you wish it, fa riiest egal^^—and they began clam¬
bering down.
" Why, surely there is an English yacht I and close in¬
shore," she exclaimed, as they reached the refuge cavern,
as she saw a trim yawl hove-to as near the shore as
was safe in that weather.
"No Gabrielle, not a yacht. Now hear all; for the
last year your uncle has been smuggling, and on a large
scale. The goods have been concealed in the inner
cavern below, and thence carried iip at night to the farm,
and driven off by degrees. There is a cargo of wines
and lace for England, waiting for that vessel now. That
maudit colonel suspects something, and will alarm the
coastguard,  le scelerdt.     This  evening is Gaspard's last
356 The Attempt.
chance, and to give him that chance—Oh I Gabrielle, I
have ruined myself—but he is your uncle. I have
diverted the coastguard elsewhere for to-night, but as
that causes me to be untrue to my position—I have re¬
signed it—the mayorship, the departmental jurisdiction
—1 have sacrificed my career for you, and will you do
nothing for me ? " And the old story followed as they
gained the edge of the sea, and walked to the cavern.
Some way within, a little trap-door usually concealed by
a piled heap of shingle, stood open, disclosing a small
inner cave. Gaspard stood by directing some of his
labourers in the removal of small wine casks, and packets
of lace, which now strewed the dry shingle of the outer
cave. Madame Lecoeur, seated on a little pile of luggage,
sprang up as Gabrielle entered. " Oh! dear demoiselle
fa fait fremh\ does it not ? to be here so late, even not
alone. And so we are to go on a voyage to England—
all of us."
" What is all this ? " said Gabrielle to her uncle, who
drew her aside.
" Gabrielle, have pity. I may escape to-night, and get
all the goods on board, but if we fail, or if any one be¬
trays me, I shall be arrested, imprisoned, fined. Will you
suffer it ? Michel has resigned all to help us, but he
still asks your hand. Don't refuse him and drive him
desperate, or he may take the line he tells me is his duty,
and denounce me."
The old man was terribly agitated; Michel had worked
well on his confused fears.
"Dear uncle, be calm ; what is it you wish me to do? "
" That you should go with me, and Michel, and the
femme Lecoeur to Southampton to-night with the goods.
Oh 1 Gabrielle, save me from prison. Who knows what
that Colonel may ferret out ? Michel won't come unless
there is a chance of your accepting him."
"And, Gabrielle," said Michel advancing, " have i not
been true '? all your life you have been dearest to me. I
have still the dispensation for our marriage. If we stay
a few days at Southampton, we can marry without further
legal trouble, and, if all is quiet, return to Valmont.
Should not we who are the last of our family, stand by
each other ? Or do you always wish to be known as the
delaissle of the too charming doctor ? "
" I wonder," said she, " you wish to marry a woman
Avho does not prefer you to other people."
The Attemj^t. 357
" That will come, dearest," said Michel, " only let me go
with you."
" Make liim come," whispered Gaspard ; " if he stays he
may desert us.    I am quite in his power."
Gabrielle looked round as if for help; De Frajou's
warnings occurred to her, but nothing seemed worth
striving for. The gloomy sky, as seen through the
cavern mouth, was darkening into early twilight; the
near measured plash of oars was heard, and, in another
minute, several dark figures appeared at the entrance,
and a voice in very British French called out,—" All
right here ; all is quiet outside."
" All right, Captain Elliot," said Michel to the weather-
beaten old sailor who had spoken, and who was followed by
others. " Quick ^vith all these goods to the boats, and then
we can follow."
" And these are my passengers," said the old man, with
a sly glance at Gabrielle. " Is the pretty lady quite sure
she wishes to go ? Old Tom Elliot is not the man for a
kidnapping plot."
" Nonsense, the lady goes with her uncle," said Michel;
" and, Gabrielle, you will let me come too," he whispered.
" Can I prevent yoii 1" she said. Meanwhile the men
were carrying the goods out.
" You will let Michel come with you in the second boat,
will you not, chei'ie" said Gaspard, as he followed the
casks down to the boat. His goods were very dear to him,
and Michel had persuaded him the coastguard Avere at his
heels. It was a strange scene,—the liickering lanterns
and outer daylight dimly showing the fantastic white
pinnacles and fretted surface of the chalk and flint rock,—
the men swiftly and noiselessly working under the orders
of the old captain, who now and then glanced com¬
placently at Gabrielle.
" Yes; go, SU-," he said to Gaspard, " and the lady can
go off in the next boat, and have the more time to make
up her mind whether she wishes to sail with me; no
imwilling passengers for me. I had one once, eh I" and
he shoved his broad fist against Michel, and winked, " one
who shall be nameless."
At this moment from outside the cavern sounded a
scream,—long, loud, and shrill. Gabrielle and the others
rushed out and perceived Madame Lecoeiir (who, as slie
afterwards said, had gone out to watch the boat push off)
standing stifl'and straight, with her mouth open, and both
358 The Attempt.
hands pointing towards the Fontaine des Sirenes, some
thirty paces off. Beside it stood a man, slightly built but
broad-shouldered, dressed in grey, and with shining fair
hair blowing about his head. Gabrielle's heart gave a
choking throb, and then seemed to stand still, as she
stretched out her hand as if to warn off the advancing
figure,—" Cest vous," she gasped.
" Old, c'est Men moi, Raoul Wachter," came in the old
familiar voice, so long unheard, so long yearned for. But
now was it joy, or anger, or terror that it brought her ?
However, he was by her side, and giving her an open
letter,—" Read," he said, " read at once, and see how we
were separated."
Madame Lecoeur recovered courage enough to rush
away past them, and up the steep path beyond as if on
wings.
" I think you have met my passenger before, Monsieur
Michel," said Elliot with a grin. " I owed him the return
voyage you see—I charge him nothing."
Gabrielle was attentively reading the letter in the
waning light. Raoid stood watching her earnestly.
Michel stepped between; " Come, Gabrielle, come," he
said, " we have no time to lose; leave this man to his
own wife."
Raoul turned upon him in a moment.
" Villain! and. you dare to let your voice be heard
here—to her—you whose lies have wrecked two lives; "
and he had him by the throat at once. The Mayor was a
big, strong, burly man, and graj^pled with his antagonist,
who, however, almost directly flung him off, and down
where the deep water washed the rocks, and he plunged
over and over, splutterhig in the pool. He rose again—a
sorry sight; Raoiil was standing over him with flushed
cheeks and lighted eyes, lashed into fury. Gabrielle
followed him and laid her hand on his shoulder. " Not
now—not to-day," she said; and Raoul spoke, " Go, then,
with your infiimy, your name I remember is Talbot, but
if ever you dare to return to Valmont—mark me—I will
denounce you, and the very children shall point at you
for the liar and the traitor that you are."
" Good heavens ! Doctor, be quiet," said Elliot, " let us
have law and order; get him away or there will be
murder done." This to some men who were dragging
Michel out of the water and into the little boat, coughing,
swearing,  and  struggling.   " Indeed you had bettor go.
The Attempt. 3o9
Monsieur Michel—least said soonest mended in your part
of this affair."
Raoul turned round; the little hand was still on his
shoulder, " Gabrielle % " he said, and there was a world of
question in his tone.
" C'est toi," she replied, and, in the delicate French
idiom, the toi answered all he asked.
" Oh! Gabrielle, pardon. I could not help it; I could
not help knocking him down I"
" Well, he is safe oiF," said Elliot, " and sir, I have
brought you honestly back to the very place 1 took you
from, and with a better will. You see," he continued,
turning to Gabrielle, "I met this gentleman on South¬
ampton pier, wild for a passage to Valmont, and the
Grandport steamer did not sail for two days. So I knew
him again, and told him I was bound to the Fontaine des
Sirenes itself, and how my cabin was fitted up for the
lady M. Michel intended to marry; but it was all other¬
wise ordained. Time is up—good evening and all good
wishes." He shook hands warmly with Raoul, and
followed his men into the boat, which shoved off, and
they were gone. No one was left, and a wild squall of
wind and rain rushed past, blotting out all the world
round them from Raoul and Gabrielle. Raoul drew her
into liis arms; she had hitherto gone through all her
troubles with great composure and fortitude, but now it
was with her as with Dante, the ice congealed about her
heart seemed to melt into tears, and she clung to him
weeping convulsively. Raoul's own equanimity was
quite at fault, and more than the rain-di"ops dimmed his
eyes as he kissed the drooping head, and tried to whisper
to her to take courage, for all the sorrow was over now—
and they need never be separated again—never. He
led her out of the blinding rain into the shelter of the
cavern, and they sat down side by side on a rocky ledge,
almost silent at first from very excess of feeling. Every
thing was cleared away; the pebbles and weed were
raked up against the trap-door. Without, as the squall
passed off, against a low bar of yellow light on the
horizon, the yawl could be seen scudding fast away
before the wind with closely reefed sails. The rising tide
thundered on the jagged rocks, the chill wind whistled
and moaned in the cavern laden with brine, the guUa
shrieked and wailed hoarsely as they flew from rock to
sea; but what recked Gabrielle of the cold and damp and
3(50 The Attempt.
gloom, as she nestled close to Raoul, realising by degrees
her own happiness, and hearing more than his letter
could tell of the sorrowful past. His wife, who had for
some time previously fallen into ill health, had died a few
months ago, dux'ing his absence at the seat of war in
Mexico; and he had then resolved upon returning to his
own country with his little boy, as soon as he could wind
up his affairs. On his arrival at Doctor Holt's house two
days previously, he had foimd De Frajou's letter, with
the wonderful news fr'om Valmont, that had filled him
with mingled joy and consternation at his mistake. He
hiirried straight off to Southampton, and there met old
Elliot, who had given him a passage. On the way he had
learned about Michel's last plan.
" Should you have married him ? " he asked.
" Possibly," she answered. " An hour ago I cared so
little what became of me, a man wdth a purpose might
have induced me to do almost anything."
" That was my case ; ah, you were fortunate at least
to escape a loveless marriage. I did not dare to seek for
Valmont news. Had I heard what I always feared to
heai', that you were unhappy with Michel, it would have
driven me wild. After that dreadftil day, when I read
the he which divided us, I thought it best we should
meet no more, at least for many years, Of her I wish to
speak no more; she loved me once and she is dead ;
but I could not trxist her. The little Gabriel is charming,
you will delight in him."
They talked for a while, till Gabrielle, starting to her
feet, exclaimed, " Let us go home while there is a
glimmer of daylight; and, 0 Raoul I I forgot the tide."
Indeed the sea was already breaking round the point of
road outside, but Raoul carried Gabrielle through the dash of
the wave, and together they began to ascend the fa¬
miliar rocky path, while she clung to the arm whose
support had been so sorely missed, with an ever-increas¬
ing sensation of rest and bliss.
" Is it possible," she said, as they crossed the dark
fields, " that not three hours ago I was walking here with
Michel, and oh such a heavy heart!"
" Is it possible that I am walking with you here again,
as if nothing at all had happened? Is it all a long
dream? Only I hope not to awake an unknown little
country practitioner. Qu'en dis tul I have been ap¬
pointed as   civilian commissioner to  visit  the  mihtary
The Attempt. 361
hospitals ; you will have I fear, to travel a good deal, to
Algiers, where not; though / think Valmont a land to
live and die in—centinaire and unaided by the doctor."
" I, on the contrary, wish to see the world, especially
Algiers and the wars. Alsace I have seen, and the corn
there is magnificent."
'■ Normandy is the land for corn.    Oh ! my darling,
what our last little mock quarrel cost me !"'
" Yet I feel that you knew, like me, au fondj du coeur,
that it was nothing at all," she replied.
Near the farm they Avere met by a nervous procession
of men and maids, Madame Lecoeur ready for instant
flight, bringing up the rear. As the light of the lantern
borne in front fell on Raoul, alarmed whispers went
round. "It is he sure enough, arevenant? Yes, dripping-
wet as the drowned always appear."
" Oui, me void," said Kaoul "a revenant with a valise
which he will trouble you to carry;" and he tossed the
article in question to a reassured servant ; and soon then
all was congratulation and welcome. A hot supper was
spread at the farm, and Raoul and Gabrielle, as they sat
by the blazing wood fire, could now look at each other at
leisure. Beyond the development from youth and girl
into man and woman, they were little changed, though
more of intellect in his face, and more of sweetness in
hers there certainly was. Suddenly at sujiper, for the first
time, they remembered Gaspard, poor old Gaspard, who
now was tossing on the stormy sea, a victim to his over-
caution. "And I wonder how they will arrange them¬
selves on board," laughed llaoul, " without the principal
personage."
There came a ring at the bell, and Joseph was an¬
nounced. He had driven up with inquiries from his
master, who had heard wild reports in the village. Ra(3ul
thought it best to drive down with him, Gabvielle and he
agreeing to meet at the eight o'clock mass the following
morning.
Warmly did the Colonel welcome his old friend, though
it cost Raoul a pang, even on this evening of rapture, to
see the change from the once dashing officer to a feeble
invalid.
" So, here you are in the body, mon clier" he said. "Do
you know I heard that yoiu* ghost had risen up by the
Fontaine and borne  away Gabrielle,  and the mermaid
DECEMBEK 1873. ^ Z
362 The Attempt.
herself had appeared, and with a shriek that was heard
at Valmont, hurled the mayor into the sea."
" Madame Lecoeur and 1 were the mermaid; she did
the shrieking, and I the hurling; but the mayor is all
right, he has sailed with the smugglers and Gaspard
Talbot, who sees all the coastguard at his heels."
" So they will be if he goes on with these tricks,"
answered the Colonel. " I saw they had a hiding place in
that cave, and meant they should only clear off this cargo
before exposing it. Indeed, I told that precious mayor as
much, who, however, has had the grace to resign."
All was explained before the two friends separated for
the night, but Eaoul accompanied Joseph, when he took
in his master's coffee, early in the morning.
" Naturally I have not slept," he said, " and now, as
you wish it, I should hke to see you professionally."
When the examination was over, Raoiil said somewhat
sadly, " I think, yes, 1 am sure, I can give you more ease,
and there may be great improvement, as long as a strong
impulse from without stimulates the vitality; a half
foundered boat will often keep afloat, if she will steer
and has way on her."
" You have taken the wind out of my sails by ending
your romance so comfortably, doctor ; you must take me
back to Algiers for excitement, and, meanwhile, do some¬
thing to amuse me ; bring Gabrielle here to breakfast,
and sing some of your old German songs, if you still have
your voice. Sing the Lied von der Ruhe." Raoul opened
the piano, and sung to a rich sweet old German air.
" Im aril) der Liebe ruht sich's wohl
Wohl auoh im Schoosz der Erde ;
Ob's dort noch oder bier sein soil
Wo ruhe icb linden werde ?
Das forscbt main Geist und aiant und denkt
Und pflegt zur Vorsiobt die es lengt.
Im Schoosz der Erde ruht sich's wohl
So still und ung-estbret
Hier ist das Herz oft Kummorvoll
Dort wird's dui'ch nichta gescbweret
Man sohliift so sanft so still und slisz
Hinuber in das Paradies."
The words of the song expressed what both felt, but
neither cared to put into words. Raoul played on in
silence long dreamy chords, till he said, "I must go,
I promised to meet Gabrielle at the messe basse."
" Go, and thank God for one of the best of gifts—a
good wife," said De Frajou.
The Attempt. 363
It was Sunday morning,—a bright and breezy Septem¬
ber day; and the fine old Carillion was ringing, Mary,
Joseph, and George, as the bells were called, whose
voices were known and loved far out at sea. How often
had Raoul heard them in his mind, as now in truth.
While avoiding the main thoroughfare, he sped up the
narrow lanes, past flowery hedges and scattered cottages
towards the massive grey church, which stood alone in a
grassy valley, somewhat retired from the little town that
lay between it and the sea. And, down the little turfy
hill, he could see Gabrielle coming the straight way from
the farm. Her freshest bloom seemed glowing in her
cheeks again ; her dark velvet bodice, poin^ cVAlencon cap,
and rich gold ornaments, were most becoming, as she
hastened to him with a bright smile and outstretched
hands.
" This morning I thought it was all a dream again," she
said, " the dream of your return I have awakened from so
often; but it is true—true, and the sunshine of the old
days has returned."
•' And I grew nervous when you were out of my sight,"
said Raoul. " Of cjurse this must not last, we must have a
word with the cur6 before mass; as to the contract, it
was all drawn out ten years ago, and only wants dating
and signing. We are too busy to wait; I am a consulting
surgeon, you know, and you have Leon de Frajou and
little Gabriel to look after at once."
An hour later they had left the church, and were walk¬
ing arm in arm down the Grande Rue, which was
thronged with people, all endlmanche, and most excited
by the great news of the night before. So many
congratulations and marvellous questions about the
Siren were pressed upon the doctor, that he felt some
explanation to be necessary, so he turned at the door of
the Colonel's lodging, lifted his hat, and thanked the
neighbours warmly; and then continued,—" That I am
here again I owe to Colonel de Frajou, who found out
where I was and how I had been deceived. It is true
that I was detained two years a prisoner in Algeria; but
I should not, after that, have remained eight years in
America, had I not had false information that Mademoi¬
selle Gabrielle was married. She allows me, however, to
say now that she soon will be ; and I have to ask pardon
f ir taking her away. But I have no rancour against our
Siren; she holds her cup of pure water to all comers ; is
364 The Attem2)t.
it her fault if strange guests come % In the old war
times, the English ships used to go there for water, as I
have been told by sailors who were present; doubtless
they somethnes took prisoners, and this, I believe, is the
real foundation of the legend of the Siren."
And so, amid acclamations and congratulations, they
passed indoors; and there were no two happier people
that day in all France than the guests of the sympathetic
Colonel de Frajou.
" Well, mademoiselle," he remarked, " which of us
guessed rightly about the doctor ? I can read faces, and
I would have pledged my own honour from the very first
for that of the horseman who rode up to warn us of the
ambuscade in Algeria."
Little remains to be told. Gaspard Talbot came home
in a fortnight by the steamer, if not a wiser man, at least
more disposed to submit to his niece's wisdom.
When he reached the Grande Ferme in the evening,
and asked for mademoiselle, the servant, with a grin,
replied—" She is no more, but Monsieur le Docteur and
Madame Wachter are at home, and have Monsieur De
Frajou to dinner." There sat Gabrielle at the head of
the table, a radiant matron, her little faired-haired step¬
son by her side. They had delayed their departure for
Paris till Gaspard's return,—Paris, where the rising
sux'geon was noAV expected, and where there was no
l')nger any question of a little lodging au quatribne.
Michel Talbot never returned to Valmont, but as he
had money and astuteness, he probably throve somewhere
in the eyes of the Avorld. Captain Elliot retired on liis
gains, and lived in Scotland, highly respected, and au
elder of the kirk. The farm is let now, save one suite of
rooms where Doctor Wachter and his wife and family
often spend their summer holidays; but he has been all
his life too busy and too much in request, to stay long
at a time in that remote country place. This is a brief
record of some of the early days of one of the chief
surgeons of France, and we must not pursue the story
too far if wc wish it to end well, or we shall find again
the mingling of good and evil fortune that belongs to
human life. Sufiice it to say, that Raoul and Gabrielle
were most happy in their marriage, that the little Gabriel
was as much treasured by her as her own beautiful
children, and that they enjoyed above all things the time
tliey could spare for their retreat at Valmont from the
The Attem2)t. 30')
cares of a busy life. One of the tall Ogive windows in
the lantern tower of the church has been given by them—
St Leon, and St Louis armed cap-a-pie in the desert, fill
the two lights, and above are blazoned the extinct arms
of Frajou Kocheambeau.
And the Sken! Her exploits are now a thing of the past,
but perhaps they are none the less thrilling in tradition
and report; and the witching scenery is all unchanged.
Still the lonely rock column in the sea seems to mark off
an enchanted land, and through the cavern mouth strange
formations show in fantastic light and shadow, and the
rippling shower still sparkles over the velvet moss, in
the haunted solitude of the Mermaid's Fountain.
E. J. 0.
(Concluded.)
ilu ilurn in Wixwitx.
The stainless snow wrapped all below,
From above the sunlight streamed ;
And, fair to view, through a mist of blue,
The pearly Pentlands gleamed.
Stirred not a breeze in the frosted trees,
But all was hushed and still.
As if life were dead, and its shroud were spread
Spotless o'er field and hill.
Black as a pall seemed the ivied wall,
AVhere the snow in fragments clung;
The frozen pond slept dark beyond,
With icicles o'erhung.
The pathway led where the trees o'erhead
Will hide tlie sides in spring;
And music there, on the frosty air.
From the dell rose murmuring.
For the merry stream, with a sunny gleam,
As it raced so far away,
A defiance tossed to the chaining frost
To hush one ripple gay.
36(5 The Attempt.
The beams that played through the leafless glade.
It caught them, and it cast
A golden glow to the cold white snow,
Like a smile, as it hurried past.
The glen was steep and the snow was deep,
But the biu-n was singing still,
As blythe a tune, as if lavish June
Strewed flowers upon the hill.
Brave stream sing on, till the snows are gone,
And daisies shall star the brae,
And violets drink at thy sunny brink,
And primroses breathe of May.
Like the heaven fed life, that, when storms are rife,
And mid-winter's bleakest chill
Binds each fair thing that from earth can spring,
Liveth and singeth still.
Yes, singoth on, though the flowers are gone,
And liveth though all are dead,
And smileth on woe, with a heaven-caught glow,
From the unseen glory shed.
It never dries 'neath summer skies,
Nor freezeth with winter's breath ;
Music it makes in the heart that breaks.
And singeth of life, in death.
Unseen its source,—its mystic course
Unchained by the frosts of earth.
Flows on in strength till it springs, at length,
To His throne who gave it birth.
OmcRON.
I
The Attempt. 3G7
A TALE OF THE FORTY-FIVE.
CHAPTER XXIV.
OULLODEN.
" Naxcy, " said Barbara, when they had left old
Lauchlan's cottage, and were on their way home again,
" I must find out this Rab MacDougal, and see what he
can tell me about poor Maggie. Did you ever hear a
sadder story?"
" Yes, it was very sad; but how can you find out Rab,
Barbara? Old Lauchlan does not even know whether
he is alive or not, and even if he is, he is away some¬
where in Perthsliire; besides, it is so long ago. What
good would it do even if you did find him. He could
find no trace of Maggie, even immediately after she had
gone away, so how can you hope to get news of her
now?"
" I don't know," said Barbara, " it does seem rather
hopeless, I confess; but I must do all I can to keep my
promise to Peggy, and in the first place, I must find
Rab."
Barbara spoke determinedly, as one who had quite
made up her mind, and accustomed to yield to her sister's
strong nature, Nancy made no further remonstrance. I
think, unconsciously to herself, Barbara's determination
to seek for Maggie till she had found her, if she were
still alive, however hopeless the task might seem, and
however many difiiculties might lie in the way of its
accomplishment, owed something of its strength to a
half acknowledged feeling that if she was to live at all,
she must keep herself from brooding over the irrecover¬
able past and the dreary futtu-e; she must fill the present
so full of absorbing interests, that she should have no
time to consume her own heart with unavailing regrets,—
and she clutched at this commission of old Peggy's, very
much as a drowning man at any straw that floats near
him, and which seems to offer him a hope of safety.
When the girls reached Milla Forres that bright April
afternoon,   they   found   strange   news   awaiting  them.
368 The Attempt.
During their absence, a  horseman had arrived in breath¬
less haste, bringing a letter from Colonel Forbes full of sad
tidings.    The Jacobite army was defeated and in retreat,
the   cause  was   lost,    and   Prince    Charles    in   hiding.
Colonel Forbes was well and unhurt, but he dared not
return  to his own  house.     He  was, however,   sending
Alaster   Macdonald   there, who  was severely wounded.
The Macdonalds had been annoyed at being placed on
the left instead of the right wing in the battle, and had
refused  to charge  along  with their leaders.     Alastei's
uncle,   the   brave   Macdonald . of   Kippoch,   had   been
killed; his father also had been kihed; and he himself
was   severely   wounded.     He  was  insensible,   Colonel
Forbes added  while  he   was  writing, but   the   doctors
expressed good hopes of  his recovery if he could have
care   and   constant   nursing.      Not   knowing   how   to
secure this otherwise.  Colonel Forbes had ordered him
to be conveyed to Milla Forres, where he was sure old
Elspet and liis daughters would do their best for   him.
Colonel Forbes must himself remain in hiding for a time.
Alaster would   be brought by easy stages,  and   would
probably not   arrive at   Milla Forres for two   or three
days   after   the    messenger  who   brought   the  tidings.
The letter was addressed to Barbara, but the ill news had
spread through   the house before   the ghls  reached   it
through the messenger, and when they arrived, Elspet
was    wringing  her   hands,   and gesticulating,   and   be¬
moaning " bonny maister Alaster," in her wild highland
fashion.    It was no use trying to break the thing gently
to Nancy, so Barbara just put her father's letter in her
hand.    The poor girl grew paler and paler as she read,
and when she came to the end, she staggered forward
a few steps, and fell fainting in her sister's arms.
" Eh, the puir lamb, it'll juist clean kill her," moaned
Elspet, fussing about to get restoratives for the insensible
girl.
Barbara herself was as white as a ghost, and trembled
as in a fit of ague; |but she did not faint or speak, but
quietly set about bringing Nancy round. The old
motherly protecting tenderness had crept back to her
heart as she saw her little sister's grief, and anew the
resolution rose in her mind that, whatever came of this
strange complication of aftairs, Nancy's happiness should
be cared for. Nancy should never know. It was not till
Nancy had been recovered from her fainting fit, and put
The Attempt. 369
to bed, and finally had cried herself to sleep, and Elspet's
eager questions about the Prince's fortunes and Colonel
Forbes' plans had been answered, and all her waihngs over
the    Jacobite   defeat   and   Alaster's   wound had   been
patiently listened to, that  Barbara found time to think
qxiietly by herself over this strange, new complication.
She knew well enough that if Alaster had been sensible,
he would have crept away home to Perthshire ; he would
never  have thought  of coming to Milla Forres  in the
present state of affixirs ; yet much as, in many ways, she
dreaded his coming, a strange thrill of pleasure passed
through her heart as she thought that she should see him
once more, that she might nurse and comfort him, and that
it could not be wrong for her to do so : it was plainly her
duty.    It had come to her, not by her own seeldng or by
his, but evidently, as it seemed to her, by the will of God.
Her heart had been so hungry all these months, and now,
for a little while at least, it would be filled.    Then the
thought came and almost sickened her with fear—What
if his wound were mortal'?    What if he should die on the
way ? What if, when his bearers reached Milla Forres, they
should bring with them not Alaster—her own Alaster—
but his corpse ?    But she would not dwell on the thought,
it was too horrible.    Her father said the doctors had good
hopes of him.    Why should she frighten herself with such
a dreadful nightmare ?    I do not think the idea occurred
to her that he could die after he reached Milla Forres ; all
her fears concentrated themselves on the dangers of the
journey.    I thmk she felt almost as if once there he was
in her own hands, and she would make him live.    Poor,
desperate human love, that feels so all-powerful, and is yet
so impotent to save !
In the meantime she turned all her energies to getting a
room ready for the sufferer. He must have the pleasantest
and brightest room in the house. It must be on the
ground floor, to avoid the pain of carrying him upstairs,
and that he might the sooner be able to step into the
garden when his convalescence (which she looked for so
certainly) should begin. It must look out to the garden
and the mountains, and catch every gleam of the spring
sunshine. There was one room, and only one, in Milla
Forres, which met all these requirements. It was a little
room, opening from the great hall, which had been her
mother's boudoii', and which the girls often used as a
summer parlour.    It had never been used as a common
DECEMBER  1873. O   A
370 The Attempt.
family sitting-room since her mother's death, for Colonel
Forbes, a silent, brooding, melancholy man, who had
loved his dead wife passionately, and whose heart seemed
to have been buried in her grave,—for he had never seemed
to care much for any human creature since,—had
always avoided the room filled for him with so many
associations. There his dead wife's picture hung, taken
in her young, fresh girlhood, a few months after her
marriage, in her satin marriage dress, with its antiquated
lace ruffles. There were the quaint fire-screens, worked in
silk, that he remembered her fair face bending over, and
looking up from to smile on him on many a happy
evening. There was the couch to which he had so often
carried her, with a bitter pain in his heart, that she might
look out on the bright little patch of garden and the great
solemn hills beyond, and bask for a little in the warm
summer sunshine, when it had become evident to him that
his fragile flower was fading. The room and its recollec¬
tions were too painful for the silent, undemonstrative man,
whom no one would have imagined (so cold and dignified
was his aspect now) could ever have been capable of
strong feeling. I have often wondered how many of
those cold, dignified, silent people one meets in this
world, are so because they have consumed their hearts in
one great conflagration, and in it had iip all the fuel
which should have lasted them for their lifetime, and left
themselves cold, and dreary, and indifferent. It is not
right that it should be so; I think it hardly will be so in
any nature that is truly great or generous. From the
ashes of the great conflagration, such a nature will, I
think, heap up embers, not to gladden his own heart,
but at whose glow every cold and weary wayfarer may rest
and warm himself, and bless the great heart that, out of
the wreck of its own personal happiness, has kindled a fire
to comfort others. But Colonel Forbes' nature was not
great enough for this. When his own personal happiness
went out in the blackness of death, his hearth was simply
fireless. He had been kind to his daughters, and indulgent
to them, but it was with a kindness and indulgence in
which there was no warm personal love; and so, solicitous
as he was for their "well-being, he had never been much to
either of them. He had never entered his wife's boudoir
since her death, but he had made no objections to his
daughters using it as their summer sitting-room; the
only provision he had made, being that the old fuvnitiu-e
The Attempt. 371
should remain as it was. And this room had been a great
favourite with the girls. Barbara especially, who re¬
membered her mother, used often to come there, and sit
looking at the sweet girlish face in the picture, and
di'eaming over the young life that had been so quickly
ended. The room was to her a sort of holy place, and I
think, this, as well as its suitability otherwise, was what
made her now resolve to give it up to Alaster. She liked
to associate him vdth that dear dead mother. She would
have shrunk from giving that room up to anyone else, but
it seemed quite natural and fit to give it up to Mm. So
with Elspet's willing help, she set about getting it ready
as a sick-room for the sufferer.
CHAPTER XXV.
A L A S T E r's    home-coming.
Three days of anxious waiting followed the arrival of the
messenger from Colonel Forbes. Nancy had grown thin
and pale with weeping and fasting, for they could per¬
suade her to take little food. All energy seemed to
have gone out of her with the terrible anxiety, and she
spent most of the time in tears. Not but what she tried
to bear up, poor little Nancy, and to hope for the best, and
sometimes a sort of April smile seemed to break through
her sorrow; but she was a fragile little thing, not fit for
rough blasts or stormy weather, a sweet delicate spring
blossom, just made to smile and rejoice in the sunshine,
but which the first bitter wind was sure to lay prostrate
on the ground. Barbara, on the other hand, as her nature
was, only struck her roots deeper when the storm howled
about her. All her old energy had returned with the
emergency. Only her eyes seemed to have grown larger
and more spiritual in those days of intense anxiety.
At last—what a long time it seemed they had waited—
on the evening of the third day, Elspet ran breathless
into the hall where the girls were sitting.
" They're coming. Miss Barbara, they're coming I I see
them at the fit o' the avenue, they hae a litter wi' them.
Guid keep and save us, may the bonny lad be leevin ! "
Nancy grew as pale as death, and began to tremble from
head to foot.
372 The Attempt.
" What nonsense, Elspet," said Barbara, " of course he
is alive. See, you have frightened Nancy," she added
reproachfully. Then going up to Nancy, she put her
arm round her waist, and drawing her towards the door,
she said, " Come, Nancy, you must be the first to welcome
him." By the time they got to the door, the httle pro¬
cession was already at the foot of the steps, and one of
the soldiers came up, and respectfully saluting the young
ladies, said, " He is asleep, ma'am, if possible it would be
well not to wake him, the doctor said much depended on
his sleeping."
" Very well," said Barbara, " carry him as gently as you
can to his room, I will shew you the way," and she turned
into the house.
Now that he was really here and alive, the reaction
from the terrible strain of the last few days threatened to
begin, and Barbara felt as she walked as if her limbs
would hardly support her. But she put down the threat¬
ening weakness with a resolute will, and led the way
silently to her mother's boudoir. There they laid down
the litter gently by the side of the couch which had been
prepared for the sufferer. And the anxious group caught
their first glimpse of the poor changed face. Elspet
wrung her hands in dismay at the sight, and Nancy clung
to Barbara's arm, sick and half fainting. Cruelly changed,
indeed, it was, that pale sleeping face. A sword cut had
gashed it from brow to chin, and it was bound up now in
white linen cloths. No one would have known handsome
Alaster Macdonald in the ghastly face lying before them.
All his clustering dark curls had been shaved off, and the
scared countenance, pale and haggard, seemed to have
no resemblance to the bright face they had known so
well. Barbara stood silently looking on it for some
moments. For the first minute she felt deadly sick—
surely it was not her own Alaster who lay there so sadly
changed? She could hardly realize it at first, but by-and-
bye as she gazed, something in the poor disfigured face
recalled the countenance that had grown so dear to her,
some flitting trace of a smile that passed over the pale
lips sent a thrill through her heart, and careless who
might be looking at her, she stooped down and kissed the
poor scarred brow, her tears falling fast as she did so.
Then she turned to Nancy, and saying gently,
" Nancy dear, I think we had better leave him till he
The Attempt. 378
wakes, he will not seem so changed then,"  she led her
gently from the room.
It was many days before that awaking came, for from
the dead sleep in which he was on his arrival, Alaster
passed into feverish delirium, and for days and nights,
the sisters and Elspet watched him tossing and moaning
on his pillow, and rambling in incoherent sentences over
the terrible scenes he had lately passed through. Mingled
with his ravings of the battle field and the camp, came
sometimes passionate words of love, and often the names
of the two sisters who sat watching him so anxiously.
Barbara trembled often, lest his rambling words should
betray the secret to Nancy,^—it was so plain to herself in
many of them; but Nancy had no idea of the real state
of the case, and when Barbara's name occurred where
her own name should properly have been, she put it
down simply to the incoherence of delirium. Elspet,
however, was keener-sighted, and Barbara caught her
gray eyes watcliing her curiously when Alaster had
uttered some passionate word coupled with the name
of the elder sister. Barbara herself always seemed to
consider it nothing more than the ravings of delirium,
and her perfect self-possession somewhat threw Elspet
off the scent; nevertheless, the old woman was uneasy
and perplexed, and watched matters keenly. Another
pair of sharp eyes and ears were watching also,
with faculties sharpened by strong personal feeling. Dr
Brown was of course in constant attendance upon the
sufferer, and very soon he discovered not only that
Alaster loved Barbara, but that Barbara loved Alaster.
A bitter pang shot through his patient, manly heart, as
he made the discovery, for, hopeless as he had always
taught himself to believe his own love was, perhaps he
had clung more to the faint possibility that at some
future time, when he should have risen in his profession,
he might at last venture to confess the passion that lay
deeper in his heart, than he himself was quite aware of.
Be that as it may, to know that Barbara's heart was
given to another, sent a bitter pang, on his own account,
to his; and the thought that it was given to a man who
was plighted to another, filled him with generous pain
for her. He knew so well himself what the pain of a
hopeless love was, and he knew Barbara too well to
imagine that her love for her sister's betrothed, could
sopm other than a hopeless love to her.     His heart so
374 The Attempt.
ached for her, this bright, beautiful woman, for whom he
would so gladly have given his life, and whom he felt
so helpless to aid, or even to comfort in this time of her
extremity. It so yearned over her often, as he stood by
her side at Alaster's bedside, and saw the anxious eyes
that sought so eagerly to read in his, the unspoken
verdict on the sufferer's state ; and she—she hardly
noticed him! She was grateful to him for his care and
attention to Alaster, that was all I Soinetimes he smiled
half bitterly to himself as he rode away; the ludicrous
side of the subject struck him, and he could not help
laughing at himself, and what he called his own folly, but
his heart was sad enough underneath the laughter. In
his unselfish, generous heart, the resolution arose that he
Avould keep watch and ward over this woman "who never
thought of him; that he would be by her to help in all
trouble, unostentatiously, silently, with no hope of thanks
even, just for the sake of his great love for her. Thank
God, there is love like this sometimes, even in this
common-place, work-a-day world, and the thought that
there is so, may well save us from despairing even of our
poor fallen humanity.
Jeanie Morison.
{To be continued.)
^ iui 9 £ b jt t ^ .^■
Does it ever occur to our readers, on looking at the outside of our
Magazine, and there seeing that it is printed for the Ladies' Edinburgh
Literary Society, to ask what does this Literary Society do? Does it
exist only to conduct this little magazine, and if so, in what does it
differ, except in degree, from a mere staff of writers engaged as con¬
tributors to any other magazine ?
If such questions have ever suggested themselves to our readers, it
may interest thera to hear a little of in what our work as a Literary
Society consists besides the production of cur Magazine, which, though
the chief part, is not all the work which we now try to do. No; our
Magazine, intended originally for the training of young writers, has
gradually gathered around it a cluster of ladies, who, though for the
The Attempt. 375
most part studiously inclined, are not all aspirants to authorship. These
latter have been attracted to us less by our Magazine, then by our
debates, which are held monthly by the members of our Society.
These debates have been of gradual growth. How well we re¬
member our first efforts in this direction. It had been suggested that
our monthly meetings, held at first simply to arrange matters connected
with the Magazine, might, with advantage, be wound up with some
discussion of subjects, literary, social, or otherwise. Acting on this
suggestion, a subject was given out at one meeting for discussion at the
next. Very crude and youthful was our first attempt, with no special
speakers appointed to open the discussion, but all left to speak as they
might be moved at the moment. Soon, however, the advantage of
securing the services of one member, who should introduce the subject
with some prepared remarks, was discovered, and thus the first step
was made.
Among our earliest subjects, I remember, were, " Strong-minded
women," "■ The character of Cromwell,' and (young people are apt to
venture out of their depth) "Is Virtue Teachable?" Sometimes an
awful pause would occur, when no one would venture to address the
company ; at other times whispering, or at best, partial conversations
would arise, in which the President, forgetful of the dignity of her chair,
would occasionally take part.
However, " Rome was not built in a day," and undaunted we pur¬
sued our work, gradually evolving a certain degree of order out of
chaos. The President's duties were more clearly defined. Speakers
were appointed to open the two sides of each question chosen for dis¬
cussion, to be followed by seconders, and finally our discussions assumed
the name and character of debates. For several years now, The Attempt,
besides doing in its own special work, has served as a nucleus, around
which a Debating Society has formed itself Though much remains to
be done in encouraging speakers to address the meeting without a too
constant use of notes, and in impressing on all the advantage of read¬
ing up the subject of the day's debate, so as to be able to take an
intelligent part in the discussion, still progress has been made.
We think we may venture to say that the Debates of this closing year
have been very satisfactory ; but as we are aiming at improving our¬
selves, a few critical remarks about them may not be out of place.
We notice that the literary questions are the easiest to deal with.
Many of our Members can give us a very good little essay or criticism
of the works of some well-known author: and most have intelligent rea¬
sons to give for their opinions in the discussion which follows. It is in¬
teresting to elicit what are the sources of the enjoyment some authors
give us, and the reasons of our want of sympathy with others.
The debates on ethical subjects are  less manageable, and remind us
376 The Attempt.
sometimes of an encounter of two knights at a tournament, who miss
each other when their spears should clash, and who gallop to the oppsite
side of the arena without having met at all, having merely succeeded in
giving their hobbies a gallop. Each party praises a quality the antago¬
nist has not thought of undervaluing, and attacks a position that is not
defended by the other side. And even when the two principal champions
are in opposition and understand each other's position sufficiently to
attack it, and have detected where the real question, the real point of
difference, lies, we sometimes hear in the discussion which follows a good
deal of miscellaneous talk, showing that, from want of consideration
of the subject, the point of difference has been undetected by many
of the speakers, for, indeed, it often needs a good deal of reflection to
ascertain the exact point where two sets of opinions on any given subject
diverge. When sometimes the premises are, or are assumed to be, the
same the conclusions are glaringly different. Any newspaper will, in
plenty of its leading articles, give us excellent practice in detecting
where the real point of the question lies, which is concealed from the
careless reader by the skill of the writer. We shall take a fine easy
example from a leading article the other day, criticising some recent
criticisms of Mill's Autobiography. He was prejudiced in early life
against all religion, so strongly, said the critic, that he really was not a
fair judge of religion. Stop, says the newspaper, this cuts both ways ;
you have been so prejudiced by early training against unbelief, that you
can be no fair judge of it. This seems absurd, but why, when we
admit the premiss of early prejudice do we reject the conclusion ?
Because, we reply to the newspaper, we can be prejudiced against some¬
thing, but we cannot allow it possible, in anything like the same degree,
against nothing at all—a mere negation. Say you are brought up in a
household where the people have no ear for music, believe it to be an
idle, debasing, trifling pursuit, and have raked up every story in its dis¬
favour, and all that can be said against it that they can find; would
you not, unless specially gifted, probably start in life with a prejudice
against music ? Take the converse of a very musical family. They
might think others devoid of a sort of sixth sense, full of beauty and
depth to them; but would intercourse with them be likely to prejudice
you against the converse of music, silence, inharmoniousness, nothing at
all ? And yet there is a residuum of truth at the bottom of the argu¬
ment, that the other side would probably allow ; that prejudice is of no
party or school, and that a little of it spices very generally our views of
the doings of the opposite side.
This little residuum of truth on the side we disagree with, is a thing
that in all the questions we discuss should be sought for and not for¬
gotten.    But we do not think we compliment ourselves too highly when
The Attempt. 377
we say that great fairness and a desire to understand the opposite position
characterises our debates.
A word as to delivery; we should remember that we are rather
trying to persuade an audience than to read a cut and dried essay. Few
of us could, perhaps, with advantage, dispense altogether with the use
of notes, but we need not be slaves to them. We should never forget
our hearers, and, as we go, we should endeavour to find and mark the
arguments we hope may most tell with them.
But what is the use, I hear some contemptuous critic exclaim, of you
ladies practising those acts of public speaking, which, thank heaven,
you are not likely ever to need in public, and in private save and
defend us from argumentative ladies! Granted, cynical querist, but
still besides the interest and amusement ^wc debates give us, and the
research into interesting subjects they induce, we cannot willingly
allow that they are useful for nothing. Is it nothing that ladies
even should have some skill in finding out when there is a differ-,
cnce of opinion, where the difference lies, and whether it is
real or only apparent; and if they discover it to be real, to
be content to differ ? Is it nothing that, instead of reiterating former
arguments in support of their own views, they should be taught
when once they are stated, to consider they have spoken? Is it nothing
that they should learn to give reasons for their opinions, to res[)ect the
opinions of others, to disagree without bitterness, and to discuss
questions without clamour, without heat, and with unscrupulous
fairness ? Indeed, we think the argumentative woman of popular
aversion, would have no success in our debates.
It may not be without interest to our readers to hear what exactly
have been the subjects of our debates this year, therefore we shall
bring our remarks to a close with a list of the subjects, and a note of
the majority of votes recorded in favour of either the affirmative or
negative side of each question.
I. Was    Claverhouse   guilty   of   unnecessary    cruelty    to   the
Covenanters ?    Majority for the Affirmative, six.
II. Is mental philosophy more deserving of study than physical ?
Majority for the Affirmative, twelve.
III. Does the social  happiness  of mankind increase   with   the
increase of civilization ?     Majority for the Affirmative,
eight.
IV. Is  youth  the  happiest   period of  life?     Majority  for  the
Negative, four.
ur.CF.MBEP, 1873. o j.
378
The Attempt.
V. Is  music a   higher  art  than painting ?      Majority  for   the
AfBrmative, fourteen.
VI. Is Tennyson superior as a poet to'-Browning?      Majority for
the AfSrmative, thirteen.
VII. Is genius preferable Jto application ?    Majority for the Affir¬
mative, six.
VIII. Is   perfect sincerity compatible with perfect politeness?
Majority for the Affirmative, two.
IX. Is the will free ?   Majority for the Affirmative, eighteen.
X. Is George Eliot the greatest novelist of this reign ?    To be
debated this month.
Ex Cathedra.
A Prize is offered for the best Prose Article appearing
in the February number of The Attempt. Competitive
Articles should be with the Editor by the 5th of
January.
