vv.;>^6
THE   LADIES
EDINBUEGH
MAGAZINE:
A NEW SERIES OF " THE ATTEMPT."
VOL   II.
EDINBURGH: MACLAREN & MACNIVEN.
MDCCCLXXVI.
COLSTON 4 SON,  PRINTERS, EDINBURGH.
IS 19   NO'5
Vk  1935^
CONTENTS.
PAGB
Arslonga—Vita brevis, by E. J. 0.,  310
Beneficial Influence of an Aristocracy, On the, by Irene,      ...        40
Chivalry, by Gratia,     . 45
Debates of the Ladies' Edinburgh Literary Society, by A. D.,     .        .        16
Dido watching the departing Fleet of ^neas, by Melensa, .        .      109
Dragon of the North, The, by E. J. O., 5, 33, 65
Drifting on the Thames, by Melensa, ......      374
Existence of a Standard of Taste; The, by Irene, .       .        .        .161
Experience and Intuition, by E. J. O., 134
Fourteen Deliverers, The, by M. E. Neil,   ....   47,93,125,142
From Dawn to Midnight, by E. J. O., 358
Genius, by Martyn Hay,  366
How we Passed the Local Examinations, by J. Menzies,     .        .        .      250
In Remembrance of Lydia Falconer Fraser, by Jeanie Morison, .      185
Instruction by Correspondence, On, 316
Instructresses in Cookery, by C. E. Guthrie Wright,   .... 1
Irish Bazaar, An, by Martyn Hay 150
Irish Landlord, Scenes from the Life of an, by Mrs. R. O. Leslie,     271, 310
Jingling Journal, by E. J. Oswald and J. Menzies,    .        .        .        235, 262
John Harris, by Lutea Reseda,  119
Library Table, Our, 288
Lines, by B., 224
Local Examinations for Women, On, by J. Menzies,   ....        82
Lullaby, by Melensa,         .        60
Memories, by Naomi S. Alder, 149
Miss Polly Lawley, A Short History of, by M. S. T., .        .        .      112
Motives for the Study of Mental Philosophy, by Noli-me-Tangere,       .      367
Mountain Top, The, by Enna, 277
Music-Master Nonplussed, The, by J. Menzies, 294
My Window, by Martyn Hay 173  199
Nae Man's Lan', by Jeanie Morisou, 339
iv Contents.
PAoa
Objects Pursued in Education, On the, by J. Menzies,         ... 61
Parliamentary Franchise for Women, The, by Flora Masson,      .        . 97
Physical Science necessarily Injurious to Religious Belief, Is the Study
of, by Irene,  230
Physical Terms as applied to the Mind, by Marjory,    .... 158
Pilate, by Joan Scott,  15
Raeburn Gallery, The, by Anemone,  377
Eailroad Lines, by Maxwell,  285
Recollections of the Past—Letters—by E. H. M.,      102, 129, 167, 193, 225,
257, 289, 321, 353
Repentance, by Jeanie Morison,  79
Royal Academy, 1876, In the, by Enna,  244
Scene : An English Forest, by Gratia,  325
Shadow of Victory, The, by Martyn Hay,              327
Silent Friends, by Martyn Hay,  54
Singer in the Night, The, by Joan Scott  212
Subtle Beauties, by Joan Scott,              172
Thought and Language, by C. E. Guthrie Wright,       .... 303
Three Translations, by Enna,  184
To Fear, by Joan Scott,  276
Two Pictures, by M. A. S. M •.        .        .142
Werburga of Chester (Conclusion), by Procla,  20
Why is it ? Various Answers to the Question, by Charlotte Carmichael, 213
Woman's Work—
VI. Instructresses in Cookery, by C. E. Guthrie Wright,        . 1
VII. The Parliamentary Franchise for Women, by Flora Masson, 97
DEBATES PROPOSED FOR DISCUSSION
BY
iih£ Sadies' (Bdinburgh ^ilijrarg ^orifti}.
SESSION   1876.
1. Does Great Britain hold the Foremost Place amongst Civilised Nations at
the present time?
2. Has Scepticism produced a Worse Effect on Society than Superstition ?
3. Is  German   a   better Language  for  Conversation and Literature  than
French ?
4. Has Belief in Witchcraft,  Sorcery,   Apparitions,   and Spiritualism  any
foundation in Truth?
5. Are the Writings of the Lake Poets consistent with the Principles of True
Poetry ?
6. Is it desirable for Women to take part in Field Sports ?
7. Can the Drama be made at the same time Popular and Instructive ?
8. Is all Knowledge derived from Experience ?
9. Have Animals any Recognition of Moral Responsibility ?
10. Did the Miracle-Plays of the Middle Ages exercise a good influence over
the People ?
n.  Was Queen Mary accessory to the Murder of Damley ?
12. Was Homer the Author of the Works commonly ascribed to him ?
13. Are the Pleasures of Memory greater than the Pleasures of Hope?
14. Is Greek Architecture of a higher type than Gothic ?
15. If a Canal were cut, laying the depressed Land of the Sahara under water,
would the Results on the whole be Beneficial ?
16. Does the Study of Physical Science tend to shake Religious Belief?
17. Is the Celtic, the Saxon, or the Norman Element in our Literature at
present the most powerful and the most elevated ?
18. If a woman wishes to repair Defects of early Education, is it better for
her first <o prepare herself for the Local Examination, than to pass
on at once to the Higher Branches of Study, such as Mathematics,
Philosophy, &c. ?
No. 16 is to be discussed this month, January 8th.
The above Debates are only suggested, not imposed, and any Lady may
propose other subjects.
All Members are requested to take part in the Debates, which take place
the first Saturday of every Month, August and September excepted ; and
Papers by Members at a distance will be read by resident Members.
Communications to be addressed to the Presidents of Debate, care of
Messrs. Maclaren & Macniven, 138 Princes Street, Edinburgh.
THE
LADIES' EDINBUEGH MAGAZINE.
VI.—INSTRUCTRESSES  IN  COOKERY.
Within the last two years, a new and important depart¬
ment of trained work—that of Instructresses in Cookery
— has been opened for women. The profession has
grown out of the steadily increasing sense throughout
the kingdom of the need there is that women of all
ranks should receive systematic instruction in the univer¬
sally practised art of cookery. It is indeed strange that,
while instruction in many subjects of comparatively little
use forms a part of every girl's education, instruction in
cookery, so essential to every housewife, has been so
generally neglected, or left to be gained by experience,
at the cost in many cases of money, temper, and domestic
peace. The profession of instructress in cookery is one
which, while demanding not only a good general educa¬
tion, but a short special training, is suited to many who
are unqualified for other departments of trained Avork.
With reference to the suitability and qualifications of
persons desirous of becoming instructresses, Sir Henry
Cole writes:—" Such person should be well educated.
She may well be the daughter of a  clergyman, doctor,
lawyer, or half-pay army or navy man So much the
better if she has had any experience of teaching children
in a Sunday or other school, and has acted as a district
visitor. She must have no defect in speaking, as she will
have to address numbers in a class. Her age should be
between twenty and tliirty."    The official directory of the
No. 1.—Januaey 1876. A
2 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
school says :—" She must be sufficiently educated to be
able to perform the duties of a teacher after the special
training, to speak aloud, also to write from dictation and
keep accounts." To these qualifications I would add,
that she should be methodical and orderly, and have
some prior knowledge of, and considerable interest in,
and aptitude for, culinary matters—a talent for either
teaching or cooking being by no means universal.
Suitable persons being found, the next point is how
to gain admission to the National Training School of
Cookery, South Kensington, the only training school for
teachers at present in existence. This may be obtained
in three ways—1st, by the votes of subscribers, each
siibscription of £1, Is, conferring a vote, and subscrip¬
tions amounting to £10, 10s., the fee charged for the
three months' training in the school conferring ten
votes; 2dly, by the applicant herself paying the fees ;
and, 3dly, by a local committee sending a lady to be
trained, and paying her fee in addition to the other
expenses incident to a three months' stay in London.
This last method is the one most encouraged by the
Training School, as it is most calculated to lead to
an immediate dissemination of the knowledge gained.
Students admitted in either of the two former ways may,
under certain circumstances, upon gaining their diploma,
be put on the staff of the National Training School, when
they will be guaranteed £2 a week while teaching, or £1
a week while retained in the school, when their services
are not required out of it.
The period allotted for training is twelve weeks, of
which six are devoted to the study and practice of
cookery, and six to practice in teaching. The school
hours are from ten till twelve, and from two till fom-. In
the mornings of the first week the student goes through
the scullery course ; she cleans, luider superintendence,
a limited number of articles in ordinary kitchen use,
including a gas stove and kitchen range, the manage¬
ment of the various ranges being explained to her. At
the end of this course she receives a certificate for the
aggregate number of daily marks adjudged for the
work performed.
The mornings of the second week, and any part of the
first week gained by diligence in getting through the
scuhery-work, are devoted to attending demonstration
lessons  in  artisan   cookery;   the  afternoons   from   two
Womaiis Wo7'k. 3
to four of these two weeks are devoted to the course of
demonstration lessons in higher cookery. The afternoon
demonstrations are respectively on roasting, soups,
entrees, vegetables, jellies, and creams, omelettes and
soufflees, fish (fried and boiled), pastry, puddings, and
sick-room cookery. The morning lessons are miscel¬
laneous. The teachers cook chiefly upon gas stoves
fitted into a kind of counter, as a large audience could
not see the cooking on an ordinary kitchen-range, and
the latter mode would besides oblige the teachers to turn
their backs upon the audience. Tlie teachers, while
cooking the various dishes before the class, not only
describe each process, but give any additional information
that may be asked. The student is expected to study
the books recommended, and to take full notes of these
lessons. At their termination, she has the privilege,
on payment of an entrance fee of 2s. 6d., of attending
a written examination on the theory and practice of
cookery. For this, if attended with success, she receives
her second certificate.
She next passes for a fortnight into the artisan practice
kitchen, where, under superintendence and with the
simplest appliances, she cooks food suitable for families
who can spend in the purchase of it from 7s. to 20s.
weekly.
The third fortnight is passed in the practice kitchen,
which corresponds to the afternoon demonstrations. Here
the cookery is applicable to families who can spend from
20s. to 100s. weekly in the purchase of food. In this, as
in the artisan practice kitchen, the student cooks under
instructions the dishes entirely herself, from the weighing
out of the materials to the final dishing and garnishing.
For each of these courses of practice she receives a certi¬
ficate of the aggregate number of marks received for daily
Avork.
The student who is qualifying herself to be an instruc¬
tress next enters upon the practice of teaching cookery,
and spends a fortnight respectively in the demonstration
kitchen and in each of the practice kitchens, where she
assists in teaching. For this also certificates are given,
and the final diploma is based upon the collective value
of the certificates, the varied work for which they are
given testing the average capabilities of the student. If
in any department she has shown herself very deficient,
the diploma is withheld until the deficiency is made up.
4 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
The demand for trained teachers greatly exceeds the
supply at present, and the National Training School of
Cookery, South Kensington, specially established for the
systematic training of teachers of cookery, can receive a
much larger number of regular students than have hitherto
availed themselves of its advantages, the classes having
been composed chiefly of ladies and cooks attending one
or more single classes.
In England, schools at Leeds, Liverpool, and Oxford
have been opened, under the superintendence of teachers
holding diplomas from the South Kensington School.
The same has taken place in Edinbiirgh, where the
system has been warmly received by the public. The
school was opened on the 9th November last by Sir
Robert Christison (in the absence of the Lord Provost).
Professors Calderwood, Hodgson, Maclagan, and Dr.
Alexander Wood bore testimony to the ignorance of the
art of cookery prevailing in all classes, and pointed
out the great benefits which would result from such
an institution as the present. To artisans in particular,
Professor Maclagan stated, from his own experience,
the diifusion of a practical knowledge of cookery would
prove of great value. These views have been cordially
seconded by the public, who have attended the demon¬
stration lessons in plain, superior, and artisan cookery.
The classes on artisan cookery especially have been
largely attended.
The Association commenced their operations in the
Lecture H[ali of the Museum of Science and Art, the
use of which was kindly given temporarily. But as they
must provide for the expense of leasing and furnishing
permanent premises, and of further organising the school,
it was agreed at the opening that the public should
be invited to contribute a sum not less than £500
towards this object. Such an appeal has been found
necessary in the various cookery schools in England, and
has received a hearty response. The committee trust that
a similar sum will be forthcoming here. They propose to
increase the staff of trained teachers according to the
demand for classes in Edinburgh and neighbouring places.
A school of cookery will soon be opened in Glasgow;
Dundee is agitating for one; Aberdeen will shortly follow
the example. Indeed, the importance of the subject is
now so fully realised, that an efficient teacher can hardly
fail to find work.    If she is sufficiently philanthropic to
The Dragon of the North. 5
look beyond her personal interest, she cannot but
derive encouragement and pleasure from the fact, that
she becomes a sharer iu a work which will probably
prove to be one of the most powerful agencies of the
present day in repressing intemperance among the lower
classes, and which cannot fail to add to domestic comfort
and economy among all classes.
C. E. GuTHRiE Wright.
m\t ivagon  of lh£ gortli.
CHAPTER   XIII.
Never was a battle shorter ;
Soon with spears it was decided,—
Though my lord had fewer numbers,
Yet he chased them all before him,
Arnor the Scald.
—Oeknetinga Saga.
I COULD see the room from the turret floor where I lay,
and we had not long to wait ere Syades returned with
several of our traitorous garrison. " And now, lady, will
you follow, as we carry your sick man away ? " he said to
Hertha, as he caused some men to raise the couch where
lay Astolfo, with the silken cover heaped about him.
Just in the doorway Astolfo asked them to stop in my
own voice, and the next instant, as they set the bed
down, he had sprung at the throat of Syades. Down fell
the wizard, with Astolfo over him, making a dagger
flash before his eyes, as he said—" Stir not, but do my
bidding, or you are a dead man." At the same time
Ivar ran out to guard the passage against aid coming,
and Olver was dealing ponderous blows to the men who
were with Syades. In a minute all was over, and Astolfo
led Syades back into the room safely bound, leaving Ivar
to secure the men outside. " Now, Saracen," he said,
" understand clearly, I shall lead you about, and tell you
what orders to give. One will be to order all the Moslem
out of the castle. If you are not obeyed, the worse for
you, as there may be a fight; but the very beginning of
it will be my sword through your body."
" Nay, Sir Astolfo, no need of violence," said Syades ;
" the wise man knows how and when to bend before the
6 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
storm. Only promise, if I fulfil your will, to set me free
before Thorstein my foe returns, otherwise I had better
lose my life now in good company, instead of then, alone."
"Tluit is granted," said Astolfo, "if all goes well."
Thus were all the Saracens in the garrison cleared out,
save Syades himself; for, judging him dangerous, we still
held him, till we were reinforced, a close prisoner.
Now in two days, when I was able to walk about again,
though still weak, I found we had but a very small
household and garrison for our vast castle, Avhich seemed
most empty and dreary, w4th its sounding halls and long
dark corridors. About twelve Italians, excluding falconers
and grooms, were all we had to stand sentry at the great
gates and posterns to attend on us and on our horses.
Astolfo had sent messages to Thorstein, and we expected
him, or men sent by him, every hour now. After supper
in the great hall, we all, save Valeria, gathered round the
fire that roared joyously up the chimney. A carved screen
went round our seats and the table where stood the lamps
and wine, making an island of light in the darkness of the
great hall, A winter storm-wind shook the casements
and lashed up the sea till we could hear it booming on the
rocks far below; and sometimes a blue flash of lightning
lit for a moment all the tall windows, and made the dark¬
ness seem blacker afterwards. Then it was, talking of this
and that, Astolfo told how it had been reported to him
that the Dragon had been seen again in the neighbouring
marshes. A belated shepherd had seen the terrible head
and crest rising over the stagnant Avaters, and had fled,
leaving his flock; and when morning was come, many of
them were found dead or dying, destroyed by the evil
thing. " It is strange that those who seek it always fail
to find it," said Astolfo. " Methinks I will question Syades,
who knows much, if he would tell, upon this matter. "
"But you will not trust him, Lord Astolfo," said Hertha;
" trust neither night-time, nor snow in spring, nor a tame
snake, we say in the North."
"Go on, Hertha, with the saying," I answered,—"nor
the sigh of a woman."
" No, nor that either," said Hertha. " I had meant to
tell you Valeria spent a long time with Syades to-day,
and will see him again this evening. I suspect it is to use
magic arts to find out the fate of Lorenzo; but she tells me
little, for she thinks we are all unfair to him, and that
over-zeal for her brother only has led him into foults
The Dragon of the North.
Now, I pray you, get her to see him if she must, only in
your presence."
Astolfo thought this good advice, and said he would
bring Syades at once, if only he could persuade Valeria
to see him with us. But Hertha went away, for she
said she would not see him ; and soon Valeria joined us,
and then he was brought in bound, for, being a wizard,
though I do not think we disliked him, we mistrusted
him utterly. Then we asked him, as he had wished
us to think him still the faithful servant of the marquis,
what he thought had become of him.
" Have you searched the vaults of Caserta ? " he said ;
" I trow not. Depend upon it, some of the holy brethren
know where he is. The poor youth was only beginning
to understand what freedom was. Now they will put
him in ward, and work on his conscience till he consents
to take the final vows, and give them his large posses-
Bions. I always feared their power over him, so was
anxious above all things to wed him to that magnificent
Hertha. A pity indeed she casts herself away on
that wandering knight Eainulf, who needs no wife, and
might have worshipped the marchioness from afar as
his lady-love."
" Ay," said Damasus, " it is likely you are right.
They set up for being strict saints at Caserta, but they
love gold all the same.    Lorenzo will turn up one day
a well-disciplined professed monk."
" Nonsense," said Astolfo angrily; " they are true men
there. Lorenzo is not with them if they say he is not.
The abbot is a just man, if severe, and Fra Anselmo
is a saint indeed."
" But, like the rest, he is sweet to a rich novice," said
Damasus.
" Silence," said Astolfo, " no  word  here  against Fra
Anselmo.    Now  answer,   Syades;   have  you   ever   seen
this Dragon of which people talk, or is it a mere fancy
ofthe peasants ? "
" Nay, 1 have seen it," said Syades, " and were I but
a free man, and did I know of a bold man, I could show
something of his lair, and how he is to be got at."
" Show me how to get at it," said Astolfo, " and if I
can fight with it, whether I kill it or not, I shall set you
free with a recompence."
" Nay, sir," said the Saracen, " though my life lay on
that, I will not.    The beast has some hidden lair, whence
8 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
lie will never come if he sees more than one man, and to
match him single-handed requires,—pardon me, my lord, I
do not doubt your spirit,—a first-rate warrior, such as
Thorstein or Rainulf; not one brought up by monks, like
the marquis or yourself."
As I expected, Astolfo, who was a promising warrior,
grew furious at being spoken of as if he were like the
monkish Lorenzo. " Wizard," he said, " speak out before
I wring your secrets out of your Saracen throat."
" Nay, my lord, you promised me life and safety," said
Syades. " Were my lady indeed to order me, I might
have to speak, only even her commands I would fain not
obey, when they might bring those she loves into peril."
Then Syades was guarded back to his prison, and we
sat in a silence that made us listen to the storm without,
till the jovial monk cried out, " Why do we sit so droop¬
ing over the wine-cups to-night ? A song, Kolbiorn; may
we not have one from you again ? sing how your Sigurd
conquered the Dragon."
" No," said I, " the dragons of the north are honest
beasts, with teeth and claws like our great Dragon ship ;
but the dragons of the south are evil demons, hard to see,
but whose breath poisons the air. I have been near one of
late;  methinks I am too poisoned to sing."
" Don't talk of demons in this castle, at this hour,"
answered Daniasus; " think rather of feasts and fair
ladies.    Shall I singt" and he trolled out merrily,
Gold-locketi my lady is.
Sunshine tangled iu her hair ;
Blue eyes my lady hath,
All my heaven is shining there.
Some may dream of saints celestial
Kneeling on the chapel floor ;
They are far and we terrestrial,
'Tis my lady that I adore.
Life is short;  ay, more's the pity ;
Ail the joys I will crowd in mine :
Oh for the hall in the marble city,
Oh for the fl iw-ers and costly wine !
Oil for my lady enthroned ahove us ;
Life and love, though tliey pass away !
We who have wiue and ladies !o love us,
Come what may, we have Iiad our day."
"Bravo,  monk,"  I said, "a  good  song for midnight
Tlie Dragon of the North. 9
when the ale is iu and the wit out, and men cannot get
home for giddiness. Only our northern Avomen would
thank you little for such songs; they will do for the ladies
of the south."
But Astolfo sprang up displeased, sajang he would
suffer no such songs from the chaplain of Valeria's castle,
and so with her and her maidens he went away. It was
midnight ere Damasus rose and went also, and soon after
1 was startled by a shriek, and hard on it a fall against the
door. I opened it, and Damasus staggered in and clung to
me. Not a word could he say but " The monk, the monk !"
till he recovered a little as I gave him wine; but still he
would answer none of my questions. I had to lead him
back to his room and get a man-at-arms to stay there
with him ere he could be pacified, and I could return to
the hall, where I sat awhile alone dreaming over the fire.
I had fallen asleep, when I know not what awoke me sud¬
denly : the lamp was out and the fire too, all but one red
brand. I sprang up, and crossed the dark hall to the
great door which led on to the staircase, where was my
room. I felt for this door, and at last found and opened
it, and then stopped, for on the great staircase was a tall
dark figure, all cowled or veiled. There was a kind of
flicker aboiit it, and most strangely was it all—was the one
hand which was uplifted—edged with the sort of cold
blue-fire that at times seems to burn in the sea. What
could the horror be ? the ghost of one escaped from the
cold prison-halls of Ean, the blue depths of the sea—
Swend or Lorenzo? But even as I strove to ask the
Appearance what it was, it was gone. Just then a yellow
glimmer showed far down the corridor; two armed men
were hurrying up, Italians of our garrison, and iii their
hands were drawn daggers. " How if he resists ? " said
one to another; " these Northmen are strong." " Silence
the bird's song for ever," laughed the other, as they dis¬
appeared into my room. I felt for my weapon, for these
were earthly foes; and soon they came oiit, speaking of
searching in the hall. Then with a sudden cry, " The
monk—Fra Lucio—Holy Mary to our aid! " they fled clat¬
tering down the passage whence they had come. Then
went I to my room, and taking thence helmet, brynie,
and trusty sword, felt nerved again, and crossed the hall
to seek Hertha. But in the passage beyond, there
already was Hertha coming to find me ; behind her, like
a   rough   faithful  dog,  walked   Olver,   and   Ivar   also,
No. 1.—Jasuart 1876. B
10 Tlie Ladles Edbihur<jh Magazine.
both armed. " We are betrayed by the garrison," she
told me, " and Syades is free; he is in Valeria's bower,
and may bewitch her. But now with you three I
may try to rescue her. We have still the keys of the
castle, and the falconers and grooms wait in the court
to let in succours: they dare not fight, but being
outside the inner gates, Syades cannot attack them.
Astolfo we cannot find; he is perhaps gone to seek help."
As we went to Valeria's bower, Ivar further told me he
had taken but one beaker of wine with the Italians, which
must have been drugged, for he fell asleep at Syades'
prison door, who was gone when he awoke.
Two men Ave found on guard at Valeria's bower;
one we slew, the other fled: the door opened before us,
and in the dark within I was aware of Valeria, who
reclined in a great chair amid a circle of flamelets traced
on the ground. Dark forms moved in the gloom around,
and in front stood Syades with a drawn sword. Hertha
walked up alone through them all to Valeria, and, sign¬
ing a cross in the air, drew her away. How it was done
I know not, for a dark throng closed round her; but she
passed through them as the moon through storm-clouds.
At the door Olver and Ivar closed up on each side of
her, beating back men who attacked us, while I aided
her to bring on Valeria, who now seemed roused, and
resisted us.
" Syades," she cried, " my faithful Syades, let me follow
him; leave me with him ! " And after us, now near and
now afar, came the Saracen and many with him, men-
at-arms of the traitor garrison, and other forms less under¬
stood, but far more awful. At last we got Valeria to the
hall, and laid her down on the Moorish cushions, and
closed the doors. Then began a strange combat, which
lasted for many hours. It seemed as if the will of Hertha
and the will of Valeria fought together all night. The
little lady drew herself up and said, " I command here till
my brother returns, and he is not dead; let no one tliiuk
him dead, and Syades is his seneschal. Send him hither !
Come, Syades, it is your lady who calls you." And then
would the doors rattle, and the voice of the Saracen out¬
side would say, "Coming, lady." "Nay, sweet Valeria,"
would Hertlia say, " he is an evil enchanter, a treacherous
Saracen wizard; wait here with us till Astolfo returns ; he
is your true protector, your betrothed."
"Go from me ;  go, you terrible people of the North !"
The Dnujon of the North. 11
then she Avould cry. " You—are you a woman or a long-
buried beautiful statue that some demon has called to
life, and now inhabits to be the bane of men? " Then see¬
ing Olver : " Save me from the dwarf, the fearful dwarf I
I know whence they come—from the fires below, where
they forge the deadly weapons." Then, if I drew near her,
'• Oh I away ; it is the northern heathen water-spirit; did he
not tell me how they sang sweet songs, harping ever, and
luring maidens to their death below the waves?" and then
again she would call for Syades or some other Italian to
come to her aid. In truth it was a wild night. For the
Italian men-at-arms I cared little, they were but twelve,
and we were three, for some of my strength had returned,
but there were more things abroad—unearthly shrieks and
peals of laughter, and the trampling of many rapid feet,
mixed with the uoises of the storm which still raged out¬
side. And all the time the great alarrn-bell tolled above,
proclaiming our need with its iron tongue. Ivar told me
that Bergliot alone in the bell-tower rang it. " That
woman, though she talks ever of feaijs and fancies, has
courage enough to visit a vampire iii his cairn, and
outwit him too," he said.
The long winter night was far spent; Valeria was a
little quiet, lulled by the Latin hymns that Hertha sang
low to her, when at last a horn sounded from without.
" Thorstein himself," said the smith, " and not too late;
now all will go well." Anon quick steps were sounding
on the great staircase. Olver flung wide the door, and
Thorstein, followed by a few of our own people, stepped
in, fresh and strong as Baldur defying the host of Niflheim.
No need of much talk ere he dashed through the long
corridors whence the minute before such clani,our had
arisen. But now all was silent as the grave ; not a crea¬
ture was there; tlie rooms were all empty, save one where
lay Damasus, half dead with fear. Just as a faint yellow
dawn streaked the black winter-night sky we returned to
the hall, where Bergliot with Hertha tended Valeria, and
Astolfo stood by her.
" This comes of living in castles," said the old woman ;
"heaven knows what may lurk in them. But for our hav¬
ing so offended Thor the thunderer, I should have run out
into the storm." But we all agreed in praising Bergliot,
saying that in castle or ship she ever acted manfully.
" Yes," she said, " wherever I go, praise be to Thor and
his hammer, I can make a noise."
12 Tlie Ladies^ Kdinhurgh Magazine.
" I owe you great thanks for the noise," said Astolfo,
who, as I now saw, had less than his usual gay aspect,
and was miry from head to heel; and when we asked
what had befallen him : " That villain wizard," he said,
" he told me if I rode down to-night to the marshes, I
shoidd find there one who would guide me to the lair of
the Dragon ; and I have been there on horseback for
hours."
" And no one came ? " asked Thorsteiu.
" I know not," he ansAvered ; " none came to guide me,
yet I was not alone, me seemed." He shuddered, and
added whispering, '• Let us bury Fra Lucio's bones to¬
morrow. l)ut the peal of the alarm-bell recalled me to
Asile, having lost my horse and lost my Avay, and had
trouble in avoiding a whole troop of Saracen warriors
that are moving about the coast."
Thorstein said he knew the whole country was astir,
and that Syadcs had all in readiness to seize the castle,
or at least the ladies as hostages. A messenger telling of
the alarm-bell at Asile had roused him at his last resting-
place, and he had hiuTied on, not giving time for most of
his meu, who were now mustering on the shore below, to
follow. " A Saracen galley has, I hear, come in to Salerno,
so we shall have a real good fight, and I trust justice
Avill be done on the traitors."
Now Valeria suddenly cast herself at Thorstein's feet,
saying, "Oh spare him, mighty warrior; spare Syades,
our true friend: you do not know all: promise me you
will spare him before you go."
"Rise, lad}^," said Thorstein coldly; "here you command,
and in the matter of Syades you shall be considered; we
have not got him yet, and to-day you cannot judge."
" The night has shattered her, Thorstein," said Hertha.
"Come with me, sweet lady, and rest;" then she turned at
the door, and asked with glowing cheeks, " Is Kainulf with
the men below? "
" Ilainulf is following. One of us had to escort Prince
Sergio and his daiighter to Naples; but he will be here
anon," said Thorstein ; and as we descended the stairs
together—"Hertha is but one of many pleasant things to
that gay cavalier, not the one heart's treasure she is to
me ; but for spilt wine and Might-have-been make no
moan."
Tliis is no chronicle of war, so I need not relate how
we found our men, and routed the Saracens again and
llie Draijoii of the Nortli. 13
again wherever they dared make head against us, feeding
the eagles with their blood, and driving the survivors to
Agrapoli or the sea. We fell also on the Italian traitors,
and of those known to have given allegiance to Syades
we spared not one, executing even the prisoners. Two
days these combats lasted, and when at length we
sheathed our swords, and turned our weary horses' heads
towards Asile, order and quiet prevailed all along the
coast, and for long men talked there of the vengeance of
Thorsteio.
All was changed in the castle when we returned. The
court was thronged witli the gay retinue of Sergio, Prince
of Naples, who with his fair daughter had come to honour
the wedding feast of Sir Eainulf, who escorted him. We
had no news of Lorenzo, but all thought the marriages
should be delayed no longer, as the ladies needed in these
warlike times the protection of tlieir husbands. And all
could see that a third wedding was wished for by Sergio,
as well as pressed by the emperor. The lovely child, his
daughter, looked wistfully at the great warrior Thorstein,
battle-stained and worn as he was, and brief in speech to
all the ladies. Nay, when, shortly after, the Dragon ship
came under Asile from Caserta, he went on board till the
weddings, saying he would sail away in her for ever if
any more Italian alliances were proposed to him.
After that a right splendid marriage-feast was held ;
Sergio gave A'^aleria to Astolfo, and Thorstein gave
Hertha to Rainulf, and these last were such a pair as
can seldom be seen. Then all but Astolfo and his wife
left Asile, where, since the solemn interment of Fra
Lucio's bones, the hauntings had ceased. Astolfo gathered
a good Italian garrison, for Valeria still seemed scantly
to like us Northern folk, even though Syades had escaped
from our hands, Thorstein went north to Gaeta, now
with a great retinue; I rode Avith him some way, and
then we kissed and parted. " Keturn to me," he said,
"when your present longing for roving is over; I feel
now far lighter-hearted, for I mean to stay here for three
years only, and then up sail and back to Norway, or
somewhere to freedom and joy."
And so Thorstein rode away, with the trumpets ringing
out before him, and the shining knights behind, and
the throng of mounted spearmen, with banners fluttering
and weapons glittering. He had come to the land the
second in command of a single long-ship; and now he
14 The JLadies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
was in all Italy second only to the emperor; but it
happened quite naturally, for he was a born king of
men.
Then I went to visit Hertha in her fair castle near
Salerno.    Here she led a blissful life.    The early spring
already made these south lands beautiful, and we hxmted
boars  and harts on the  Avooded  mountains,  or  floated
about on the calm blue sea.    But I did not stay there
long;   the  Neustrian  Normans  think   all  who are  not
Christians   their   enemies,   and   Rainulf   loved   not   that
Ilertha and I should be such friends when I was yet
Odin's man.    One beautiful evening we rested from the
chase in an olive wood, where a stream splashed into a
long carved marble basin that had once been a tomb.
It was the same stream that ran past the little chapel in
the wood where Hertha had so nearly been wedded to
Lorenzo.    Rainulf, who was very devout, had gone to
his orisons in the chapel, while Hertha talked with me,
and implored me to take Christianity.    I made her look
at the ancient tomb, where were fairly carved youths and
maidens, old men and aged veiled women, all walking
with sad faces toAvards the boat where Charon Avaited to
row them over the death river into the unknown land.
" See, they know not," I said, " when they bid fareAvell
to the day and come to their dark chamber below, if ever
again hope and joy, yes, or grief and war, shall be theirs,
or if  all  is  nothingness.    So in all ages people  have
strained their eyes into that cloud-land till they saw, or
thought they saw,  something.    Those  that  carved this
saw one thing, those that piled our cairns in the North
saAv  anothei';  your Christians see  something else.    But
I like the northern Avay: do not expect more  than  life
gives;  meet good and bad fortune with an equal mind ;
treasure life while you have it, but treasure above it the
honour which belongs to a man.    And should there be a
life beyond, honour Avill come to meet you; and should
there be none, honour will rest on the stones of your
cairn, and for awhile your name shall live in the thoughts
of men.    If only for aAvhile, let us not complain, for what
must be should be, and this is the end of the matter.
Know you, Hertha, that Eric is b3und for Mikelgarth with
messages of peace from this land?    Thither Avill I, for I
am weary of being so long ashore."
When we parted, Hertha gave me a costly ring, and
said, " Do not let the Dragon forget the Avay back to us;
Pilate. 15
all happiness attend your voyage, and perhaps for you
too the sun will rise in the east."
So I, feeling that we were drifting apart like two ships
in contrary currents, went on board the Dragon ship with
Eric, and sailed for Mikelgarth ; and we fought and con¬
quered and feasted in the far eastern seas, and among the
sunny islands of Greece, for three whole years.
E. J. 0.
{To be continued.)
A SOUL in the darkness groping,
Touching the Door—
Yet passing hence for evermore I
A Captive Soul, by its weakness
Cruelly bound,
And by chains which cowardice
Has cast around.
But we from the picture turning,
Might look within,
And fear lest our souls be guilty
Of the same sin.
Have we called upon Truth, yet pressed not
Eager to find ?
Her music, her light have we passed by.
Deafened and blind!
O! to be free from the slothful,
The coward's tie.
Lest we tread a path still darker,
And Christ crucify.
(0! to be bound as the Christ
By Love was bound;
For true light and sure guidance ever
With her is found.)
Farewell then to fear—we stay not.
Content to rest,—-
God-born are we, and God-seeking:
Eternal's our quest! JoAN ScOTT.
16 The Ladies' Edinhurgh Magazine.
Rebates of ilic ladifs' (gdinburrjlt
The readers of the old series of " The Attempt" will need
no explanation of the subject of this paper, for they have
been accustomed to see from time to time in the Magazine
an account of our debates ; but it may be necessary to
remind the larger circle which we now address, that the
Ladies' Literary Society not only writes, but reads, and
that a considerable amount of study and thoughtful
argument is promoted among our members by the regular
discussions which take place at its monthly meetings.
The subjects for debate are chosen by the committee,
and suggestions for choice are readily received from any
members : a list is prepared, which this year Avas published
in the A^otI number of the Magazine, in accordance with
a very generally expressed wish; and information can
always be obtained from the secretary of the L. E. L. S.,
or from the editors, as to the " fixtures," to borrow a con¬
venient hunting phrase, and as to the discussions which
have already taken place.
The list is always a large and varied one, embracing a
wide range of topics, so as to attract all tastes; but no
fixed rule binds the Society to discuss them in any
particular order.
We think it well to be thus explicit, ftimiliar though
most of our readers may be with these arrangements,
because we should like to arouse fresh interest in our
debates, especially among our younger members (and we
reckon seniority as that of peers, admirals, generals, and
public officials is reckoned); and because we should be
glad to have suggestions as to subjects in them even
from non-members occasionally. Passing for the present
to a short account of the debates of 1875, we shall then
point out in what way we think this increased interest
might be stimulated and made useful.
At the January meeting the question appointed for
discussion was: Is an advocate justified in defending his
client when he knows him to be guilty ? one which could
not but be interesting to an Edinburgh Society, and which
must have most intimately concerned many of those
present. The result of the discussion was a majority of
10 for the affirmative.    The February meeting was asked
Debates of the Ladies' Edinburgh Literary Society.     17
to consider. Whether Popularityis a Test of Literary Merit?
and a very lively discussion was called forth by a question
on which nearly every one has something to say, and
which admits of such well-supported argument on either
side. It was carried in the affirmative by 18 votes against
8, and some remarks on that side were afterwards published
in the Magazine. If any of our readers are acquainted
with a series of lectures delivered last spring in London
by various eminent writers, and entitled Companions of
the Devotional. Life, they will find, perhaps, some
thoughts in that paper recalled by the first of those
lectures, which was given by Dr. Farrar. In March the
Society took up a weightier subject; viz.. Is it Advan¬
tageous or not to a country to have a Religion established
by Law } It may be said to have been, on the whole, one
of the most successful of the year's debates, because,
being on a subject which in these days occupies a good
deal of public attention, it gave rise to more speaking
from others than the proposers and seconders than is
commonly the case, and this always lends spirit to a dis¬
cussion. This question was an example of the difficulty
so often experienced of stating subjects in a debatable
form, and the various ways in which it was taken up
showed how differently it was understood by different
minds. The intention of its being worded as above was,
that religion might be regarded, if the speakers were so
disposed, in the abstract, and the advantage of State
establishment argued upon without reference to the truth
or falsehood of any particular system. It was curious to
see how completely the abstract was ignored, and people
thought and spoke of one religion and one only, showing,
however, some confusion of ideas here and there between
religion and its form, between Clu-istian truth and Church
organisation. The negative was carried by the small
majority of 2.
The April debate will also be remembered by many as
one of very great interest and power. It did not call
forth so much discussion as other lighter topics have
done, but that was not to be wcmdered at. Few people
would be ready with an off'-hand opinion on the grave
question: Can the Immortality of the Soul be discovered
by the light of Nature? but the four carefully written
and thoughtful papers of some of our best-read members
were listened to with the greatest interest, and we have
often  wished  that  they   could   be  more  widely  made
No. 1.—Jani-arv 1876 C
18 Tlie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
known among absent members and others.    The majority
for the negative was 2.
The less serious question, Is there a Standard of Taste ?
engaged the Society's attention in May. Only two
papers were read (one on each side), though we should
have thought the subject a pleasant and attractive one,
on which most educated people might be supposed able
to form an opinion. But no seconders were found, or else
they failed in their undertaking, and this is apt to be
injurious to the liveliness of the after discussion; the
attendance too was rather scanty on that day, and several
members did not vote. A majority of 4 was recorded for
the affirmative. In June the question submitted to the
consideration of the Society was : Is the Realistic more in
accordance with the true Principles of Art than the Ideal
School of Painting and Sculpture ? and though again no
seconders came forward, the papers read on either side
introduced a pleasant discussion, in spite of the unfortu¬
nate absence of several who would probably have taken
a prominent part in it. The negative was carried by 14
votes against 3. As the summer advances, members leave
town, and it becomes rather difficult to find proposers
and seconders who can be certain of being present; it
has, therefore, been found advisable to take up in July
some very light topic, engaging all who come to the
meeting to contribute something to it, and the discussion
is carried on Avith less formality than usual. This year
the members were invited to select any short poem, not
exceeding a certain length, which they considered to
possess unusual merit, and to read it with any critical
remarks, original or quoted, which they chose to make.
Some fourteen poems were read, and most of them com¬
mented on, but no vote was taken, the discussion not
admitting of one.
The next meeting was held in October, and the debate
was on the question, Can the Characters of Men be dis¬
cerned from the Features of their Faces ? Two very good
papers were read supporting; opposite views; the votes
were pretty evenly divided, several giving a partial affir¬
mative, showing how much is to be said for both sides of
the questio]!, though the ayes had a majority of 1.
A large number came together at the November
meeting, and tlie discussion on the question, Is the
Existence of an Aristocracy Beneficial to a (Country? was
certainly one of the most general, spirited, and amusing
Debates of the Ladies   Ediiihurijh Literary Society.     19
of the year. The question was perhaps rather vague in
its wording, for it was ruled by the President, after
hearing the arguments on either side, that there was no
real division of opinion, so much was admitted by the
negative and granted by the affirmative, bringing the
two parties into substantial agreement. No vote was
therefore taken on this occasion.
The December discussion was intended to be on the
question : Does the Study of Physical Science tend to
shake Religious Belief I There was a very large attend¬
ance, but as a good deal of business has to be transacted
in this month, such as the election of new office-bearers
for the ensuing year, the receiving the editor's report, etc..
it was found advisable to postpone the discussion until
the January meeting.
And r.ow, ere concluding this rapid survey of the year's
debates, we must return to a point just glanced at in the
opening of this paper; namely, an increase in the interest
and share taken by the members generally in the discus¬
sions. Arrangements, we believe, are now suggested for
making known through the Magazine the subjects pro¬
posed for debate during the present year. The list is only
put forth suggestively, and additions and alterations may
be made from time to time. But the subject chosen out
of this list will henceforth be announced in the Magazine
a month previously, with the hope that all the members
Avho read it will be induced to think over the question,
Avith the view of having something to say should they
attend the meeting. It often happens that in one's
reading, or in chance conversations, one lights upon ideas
which bear upon a past debate; if one knew what the
coming debate was to be about, such accidental sugges¬
tions would doubtless be equally frequent, and might
prove really useful. It is also hoped that readers of the
Magazine, whether members or not of the Society, will
be induced by the monthly announcement to take an
interest in thcvdebate. They can easily, if so inclined,
become members, and will then be enabled to join in any
of the discussions, either viva voce, or, should they not be
resident in Edinburgh, by papers sent through the Editors.
Members, too, who are unable for any reason to undertake
a formal speech or paper, might surely sometimes con¬
tribute a few words of opinion in writing on any topic
which has attracted them specially, which might be com-
municated through the proposer or seconder on either side;
20 Tke Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
or, knowing as they Avill now do beforehand the subject
of debate, they might look up some quotation from any
author which they think apt and suitable. The vote
would be in no way influenced, but a good deal of liveli¬
ness would be added to the discussions, and thev would
become more general.
To those Avho ask why people should take this trouble,
and what is the good of these debates'? we feir we have
no very definite answer to make. Those who join in
tliem know that friendly discussions on subjects of
interest are pleasant, and that they are not without their
use. It is a good thing for all persons to be required to
think, to fix their minds upon any one topic, and to
study it from all points of view. It is good also, and
more generally useful than many, perhaps, are aware,
to be forced to put one's thoughts clearly before others,
and to state why one holds this rather than that opinion.
We think that their pleasantness and usefulness would be
much increased by the participation of larger numbers in
the discussions ; and we urge upon the members of the
Society to see what each can do to realise the expectation.
A. D.
■eSlfrburga   of  Q!luster.
CHAPTER XI.—Conclusion.
" What a long time has passed since we last met," said
Randall, as they left the chapel.
" Yes, indeed," answered Werburga. " How strange it
seems ; I have not seen you since I acted the patron
saint."
"No," he replied; " and that evening appears to have
inspired you with a desire to follow the saint's example,
by retiring from the world."
" No, by no means," she said; " the action may be
similar, but the motive is different."
" You do yourself injustice, I fear."
" Oh, no I" she answered, " nothing would ever induce
me to retire from the world but laziness.. I must own
I was half actuated by filial duty; but the other half
was sheer laziness.    Think  what one escapes by living
Werhurga of Chester. 21
here! All the conventional visits, leaving one's card at s:>
many houses, wearing out so many gloves and bonnets in
the year, and going about with always the same degree
of unmeaning sweetness expressed in one's face. For
my part, I like to be different every day. It is quiet
here, yes ; but if I feel dull, I have only to betake myself
to the organ in the little chapel."
" But do you not miss your old pupils the chorister
boys?"
" Far from it; I look on my lessons to them as an act
of presumption on my part, for I have since discovered
that I know very little about the matter. You may think
me changeable ; but you must allow me to retaliate by
calling you so too. How do you like your new calling"?
Perhaps so little that you mean to change again ?"
" No, indeed," said Randall. " I feel its benefit too much
for that." He looked steadily at her in the moonlight,
Avhich now shone over them, and said—" One who has been
privileged as I have to counsel and comfort a dying man,
cannot readily renounce the sacred calling."
" AVhere have you done that? tell me," she said.
" No," answered Randall, " that I must leave to your
father, to whom I have  already told the  story, which, I
may admit to you, concerns you not a little."
" Indeed, you rouse my curiosity," said Werburga.
"What can have happened?"
They had now nearly reached the cottage. When
they entered, the Baron beckoned his daughter to his
side^ and began to talk to her in a low voice. When he
had finished, she looked up brightly, and said, "Then
we are no longer poor, papa, and you will have no more
of those cruel fancies to vex you. Oh, I am so glad ; but
we shall still remain here, shall we not ?"
" Softly, my child, yon are too rash," said the Baron ;
" you must understand that we shall not be so very much
richer than before. All this time we have only been de¬
prived of so large a porticjn of our income as might be
accounted for by the fluctuations in the rent of land ;
for this was the reason invariably given me by Mr Wood
for the decrease in my fortune; and I, alas! was blind
enough always to believe him without exerting myself to
make personal enquiries about the matter."
"If you had not been too good and too trustful for this
world," said his daughter, " you might have been so com¬
fortable all these years; but, for my part, I feel rather
22 The Ladies' Kdinhurgh Magazine.
glad of it;   we have been so happy, and we should be so
miserable in a large, luxurious house, with stiff domestics."
Randall had again strolled out, so as not to interrupt
this talk.
" My child, let us not speak of this at present," said the
I^aron, " A for more serious thought is in my mind.
From the state of my health I know that I cannot be long
with you; and who will take care of you when I am
gone? I am glad I can leave you in comfort, but will
you accept of any guardian I may appoint for you % "
" Oh, papa, you distress me," she said. " Let us not
indulge in such gloomy forebodings."
" One wish of mine you will comply with," said the
Baron. " As we have been so highly favoured, let us be
merciful to others. It will of course be necessary, in
making arrangements with the banker at B., to expose
something of Mr. Wood's villany; but so far as we our¬
selves are concerned, let us, by neither word nor look, do
anything to betray his treacherous conduct to any one."
" Certainly not, papa ; I would not condescend to say
anything about him. I shall never mention his name,
even if asked to read it on his tombstone."
"What strange beings women are!" exclaimed the
Baron for perhaps the fiftieth time in as many days;
'"they fear death for their friends, and laugh at it for their
enemies. A new philosopher has yet to write the psycho¬
logy of the female mind."
" Papa, I see you are better," said his daiighter quickly.
" This good fortune has done it; I am so glad !"
The bearer of this good tidings now re-entered from his
lonely walk, during which his reflections had possibly
been a shade less cheerful than those of the Baron and
his daughter. The gloomy thought that had depressed
him during the journey had returned witli double force.
Surely Werburga was a different being, both by position
and character, from what she had been one short year
before. He felt now that, in regard to wealth and posi¬
tion, she had soared far beyond his reach. From the
short conversation, too, which he had had with her, his
blind devotion led him to give an intensified meaning and
an implicit fliith to all she said, and to believe that in the
number of those from whom she wished to retire, she in¬
cluded all human beings except her father. All this
tended to make him timid and embarrassed in her society ;
he almost felt as if his visit were an intrusion, and de-
Werhurga of Chester. 23
termiued to make it as short as possible. Werburga soon
perceived that Randall was no longer the same. His
manner was cold and distant; and as she was too proud
to try to concihate him, her manner became cold and
distant also, if possible more so than liis. So there was
no more calling each other by their Christian names, no
renewal, on Randall's part, of the mute avowal made so
short a time before in the chapel.
The very next morning, accordingly, Randall was in
readiness to depart for Stretton. He gave as a reason
for his haste the fact that he had not yet been home
since his return. Werburga, before his departure, sat
writing for some time a letter for her father, she said,
which she gave to Randall to take to Squire Trevor.
On his journey home Randall had to pass through
Chester. Many parts of the town were for him full oi a
tender interest, from the memories they recalled. He
did not fail, during this brief visit, to stroll into the
cathedral, and dream over again all the incidents of his
first interview with Werburga. On turning to leave
the building, when he perceived, crossing the nave
towards the south door, Squire Trevor. He had a sprig of
white jasmine in his hand. Coming forward, he greeted
Randall cordially, which Randall on his part returned
with some degree of coldness. He was thinking of the
letter to Trevor Avhich was hidden somewhere near his
throbbing heart. Directly on leaving the cathedral, he
drew it forth and gave it to Trevor. " From de Rehmar,
I suppose," said the latter with a nonchalant air ; "I know
his daughter is his secretary." This was a relief to
Randall, who had not reflected that the letter could
be from any one but the writer herself.
" Stay," said Trevor to Randall, who was preparing to
take leave; "you are going home; let me ask you to
share my carriage."
Randall stammered some excuse, but Trevor, paying
no attention to this, threw open the carriage door, and
motioned to Randall to enter. Trevor read the letter,
and then said, almost gaily, " So poor Mr. Wood is gone,
and de Rehmar, I am glad to find, is no loser by the event.
Ah I poor Bernard, how deep and yet how shallow he
was! De Rehmar, generous fool as he is, wishes me to
keep silence with regard to the dead rogue. Well, I
shall do so, as it is perhaps the last favour I may ever
do the Baron, but I own it hurts my conscience.
24 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
" The last favour you will ever do him ? " said Randall
involuntarily.
" Yes, why should I do anything more ? He and his
daughter are nice people, very, and 1 liked them once ; but
now they have buried themselves alive, and as I have
never been trained as a sexton, I do not expect to be able
to dig them out."
Randall shuddered at the fickleness and flippancy dis¬
played by this speech of Trevor's. Yes, it was true, indeed,
that his hobbies were many and shortlived, but to think
that his friendship for de Rehmar should le classed among
these! Only one cause of satisfaction did he find in what
Trevor had said,—this estrangement from Werburga was
at least in his favour, if a reality. Still he had his doubts
whether this were so; they arose, if not from reason,
from the maddening influence of unquenchable jealousy.
.All this passed quickly through his mind, and then
he said, " What a pretty sprig of jasmine! is that from
Chester?"
" Ah, by the way." said Trevor, with some tremulous-
ness, " this pretty flower is for your sister. I heard her
express a desire for a cutting of the very plant which her
friend Mile, de Rehmar had cultivated in the cloister alleys.
I found it to-day growing so luxuriantly in the damp,
cool recess; it looked like an angel in the Inferno, or at
least in purgatory."
Randall glanced at Trevor with a puzzled look. What
could all this mean ? Was this thoughtful kindness to
his sister merely a screen to hide the far deeper feeling
for Werburga, which had prompted him to gather some
flowers of her planting?
They were now silent for some time, Randall musing
partly on Werburga, whose image he Avas now vainly
trying to banish. And Trevor—what was he thinking
of? He did not, as on a former occasion, alight nimbly
in search of fossils; it was evidently nothing stony
which now occupied his mind; his eye had too bright a
sparkle for that.
The old church tower of Stretton now came in view,
standing like a huge sentinel on its height. The carriage
rolled rapidly through leafy lanes and past smiling home¬
steads. Trevor smiled to himself as the carriage stopped,
and set down Randall at the white house ; he shook Ran¬
dall cordially by the hand, to which the other only respon¬
ded faintly.    Indeed, he had given Trevor rather short
Werhurga of Cliester. 25
answers and few words the whole way, which the latter
did not make the least attempt to explain to himself, as
he had established it as an axiom that everything which
Randall said or did was unnaccountable.
Randall met with a delighted Avelcome from his mother
and Malvina, which greatly flattered him. They too
were much pleased with the change in his appearance
and manner; and he would have felt quite flattered
by this, had he not found that they seemed to be equally
delighted with every little incident, even with the
alighting of a fly on the dinner-table. There were little
tremulous movements, and sudden blushes and bursts of
laughter, from Malvina; all of which seemed to him
new and extraordinary phenomena in her usually quiet
and somewhat impassive demeanour. And withal, she
was looking prettier than he had ever seen her before.
Mrs. Holme, too, so far forgot her dignity as sometimes to
join in these little outbursts ; her look and manner were
more cheerful than they had yet been during her widow¬
hood.
" By the way, I brought you a sprig of jasmine from
Squire Trevor," said Randall, addressing liis sister.
" Squire Trevor! you drove out with him ? " said Mrs.
Holme.    " I trust you found him agreeable."
" Indeed, rather too much so," said Randall. " I did
not return his advances with more than civility, aud in
future I intend to beware of the oily-tongued fickle man
of the world."
Mrs. Holme looked intensely shocked; but only said,
" Randall, he is our friend."
" Indeed," answered her son, " then you must be a fickle
person too, for only a year ago you used to warn me
against him."
" On your own account only, my dear boy," answered
Mrs. Holme mildly. " Now that you are more matured,
you are able to benefit by his society. And he has been
kind to you particularly, if you only knew-^ "
Here she paused, but she had said enough. " Knew
what?" asked Randall; then suddenly sitting bolt upright,
and looking her full in the face, he said—"Mother, tell me,
it is not to Squire Trevor that I owe the means of carry¬
ing on my studies '] "
"Ask me no questions, Randall," said his mother: she
looked puzzled, and a little frightened.
" Ah ! I see it all now," he said, hastily rising from his
No. 1.—Jakuaei 1876. D
26    ' The Jjudies Edinburgh Magazine.
seat and leaving the room. Malvina rushed after him,
and begged him to come back; but he was inexorable.
Late as it was, he took his hat, and set out at a quick
pace in the direction of Glanhafon. As he walked up the
avenue, therustling of leaves and the swaying ofbranches in
the breeze did not fail to recall to his memory that evening,
little more than a year ago, when he had passed up that
avenue on his way into a new sphere of action. Even
then he had recoiled somewhat from the society of
Trevor; now he did so still more, as the burden of obli¬
gation seemed to weigh upon him so as to prevent his
escape. He was shown into the library; Trevor was not
there. All was as before—the rich hangings, the high
chimney-piece, the long high windows But the study
table no longer bore traces of recent wa^rk. The papers
were all covered over with a cloth, on the top of wdiich lay,
as if thrown down, some volumes of poetry and romances.
AVhen Trevor entered, and they exchanged words of
greeting, Randall was not slow in revealing the object of
his visit. " I am deeply concerned," he said, " to find that I
am under a great obligation to you, sir; and I beg you,
as you value my regard and my peace of mind, to
acquaint me with the amount of it."
" Indeed, you puzzle me,"said Trevor,from his easy-chair.
"I employ no one to keep my accounts, neither do I do
so myself; it is conseqiiently impossible for me to grant
your request. If you fancy yourself under an obligation
to me, hoAvevcr, you may consider yourself released from
it on condition of your doing me a small favour."
" AVith the greatest pleasure, if in my power," said
Randall    "What is it?"
" Only to inform your mother and sister that I shall
do myself the honour of driving with them to-morrow
afternoon.    I shall be happy if you will accompany us."
" Ah, you are making game of me," said Randall; " is
there no other way out of this dilemma ?"
" Yes, by shaking hands and joining me in a cup of
coffee," said Trevor.
Even a compliance with these requests failed to satisfy
Randall's independent spirit. To do him justice, how'ever,
he took leave of Trevor with the utmost seeming good-
humour and cordiality. He did not join the driving party
on the following afternoon, but went instead to see Miss
Wood, and thus fulfil his promise to her brother. He
found her overwhelmed with grief at the news of her
Werbwga of Chester. 27
brother's death, and when he put into her hands the china
cup which Mr. Wood had met with such misfortune in
obtaining, she burst into tears, and said, " Oh, he was too
good to live : he lost his life in getting this for me ; how
can I live without him 1" All this recalled to Randall that
Mr. Bernard Wood must have lived a double life, of which
his sister could have seen only one side, Sober domestic
virtue seemed to have attended all his acts at home,
while the comfort in which he practised this virtue had
beenprocuredbytheunscrupulousnessof his actions abroad.
No doubt all the feminine part of the community at
Stretton with whom he had dealt would miss him sorely ;
the egg and butter wives in the weekly market would
sigh for their unfailing customer. Shame upon the
wretch who woidd disturb such dreams of fancied virtue 1
Randall at least, far from doing so, would let Bernard
Wood rest in peace in the tender memories of his sister
and other deluded beings.
On leaving Miss Wood he took a walk, during which
he could not help reflecting that Trevor seemed to be at
present in a very excitable and even flippant state of
mind. What could be the reason of it ? To Randall it
was rather unpleasant, as it prevented any serious con¬
versation whatever. He had not made any further
attempt to fathom it, when, on entering the house after
his walk, he was met by Mrs, Holme in the hall. She
drew him quickly into the parlour, and said in hurried
tones, " Only think !    Trevor and Malvina are engaged."
" No ! " said Randall, emphatically ; " I cannot believe
it." He had such a faith in the attachment of Trevor to
Werburga, that such an announcement could not at first
be received by him. It was only by settling it in his
mind that Trevor was the most fickle of men, that he
could believe such an event to be possible. Had he had
any idea of what had occurred dming Trevor's visit to
the de Rehmars in the preceding autumn, he might have
changed his opinion, and attributed to a feeling of pique
what he now believed to be entirely due to a fickle and
changeable character. So much was he occupied with
these reflections, that he was somewhat slow in expressing
any joy at the news he had heard, and still slower in
understanding how it was that a young girl like his
sister—pretty, it is true, but a mere child when compared
with Werburga—had been able to captivate Trevor. Her
very childishness was perhaps partly the cause of this.
28 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
Trevor could mould her as he liked. Malvina, though
almost a child, was a true woman, in so far as she had a
power of unquestioning admiration. Her affections were
plastic enough to love for no other reason than that sJie
was loved, without holding out any demand for special
qualities which she could esteem. And possessing, with
all this, great beauty and gentleness of manner, she was
well fitted to attract a man who, like Trevor, thought
himself defrauded by the world of the admiration and
esteem which he considered his due. With his self-love
deeply wounded by the indifference of a woman who
would not fawn where she could not love, Trevor, partly
from pique, partly from a pleasant sense of acknowledged
superiority, had yielded to the attractions of one who
could admire blindly, and accept every attention with
gratitude. Kandall soon recovered himself sufficiently to
rejoice in the happiness of Trevor and Malvina; and this
he did the more heartily, as he hoped that Trevor, in the
society of his childlike sister, might soon become less
flippant and self-asserting than he now considered him to
be. As for Mrs. Holme, she was beside herself with
pride and joy. Position, the great idol which she wor¬
shipped, was draped in folds ample enough to conceal the
slight moral flaws which she had formerly detected with
such ease.
" You will not scruple now," said the widow to her son
one day, "to accept Squire Trevor's generosity, seeing
he will no longer be a comparative stranger?"
" Indeed, mother, I had rather not accept it, and Avill
certainly repay it when I can." Had Randall had the
remotest guess at the real motive which had prompted
Trevor's kindness, he would instantly have borrowed
money to repay the debt. But he knew nothing of that,
and probably would never know. As it was, he had some
difficulty in persuading himself to go on profiting by
Trevor's liberal kindness, even with the fixed resolve that
he would repay him some day. And the sense of this
obligation did not fail to remove any hope that might
have arisen in his mind from the knowledge that Trevor
no longer stood between him and Werburga. There was
something else that stood between them now; on his
side, poverty and obligation forbade him even to look
towards the height where she sat, enthroned in all the
distinctions of rank and fortune which had always been
hers by right.     And he, the poor student—no, he must
Werhurga of Chester. 29
not think of her. Insensibly he exaggerated both her
wealth and his poverty, as he suflfered these desponding
thoughts to prey on his mind. During tlie interval that
elapsed before Michaelmas term, he made many an
eft'ort to rejoice in the joy of others without seeking
happiness of his own. It was a hard struggle, for in his
own future all was dark. Towards the end of September,
his friend Alfred Chastel arrived on a short visit. This
was cheering to Randall, who, having been much thrown
on his own resources, had been in danger of again growing
morbid. As he was one day returning from a walk with
Alfred, the conversation turned to Baron de Kehmar and
his afi'airs. Kandall related all the particulars of his late
visit to the Baron.
" The daughter must be charming," said Alfred. " By
the way, with regard to her inheriting the property, Mr.
Bernard Wood told me a curious circumstance—namely,
that the entail is contained in a contract of marriage.
When 1 asked him to explain this, he informed me that
by a peculiar whim of the entail, it is forbidden to Mdlle.
de Rehmar to succeed, unless she have, previously to her
fathers demise, contracted a marriage; and provided she
have not done so, the estate goes to the nearest male
relative. If, on the other hand, she have contracted a
marriage, she and her husband inherit equally, the title
passing to him, with the permission to pretix his own
surname to the family name."
" How strange I " said Kandall: " you have remembered
aU this, and yet you never mentioned it to me at the
time."
"My mind was full of other things," said Alfred, "so
that the affairs of this German baron seemed to me some¬
what of a myth; now, however, that we have been talking
of him, I remember the whole conversation word for word."
*****
Again October had come, with its clear skies, bright
sunsets, and "woods forlorn." Loneliness had come to
the external garment of nature, for the swallows had fled,
and the bees, ants, and squirrels had all retired to their
own domestic circles, to gloat over the hoards they had
amassed during the summer; and desolation, with its
ruthless finger, was marking out the cottage on the lake
for its prey. On one of the first days of that cold clear
month, there sat within the parlour at the cottage a lady
whom we have not met for some time.    Miss Langley had
30 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
readily responded to Werburga's hurried summons, and
come to be with her while the life of the Baron was slowly
ebbing away. She was well able to sustain the courage of a
sinking heart, for she had held her head high amid many
storms of trouble ere now. As she sits tranquilly knit¬
ting in the growing dusk, her kindly face wearing a
shadow of anxiety, the door of the sick-room suddenly
opens, and AVerburga quietly emerges from it.
" Papa has taken such a longing to see Randall Holme,"
said Werbiu-ga in a low voice, looking anxiously round.
" You wrote to him ? "
"Yes," said Miss Langley, "I told him the state of the
Baron's health, and that he was anxious to see him. The
letter went two days ago ; he may be here this evening."
" I shall comfort papa with that," said VVerburga, again
j'etreating.
"Stay!" said Miss Langley, rising; "you have never
left him all day; do go and brace yourself with a little
fresh air.    I will stay with him till you return."
" Very well, 1 will go out for a little, as you advise," said
Wei'burga, yielding to the caress of her faithful friend.
It might be about a quarter of an hour later. The door
of the little chapel stood open, and just within it, half-
leaning against a wooden seat, stood Kandall Holme. He
was listening with breathless attention, and violently
throbbing heart, to the slow solemn strains of the organ.
Who was playing ? He thought he knew, yet he stood
rooted to the spot. The strain ended quietly, almost
died away, and then came soft footfalls over the chapel
floor. He stood immovable; and as she came nearer,
the first gleam of moonlight stole over to where he was
standing. She stood before him now, with a face all soul
and feeling; with pale cheek and earnest eye she looked
up to him, and said slowly—
" I am glad you have come; papa has been longing
for you."
" I am glad too," said Randall. He took her trembling
band, and held it firmly in both his own. She let him
hold her hand, and as they stood together there, some¬
thing whispered to her that though they had been absent,
his heart had been with her all the time.
On reaching the cottage, Werburga hastened to her
father, while Miss Langley appeared, and greeted Randall
kindly. Strange to say, he was hardly conscious of her
presence.    Then he was summoned into the sick-room.
Wefhurfja of Chester, 31
De Rehmar looked thin and wasted, but his spirit was
more alive than ever. He motioned to his daughter to
withdraw, then, beckoning Randall to him, he said—
" It was strange of me to send for you, and it is still
more strange to make such a request as I am going to
make. I am dying, you see. You love my daughter;
marry her before I die."
Randall was too overcome to speak; he knelt by the
bed-side, and hid his face in his hands.
" You will do it ? " said De Rehmar.
" Yes, I will," answered Randall.
" Go, then, and send my daughter to me."
There is a subtle influence which the dying exert over
the living, which changes their weakness into power—
their dying into a mighty impulse of life. Such was
the spell with which the Baron bound his daughter dur¬
ing these his last days on earth. Her passionate grief
would have made any sacrifice seem small to make
for him. She knew he would die more happily if certain
that she should inherit his property ; and she knew also
the only condition on which this was possible. So, when
he now demanded of her the fulfilment of this condition,
she bent forward and kissed him tenderly, saying, " Papa,
I will do as you wish." A smile came over the face
of the dying man, which seemed a rich enough reward
for any sacrifice.    Yet was it, after all, a sacrifice ?
When the Baron, a few minutes later, beckoned Randall
to him, and placed his daughter's hand in his, Werburga,
her eyes full of tears, gazed at her father, and felt that he
was satisfied. He had atoned for his former neglect of
Randall—given his daughtei to one who loved her, and
was worthy of her, and, dearest thought of all, had pro¬
vided that his name and property should remain with her.
Willingly, then, she had pleased her father, mechanically
she had accepted Randall. Yet to do a thing mechani¬
cally implies that we at least feel no repulsion in doing
it; and when Werburga looked at Randall, and saw the
look of grief and love in his face, she smiled to him
faintly through her tears.
Miss Langley said afterwards to Werburga—" Now I am
{)leased with you; you will be much  happier when you
lave come down from the clouds, and found that the
world is quite habitable after all."
To Randall she said—"1 have now more than forgiven
you for your shabby conduct to me last year; and though
32 Tlie Ladies' Edbihurgh Magazine.
you have not yet reached your place in the world, you
are on the way to it; and I almost think you need some
noble being like Werburga to help you on."
Kandal) ihanked her, and assured her that his shabby
conduct towards her should be amply atoned for.
Six months later, a traveller stopping to look at the
chapel and the little cottage, beheld near the former
a plain marble cross bearing the name of Gustav de
Relimar. The cottage was still unchanged; but close
beside it workmen Avere busied in rearing a stately
dwelling. The traveller, on enquiring for whom this was
destined, was told it was for the Baron and Baroness
Holme de Rehmar, who were at present residing at
Oxford, where the Baron Avas completing his studies.
And when, a few years later, they had taken up their
abode in this handsome dwelling, Werburga said to her
husband, " I think I can now really grant your request,
and call you my dearest friend, for you have come to
live with me in papa's favourite place, near his grave,
and close to the beloved cottage; and is not that your
true position in life, quite as much as being the pastor
of the parish "?"
" And you," said Randall, " are not very different, either
from your former self to whom I made that request, or
from the patron saint with whom I connected you in
thought, for you still have a constant craving after church
music; and you have implicitly obeyed the command
which St. Chad laid on St. Werburgh, ' "Withdraw from
the world.'"
A sound of carriage wheels interrupted this dialogue;
and they hastened into the hall to welcome their beloved
Trevor and Malvina, who, along with Mrs. Holme, had
come to pay their first visit to the clerical Baron and
musical Baroness in their new abode. Procla.
(^Coiicluded.)
33
§hc  irarion   of the   Dorth.
CHAPTER  XIV.
Wearily, drearily,
Half the day long,
Flap the great banners '
High over the stone ;
While I with life all dark,
Watching the loophole's spark,
Lie here alone ;
Still strain the banner-poles
Through the wind's song,
Westward the banner rolls
Over my wrong.
Anon.
" Now it happened to add to the distresses of those times,
that witchcraft and sorcery increased in the land, so that
in the castle of Asile, not far from the city of Salerno, a
monk of Monte Cassino, of evil life, named Damasus,
venturing to hold a vigil, he was snatched away by the
phantom shadows of wicked men who had departed this
life, and was never seen more."
Thus many years after all the events I have spoken of,
the novice Stephen read to ns from the " Chronicle of
Salerno," in the chapter entitled ^ " Rainulplium quoque,
ipsiis Guaimarii Suggestione, de Comitatu Aversano investivit."
' " The first establishment of the Normans in Italy belongs to one of those
twilight jieriods of history which are a fair field for romance. Three powers
wrestled together in Southern Italy at that time, tlie Greeks, the Northern
Lombards, and the local Princes ; and their endless strife laid the unhappy
land ojien to the attacks of the Saracens, who wasted and plundered it far and
wide, even settling in little colonies and robber fortresses along the coast,
where their galleys were always safe and welcome. Porty Norman pilgrim
warriors from Jerusalem, A.n. 1015, finding the town of Salerno about to pay
a heavy subsidy to avoid being plundered by a Saracen army, proposed to fight
instead ; and by their individual prowess rescued the land and drove off the
Saracens. They would make no stay, and take no reward, but Gaiiner, Prince
of Salerno, never rested till he had persuaded others of that nation of heroes to
espouse his cause against the Greeks. Pour years later many came from
Normandy, and some from Norway, which also at this time sent its warlike
pilgrims to visit southern shrines. They fought with varied fortunes against
the Greeks, now backed by the whole jiower of the Emperor Basil, and on the
side of Gaimer, aiul of the Emperor of the West, Henry II., who asserted an
imperial claim to Italy. The changes and treacheries of the native princes,
such as Pandolf, and Atenolf, Abbot of Monte Cassino, render the histoi-y very
confused, but through it all we find the Norman character ever the same—
honourable, hardy, devout, and brilliant and successful in war to a degree
which seems fabulous, unless we remember that a complete warrior of that
No. 14.—Feiikuabt 1870. E
34 The Ladies' Edinhurgh Magazine.
I, Fra Lorenzo, was superintending some of the monks
and younger novices in our library at Caserta, where some
were making copies of manuscripts, others were illuminat¬
ing, and a few, gathered round me, were listening to the
newly-written Chronicle by a brother of our order, lately
sent us from Monte Cassino. " Nay," I said, interrupting
Stephen, " our brother knew not what really happened;
I was at Asile at that time, and remember all as if it were
yesterday; " and as I spoke, the long years flew back as
though they were not, and the light-hearted Astolfo, and
my tender sister Valeria, and the jovial Damasus, and
Hertha in all her gracious beauty, and Thorstein, with the
gentleness he won, and the simple force he never lost,
seemed all living again, and moving and speaking around
me. But the brothers and novices broke my dreams by
asking me to tell them clearly of these old times. I had
written down long ago, with the aid of a Northern poet,
Kolbiorn, the adventures of my youth till that terrible
time of captivity to Syades, and there I had stopped, be¬
cause I could not bear to recall it; but now that time and
its miseries were like a dream which fades apace in the
morning because you know it is a dream, AVill it be so
when we wake in the morning after death ? will all that
troubles us here become like a dimly remembered dream?
I think so, for already the pain is past, and already the
most real thing left of all the story is my longing to hear
again the kindly greeting of my for long unseen friends.
period had a personal pre-eminence impossible in the present day. All their
allies, save Gaimer, seem at times to have behaved treacherously towards
them, and they had to elect one of their best champions, Thorstein or Turstan,
to giiardStheir interests ; and to liim the Emperor Henry, on his ■withdrawal
from Italy, gave the command of the army and the province of Aversa.
Turstan, though loved by the Normans, was, the chronicle records, too noble
for the Italians, for they wearied of the just severity of his rule, and after
awhile persuaded him to go in search of a poisonous dragon, hoping that he would
perish in the attempt to kill it. The contemporary chronicle is responsible for
the story of this dragon, which is one of so many similar that, to quote Mr.
Kingsley, " tliey make it tolerably certain that a large snake (Python) still
lingered (in the early middle ages) in Hurope." Such are said to have devoured
not only herds and flocks, but husl)andmen and shepherds, and to have been
very poisonous. Proliably the last survivors were found, as indeed traditions
say, in pestiferous marshes, which increased the peril of attacking them.
Rainulf, the younger brother of Osborn, a courtier of Duke Richard the
Fearless of Normandy, succeeded Turstan, and for more than twenty years
ruled tlie province with great judgment and valour. He it was who first
persuaded the sons of Tancred de Hauteville to come to Italy, who in the
course of a few years rescued the land from the Saracens, and founded the
flourishing kingdom of the Two Sicilies."
The Dragon of the North. 35
K(jlbiorn and Thorstein and Hertha. So I resolved, while
I yet remembered it, to write down at once in brief the
end of my story; and I seated myself in my favonrite
window-seat in the Scriptorium, where the rose branches
trail inwards and drop their blossoms over the desk, and
the doves are so fond of cooing and parading. All is safe
and peaceful here. We fear no Saracens nor private foes
under the strong protection of William Bracciodiferro, the
brave son of Tancred de Hauteville. And an inner peace
has also stilled my former heart's fever into pleasant
memories. Only the plash of the fountain in the cloister
square breaks the noonday stillness ; and I look down on
the fair cloister arches on which I toiled so long, all
finished now, and far dearer to me than ever, since the
events I am about to relate gave them for me a double
consecration.
You, my brothers, only know in brief, that when
Syades the Saracen drew me away from Caserta, he took
nie to Asile, and kept me there a prisoner in the secret
vaults for three and a half years. You know that there I
Avas tended and watched in his absence by a woman,
Vivia, and her African slaves, In her youth she had
reigned over his heart; in her latter years, after Moslem
fashion, she was only his submissive tool and slave. But
never, save in confession, have I gone over the story
which yet I feel when you honour me, as ever, too highly,
ought to be told. My prison was no dreary dwelling
— a high chamber partly hewn out of the rock,
lighted only after the ancient Roman fashion by an open¬
ing to the sky far out of my reach. It Avas dry and Avarm,
and a passage from it on one side led to Vivia's cottage,
Avhich opened on the marshes, and on the other many stairs
and long narroAV passages in the rocks, guarded by iron
gates, led at length into the secret entrance into the hall
of Castle Asile, behind the carving of the high seat, Avhich
Syades had shown me when I ruled there as marquis.
Then I had many roll of manuscripts and also graving
tools, so that I acquired some learning, and had hcAA'^n in
bas-relief on my prison walls various scenes of my life.
Hertha was there, and the Dragon ship, and the Norman
Avarriors scouring the seas, besides saints and Our Lady
Avith the Holy Child; and carried by my dreams over
these fair forms far beyond my prison walls, I Avas some¬
times almost happy.
But it was not the outer but the inner prison in Avhich
36 2'he IjCidleti Edinhuryli Magazine.
my Avill was captive, and raged and beat in vain against
the iron will of Syades, that made my misery. As I threw
off the fever which attacked me at iirst in Asilo. I used to
see him, with his black eyes fixed on mine and his hands
waving before me, and the chains seemed faster bound
than ever. My body was like a corpse moved by his mind;
sometimes I knew nothing of where I was and what I did.
Sometimes my will struggled so fiercely with his power
that I would fall feinting on the ground; sometimes, when
perchance ho thought not of me and was away from Asile,
I had a little more liberty. For he was often away, espe¬
cially at Agrajjoli, where Saracens lived quite unmolested.
Often had Thorstein wished to storm the place and drive
them forth, but the Greeks, though groaning under
Saracen bondage, were too jealous of the Normans to let
him interfere in Apulia, and it was left for the sons of
Tancred to subdue that colony. Syades Avas wont to
promise me liberty and my possessions again, if only I
Avould help to lure Thorstein, whom he hated more and
more, to his death in the vaults below, and win back the
treasure; but J would consent to nothing, though he could
force me to do his will. No doiibt he thus kept and
tended me, because, like others, he believed that only a
christened man could find a buried treasure guarded by a
demon ; and also, if I recovered my possessions, he would
always have retained a xiseful power over me. He wished
me to swear not to reveal aught of my imprisonment,
but Avith his aid I Avas to make it appear some unknown
monks had detained me. I knoAv not if I coald have
spoken the truth, for there Avas a spell laid on my speech ;
and AA'hen I Avished to tell any one my fate, no Avords
Avould come. So it Avas in early days, Avhen Syades
brought me into the castle to aid in a plot against Thor¬
stein, I saAV both Kolbiorn and Damasus, but stroA^e to
speak or raise my coavI in vain. So it Avas a year later
Avhen, but for Damasus' coAvardice, I should have escaped.
They had given me graving tools, and by means of these,
toiling long and carefully, i had enlarged the holes of the
staples of the doors betAveen me and the hall of the castle,
so that one evening I issued forth and sought Astolfo.
Alas! as I stole along, like, as the chronicle says, a
phantom of the grave, J lighted on Damasus stumbling-
back from an evening carouse. He said nothing, but
stared Avith terror on his face, Avhile I ran toAvards him,
stretching out my hands, to shoAv they were flesh and
TJte Dragon of the North. 37
blood. But at my touch the coward fell lifeless on the
floor. All was too late; Vivia and her slaves had dis¬
covered my flight, and now stood by me in the passage;
they bore oft' Damasus, and I had as little power as he to
resist them. Next day came Syades, and laughed grimly;
but, as usual, he used only gentle persuasions with me,
telling me it was time to rescue him and myself by
destroying Thorstein. '■ Think not he wfll escape because
you will not move in the matter," he added. "Many
besides our own society have sworn the tyrant's death.
As for the monk here, he knows too much; he shall die,
or leave the land for ever."
How Damasus knelt at his feet and prayed only for
life, you, my brothers, can imagine; for some of you, too,
value life too highly. So listen to his fate. Syades made
him a present, alive indeed, to the master of a Saracen
galley. Some years afterwards, a Norman ship having
taken a Saracen war-galley, liberated near Caserta the
slaves that had toiled chained to her oars, exposed alike
to the burning sun by day and the chill winds at night;
driven by the Saracen whips to efforts that happily
shortened their lives, for death was all they had to hope
for. And among these slaves was Damasus, who found
his way back to our monastery, but died shortly after
from the effects of ill-treatment; not an evil monk, but a
very poor-hearted one.    JRequiescat in pace.
From that time, when I so nearly escaped, a more cruel
bond was devised by Syades. He secured thoroughly
against me the door into the hall, but left me free to go
thither when I would; and in the carvings a little slit
was contrived through which I could hear and see some¬
thing of what passed within ; and yet the spell was on
me so that I could make no sign and say no word. And
there I could watch Valeria playing with her little chil¬
dren, and see many a gay feast given by Astolfo—yes,
sometimes hear them idly wonder about Damasus' fate
and my own; but as the years went on, how little they
seemed to remember! Hertha and Rainulf sometimes
came, and they talked of newer things, as of the order
Thorstein had established, but how he was hated by the
baser people even as he was loved by the Normans. All
this I would see and hear with a passionate longhig to be
back in the living world, feeling at times as if I must
yield all to Syades and bo free.
Now the time had run on till three and a half years had
38 The TaJu's  J^dinbur(jh Ma<ia:tne.
passed since my captivity began. The July weather was
very hot, and I heard how sickness and pestilence v/ere
abroad over the land, and how the Dragon had appeared
again, and desolated the country round with his poisonous
breath. One day, as I sat carving in my cell, Syades
entered, and with his evil smile—-" Lorenzo," he said,
" the hour of your deliverance and mine draws on apace.
The people have sent to pray Thorstein to rid them of
this Dragon, and he comes to-day to Asile. All I need is
to get him alone, and with no help near, into the Roman
ruin, and you, who will be thought by him a troubled
spirit,—you shall appoint the time and guide him ; he will
certainly follow you. You need not think to refuse ; you
are now wholly mine; the right words will come to your
lips, and the right way to your feet, whether you will or
no. For me, I shall watch with others within the cavern;
should Thorstein hesitate, a touch Avill send him to the
death he loves so to give others. Then I shall go with
my treasure, and you may say or do what you like, for I
shall be far away before you can act." As usual I heard
all in silence, for I was powerless, and when the night had
come I felt myself compelled to leave my cell and wander
np to the hall. The door stood open, and my steps turned
with no will of my own through the hall and an ante¬
room Avhere many men were sleeping, to an inner chamber
Avhere Thoi'stein lay, with a squire at his feet. So had I
seen him last at Caserta, but he looked older and more
careworn and weary now, as he moved uneasily in the
hot night-air Avhich blew in from the moonlit Avindow;
then, as I came near him, starting from his sleep, he sat
up, and said, low and awe-struck, "Lorenzo, is it thou, or
what in thy likeness ? "
"I am Lorenzo," I was forced to say. "I cannot rest
till the treasure is found and the Dragon slain. Oh, give
me rest!"
"How?" he whispered; "whither shall I go? Only
show me the way—it ever eludes me; I will follow
wherever you lead."
" Meet me on the marshes to-morrow at midnight, and
alone."
I suppose my face as I lured him to death appalled him,
for he said, " One word more—are you happy ? are you
lost % " But I could not speak, though a pang of anguish
passed over me as the oath came back tome—"Swear
neither to pity nor spare him,"—and I went as I came,
77(1? Dragon of the North. 39
rousing no sleeper, able to give no help, but dragged
away from friends and kinsfolk back into the pit 1 had
made.
Next day, in my unhappy restlessness, I went towards
evening to the door into the hall.    There was a large
company at the long tables,  for Thorstein and his fol¬
lowers were there, and also Kolbiorn the Scald, who was
newly arrived at Salerno from Greece in the Dragon ship,
and had hastened to Asile to greet his leader.    He liad, I
could perceive, much to tell of I he Eastern seas and the
court of the Greek Emperor;  and when the tables were
drawn, and but few left in the hall, he and Thorstein sat
together on the high seat near me, and began a long talk
in their own speech, of which I understood a good deal.
They plainied to sail away north ere long, and Thorsteiu
told how my shade had appeared in a kind of dream, and
told  him how  to  find the Dragon,  and when  Kolbiorn
implored  to   be   allowed  to  go   with   him,—" Nay,"  he
answered,  " alone I must  go, and  can  mention neither
time nor place.    They say this Dragon never appears to
more than one man, and therefore it is that all have failed
to find it.    It may be all a plot to attack me at a disad¬
vantage, and take my life.    I have foes enough who are
false enough ; it may be that shadow was but my own
fetch, and the end for me is near;  but  I must risk it.
Come what may, I am glad to have told you all; and I
think also I shall kill that Dragon."
You, my brothers, have seen miracle-plays, where saints
and heroes and common men work together, as they hope,
for some good end, and all the while some evil spirit the
spectators^ only see is marring all. So I looked on the
people within, full of honour and kindliness, I who was
the instrument for destroying all that good, and taking
from our unhappy land the champion under whose rule it
was prospering as never before. 1 was to lure the brave-
hearted Norseman, who had forgiven me so much, and
ever helped and cheered me, into a treacherous snare;
and yet I could do nothing. Why. in my wild passion
for Hertha, had I given myself to the terrible Saracen, in
exchange for a gift which, hke all devils' gifts, had no
real good in it % Now, hating myself and my deeds, I had
yet to go on whither the road I had entered led, for in the
free choice of the past lies hidden and bound up tlie
necessity of the future. E. J. 0.
{To he continued.)
40 The Ladies' EcUnhitrgh Magazine.
(d\\ Wm Denoficial Jn|Iucn« nf an ^ri.'itofrarir.
From the very earliest times in the history of any European
nation we see traces of division and separation of the
classes who compose it one from the other, including a
pre-eminence of one over the rest, though the special
kind of pre-eminence may be different among this or that
people. 1 announce this as a fact (and facts, we know,
are stubborn tilings) ; and I say that this fact is, because
it springs out of our very nature that a supremacy of
some kind or other of some men over their fellows
is necessary and inevitable wherever society exists.
From this very necessity I think I may fairly argue that
the existence of an aristocracy is at least rneatit to be
beneficial to a people ; else we should be driven to the
gloomy conclusion that, as human society grows and
spreads, it must nourish witliin itself a poison-tree, which
must eventually destroy it.
AVe see this system in the germ, as I have said, in the
rudest times of European history, because there is, and
can be, no such thing as a dead level of absolute equality
—as a great writer has said, "Those who attempt to level
never equalise." AVlierever men join in associated life,
the elevation of some over others will inevitably appear.
Even if the associated act be only tlie temporary fellow¬
ship of two upon a horse, it will be obvious even to a
Dogberry that " one must ride beliind." The following
instinctively those promptings of Nature Avliich Burke
calls "wisdom without reflection and above it," has led
to the gradual upgroAvth, in European countries at least,
of an aristocracy; and in order to judge whether or not
tliis is advantageous to the community at large, we need
only look at tlie history of those countries which have
been most influenced by the existence of such a class, and
notably at our own, where the evils inseparable from
every human system have been counterbalanced and held
in check by other forces. The name has doubtless de¬
parted somewhat from the signification it originally bore—
Foiver of the best, considered as individuals and not as a
class; and it has always been used, in this country at
least, as designating an important social influence rather
than a ruling class. It Avould be interesting to trace the
working of this law of natural progress from its earliest
appearance, ordering the arrangements and entering into
0)1 the Beneficial Influence of an Aristocracy. 41
the lives of the fierce ancestors of modern Europe, through
accidental circumstances and contact with the older forms
of social and political life to the development of the aris¬
tocracy, as we are accustomed to think of it; but that is
not the point before us. I will only remark that the
landed aristocracy is described by Hallam as " the most
striking feature in the political system of Europe during
many centuries, and is, in fact, its great distinction from
the despotism of Asia and the equality of republican
governments;" and unless we are prepared to con¬
fess the history of our own and neighbouring countries
for nearly 2000 years to be a tale of shame and retrograde
movement, falling far short of the glory, greatness, and
success in the conquests of civilisation achieved by
Persian, Assyrian, and Egyptian monarchies, I think that
this system may claim to have been a helping and not a
hindering influence in the work of national progress. It is
in the wider, though less strictly correct, sense of the
word as applied by Enghsh usage, that I think of the
existence of the class, which, as I believe, is of great
importance to a nation's welfare; and perhaps the word
Gentleman names it more accurately than Aristocrat.
Call it as you will, aristocracy, or gentlehood, or nobility,
the thing itself is, as Burke says, " the graceful ornament
to the civil order, the Corinthian capital of polished
society." Like a telescope bringing what is distant
within our ken is the word Gentleman, derived through
the Norman and Latin tongues from gentilis, belonging
to a known clan or family, witnessing to the inherent and
natural necessity in human nature of a preference in favour
of those whose ancestry is conspicuous.
The good deeds, the famous deeds, the greatness, how¬
soever displayed, of some one whose qualities raised him
to be a leader among his fellows, lived on in the memory
of his countrymen, and especially of his descendants.
Surely it is a matter of importance in the development of
any nation that there should be a means, such as the
hereditary descent of rank, property, and esteem presents,
for the preservation of such footprints on the sands of
time; that such a help should exist to reverent remem¬
brance of the past, to noble emulation and imitation, to
unselfish living, not for a man's present interests only, but
for those that come after. It is easy to sneer, in times of
peace, and in the enjoyment of all that softens and em¬
bellishes life, at the pride of birth, which glories in descent
No. 14,—Febkuaet 1876. V
42 2]ie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
from some fierce warrior who could not write his name,
and whose sole distinction, in the opinion of radical lec¬
turers and soi-disant reformers, was that of being a bigger
robber than his fellows. Men must be weighed in the
balance of the age they lived in to be fairly judged, and
there have been times in the Avorld's history when a stout
arm or a warlike spirit has done no mean service to the
nation.
The vast and undeniable influence which the growth
of an aristocracy has exercised in the inspiration and pro¬
motion of such tendencies as 1 have mentioned, is plainly
to be seen in the history of all the leading European
nations, and is one of the most telling arguments in
favour of it. Ill indeed would they have fared without
that influence. As Burke says, " People will not look
forward to posterity who never look backward to their
ancestors." It has exercised a powerful check on more
than one dangerous or pernicious influence of a difi'erent
kind. " Quentin Durward is as good a gentleman as the
king, only, as the Spaniard says, not so rich." Is there
not in the sentiment of the stout Scottish archer and of
the Spanish liidalgo an admirable counterpoise at once to
the pride of wealth and the pride of power ? The over-
exaltation of the possession of wealth is about the most
vulgarising influence to which men can be exposed. The
supremacy of birth and rank, independent of mere wealth,
is the best check on a supremacy which is otherwise sure
to prevail in nations rich, like our own, in material re¬
sources, and rapid in developing them. Hal)am and a
host of other writers also bear witness to the happy
influence exerted in favour of national freedom and con¬
stitutional rights by the aristocratic class, against the
encroachments of powerful and otherwise irresponsible
rulers. Again, there is a refinement of thought, a polish
of manner, an intensification of noble and virtuous ideas,
transmitted from generation to generation of the well¬
born, which heighten insensibly the standard of the rest
of the community, and contribute to the difliision of a
patriotic spirit. " There ought to be," says Burke, " a
system of manners in every nation, which a well-informed
mind would be disposed to relish. To make us love our
country, our country ought to be lovely." The simulta¬
neous upgrowth Avith an aristocracy of the feudal system,
and the institution of chivalry in mediasval Europe, con¬
tributed largely to the development of such a spirit in
On the Beneficial Influence of an Aristocracy. 43
our country. Over its sudden extinction in a neighbour¬
ing land, what can be said equal to the same authors
matchless passage on the fall of the monarchy and aris¬
tocracy of France?' The existence of an aristocracy is
far from being the purely selfish advantage its traducers
would fain represent. "Its rights and distinctions," to
quote Burke again, " serve the true interests of other
classes as well." Mutual protection and service knitted,
in feudal times, ties between superiors and inferiors, which
drew forth and cultivated in the most rugged natures
feelings and deeds most honourable to humanity. Patience
and courage under disaster, lives and deaths which should
do no dishonour to the race, unselfish love, sometimes to
the unworthy for their fathers' sakes, unshaken fidelity
and service, "all for love and nothing for reward"—these
have been called out and nourished by the system I
write of; and the source from which so much that is good
has flowed can surely not be evil. Is human nature the
better or the worse for what fosters the spirit of loyalty"?
Let Shakespeare answer us:
" He that can endure
To follow with allegiance a fall'n lord
Does conquer him that doth his master conquer."
Noblesse oblige—and the saying is but the verbal recog¬
nition of the great truth, that to whom much is given of
him much is required. " The mark of rank in nature is
capacity of pain," and rank in human society brings with it
added cares, heavier responsibilities, a wider and more dif¬
ficult range of duty. It is when this fact is lost sight of that
decay attacks the system, which is but temporary and im¬
perfect, like the rest of the fasliion of this world. I am not
prepared to claim for it such a permanence as was implied
in the complacent assertion of one who said that his family
had always occupied a distinguished position in this world,
and he had no doubt that it would be Heaven's will that
it should continue to do so in the next. I am not quite
so thorough-going an aristocrat. Nor do I deny that a
corrupt aristocracy is a grave national evil, and that both
general and special instances of such corruption may be
too easily pointed out. Addison remarks truly that
" title and ancestry render a good man more illustrious,
Letter on the French Revolution, p. 148.
44 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
but an ill one more contemptible." Ignoble lives are
sometimes unhappily linked to historic names and gentle
blood, and it does occasionally happen that greatness is
thrust upon those who have done little to deserve it, and
their honours descend to a posterity as personally insig¬
nificant, with no other claim to distinction than is in¬
volved in being "the tenth transmitter of a foolish face."
These are the defects we must expect in a world of im¬
perfect and erring men. But even in such cases the future
is hopeful, for, to quote Burke once more, " Inheritance
leaves acquisition free, but secures ■what it acquires."
There is nothing to prevent the grandson of a " slight
Sir Robert, with his watery smile and educated whisker "
from reaping in his own career a full share of those
honours Avhich, as Shakespeare tells us,
" best thrive
When rather from our acts we them derive
Than our foregoers."
The same poet would bid him do so, and be himself
an example to his posterity of that
" ancestry (whose grace
Chalks successors their way.)"
I shall not dwell upon the aid which art and learning
have had in times past from the patronage of rank, nor
upon the restraining and civilising influence exercised in
ruder ages by the respect for inherited Right over the
mere brute force of Might. I will only remind my
democratic readers that the master spirit of the great
Revolution, Oliver Cromwell, avowed his hatred of that
" levelling principle " which tended to " the reducing of
all to one equality;" that in the day of his power he
put forth no hand against his country's aristocracy; that
he prided himself (I use the word in no bad sense) on his
own good descent, and saw in the existence of class
distinctions *' a good interest of the nation and a great
one." May our country never fail to hold in honour all
those who
" bear without abuse
The grand old name of gentleman."
Irene.
Chivalry. 45
dl h i u a I r n-
(A Lament.)
A MEDLEY-DREAM of castles grim
(Proud banners floating from the Keep),
Of yawning moats, of towers that frown
Above drear dungeons chill and deep.
A dream of holy pilgrim-bands,
Of outlaw-chiefs in Lincoln green,
Of melee-jousts, and doughty deeds
AVhose like the world has seldom seen ;
Of noble dames who come and go
Majestic, thro' their princely halls ;
Of Avislful damsels looking down,
Like pris'ners from the castle walls.
With clash of steel, with blast of horn.
Come knights and ladies riding by.
And sunbeams shine on brave array
Of azure, or of cramoisie.
On tented fields the heralds call
To valiant deeds and bold emprise,
And men lay lance in rest to win
A guerdon-glance from maiden eyes.
Sweet faces look from hood and coif;
The trumpet sounds,—gay pennons fly,—
The good swords flash !—Who would not love
The gallant days of Chivalry ?
The maidens then were always fair
(Or so at least old stories tell);
The knights were plentiful and brave,
Handsome, of course, and good as well.
And Honour sat enthroned a Queen
W^hom all men guarded jealously ;
And Love and Truth were saci:ed things
In those old days of Chivalry.
A glamour lay on life, and shed
Its charm on common household ways: . . . .
I think there is too much of Fact,
Too little Fancy, now-a-days.
46 The Ladies^ Edinhurgh Magazine.
I think men toil too much for gain,
Live too much lapped in silken ease ;—
I wonder whether knights of old
Were so perverse and hard to please !
I wonder whether ladies then
Frittered and loimged their time away,
Drawling in mediaeval slang,
Coquetting all the livelong day !
Did they shine down each other's gowns ?
Did they vote all things sober " slow" %
And pine for " change," and sulk and frown
Until their lords agreed to go ?
The most, I trow, led simple lives.
Homely, but useful on the whole ;
Broidered,—dispensed with gracious hand
To passing poor their daily dole ;—
Tended the sick,—cooked,—loved their lords.
Year in, year out—remained at home
('Tis only now-a-days that folks
Grow restless and prefer to roam).
Sweet saintly sisters sans reproche !
Sweethearts who loved so loyally I
Brave knights sans peur, of stainless shield,
The pride and flower of Chivalry !
Say ! does this later wiser world
Seek out and gain as fair a goal ?
Is life a nobler, better thing ?
Are men more true, more pure in soul I
Do we not lack the pure ideal
Of old romance and poesy ?
We lack, I -wis, a something yet
Of true and kindly courtesy.
We want the Chivalry of life
Once more to sun us in its rays.
And bring the medieeval charm
Back to our world of now-a-days.
Gratia.
Tlie Fourteen Deliverers. 47
Fkom the German of W. H. Kiehl; (Daheim of March 1, 1873.)
" KoNRAD Lenz, born in 1513, died about 1590, pupil of
Christopher Amberger. remarkable for the warm gold-tone
of his colours, painted histories and legends, and also
mythological subjects, on small-sized wooden tablets.
His pictures are very rare." These, or nearly these words,
are to be found in the catalogue of a gallery, the name
of which I cannot at this moment recollect.
This remarkable man used to say, " Painting would be
the finest of arts, if only the pictures did not require to
be ready." For he painted willingly and well, only he
would never paint except when he chose, and that often
happened only once a week, and still oftener not at all.
To have a bespoken picture ready at the stipulated time,
was quite an impossibility to him. If he had promised to
send it by the Christmas of this year, he would begin to
lay the ground-colour on the tablet at the next Whitsun¬
tide. Nor did he grieve in the least over this peculiarity,
which was evidently connected with the capricious
nature of the planet under which he was born, but said,
" I have learned to paint; others can learn to wait."
This light-hearted artist numbered four-and-twenty
years when he received his first large commission. He
was to represent the fourteen Deliverers on fourteen
small tablets, with illustrative scenes out of their legends
in the background; but the principal condition was, that
the whole must, without fail, be finished within the space
of twelve months; that is to say, on St. Leonhard's Day,
1538, when the artist was to receive the high and honour¬
able payment of a hundred gold guldens.
The giver of this commission, Knight Hans of Halten-
berg, had, some time before, fallen into the hands
of pirates of Tunis, on a journey from Genoa to Naples.
During   his  imprisonment   he   prayed  to   the  fourteen
' I have been unable to find any adequate English eqiiivalent of the
German " Nothhelfer," the title given to a certain group of saints whose
peculiar office seems to have been the rescue of the distressed, and have used
the term " Deliverers " as the best substitute I could think of.
48 Tlie Ladles Edinburgh Magazine.
Deliverers, and vowed to each of them, by St. Leon-
hard's Day, 1538, a beautiful picture in the chapel of his
castle, if he should be released from the dungeon within
two months. Soon after this he did indeed regain his
liberty, and made no delay, on his return to Germany, in
at once ordering tlie pictures, and sharpening the con¬
science of the painter to ensure their punctual delivery,
in order that he might keep his word with the saints.
Konrad Lenz had thrown himself into the work with
true enthusiasm. The three ladies of the helpful group.
Saints Katherine, Margaret, and Barbara, were painted
in hot haste, tablet by tablet, within a fortnight, and were
an admirable success. Then he set himself to St. Pantaleon,
St. Veit, and St. Eustace. By this time the work was
already beginning to lag; he speutthree weeks on each man,
and worked by fits and starts, now at one, now at another.
When the turn of St. Blaise came, he was again in
capital working train ; but so much the less speed was
made with Pope Gregory. For two full months he
dragged on with it. At last he set his teeth together;
•'It vmi^t be done!" he was heard from time to time
exclaiming in his studio. In desperation he seized brush
and palette, made the final onset, and certainly, in a
few days, the saint stood completed.
But the artist had also become nearly ill from sheer
self-control. He had still six pictures before him. Six
is, indeed, the smaller half of fourteen, but it seemed to
him an enormous nimiber, of which he dared not think
if he did not wisli to get brain-fever. So he carried the
finished pictures up to the loft, and the six empty tablets
with them, so that he might have no chance of seeing
them again, and went about for a week as idly as if there
had never been any Deliverers.
The knight, who from time to time rode over from his
castle into the little town to watch over the progress of
the painting, discovered wath horror this complete
cessation of work. When he stopped into the studio,
there sat Konrad Lenz at the dulcimer, playing dance
music. The easel was quite empty, and on the palette
the dust was lying so thickly that one could have written
on it with one's finger.
" When I am making music, I am really, in spirit,
painting my very best; as for the colouring, that will
come by-aud-by!" cried the painter, laughingly, and
was very much surprised that the old gentleman was
Tlie Fourteen Deliverers. 49
astonished and indignant. He begged him to listen to
some more springs and waltzes, which would be certain
to drive the wrinkles from his gloomy brow.
Another time, Konrad had wandered about the whole
day in the forest, a mile away from the town. Suddenly
he saw the lord of Haltenberg among the fir-trees, with his
dog at his side. He might have crept away unobserved, but
such a thing never occurred to him; he stepped in front
of the old man with the greatest simplicity, greeted him,
and said, " You are hunting for a stag, and I am hunting
for verses : they are SAvarraing in my head like bees, and
only need to be caught: since eiinrise I have been
wandering from coppice to coppice, and making the most
beautiful poems. One can make poetry nowhere better
than in the forest."
The knight asked if painting, too, got on best in the
forest. "rainting?" repeated Konrad, in surprise,—
" the painting comes afterwards quite of its own accord,
and then it gets on so much the better ! " But the lord
of Haltenberg was not appeased by this answer. He
seized the painter firmly by the arm, looked him piercingly
in the face with his little brown eyes as if he Avished to
see him through and through, and reproached him Avith
his IcAaty, by which he irritated not only him, but, what
was much Avorse, the saints themselves. " And do you
then think "—so he concluded—" that a painter also may
not some day stand in need of the fourteen Deliverers %
They will abandon you in need, even as you now abandon
me."
The painter at first looked at the old man Avith his
great blue eyes as innocently as a child, then his face
crimsoned; he bent his eyes downwards and cried, " You
are right. It is horrible ! what a chain of mischief I am
Avinding round us by my thoughtlessness I " And he
promised at once to resume the work zealously that very
day, and ran home Avith hasty steps, so as to make sure
of being at his easel the last half-hour before sunset.
n.
It was a pleasure to see how Konrad Lenz now set
himself to his painting again; his brush flcAv untiringly
over the picture, from morning to night, Avithout rest.
In a few days St. Nicholas was ready, all but the varnish,
No. 14.—Febeuaet 1876. G
50 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
St. Erasmus partly painted, St. Egidius finely designed,
and St. George with his Dragon roughly sketched.
A lovely summer morning laughed in at the window,
and the sun beamed golden on the opposite roofs,
although it did not shine into the studio itself, for it had
naturally a northern aspect. The painter, half singing,
half whistling, was putting the deepest red—natural
cinnabar—on the mantle of St. Erasmus. He was rejoicing
like a child over his happy and quick success. He was
almost sorry that there were only fourteen, and not
twenty-eight Deliverers, for he could have had all the
eight-and-twenty ready by St. Leonhard's Day.
Uplifted by this glorious idea, he glanced for a moment
at the street. There stood a matron, accompanied by a
young lady, evidently people of rank. They spoke and
pointed with lively gestures ; they were apparently in
search of a street or a house, and doubted Avhicli road
they should take. They were strangers, for Konrad did
not know them, and he knew all the ladies in the town.
He laid down his palette and looked out and listened.
How beautiful the girl was ! certainly most simply dressed,
bvit how noble, how distinguished in every motion! And
now the painter hears quite distinctly that the ladies are
seeking the way to St. Katharine's Convent. The street
is quite empty, no one to be seen, far or wide, who can
give information; therefore no course remained for him,
as a well-bred young man, but to hasten out and offer
himself politely as guide. The ladies followed him. He
said to the old lady everything that one is accustomed to
say when one is conducting strangers, but he himself
hardly knew what he was saying, for he was continually
glancing back over his shoulder towards the young lady,
who modestly kept a step behind. She was even more
beautiful near at hand than she was at a distance,
and the few words which she sometimes very shyly let
fall sounded like heavenly music. Youthfully fresh in her
beauty, she seemed in her liumble manners, on the other
hand, to be quite of the old school.
The convent was, alas I too soon reached. The ladies
thanked their giiide; the gate opened ; then the young
lady threw to the painter another parting salutation, with
a smiling glance, so roguish, droll, familiar—was that also
of the old school ?
Konrad Lenz stood before the door like one awakened
out of a di-eam.    The old lady had in truth thanked him
Tlie Fourteen Deliverers. 51
very condescendingly ; and now, in addition, this indescrib¬
able parting glance of the lovely little one I    He examined
himself from head to foot.   And now he discovered, for the
first time, that he had run out of his studio in slippers and
without a cap, with an apron fastened on in front, and
bedaubed with a whole rainbow of oil-colours ; he looked
more like a varnisher than a painter.    Slowly and sullenly
the poor youth slunk home.    He  enquired  everywhere
Avho the ladies were, but no one knew them.     After all,
had the beautiful maiden been really brought to the con¬
vent to become a nun ?     Surely not!     No one goes into
a convent for ever with, such a look  as  she had cast  at
him.    The image of the  girl left  the painter no  rest;
during the whole day he saw her standing before him, and
heard her sweet voice.    How then could he finish painting
Erasmus ?   If there had only been a St. Erasma, he would
have given her the face of the incomparable maiden, and
would thus have painted his dream out of his soul.     But,
alas! among the fourteen Deliverers there are only three
women to eleven men, and these had been ready first.
Konrad fetched the three paintings again.    How cold and
dull these female figures now seemed to him! not one
bore even a distant resemblance to the unknown.    But
the first of the three was at least called Katharine, and
the girl, whose name he did not know, had disappeared
into St. Katharine's Convent.     And therefore St. Katha¬
rine should at least get her features.    He scraped the
tablet clean, and began to paint it over anew.    But still
his brush did not attain, even distantly, to the ideal of his
soul.     For five days he put colour on colour, the layers
became always softer and thicker, but St. Katharine only
got the more unlike the unknown.     So he poured spirits
a second time over the tablet, and rubbed it again with
pumice.    Only the feet of the saint and half of her wheel
of martyrdom were visible when the lord of Haltenberg
stepped in to see what progress had been made in the
meantime.    He certainly found St. Nicholas ready for the
varnish, but. on the other hand, St. Katharine was quite
dissolved   again  in   spirits.      W\i\\  touching  frankness
Konrad confessed to   the  enraged   knight that he had
fallen in love, and lost every trace of his unknown be¬
loved, all in the course of a quarter of an hour.    Now he
was consoling himself in his distress by trying at least to
retain the lost lady as a Deliverer.    A stone could not
but feel compassion for him.    But the old man remained
52 The Ladies' EJinhurgh Magazine.
harder than a stone ; certainly he himself had never fallen
in love in a quarter of an hour. He scolded without inter¬
mission, but the painter laughed in his face, and without
a farewell, noisily left the room. But after three days
came the answer. The seneschal of Castle Haltenberg
appeared wdth the express command of his master to
carry away St. Nicholas, with or without varnish, together
with all the other tablets that were ready. But if, by
chance, St. Nicholas should be effaced again, or St. Katha¬
rine not yet repainted, the servant was instructed to sit
by the painter, without moving from his side, until both
should be ready. For the all-too-lively artist must be
protected from distractions.
Proceedings were always carried on, as will be seen,
between the knight and the painter in quite an honour¬
able and open manner; each said to the other what he
thought, without any reserve. And yet there was a
subtle difference between them. The one was open, like
an old hero, because duty and conscience commanded him ;
the other like a young painter, because it made fun for him,
and also because he had not yet learned properly how to
deceive.
The painter found the knight's method of compel¬
ling him to paint, by quartering his servant on him,
equally new and rough. If the knight had been at hand,
he would have paid him back for it in abusive language.
But he dared not make the seneschal suffer for it, for he
was only doing his duty; and he was, besides, an exceed¬
ingly strong felloAV, whom one could not tru'n out of doors
Avithout abiding the consequences. So he offered him a
chair, and placed a pitcher of wine and a large piece of
cold roast beef before him, for the man had already ridden
thirteen miles that day, and had not yet breakfasted.
The appetite with which he silently fell to work on the
roast meat Avas a sight to see. Konrad made as though
he were filling in the ground for St. Katharine, in order to
inspect his uninvited guest the more closely. Suddenly
an idea flashed througii his head. Would it not be more
sensible to paint this noble, tangible piece of nature which
was sitting there before him, than to chase the air}^ phantom
of a woman's image, which, after all, he could never seize
Avith his brush ? No sooner said than done ! Quite of
their own accord, as it were, the weather-beaten features
of the old seneschal shaped themselves on the spoilt
tablet.    And as soon as tlie outhne stood clearly marked,
The Fourteen Deliverers.' 53
he mixed an entirely new palette, and began to paint
again from the very foundation. He commanded the
seneschal to sit quite still, which he did with comical self-
restraint, believing that to be part of his commission.
But, on the other hand, not a word was to be got out of
him; his master had strictly enjoined him not to disturb
the artist by conversation. Lenz wrought his new model
on the tablet most faithfully to nature, except that he
lengthened his ears to somewhat asinine proportions,
made a pair of little horns shoot from the midst of the
woolly hair, changed the tight leather hose into goat's
feet, and stuck on sideways, behind, the dearest little tail.
And thus by vespers he had a breakfasting satyr ready,
and was happy in the consciousness of having again at
last finished a picture out of hand. He was not at all
dismayed when, at the very moment of his laying aside
the brush, the knight tapped him on the shoulder. He
had not heard him coming from sheer joy at his own
creation.
" You have made your appearance at exactly the right
time !" cried he, showing him the new picture, and assur¬
ing him that it was one of the best he had ever painted.
Surely, now, the knight must confess that he could both
sketch and complete quickly when necessary.
But this strange man had no appreciation of this
masterpiece; he thundered, and stormed, and called the
painter a fool, who had already lost another day, and
now, after all, had painted a forest demon instead of St.
Katharine.
Lenz could not help laughing till the tears stood in his
eyes, and he looked and laughed so heartily in the
knight's face that he also was compelled to join in the
laugh, although he compressed his lips with all his might.
This only increased the artist's inclination to laugh to
such a degree that he even infected the seneschal, who
greeted his portrait with a burst of such neighing as might
have proceeded from a veritable satyr who had just run
out of one of Theocritus' Idylls.
" You are quite right to scold !" cried Konrad, when he
had at last regained his breath; " it is really a shame
that I should allow myself to be led away so easily ! But
then, why did you set such an irresistible fellow before my
easel I"
The knight was now of opinion that there was only
one other means of getting the Deliverers ready in time ;
54 The Ladies Edinhurgli Magazine,
the painter must come up, with all the tools of his craft,
to his castle, in which there were some remote chambers
where notiiing would disturb him; there he would be
able to finish the pictures in deep silence and solitude.
The painter met the proposal with alacrity, and hoped
for the speediest success. His only fear was that he
should become a burden to his patron. But the latter
reassured him on this point; he had already for some
time cherished the plan, and had prepared everything
for it. Indeed, the seneschal had providently brought a
pack-horse with him besides his own beast, and had left
it at the inn ; and on this animal was now packed the
easel, with the painting apparatus and the tablets ready
and empty.
Thus the three set out the same evening, Konrad also
on horseback, armed with a maulstick instead of a spear.
But the old seneschal rode behind, as squire, leading on
the right hand as dextrarius the pack-horse, carrying,
instead of shield and armour, the easel and the pictures.
Konrad found the knightly procession so charming
that he had a great desire to sketch it, at least with a
few strokes, beiore it broke up; but the kniglit pressed
on, for there was still a sharp ride before them if they
were to reach the castle ere dead of night.
M. E. Neil.
(To be continued.)
My gentle, silent, sympathising friends! I love them
so, and can do so little for them ; nothing, except give
them my feeble meed of praise, and try to excite in others
the admiration and esteem I feel for them myself. Many
of them are unappreciated, and are humbly content to be
so, and yet did those to whom we are indebted for them
know the use and comfort they have been to hundreds,
they would gladly accept the praise which, perhaps, is
only withheld from iuconsideration. They are such a
goodly company, old and young, rich and poor, mortal
and immortal, suiting all ages and all moods, willing to
learn and apt to teach, quelling doubts, answering ques¬
tions, soothing sorrows, comfoi-ting the dying, keeping in
Sileitt Friends. 55
memory the dead. Such a treasure of culture may be
under the plainest exterior, that, as in many other
occasions in Hfe, it will not do to judge by outward
appearance.
'J'here are of them clad in purple and gold in king's
palaces, but there are of the same degree whom I have
seen soiled with the c(jrdial grasp of men whose faces
were begrimed with the sweat of their brow, but who
thought a few moments' interchange of thought, as even¬
ing fell, with one of my friends, was well bought by a
hard day's toil. Some little hopeful sentence spoken, or
poetic thought uttered, answering to the throb in a
listener's breast, has cheered the soul of many a sore-
wrought labourer, and lightened the burden of many an
anxious heart.
Other friends may fail and disappoint you, checking
your outflow of warmer feelings, and chilling your young
enthusiasm with the fungus-growth of worldly selfish¬
ness. These will never fail you. In adversity, as in pros¬
perity, they are ready to satisfy your cravings for know¬
ledge or sympathy, with a fulness born of an experience
of joy or suffering deeper and wider than yours. If you
are bound to them once by ties of aflection, your love of
them and understanding of them will grow with your
growth, and expand with the larger, broader expansion
of your nature, entering as they only can into the sacred
feelings of the heart, with which a stranger dare not
intermeddle ; till, when you arrive at the more than three¬
score years and ten, and the rapid rush of this terribly
earnest nineteenth century is pushing you aside, a worn-
out machine, on life's busy highway, you may, when
scarcely any longer able to hear the beloved voices, be
haunted by the pleasant memory of many a golden word
you gathered from their lips in sunnier hours.
Am I gay ? There are of them ever ready to laugh and
dance with me, to exchange the " merry quip and crank,"
to extract brightness from the commonest things in life;
to enter heart and soul into the youngest schoolboy's
wildest prank, or the more sober recreation of the Avearied
statesman's rarer holiday. Do they wound me, smiting
my inmost faults with the sharp blows of stinging satire ?
it is with the intent to heal; and such wounds are better
than the kisses of an enemy. I bear without resent from
them keen bitter truths I might not take in silence from
my dearest living friend, for they have no eyes to see my
5(5 llie I„adles' Edinburgh Miujazbie.
burning cheeks, nor outward voice to rebuke with harsh¬
ness my tardy repentance.
Am I sad in spirit ? They come to me with a dumb in¬
stinctive sympathy which is inexpressibly soothing, with
the gentle touch of an experience wider and sadder than
mine, and conscious of the blessing I shall yet win from
my grief. Not roughly, as some living yet kindly friend
might do, nor yet with ostentatious aid, but silently, like
a whisper in the air.
0 my friends, my friends! what have I not owed to
you, in dark days and bright, of the pleasures of antici¬
pation, possession, and memory! Musing thus, it pleases
me to call to mind some occasions when these friends have
stood me in good stead.
1 am tired of work; cares, anxieties have pressed upon
me till mind and body are alike exhausted; the outside
world of nature is proclaiming a glad holiday, and I leave
stone walls and beaten paths for a forest road and the
attractions of solitude. But I will not go alone with my
own thoughts; out of the ready willing company of
" silent friends " I select one or two congenial companions
of my wanderings.
Out into the lambent air I go. Above me white, curdy
clouds curl like waves on a wide plain of blue; arcmnd
me happy creatures flash and flit, making the silence
musical; beneath me, at my feet, shafts of quivering light
come and go on the green grass ; the hills take a deeper
shadow in the distance ; the flowers sway and bend their
proud heads as they gambol with the breeze. Nature is
in one of her most exquisite moods ; this ''beauty exceed¬
ing " almost weighs me down to sadness; everything
seems in harmony, I alone am senseless and dumb. I
would fain express my gratitude to the mighty Maker of
that eternal beauty by singing aloud its praise ; but this
same Nature has not endowed me Avitli the facul y of
song.
I bethink me of my companions. I throw myself be¬
neath the shade of a chesnut-tree, whose broad leaves fan
my cheek. I beckon to one. In a moment he is en rapport
with my spirit. Before he has spoken long, my imperfect,
half-developed thought stands forth a lovely being clad in
shining raiment; some subtle instinct in him has grasped
my crude yet yearning fancy, and clothed it in a fairy dress.
My eyes are opened to a thousand beauties of whose
existence I had not dreamt before.    His hand wanders on
Silent Friends. 57
my heart-strings, di'awing forth sounds like Mendelssohn's
dreamiest melodies; he has deepened my admiration, my
understanding, my thanksgiving; he has fathomed my
longings in a way no human friend could do. I am one
with him, and he with me, in a mystical communion of
spirits. This day will be a red-letter day in my memory
for ever.
Or I am a prisoner in the house. I have tried every
occupation, every amusement, till they have wearied me.
I go to the window—there nothing meets my eye but a
close, clinging slurmd of grey mist folding the trees in a
death-like embrace ; the dreary sound of ceaseless rain
plashing on the sodden grass; the dull, monotonous,
discontented moan of the surf I cannot see; the distant
roar of swollen, turbid streams from the hidden mountains ;
the slowly-rising vapour of rank vegetation; the crushed
and bruised firlornness of the dying flowers; the de¬
pressing, deadly aspect of everything outside ! There is
none of the fierce beauty of an autumn tempest, when the
red leaves swirl in the air, and vast rifts in the clouds
overhead disclose islands of deepest blue; when rags of
mist are caught and lie on the dark pine-woods; when
" there droops upon the dreary hills a mournful fringe of
rain." Then I might go outside, and the buffeting of the
wild winds would drown my laughter and bring a fresh
glow to my cheek ; but this dreary, dreary expanse of mist
and rain, how to escape from sight and sound of it back
to remote ages—anywhere !
Suddenly some instinct prompts me to go to a quiet
room ; no glaring colouring of modern chintz disfigures
it; a low-toned richly-mellowed glow of comfort and
antiquity pervades the chamber. 1 forget the desolation
outside as I remember many counsels and advices given
and taken, many hours of fun and frolic, wit and wisdom
engaged in here with friends, some of whom will spend an
hour with me still whenever I wish. I call one, and seat
myself beside him with my back to that dreary prospect
outside. In a few moments I am unconscious of the
sound of rain, or any depressing influence whatever. My
particular friend of to-day has seen so much, has travelled
so far, has such a marvellous gift of transmitting his own
experience and appreciation to another, that though he is
old now, he has lost none of the fire of his youth, and I
love and venerate him deeply. Now, I am proceeding
along with him down a wide and stately stair in the train
No. 14.—FEERUAnv 1876. H
58 The Ladies JuIhibinriJi Magazine.
of kingly men and noble women. I see gentle lips made
brave to utter words which will send their dear ones on a
mission from Avliich they will never return. I see proud,
manly eyes dim with a sudden mist of tears, and all for
honour's sake. Now, I am in other lands by the lone
mere or the wide prairie, the weird wail of pine forests in
my ears; wild tribes dash past me in the primitive i)anoply
of barbaric royalty; magnificent animals in the pride of
imtamable power sweep over the plain. Or I am with a
handful of castaways on the wide and cruel sea ; the roar
of gigantic waves is on my ear, and death in its most'
appalling aspect is before my eyes. I am lifted out of
myself, all past feeling and outward influence is merged
in the one intense delight of listening to my friend.
Or I am sitting h-nely and desolate amidst the ashes
of my dead hopes. They have carried my dearest from
my sight; I am worn from much weeping, and Avearied by
the ceaseless, well-meaning, ill-timed attempts of friend
and acquaintance to comfort and console me. My brain
is hot and my eyelids heavy with unshed tears ; my heart
is rebellious, and rises up against my crushing woe with a
bitterness well-nigh unbearable. Where and to whom can
I go? "Ofor the wings of a dove, that I might flee away
and be at rest! " Away anywhere from the common¬
places, and the preachments, and the decorous low-voiced
monotony of a time of grief. I go to my own room ; it
is sacred to myself and the dead, and the clinging
memories which are still too recent to be as dear as they
will yet be(;ome. 1 sit down despairing with a dumb
anguished cry which can find no voice. Suddenly, like
an inspiration, I mind me of one of my quiet friends, the
oldest and best of all. 1 have often neglected him in the
heyday of my prosperity and joy. I have ofteuer listened
to his counsels and followed my own; but in spite of all
this I know him to be true and tender, and I hastily sum¬
mon him to me. With a inarvellous and matchless fitness,
in a low, tender, minor tone according well with the out¬
ward and iuAvard gloom, he tells me a storj"—a simple
story—which wins me out of myself, out of the selfish
enjoj/ment of my own sorrow; and the while sympathising
as no other can with my wounded heart, he calls out 7ny
sympathy for a sorrow dead and gone long ago.
He does not check my tears, nor tell me to restrain my
grief; he does not speak to me of resignation, well know¬
ing I cannot yet awhile understand the word; btit as he
Silent Friends. 59
speaks, a healing balsam pours itself into my wounds, and
I am at peace. I am no longer in my lonely chamber,
the intense glow, deepening into the shimmering haze on
purple hills of an Eastern sky, is before me, the silvery
green of olive groves softens the outline of the rugged
rocks which enclose a valley where lies a little village.
As I near it, the rise and fall of Oriental lamentation
for the dead breaks upon my ears; I stand, where two
sisters, different as night from day, but now alike in the
unity of one common grief, lament with bitter wailing
the loss of their brotlier, their bread-winner, the head .of
their once happy household.
I am weeping now, not for my own loss, but for theirs :
I am comforted too, not by any earthly friends, but
because the same tears which mingled with Martha's and
Mary's were shed for me as Avell. This is what my
gentle friend has told me in the twilight.
But once more. Circumstances have placed me in a
remote part of a wide and thinly populated continent.
Human companionship is denied me, except at rare and
most welcome intervals. Hard manual labour, to till my
ground and make myself a habitation, distracts me for a
time; but looking at dark days in the past and for better
days in the future gets wearisome at last. What should
I do but for two or three of those " silent ones" who
have accompanied me across the seas ? So often have I
heard them that I know every word they are going to
say, yet now they fall on my ear with an accent like a
voice of home! and the scent which lingers on their
garments has a whiff of the sweetbriar and wallflower
of the garden of my childhood. They have an honoured
place in my wretched hut; I patch and mend their
tattered clothes, while my own go threadbare. Do
wanderers come to my home and break the monotony
of uncounted weeks ? I introduce them to my dumb
companions, so that they may share in my delight. And
when brighter days come, and 1 have again a place in my
own country, and gather other of the silent brotherhood
around me, younger, more brilliant, and cleverer than
these, their old and worn faces shall still have the first
place in my affections, so sanctified are they by use and
memory.
But my friends, as a company, alas ! are not all perfect.
I would most willingly pass over their faults in these
pages,   which I meant to be  full  of their praise; but I
60 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
must raise my voice, though my pen involuntarily lingers,
against the spread of erroneous thought. Some there are
who come in the guise of friends, wear the same livery,
and speak the same language. They insinuate themselves
with gentle voice into the homes of the young and
innocent, they portray Vice in so fair a guise, that but for
the paint on her face and the flimsiness of her attire she
might be taken for her sister Vntue; they trouble the
still Avaters of a tender conscience; they meddle Avith
mysteries AA^sely hid, like " fools, rush in where angels
fear to tread;" they inflame the senses till they have
prepared the unconscious heart to welcome the more open
forms of sin ; they scoff" at religion, while they pretend to
worship Nature; they poison the atmosphere, not for time
but for eternity, for they are—immortal!
Fascinating as many of them are, I would liaA^e all, on
the appearance of their real sentiments, to throAV off" com¬
munication and friendship Avith them, for they debase
their God-given genius, and degrade the guild to which
they belong.
No need to touch them; thank God, amongst the myriads
of the widely-scattered, many-voiced brotherhood, these
are the minority : let us hope, as years pass and education
and culture make rapid strides, they Avill groAv less and
less, till at last they are SAvalloAved up by their more
worthy brethren. You aa'Iio have given any of these
dumb messengers life, and sent them out to spread their
influence far and Avide beyond recal, remember that a
great responsibility lies upon you,—that those beloved
children of your intellect, whose use or sweetness you
will to share with others, shall never be a Avitness against
purity or truth. Martyn Hay.
I U t I a b g.
The sun hath long gone to his home 'neath the sea,
The stars in the lieaA'en are all waking and bright.
The little birds warble no longer to thee,
So hush thee, my darling: good-night, love, good-night I
The golden head droops, and the weary hands rest.
And slow the soft lids veil the sAveet blue eyes' light.
Then nestle the doAvny cheek close to my breast,
Aud hush thee, my darling: good-night, love, good-night I
On the Objects pursued in Education. 61
Wilt thou dream of the home that was thine ere thy
birth ?
Will its angel-throng crowd on thy wondering sight?
Will they whisper thy name ere thou cam'st to this
earth?
Nay—hush thee, my darling: good-night, love, good¬
night.
The morn will come back, oh my sweet, for your sake;
The sun will stoop down from his far blazing height
To peep at my baby, and bid him awake,—
So hush thee, my darling: good-night, love, good-night!
Melensa.
^n llu Objects ^urLSued in (Education.
When in the humdrum life of the busy town we have
been rubbing off our corners of originality against those
of our neighbours, and merging our character in that of
the crowd, it is good to retire with a few choice spirits
into some quiet nook, where Ave may cease awhile from
the turmoil of life, and drink inspiration from the serene
faces of our associates. Here we may revive the heart of
youth, and compare opinions on the affairs of mind and
market, poetry and politics; review at will the literature
of the day, noting what to choose and what to condemn;
and here we may trace some subtle thread of quaint
philosophy back to its beginning, and receive some mes¬
sage left by the wise men of old.
Being told expressly by one of those wise men that
" the proper study of mankind is man," we propose to
make a few remarks on the manner in which man is to be
educated. Is he to be educated with a view to develop¬
ing his whole nature, or simply with a view to usefulness
in some particular walk of life ? Or if educated in one of
these ways, can that one include the other? Education
for a profession narrows and intensifies the range of study.
By rendering a certain degree of proficiency requisite, it
induces a very ardent pursuit of the end in view, and
banishes that slovenliness which is apt to attend studies
entered on with no intention but that of generally
developing the mind. Education, on the other hand,
when undertaken for the last-named purpose, is more
various in its branches, and when perfected will render
62 The LdJU's' Jullnhioyh MiKjazine.
the man a being great and wise in many ways; but
by reason of its very extent it must be slower in
growth, and its results hardly attainable in any degree
of perfection by the efforts put forth during our short
lifetime. The first mode of education fits a man for
action; the second, for existence. Living in the world as
a being and an acting power, for being and for action he
must be prepared. Both processes must be there in kind;
the question is as to the proportion allotted to each. In
the case of a man of independent fortune, education is
likely to take a more general turn; his natural bent will
be considered and followed independently of pecuniary
considerations. But in this world of action, of change,
and contingency, no process by which a man is fitted
for a special sphere of action is thrown away, and the
more thorough training which this process requires must
react beneficially upon the Avhole being. One who, on the
other hand, must earn his bread and go through a routine
of similar duties from day to day, is in danger of becom¬
ing too much engrossed by the duties of his profession ;—
the higher realms of fancy and the subtler trains of
thought, the imiiges of beauty and the wisdom of learned
tomes, are apt to pass him by as an idle dream which he
regards not. How necessary is it, then, that imagination,
memory, reason, should be well accustomed to their
highest walks, ere the tyrant action has entirely usurped
the field I Those, on the other hand, whom no peculiar
duty fetters to a daily task, but who are at liberty to
rove at their sweet will through the domains of poetry,
philosophy, history, and art—are they in no danger of
wearing dim the fine eye of appreciation, or of fainting
when midway upon the aimless course they have under¬
taken ? How grateful to them at such moments would be
the possession of some art by which life is fostered and
society is benefited—the feeling that duties to the world
are incumbent upon them, and must be discharged ! Such
a feeling would surely make life strike its roots more
firmly into the soil, give reality to its passing events, and
intensity to its occasional pleasures. Instances are not
rare of the wealthy and exalted in rank inuring them¬
selves to the hardships of a workman's life, and this solely
with a view to overcoming obstacles, obtaining know¬
ledge, and thus increasing their influence over men.
Every one will revert in thought to some instance of this
kind, and one which stands out prominently on the page
of liistory is that of Peter the Great.    First, as a common
On the Objects pursued in Education. 63
soldier, he earned and lived upon his pay, and then as a
carpenter mastered  the  art  of shipbuilding,   which  he
afterwards  practised  with  success.      Such a  course   of
action, far from  lessening  him  in the esteem  of other
rulers, paved the way to interchange of civilities between
them, and by the powers of labour and endurance which
it fostered in the Czar, greatly increased his right to be
called The Great.    It were well, we have often thought,
were this example more generally followed, not only by
the higher, but by the middle ranks.    With the trades
and professions a similar course, we know, is in part pur¬
sued.   The humble positions of clerk, assistant, apprentice,
woi'kman, must be tilled for years ere the name of lawyer,
minister, merchant, or manufacturer can be merited.    The
rank of an  officer rises gradually, and the hope of pro¬
motion in all these cases is far from weakening the efforts
made at excellence.    To superintend well, it is requisite
to understand the labom- which we superintend;  and in
this assertion we refer not only to men of business, but to
those at the head of establishments, domestic or otherwise.
From what we have said, it would  seem that some
individuals  require to be warned   against  a  narrowing
system of education; others against too many aims, and
too little done towards each.    Does it not appear fitting
that when the man of business returns to his home in the
evening, worn and exhausted, there should be there one
ready to meet him half-way in the effort to throw off the
burden of the day, and in higher and  fairer realms of
thought to live
" A life that all the Muses deck
With gifts of grace that might express
All-comprehensive tenderness,
All-subtilising intellect."
Should not this being be one whose aspirations, various
yet harmonising, would remind him that life is not a
drudgery or a task, but an " eternal process moving on,"
where " from state to state the spirit walks" ? Should
such an one have much to do with the duties of a profes¬
sion ? should she, too, be coming in at the same hour as
the man of business, equally heavy-laden with care and
weariness, ignorant of the state of her household ? and
should they discuss together the probably tough beef, and
the still tougher topics of the day, unsoothed by aught
that is harmonious, innocently childlike, or softly beau¬
tiful ? But let us close the door on this topic also, before
it looms before us in all its many-sided aspects.
64 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
We have looked at education for a profession, and at
general education, but have said nothing of cases in which
a decided natural bent is to be followed. Where a par¬
ticular bias of mind exists in such a degree as to consti¬
tute genius, it frequently exhibits itself early, and with
uncontrollable energy and independence begins the work
of self-development. In such cases no question can arise
as to the direction which education should take; natural
inclination removes all doubt, and points and paves the
way to the career in life. The avidity with which know¬
ledge is imbibed reacts upon the whole being, and by such
intensity of purpose both objects of education are gained.
It is well when, during the unfolding period of the youthful
genius, some appreciative guiding spirit is there to direct
and control the efforts of ambition. Such a guide the
great novellist IMiss Edgeworth possessed, we are told,
in her father. "He gave her the most bracing kind of
education, moral and intellectual; the groundwork being
scrupulous accuracy of statement, patient observation,
frankness, self-knowledge, and self-respect."
And in conclusion, it is well, when we strive either to
confine and heighten, or to extend and enlarge, our aims ;
that we do it with an eye not only to the present, but to
all future existence, so that when this the first stage of
our being is over, we may be prepared for those honours
which the poet tells us awaited one of high and earnest
spirit when arrived at the goal of human life:—
" The great Intelligences fair
That range above our mortal state,
In circle round the blessed gate,
Received and gave him welcome there;
And led him through the blissful climes,
And showed him in the fountain fresh
All knowledge that the sons of flesh
Shall gather in the cycled times."
Jane Mexzies.
A Prize is offered for the best Article on any subject of Moral or Mental
Philosophy appearing in the Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine till December 1876
inclusive.
The Subject of Debate for the next Meeting of the Ladies' Edinburgh
Literary Society, February 5th, is :—" If a woman wishes to repair Defects of
early Education, is it better for her first to prepare herself for the Local
Examination, than to pass on at once to the higher branches of Study, such
as Mathematics, Philosophy, &c. ? "
The Subject of Debate for the following Meeting, on March 4th, is :—" Has
Belief in Witchcraft, Sorcery, Apparitions, and Spiritualism, any foundation
in truth?"
Those interested in these Debates are referred to the List published in this
Magazine for January.
65
®h« gragoit  of the  l^oiilh.
CHAPTER   X V.— ( Conclusion.)
" Long since we pace this shadowed nave ;
We watch those yellow tapers shine,
Emblems of hope over the grave,
In the high altar's depth divine ;
Fenced early in this cloistral round
Of reverie, of shade, of prayer.
How should we grow in other ground ?
How should we flower in foreign air ?
Pass, banters, pass, and bugles cease !
And leave our desert to its peace."        —M.  Arnold.
Evening darkened, and my enslaved will bore me
back to my cell, thence out through Vivia's house to
the waste of shallows and sedges that filled the gloomy
rocky valley where was the entrance to the Roman ruin.
A low red morm hung over the marsh-lands, but a heavy
and increasing fog was already making the way difficult
to find. I wandered on till I reached the place where the
water that once ran into the cistern had been choked up,
and had settled into a stagnant lakelet; and here I saw a
new channel had been dug to the cleft in the rocks where
the water had once poured in, so that but little cutting
was needed to allow it to flow once more to its old outlet.
As I stood there, Syades came up, and three or four of his
black slaves, fully armed. " Mutes like yourself, only for
ever," he laughed as he passed. " They will make all
safe in the vault, so that there shall be no doubt about
Thorstein's descent to the Dragon's bed, as the Norsemen
call the grave of buried treasure. Tlien, as you see, the
stream is ready to come and hide it all up, and flow
healthily over evil memories. Bring him to the entrance,
and point the way, and to-morrow you shall be a free
man." And he and his men disappeared in the narrow
mouth of the cavern. So they were to lie in wait for
Thorstein, and fall on him in the darkness, and hvirl him
down to perish in that foul air where our torches expired.
I stood there long helpless, as if turned to stone.
It must have been midnight when suddenly, quite close
to me, two figures loomed through the moonlit mist, and
as they spoke together I knew Kolbiorn the Skald and
L     No.  15.—Maech 1876. I
66 Tlie Ladies' Eduiburgh Magazine,
Astolfo. Might they not help, I thought ? and I grasped
Kolbiorn, who was nearest, by the shoulder. As he looked
at me he started violently. " Away, evil spirit," he said ;
and then as he struggled against me, "It is flesh and
blood—a vampire.   Help, Astolfo ! "
" It is Renzo himself I " cried Astolfo,—" Renzo in one of
his dreams, my dear old comrade. Look in his eyes—he
lives. Speak! is Thorstein in danger—will he come here'?
In heaven's name speak. Art thou bewitched ? I came
here, because long ago Syades sent me here after the
Dragon in vain.    St. Mary to thine aid I speak."
I looked at them in despair, but Kolbiorn began,
" Syades: I have it, I remember how he could cast such a
spell over some of our men that they could neither speak
nor move, save at his pleasure. Is it so with thee.
Marquis? Canst thou lead us where we may aid
Thorstein ? he forbade us to follow him." Now the
vault to unwarned men was but a trap, nor could I con¬
trol myself to guide them. Then suddenly I thought if
they could cut through the water-channel and lay the
vaults under water before Thorstein came, he might yet be
saved ; and I pointed at the narrow barrier. *' Ah, this is
new," said Astolfo ; " shall we cut it through then, Renzo ?"
and as I signed assent, Kolbiorn with his axe, and
Astolfo with his sword, began to work on it ; and they
afterwards said that I seemed to vanish away, but the
spell of my evil errand came over me, and I fled away
into the thick mist, forced to meet Thorstein, who now
came riding at a distance over the marsh-lands. As he
saw me he dismounted, and silently I led the way to where
the low bushes concealed the entrance to the vaults. I
raised them, the portal was open, and Thorstein stepped
into the darkness with his sword drawn, and then paused
as a sudden rush and roar of waters came to our ears.
And then came out on the hot stimmer night such a blast
of cold wind, fetid and poisonous, as bore us both back
from the mouth of the cavern. It was the foul air rising
before the rising Avaters. Then came a sound like thunder
within the clifi", and a broad sheet of flame flashed for a
moment from the dark doorway and vanished in the
night; but in its light I could see several dark figures rush¬
ing forth from the vault. Thorstein dashed to the encounter,
and his sword flashed as it turned in tlie last of the red light.
Then, when my dazzled eyes could see again, he was
withdrawingthe smokingblade fromoneofthethreecorpses
'Jlic Dragon of the Xorth. t)7
that lay before him, and the dead writhen face of the
Saracen wizard glared white in the misty moonlight. As
1 stood there bewildered, but with a new sense of freedom
and power glowing within me, Thorstein siiddenly rushed
through the shallows towards the place where the stream
was descending ; and as I slowly followed, I saw that
something crested, huge, writhing, was opposed to him ;
and even as I came up, a great slimy bulk, half hid in
mist, rolled backwards into the marish pool; a foul vapour
rose, an ugly coil or two surged up above the black waters,
and then the swift stream seemed to sweep off the shape¬
less form, hurling it on till Ave saw it no more. We, I say,
because Kolbiorn and Astolfo had now run up also. Thor¬
stein stood there panting, bloody, and covered with
slime.
" The Dragon," he said, " I saw it glitter here;
methinks it is killed ; Death's-touch has been through
and through it, but it had no wings. Was it the
Dragon, Kolbiorn, or a huge worm, or Syades in another
shape ?" He looked and spoke somewhat wildly, and
Kolbiorn took him by the arm and said, " The Dragon
it was, no doubt; it is slain, and the land is delivered;
and here is Lorenzo d'Asile, as I think, delivered too.
He himself—no unquiet spirit, as you thought yester¬
day." Thorstein turned to me, and 1 threw myself at
his feet.
" Pardon, oh, pardon," I said ; " I know you said, ' Down
with the evil people—give them to tlie vultures and the
crows.' Slay me then, I deserve it, but forgive me first—
me, your sworn enemy, whom your goodness conquered
long ago, but not till I was the wretched slave of Syades,
and the tool he used to betray you."
" His slave ! and all these years—how you must have
sTiffered! but you know 1 forgave you long ago," he
answered, as he drew me to him and kissed me : " do you
take me still for a wild viking'^ Let us hasten away
from this evil place.    I see the dawn appearing,"
It seemed as if the dawn was indeed appearing after
my long night of slavery as the Northmen led me away
mounted on Thorstein's horse, while Astolfo sped on
before with the news. We passed the spot where lay
Syades and two of his slaves, slain by Thorstein ; the
others must have perished in the cavern. Vivia was
there, and was caring for them; strange as it may seem,
she mourned for Syades, and only waited to see him laid
68 Tlie Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
in his tomb before she followed him, giving herself death
by poison.
The early summer morning was brightening as we
went round by the quiet shore and up the well-knowu
steep path to the great gates of my own castle. By this
time all was known there, and the people were crowding
OTit to welcome us. Wearied, yet blissful, I lingered but a
little while among them, before the sweet Valeria brought
me to her bower and there tended me carefully, while by
degrees the strange surprises were calmed down into
quiet peaceful rejoicing.
It was not till next day that we could enter the cavern
where the water had forced up the foul air which still
made it dangerous. The pillars of the cistern were all
reflected in the still, black waters, and on the steps
above we found the dead bodies of some of Syades' men.
Of the Dragon and of the treasure we saw not a trace ;
and some say both are yet to be found in the vaults
or the marshes. Of the treasure I know nothing, but
from this time it is certain that all the havoc caused
by the breath of the evil beast ceased, so doubtless it
perished under the well-named Death's touch—the sword
of Thorstein.
Higher than ever stood his fame ; from all the land
round came the people with songs and flowers and gifts
after their fashion, and lays to sing in his praise; though
some ventured to aver there Avere those who hoped he
might have perished in his conflict with the Dragon, so
much they hated the stern, equal justice of his rule. He
seemed, as the days went by, to be still somewhat ex¬
hausted ; but the combat with the beast, whose pestilen¬
tial breath had poisoned all the marshes, was enough, he
said, to account for the fevered restlessness, un wounded
as he was.
Now, I had sped so ill as a secular, I had sinned and
suff"ered so deeply, that I only wished to give up my
possessions to my sister Valeria, who had now a fair son,
and return as a monk to Caserta. I thought that my
heart—empty, save for the ashes of the fierce fire of love
that had burned there—might once more have the sacred
fire of divine love kindled in it. In good truth, I trust
that I have become a better monk, and more able to help
the young, owing to the keen joys and griefs of my short
sojourn in the world. Thorstein would himself go with
me to explain my case to our severe abbot;   also, he
The Dragon of the North. ■        69
wished to meet Gaimer, Prince of Salerno, then some¬
where on the southern coast, as well as Rainulf, as he
intended to resign his command to them.    We started,
therefore, bound for Caserta, with Kolbiorn and a goodly
following of armed men, and the first night we halted at
the castle of Rainulf and Hertha.    Still tlie old feelings
made my whole being tremble as we drew rein at the
gateway ; but we found the lord and lady b(jth absent;
they had gone with Eric for a short cruise on board the
Dragon ship.    Moreover, the   seneschal who entertained
us said that his lady had been for a while ill and weak,
and they had spoken of leaving Italy shortly, and sailing
northwards.      Thorstein sent a small galley in search of
the ship, with a message praying them to come to Caserta ;
and as the wind was very light, the crew doubted not
they would find the great war-ship.    Meanwhile we rode
onwards to Caserta, travelling early and late, and resting
during the sultry August days.    But languor and fever
increased upon Thorstein daily, with attacks of faintness,
so that we had to make the day's journeys shorter and
shorter.    Kolbiorn tended him with unwearied love; he
would do all for Thorstein, save take Christianity.    One
day as we rested from the fierce glare of the sun in the
cool dark portal of a little church, Kolbiorn said,  " Look
you, Thorstein Sigurdson, Christianity seems to me like
being within walls shut in from the outer air, like yonder
dark church—beautiful, but Italian or Greek rather than
Northern; sheltered all round, rather for tender girls and
women  than for strong men.    They should live in the
free air, and hear Thor rolling his chariot overhead, and
Odin flying wrathfully in the storm, and yet fear nothing;
no,  not if they are told of strange foes to combat   in
death and beyond it; of Loki and his evil crew—of the
frozen city where the adders drop perpetual venom—of
all that is dark and doubtful.    For is it not in a man's
own breast that the Odin-spirit of courage should dwell,
and in his strong right hand the force of Thor ? then when
all is done, let him abide good or ill fortune with an equal
mind, for it is the blind god Herdar who meddles as he
will; and he is the hand of Fate; and to me it seems that
also in Italy, Fate rules all."
" That may be well for the strong, but how of the weak,
Kolbiorn?" answered Thorstein.
" The weak perish ; it is their fate ; they must not cum¬
ber the strong."
70 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
" Then leave nie to perish instead of tending me so
carefully," laughed Thorstein. " I am certainly now one
of the weak ; no, you cannot do it—nor can I. To defend
the weaklings of this land I fought with the Dragon, and
have become weak myself; for the strong must become
like our evil giants, the foes of the gods and men, or they
must be often sacrificed for the Aveak. That is truth,
Kolbiorn Vigfus(m, and that is also Christianity."
" You did not think so much of the weak when first
you steered your long-ship out from Hardangr Fiord,
Viga^-Thorstein, in search of fame and prey."
"No, I had hardly seen them the:".; but good or bad,
they seem all rather weak in this land; we should defend
them from the Saracens, not harry them ourselves. I
had rather be a dog than a wolf any day."
"And I had rather be a black bear^ than a dog. 'You
may kick the dog who saved your life, but vou must
thank me for not eating you up,' said the bear."
" There is another thing that you cannot help. Men
will always love you rather than fear you with that fair
face, my black bear," answered Thorstein.
" Come then, I will sing you a song all for yourself," said
Kolbiorn; " give me time, and I can sing any man's
song! "
" That is why you believe no man's song," ansAvered
Thorstein ; while Kolbiorn touched the strings and began:
In the warm southern night,
When our sea-stead was sweeping
The wide ocean plains,
And our lads were all sleeping
Beneath the ship's tent.
Save the steady watch for'ard,
A dream came to me
As we steered to the nor'ard.
The fairest of women
I saw in my dreaming ;
Around her clear forehead
A bright light was beaming :
A cross on her breast shone,
A palm in her hand ;
And she sang a sweet song
I could not understand.
' Vi(ja, Killing. ' Kolbiom means black bear.
The Dragon of the North. 71
She sang, as she wandered,
So clear and so strong,
The far northern mountains
Gave back the strange song ;
And up to the heavens,
And down to the graves,
The sweet voice re-echoed
That blesses and saves.
The dwarfs of the black mines
Shrank trembling together,
Ihe watersprite fled
In the wrack of the weather ;
The elves from the hill-sides.
The trolls from the heaths.
They melted before her
Like July's snow-wreaths.
Thou, Odin the kingly,
Can thy reign be o'er ?
Is thy thunder all silent.
Thou grim fighter, Thor ?
Does the twilight of gods
Over Asagaard darken ?
Is the sweet song so true
That the world needs must hearken ?
They know who have vanished.
They never will say,
The print of the death-shoes
Turns ever away :
Oh ! speak from the silence
That nothingness seems :
Is it truth, is it love,
Or the fairest of dreams ?
"Was that a real dream, or only a song?" asked
Thorstein.
" It was a real dream I had as we sailed north from
Crete, where Eric had taken baptism, and I thought I
should soon be the only one left faithful to the old days."
" In the old days we fought for liberty, not against
Christianity, of which I for one knew nothing," answered
Thorstein; " but King Olaf is a kingly man, if he does
love his own way too much, and I should be on his
side if I fought again in Norway."
When we reached Caserta, the Abbot Crysolarus re¬
ceived us well, and, at Thorstein's request, promised that
I should re-enter my noviciate without further probation.
72 Tlte Ladles Edinhurgli Magazine.
I was rich enough to endow the convent well, and yet to
leave a great lordship to Astolfo, who followed us to
receive the investiture, Thorstein seemed no better, and
Cyril, our infirmarer, the best leech in Magna Grecia,
said that the deadly serpent-poison, for wliich there was
no cure, had infected him, though his natural strength
fought hard against the disease. Never was our quiet
house so crowded and so warlike as at this time; never
was there such a coming and going of knights and mes¬
sengers, for the safety and government of the land now
depended much on Thorstein.
8ome days had passed; it was towards evening, and the
sky was like a glowing rose framed by the grey stone
windows, when Rainulf arrived, and sped up the stairs
to the guest-room, just as he did when it almost broke my
heart years ago to see him claim Hertha for his own. He
looked aghast at the sight of Thorstein, for death was
now written on his face; but they greeted each other
warmly, and spoke much together. Hertha, he told us,
was coming on board the Dragon ship, while he had rid¬
den fast to us by land. " Eric brings her ; it is better for
her than riding far. She pines in this fierce heat, and I
had devised a voyage for her." Then in further discourse
it appeared that Rainulf would in no way consent to stay
and take Thorstein's government, for he had resolved to
sail north with his wife. " It may be only to Normandy ;
but if this pining for the north lasts, I too shall go to
the home of my fathers. Yes, Thorsteiu, I shall see
Norway."
"Ah, could I but go with you," sighed Thorstein; but
he rested content to know that Hertha was coming. And
the next day a novice came running in from oiir sea-view
to say that the Dragon ship was glittering in the bay.
Alas I in the evening came a messenger to say that Hertha
was not able even to ride thence to the convent. " Then
will I go to the ship," said Thorstein ; and he^'would not be
dissuaded, though little fit for the journey. However, in
the cool of the following morning, mounted on the
Abbot's mule, he got safely to the shore. Kolbiorn and
Eric aided him to pass tlie gangway and mount the poop,
looking full of joy at being again in his old home, the ship.
Then his countenance changed; there, under a silken
awning, lay Hertha on a couch, her golden hair spread out
round her lovely face, like the halo round the head of
some dying saint; for she was dying, I read it at once ;
The Dragon of the North. 73
her eyes were bright, her cheeks glowed with fever, her
hands were wasted, her face was deeply carved in, but
her smile was as radiant as ever as she stretched out her
hands to Thorstein. They had piled cushions for him near
her on the deck, and the two talked long together in their
own language, while Rainulf and Kolbiorn hovered near
and tended them. As I sat a little way off, I wondered
to see them so happy; and yet to me also there was a sort
of sad pleasure in the thought that now I might love
Hertha still, and neither Thorstein nor I needed to envy
Rainulf, who talked of voyages and future days, and
would not see how it really was.
And she had, as long ago, sweet words for me; " I am
glad to think of you once more as Fra Lorenzo, whom I
used to honour, and who so helped my ignorance. I shall
hope to see him at the end of the straight road that tho
good monks travel. As for Rainulf, you must all tell him
to stay and guard our holy faith in this land, otherwise
Greeks and Lombards will be at each other's throats
again, and the Saracens will profit by their quarrels to
come and spoil all."
" Nay," said Rainulf, bending over her fondly, " soon
you and I will sail together, and the cool sea-breezes of
the north will make yon strong."
" Yes, " she said, turning to Thorstein with a smile, " I
did think to make him speak better Norse at the court of
King Olaf, but it will not be; and he will have good help
and good company soon here in Italy, for some sons of a
friend of his, one of the bravest of knights, Tancred de
Hauteville, are coming here. I hear they are of the
noblest of men, and I am glad to leave it so. But you,
Eric and Kolbiorn, you will take the dear old ship back
to Norway. There are some who will wish to hear of us
there, and who for long have been waiting for our return.
Now sing one more song for me; sing of that return, and
give me sweet thoughts of the old days." Kolbiorn
touched his strings at first gaily, but his song became
sadder as he went on : it was Norse, but I thus translate
it:—
Far on the Fiord the ship is away,
'Tis but a speck on the ocean grey,
Bound for the Southlands, sailing free ;
They have gone forth to seek renown,
Maidens turn to the silent town—
Look, fair Astrid, over the sea I
No. 15.—Makch 1876. K
74 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
Long away, and the southern air,
Heavy with fragrance, weighs them down ;
Long away, till the silver hair
Glimmers so pale in the golden brown ;
Long away, and the decks are low
With piles of gold and precious stone ;
What have we'gained ? for the men we know,
One by one they are missed and gone.
" Who returns ?    Who comes no more ?
Waves that beat on their own loved shore,
Have you no message nor word for me ?"
" None, sad eyes, till you search the few
Toil-worn waifs of a joyous crew, "
Look, fair Astrid, over the sea !
*' That is not what I meant to say, but it all goes
wrong," he said half angrily, pulling roughly at the
jarring strings, and walking quickly away with the tears
running down his face.
" If his Astrid looks so long, she will be a fat old dame
like me, not worth looking at," said Bergliot, who still
waited on Hertha : " all the same his songs make one long
to go home."
" Do you still think of returning to England, Bergliot V
asked Thorstein.
"More than ever now that Knut the Great our king is
really on his way to Rome with a great following," she
answered: " thither will I with Ivan, and no doubt we shall
get safely back with them."    And so indeed she did.
In the cool of the evening Thorstein prepared to go,
though he seemed hardly fit to move, and Rainulf and
Eric implored him to remain. " No, if I stay here I shall
die here," he said ; " and I may die hard, which will be bad
for Hertha. No, I must take my last farewell to-day of
her, and of the ship, and of the sea."
And so the cousins kissed and parted; their talk had
soothed for both their longing for Norway, which they
seemed content now to see no more; "And I doubt also,"
said Thorstein, " if I could have gone back with so many
blood-feuds on my hands. My Hertha, I long now to
shake hands with many a countryman who has fallen in
fight before me for next to no quarrel; what friends they
would seem here in this strange land I "
We went ashore, and Thorstein rested awhile on a rock
at the edge of the sea, plunging his hands into the water
and letting it drop through his  fingers; his eyes, as  he
TJie Drcujon of the Xorth. 75
still looked at the ship, filled with tears; and I saw on his
face that now indeed was the bitterness of the death-
parting to the sea warrior. We got him back to our
infirmary, and there followed a dreadful time, for the
poison brought on strong convulsions, in which he would
crush up metal cups and clasps in his fingers, and then lie
unconscious for a while in Kolbiorn's arms till the pain
began again. Our infirmary had a window into the
chapel, and he heard with pleasure and dev(jtion the
services within, and wished masses to be said for the
Christian men he had slain, but he never could remember
all their names, nor even their number.
" Ah, they called me Viga-Thorstein in Norway," he said
to Kolbiorn, who never left him. '• If I had lived, I might
have been called Dragon's Baue. I am glad the evil beast
was the last thing poor Death's-touch slew. Bury the good
sword with me, or 1 might miss it from my side. No, that is
not Christian vogue,—lay it up in the chapel; but then these
good tame monks might lose it. Lorenzo there would be
giving it to some Saracen. You must keep it, Kolbiorn,
and draw it on the right—King Olaf's—side in Norway.
Ask his pardon for me—say I made a Christian end; and
never forget the Dragon of the North conquered the
Dragon of the South."
Gaimer, Duke of Salerno, arrived with Prince Sergio of
Capua and a great retinue ; our house was too crowded
to receive them all, so a gay camp was pitched on the
meadows under the hill, and all was stir and movement
round the place where the great Northern leader lay
dying. Thorstein held counsel with the knights when he
was able ; all were only anxious that liainulf should
succeed him, but he still sent word that he meant to leave
the land.
A few days had gone by; it was yet early in the
morning, hardly dawn, and the brethren, each with his
lantern by him, were singing Mattuitina in the chapel,
while Thorstein listened from his couch by the window,
and Kolbiorn and I waited on him ; when we saw a knight
enter hastily, and then linger uncertainly in the nave.
" It is liainulf," said Thorstein ; " call him, I know his
tidings," and Rainulf came up. " You will stay and rule
Aversa now," said Thorstein to him eagerly as he entered.
" There is no reason now why I should not stay and do
what work a man may with a heart's wound," said Rainul'
as he sunk down by the chapel window, laid his head on
76 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
the stone, and wept heavily. " He too loved her well,"
whispered Thorstein, " but this is only good tidings for
me; for if I am soon to meet those men I have hurried out
of their young lives, I shall also meet Hertha, my little
girl, who always cared for me." Then I joined the
brethren in the chapel, leaving the Northmen together ;
and when I returned at noon, Rainulf was himself again,
grave and firm, and Thorstein, who was better, was able
to hold a long council with him, Gaimer, Astolfo, and the
other leaders, in which all the succession and affairs of the
Countship of Aversa were settled. Then without our great
gates there assembled a glittering crowd of armed men;
with shouts and acclamations they raised Rainulfon a shield,
and proclaimed him Lord of Aversa and leader of the
Normans. Thorstein was carried out to see it all, and to
receive the greetings of many friends. He suffered little
now, for the strength that had fought so hard against the
poison was gone ; and the next day passed quietly, till in
the evening he grew very restless. " This is not a fair
death—it is a straw ^ death. Oh for Odin's marks ! for a
wound to let the soul out by a door of honour," he said.
" Care not for that now you are a Christian man," said
Father Anselmo, who had shriven and tended him ; "' all
deaths are honourable now."
" Besides," said Kolbiorn, " the Dragon's breath is a
kind of wound."
" A poor sort, Kolbiorn—the worst—but it does not
matter. Only carry me out into the air again; let me die
with the sky above me." So we laid him in the cloister
square, close by the rippling fountain, and there he lay
quietly in Kolbiorn's arms till the stars came out all over
the purple summer-night sky. " You must become a
Christian to-morrow, Kolbiorn," he said, " or how can you
now be at the funeral mass 1 "
•' Fain would I," answered Kolbiorn, " but there is not
light enough—I cannot see the way."
Thorstein was long silent, while Fra Anselmo recited
the prayers for the dying.    At last he spoke again.
" See, Kolbiorn, there are some stars I know and steered
south by. You may steer north by them again; I showed
you how. I go on another voyage, but, trust me, there
is light enough to pilot us over that sea too."
' Death by sickness, thought so contemptible by the Northmen that they
often killed themselves by a spear-wound in the breast, called Odin's mark,
rather than endure it.
llie Dragon of the North. 11
" Yes," said Kolbiorn, " I promise you I will follow you.
1 will take Christianity ; you are my leader here and
hereafter."
" At last," gasped Thorstein, " all is right. We can
both steer by starlight." He turned his head a little on
Kolbiorn's shoulder and gave one sigh, and we knew he
was gone on that unknown voyage whither all must
fare.
Tavo days later, in the early morning, I renewed my
noviciate in our chapel, and Kolbiorn, with others from
the ship, received baptisiru Then followed the grand
and solemn requiem mass with which we laid Thorstein
and Hertha to rest, side by side in our cloister. The older
brothers still talk of that day—of the princes with their
glittering retinues, of the Normen, and the rougher, stal¬
wart sea-warriors from the Dragon ship ; of the priests
and monks defiling in long procession, ■with banners and
incense and noble music. There has been no service like
it since at Caserta. Nor have we older men ever seen
the equal of Thorstein, or Turstano, as they call him here
in Italy. No ; though we see now many Norman heroes,
and even know Robert and Tancred, of the glorious line
of Hauteville- It was my chief joy to carve the tombs of
Hertha and Thorstein, on which I w^orked for years. We
feared the Greeks no longer, who ever forbade the carving
of figures; so I could porti-ay them in marble lying on
their tombs. Four warriors stand at the four corners of
his monument, his sword is by his side, and beneath his
feet a dragon writhes powerless. The Dragon ship I
have carved on the side. For her I have carved four
angels at the four corners; in her hand a rose, and on the
side of the tomb, a swan. On both are interlacing lines,
after the Northern fashion that Kolbiorn showed me:
moreover, people come from far and near to see these
tombs, which are my master-work and chief delight.
This sounds a somewhat sad story, but only because,
like all mortal histories, it ends at last in a tomb. But,
in truth, the people I have spoken of^ on the whole,
received what they strove for, and lived happily so far as
they lived well. Eainulf, as you know, still lives in
strong and honoured age at Aversa, guarding and ruling
that land, even as Robert Braccio-diferro protects us
and all Magna Grecia, as never before, from internal
quarrels and Saracen invaders. Astolfo and Valeria lived
long and happily together, but he was slain in victorious
78 The Ladies  Edinburgh Magazine.
fight not long ago, and it is my nephew who is now lord
of Asile.
Kolbiorn, saddened and weary of the south, sailed north
again with Eric in the Dragon ship, and we never saw
him more. But long afterwards, some pilgrims from
Norway, who had been in Rome, came on to Caserta, and
talked much and joyfully with me because I knew their
noble speech. From them I heard that Kolbiorn had
fought under the banner of Olaf the Saint, and had won
renown both in war and song through all the north lands,
and was then an honoured Skald at the court of Harold
Hardrada, King of Norway. They also said that they
had seen hauled up in a quiet creek of an inland fiord, as
too battered for the high seas, a very fine and great war¬
ship ; the people round wore used to visit and praise her
because she had breasted the dangers of the furthest seas,
and triumphed over a thousand foes, and also had brought
the first northern rulers of the land to the shores of Italy.
With some of her treasures a fair chapel had been founded
close by, where among other names were remembered
those of her chief captain, Thorstein Sigurdson, and his
kinswoman. Countess Hertha, who had died in far lands.
Right pleased were the pilgrims to see the fair tombs
whereon those well-loved names were carved, even as I
was to hear once more of that brave ship which was
linked with the chief joys and sorrows of my life—the
Dragon of the North.
And so may Heaven send to us all a good ending, as to
those my friends, of whom I have written, and rest and
refreshment to all Christian souls.    Amen.
The Monk Laurentius,
Of the Order of St. Benedict,
Sculptor and Librarian in the Convent of Caserta.
Anno Domini 1046.
E. J. 0.
Concluded.
79
" |l 0 p c n t a n c t"
A Border Ballad.
The moon was on the sea, sirs,
The win' was in the wast,
As doun by Cannoby lea, sirs,
The tramphu' horses past:
The guidwife at the ingle
Looked up frae the brounin' scone.
An' stayed her han' frae the girdle
Till the tramplin' hoofs were gone.
Quo' she, " 'Tis the Solway raiders :
Noo mercy on them a',
Be't wives, or weans, or faithers,
Wha in their han' may fa'.
" For Miirray o' Comlangan,
Or Herries o' the Thwaite,
They spare nor man nor maiden,
Nor priest nor shrivin' wait."
The moon was on the sea, sirs.
The win' was in the wast,
As by the Cummertrees, sirs,
The tramplin' hoofs gaed past:
Guidwife, she turned her in her bed,
" Guidman, wha gaes this way? "
" Noo mercy on the souls," he said,
" Sail pass ere it be day."
" Was't ghaists o' horses' hoofs, guidman,
For nocht mair hear I noo ? "
" Na, na, guidwife, they've wan the san',
To ford the Solway through."
The moon was on the seas, sirs.
The win' was in the wast,
The tide scarce reached the knees, sirs,
0' the raiders as they past.
Richt through the Solway's maw, sirs,
Out ower the shinin' san,'
At the base o' auld Skiddaw, sirs,
Set fit on Enghsh Ian.'
80 The Ladies' Edinburgh Alagaziiie.
Nog God hae mercy on ilk ane,
Heard they horse-hoofs that nicht;
I trow nor man nor mither's son
Ere saw the mornin's licht.
The moon was on the sea, sirs,
The win' was in the wast,
As back owre the bloody lea, sirs,
The tramplin' hoofs gaed past :
Heavy the beeves an' fat the sheep,
Fu' sh^wly ride they now,
An' a maiden's gowden tresses sweep
Lord Herries' saddle-bow I
He bauds her by the slim, slim waist,
An' by the gowden hair ;
His arm is strang an' he bauds her fast,
An' heeds nor tear nor prayer.
Across the lea his bloody print,
An' ower the shinin' san,'
The beeves afore, his men ahint.
The maiden in his han':
Fu' slowly rade Lord Hemes
Doun to the water's brink,
But ere it touched their hoofs, alas I
The beeves began to sink I
Then rose ahint him loud the cry,
" Halt, Herries, for your life !
Wha treads thae san's o' Soloway,
Nae mair see wean or wife."
Doun, doun sank the beeves, the fat beeves a'
r the sliinin' sinkin' san';
It sooked them doun its greedy maw,
Till never a beeve was fan.'
An' the glitterin' san' lay i' the moon,
As innocent, ye'd say,
As babe unborn, but douu an' doun
In its belly the fat beeves lay.
Lord Herries stood at the quick san'e boun'
Till the last o' the beeves he saw.
Then wi' an aith he turned him roun';
Ahint him like a wa,'
Repentance. 8L
He saw the rising tide stan' up,
Like a reg'ment in marching hne :
" Wha wadna wi' the devil sup ?
Spur on, " quo' he, " behin' ! "
Wi' that rowel-deep he struck the spur
In flank o' his gnid mare,
Nae witch on broomstick match for her
I' fleein' through the air.
On, on they fled as devil chased,
On, on the tide sped then ;
A cry arose ower the watery waste,
He kent it had reached his men.
But never a backward look gied he,
But faster an' faster rade,
An' nearer an' nearer cam' the sea
Ilk step the giiid mare made.
The moon was on the sea, sirs,
The win' was in the wast,
It swoopit wild wi' glee, sirs,
Ahint the tide sae fast.
The hoofs are wat, syne wat the knee
0' Harries' guid black mare ;
Frae saddle-bow intil the sea
Swung the maiden by her hair I
Then out wi' an' aith his claspt knife he
An cuttet the shiiMn' braid,
An' deeper an' deeper ran the sea
Ilk step the guid mare made.
The tide it floated the maiden fair :
Like gowdeu sea-weed spread
Was the glint i' the moon o' her shinin' hair,
But Herries ne'er turned his head!
The bridle floats on the risin' tide,
Swims the mare for the dear life,
His knees stick fast in her panting side.
In his han' the claspet knife.
The moon is aff the sea, sirs,
The win' out o' the wast;
Cauld drizzliu' ower the lea, sirs,
Soughs frae the east the blast.
No. 15.—Mahch 1876.
82 1 he Ladies' Eiiinhurgh Magazine.
The water's gane, an' nocht in sicht,
But wat, red slimy san', [nicht
When Lord Herries crawled frae that awesome
Back to the Scottish Ian'.
He had left ahint the flit beeves a',
He had left ahint his men.
He had seen the maiden float awa,
The guid mare followed then.
He fan' her lyin' stiff an' stark
On the slimy wat red san'.
When he cam' to himsel' i' the mornin' dark.
His claspet knife in his lian'.
Lane gaed he by the Cummertrees,
Alane by his ain auld Thwaite;
Folks glowered as he passed, as ain that sees
A ghaist gang by the gate.
The auld wives crossed them as he gaed,
The weans to their minnies ran ;
'Twas the deil taen H.erries' shape, they said,
Wha'd sunk in Solway san'.
He builded him a tall stane tower,
Atop o' a lanely heicht,
Whence he could glower the waters ower
0' the Solway day an' nicht.
An' day an' nicht in his tower he sat
An' glowered at the rising tide,
An' glowered whes the slimy san' shone wat
Maist ower to the English side.
An' he wrote "Repentance" on the wa',
An' he prayed baith earn an' late,
For the souls untimeous sped awa
Through Herries o' the Thwaite.
The moon was on the seas, sirs,
The win' was in the wast,
When by the Cummertrees, sirs,
A ghaistly man gaed past;
Made straight for the Solway shore, sirs.
The risiu' tide to wait.
An' dead that nicht in his tower, sirs,
Lay Ilerries o' the Thwaite.
Jeanie Morison.
83
©n ^oral 0^\-amination53 for Womsn.
" 'Tis on the advance of individual minds
Mankind must found its reasonable expectationa
Eventually to follow ; as the sea
Waits ages in its bed, till some one wave
Of all the multitudinous mass extends
The empire of its fellows—then the rest,
E'en to the meanest, hurry in at last,
And so much is clear gained."
The higher education of women in this country may, iu
its progress up to the present time, be called an almost
purely democratic movement. No munificent grant from
the Crown has come to its aid ; no generous hand has been
held out to help it to a solid footing among the institu¬
tions of the country. It has forged its own weapons,
used its own secret watchword, and upheld its own
standard. It is as yet too infantine, too useless, to
interest the State at all. Hitherto, it would be easier
to crush it than to help it. Then surely tliere is room
for anxiety about its future ; and how can this be allayed ?
Every woman can help, and how? First by educating
herself. In this way she can swell the ranks of highly
cultured women, and bring nearer the day wdien their
influence will be felt throughout society as widely as it
ought to be.
But we ought to have said, " until about ten years ago,"
when we made that complaint against the governing
bodies of public institutions. It was about that time that
the local examinations began to help us, and they have
done much since then. They afford at once a remedy for
the defects of education, and a test of its thoroughness.
There is no doubt that many women feel bitterly how
defective their education has been. They feel this
specially when they begin to study philosophy or
mathematical sciences; and finding these subjects far
beyond their depth, turn to us in dismay, and ask, Ought
I first to have passed the local examination? Were this
piteous appeal made by a woman of talent or genius, I
should at first feel inclined to say. No, certainly not, and
to add, in the words of the poet,
" Can rules or tutors educate
The demigod whom we await ?
Si The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
He must be musical,
Tremulous, impressional,
Alive to gentle influences
Of landscape or of sky,
And tender to the spirit-touch
Of man's or maiden's eye."
But then, suddenly recollecting the age we live in, its
needs and responsibilities, I should say. Yes, certainly, go
to the local examination, or at least study on the lines
indicated by their programme; for this demigod,
" To his native centre fast,
Shall into future fuse the past,
And the world's flowing fates in his own mould recast."
And no one can fuse the future into the past, or recast
the world's fates in his own mould, who has not quite met
the requirements of the age. Still as I repeat these words
I look back with a reverential sigh at many who never
heard of local examinations, and yet astonished the world,
such as Shakespeare, Burns, and many men and even
noble women Avho are among us now. And then I think
of those dear old governesses who taught everything in
smatterings, and reflect with pain that their sun is setting.
May it set in peace !
With regard then to the local examination; who
ought to pass it, and who not? I can think of only one
class of women who do not require it; I shall come to
them presently. For those who intend to be teachers,
of course it is indispensable; yet it is not, as is often said,
for governesses only. For all merely ordinarily educated
women, I should say it is very desirable. The question
of teaching reminds me of Niebuhr's saying, which may
have some weight on the affirmative side, even as con¬
cerns those who do not mean to teach ; " He who writes
a treatise, let him say what he will, claims to teach; and
no one can teach without a degree of wisdom, which is
the compensation God gives us, if we strive after it, for
the departing bliss of youth."
I come now to the exceptional being above alluded to,
who is happily exempt from the examination. She is
that person who, whether educated in private or in
public, has steered clear of one-sided culture on the one
hand, and of undue self-appreciation on the other. In
other words, she has studied every branch of knowledge
included in a liberal education  thoroughly, whether in
On Local Examinations for Women. 85
accordance with, or contrary to, natural inclination, and
has thus carried her culture beyond the ran ge of personality
into that of representative education. But here another
snare awaits her; whether educated in private or in a
public school, she may have so excelled or outstripped all
others, that she may imagine that as she stands there
facile princeps, so she would stand hrst among all others.
The local examination would then be useful by calling
out all her powers, and, after all, possibly teaching a lesson
of humility. But were she still at the head of the lists,
she would have to remember that the local examination
is but a test of one kind of education, and of a mere
portion of that kind; and that there are many other kinds
of culture which a man gives to himself or receives from
innumerable sources other than that of books. These
remarks may be met by the objection, that in the case of
middle-aged w'omen, elementary study wall weaken in¬
stead of strengthening the mind. To this I answer, that
with them such studies can never be purely elementary.
With the added insight which experience of life has
given, they will at once see the hidden relations and
reasons for the results they arrive at, and will thus grasp
the knowledge as a grown person grasps the moral of a
fable, which a child would fail to find. Thus a defective
early education would be quickly atoned for by a clearer
insight.
Having made these preliminary remarks, I shall proceed
to ask, 1st, What is the local examination, and why
instituted? 2d, What are its subjects? and are these
subjects connected wath those of the professorial classes
in such a way as to render it necessary, or at least
advisable, to pass it before attending these classes? 3d,
What are its advantages? 4th, How and what shall we
study for it ?
1st. What is the local examination? and why insti¬
tuted ? I answer for Scotland alone.' " In the year 1865,
at the solicitation of persons interested in education, and
after the examples of the universities of Oxford and Cam¬
bridge, the Senatus Academicus, with the approbation of
the University Court and General Council, resolved to
hold examinations, by professors and graduates, in places
throughout the country at which a sufficient numlser of
candidates desire to be examined, with a view to obtaining
' Edinburgh University Calendar.
8fi The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazhie.
ordinary or honorary imiversity certificates of proficiency
in subjects which are or may be taught in the bm-gh and
other schools of Scotland."
In the year 1865, accordingly, when the examinations
were held for the first time, '6'2 boys passed, and only 14
girls.     In 1866 there were more boys and fewer girls, 50
against 9.    Passing on to   1871, we still find the boys
preponderate, but the number of girls has increased to 19
against 45 boys.    But in 1874 the boys have evidently
learned  to despise these examinations;   the  tables  are
turned; there are  11 boys against 35 girls.    These are
almost the numbers   of 1865  reversed.    Passing  on  to
1875, we find some interesting facts.    Throughout Scot-,
land, 11 obtained honorary certificates—all of them girls;
iS'o received ordinary certificates; 27 only of these were
girls.    The boys have now dwindled away into ordinarily
certificated beings, while the girls are monopolising the
honours.     How are  we  to   explain   these facts?     The
Scotch schoolboy evidently despises these examinations,
while the girl is yearly learning to prize them more highly.
True, the return of 11 who obtained honours sounds very
paltry beside the Cambridge number of 567 honour cer¬
tificates for the same year.^    Yet, few as the number of
girls is, it is increasing: and the reason of this is to be
found in the  Woman s Union Journal for August 15, 1875-
Professor Calderwood writes  thus: "I have pleasure in
communicating the fact, that the offer of the scholarship
of £25. witJi the bursary of £30 for two years, offered by
the Edinburgh Ladies' Association, has led to much keener
competition this year than we  have   ever   had  before.
Last year. Miss Macplierson carried the bursary of £25
with 248 marks; this year Miss Brand carries it with 272
marks.    These facts show clearly the great importance of
bursaries, and how desirable it is  that more should be
raised, if possible—one for every centre where the examina¬
tions are held.    Another reason for the small number of
candidates is, that, under the new regulations, the school¬
master has to devote a double amount of time to primary
' In the Cambridge Higher Local Examinations, held in June 1875, for
persona above eighteen years of age, out of 226 candidates who presented
themselves for examination, 42 obtained honoured certificates, and 29 common
certificates ; 22 received additions to former certificates, and 91 passed in the
compulsory subjects alone. These examinations are held at ten centres
throughout England ; they were in 1874 thrown open to men, but no men
have as yet presented themselves.
On Local Examinations for Women. 87
instruction, thus neglecting the secondary, which must
prepare for these examinations. We are apt to despise
America in some ways, but in the matter of education we
are far behind that country. Tn the towns of the United
States of America, every boy or girl who passes the
examination, which Avith them corresponds to our local,
is as a matter of course carried on to the close of his or
her education absolutely without cost; and this is a law
in(;orporated in the statute books of their school boards.
Having now inquired slightly into the history of the
local examination in Scotland, we have to ask, What are
its subjects? aid are they so connected with those of the
professorial classes as to render it advisable to pass it
before attending them ? The common subjects, in all of
which the pupil is expected to be examined, are :—English
grammar and composition, history and geography, Latin
(this is optional for female candidates), elementary arith¬
metic, and Scripture history. Besides these, at least two,
and not more than four, special subjects are required, such
as French and higher English, or history and geography
and mathematics. But among the latter the pupil may
choose. Now with regard specially to the subjects of
grammar and arithmetic, the method of early teaching has
a great deal to do with the way in which they are under¬
stood. Grammar is too commonly taught mechanically,
without conveying any intelligent idea to the mind. No
preparation is made by such teaching for higher studies.
Supposing, however, that the scholar, in analysing a sen¬
tence, were taught at once to distinguish between the
subject, the act, and the object; he wf)uld not only have
an idea of the respective offices of the different parts of
speech, but would have already made some approach to
philosophical method. The same is true with arithmetic.
Most of the early work in arithmetic is merely plodding.
The simple rules are not taught, the reasons for the results
are not given, and the pupil is as hopelessly at sea after¬
wards as before he began to learn. A very youthful
mind cannot be expected to discover such rules and
reasons for itself. Suppose, then, that after a course of
such faulty instruction, the pupil passes at once, without
going to the examination, to a professorial class of English
literature, mathematics, or philosophy. For want of a
thorough knowledge of English, he is at fault even in the
matter of note-taking. Not knowing thoroughly the
simple rules of grammar, he cannot be expected to learn
88 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
the art of faultless composition, or to master the intricacies
of poetical analysis. In the mathematical class, too, I
have known instances of ladies vainly attempting to
struggle on after the Professor, and at last giving it up in
despair; their knowledge of arithmetic and algebra was
defective. In the philosophical classes, some preparatory
work is equally necessary, and it seems to me that the
intelligent mastery of elementary studies is the only true
means of training for these classes. Before learning the
dead languages, or indeed any foreign language, a
thorough knowledge of English is indispensable. Before
learning chemistry, the pupil must be able to work
fractions easily. I should think it vain for the Professors
either of mathematics or of chemistry to attempt much
with pupils who have not passed the Local, or are not
capable of doing so. Here, I fear, is our weak point; in
languages we are more learned. A knowledge of lan¬
guages is especially common among ladies, and so far
from advocating the necessity of studying the ancient
tongues, I should say that a thorough knowledge of two
difficult modern languages, say German and Icelandic, is
as good a training for the mind as the study of Greek
and Latin. There are many cultivated women, I believe,
who despise the local examination, and say it is quite
easy, or only for teachers. I ask. Have you looked over
all the subjects it includes, and do you think it a very
easy thing to answer questions in any three or four of the
following subjects : — Latin, Greek, PVench, German,
English, history and geography, mathematics, natural
philosophy, chemistry, zoology, botaiiy, physiology? In
the extra subjects of music and drawing I should be more
hopeful. I have now come to the conclusion that a very
vigorous mind may suggest to itself and carry out a
system of training well adapted to fulfil the pur2Doses of
education; yet I believe there is hardly one in a thousand
who is capable of doing so, and even that one would not
lose by submitting to the guidance and yielding to the
stimulus afforded by competition with others.
3d. The advantages of these examinations. These are
of two kinds, viz. personal and extraneous; the one
realised for one's self at the time of study and in all
future time, and the other realised afterwards in a
practical way. With regard to the first kind of advan¬
tages, they are self-evident. Surely it is an advantage
to feel that we have a daily task to perform, that so many
On Local Examinations for Women. 89
hours a day are taken away from aimless existence or
desultory pursuits, and spent in earnest study with a
fixed object. Is it not worthy of effort to attain the
moment when, after some hours of engrossing study, we
look around, breathe freely, and are conscious of increased
intelligence, of an altered point of view, whence we have
a wider field outspread before our mental vision? Is it
not satisfactory, too, to know, that instead of building a
lofty structure upon a faulty foundation, we are attacking
the evil at its root, and making the beginning of our
knowledge fit to bear a vast weight of solid attainment ?
Surely if we have time to spend in such a way, the
sacrifice is not too great when thus repaid. To show how
our English sisters look upon these pursuits, I may here
mention two daughters of the Earl of Portsmouth who
took high places in the Cambridge Local Examinations.
" The Report shows that none of the Edinburgh boarding-
schools send candidates; all the best pupils come from
the Merchant Maidens' Schools. Very few young ladies
in Scotland, like Lord Portsmouth's daughters, and the
daughters of many English clergymen, study privately
for this certificate." In Scotland it is generally thought
that this pass is only for governesses. But in one sense
we are all governesses; Ave all have to teach, if only by
repairing our own defects.
The second kind of advantages may be divided into
two classes ; those which precede study, and those which
are granted to candidates who have passed the examina¬
tion. Of the first kind is the bursary. 1% is well known
that a scholarship of £25 for one year, and a bursary of
£30 for two years (while efforts are making to raise a
third bursary for June 187(i), have lately been offered by
the E. L. E. Association. This has led to much keener com¬
petition and placed within the reach of many what would
otherwise have been unattainable. It is on this bursary
that the advocates of female education have fixed their
hopes, for it not only helps the one who gains it, but
also the many who strive for it, and thus leads to incal¬
culable results.
A great advantage for those who have passed the
examination exists in the shape of the Loan Fund. With
regard to this I quote from the information supplied by
Miss Ewart, 3 Morpeth Terrace, Victoria Street, London,
S.W., who thus writes :
" Our Loan Society was started in 1872, in consequence
No. 15.—March 1876. M
90 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
of a suggestion from Miss Beale of Cheltenham College,
who had found a similar plan worked well. We joined
the Women's Education Union last May, and there will
be a Report of what we are doing in the forthcoming
Report of this Union. Our conditions of help are as
follow :—
" 1. The applicant must be over sixteen, and must need
help, and intend to teach,
" 2. The committee reqiiire a clear statement of opinion,
from persons qualified to judge, that she will make a
good teacher when trained; and also what schools, or
classes, or lectures, they advise her attending,
"3, The committee only pay fees, and only those of any
of the high schools, classes, the home or colonial teachers'
class, or equally good schools, or lectures approved by
themselves, (Here tlie Edinburgh professorial classes
would certainly be approved, and girls who had passed
the local and wished to attend these would have a good
claim.)
'■ 4. A satisfactory examination must have been passed
or must be passed by the applicant before she can have
a grant.    Two satisfactory references are required.
*' 5. An agreement is signed by the guardians of the
grantee for repayment of the loan in instalments as soon
as she receives a salary,
" 6. The loan is only made from terra to term, according
to the Report sent to the Hon. Sec. by the head of the
school or other classes attended, and the agreement is
signed each time.
" 7. The amount of the loan is left to the discretion of
the committee, and the fees of the class or school which
the grantee wishes to attend must be stated in the
application."
Any application for a grant may be made to Miss
Ewart, and application made to the executive committee
of E. L. E. Association would be attended to and inquired
into by that committee.
Another great advantage of this pass is, that without it
no one can proceed to tlie University Higher Examination,
which is of immense value to teacliers, more than trebling
their salary, I have heard of a lady who had passed this
examination being at once placed at the head of a large
educational establishment, with a salary of £600 a year.
The next practical advantage attached to this pass is
to be found in the Report of the Local Examination.   For
On Local Ed-aminations for Wo))ien. 91
the few who intend to study medicine, this pass gives an
exemption from the medical preliminary examination.
Also, ladies who hold these certificates may have their
names on the calendar estabhshed by the Rugby Council
for promoting the education of women. The object of
this council is to help towards giving these examinations
their proper value, and to open a means of communication
between those who cannot find teachers and those who
have so qualified themselves.
The secretary of this ccmncil will receive the names of
ladies who have passed the Oxford and Cambridge local
examination for senior girls, and also the Edinburgh
higher examination. The calendar contains the names,
numbers, years of passing, and addresses of ladies who
have passed these examinations, and who intend to make
teaching their profession, with any further particulars
they may desire to make known respecting the nature of
the employment they seek. It is, moreover, desirable
to keep as complete a list as possible of well-educated
teachers, and especially in view of the demand likely to
be occasioned by the opening of large schools for girls; it
is hoped, therefore, that ladies who are in no present want
of employment will send their namett. A fee of 2s. ()d. to
cover expenses must be paid when the name is entered.
A lady whose name is once entered will have the right of
applying to the secretary at any time. Communications
will be received by any of the council, or by the secretary,
Mrs. T. E. Kitchener, Dunchurch Road, Rugby.
Having now menticmed some of the advantages con¬
nected with this pass, it may be inquired whether it has
any disadvantages. What is the use of all this trouble,
some may say; it only takes away so much time from the
enjoyment of lifet I reply, there is no rose Avithout
a thorn, but do not say that there is no enjoyment here
until we have asked, and to some extent answered, the
question. How and what shall I study ?
First, How shall I study? Above all, leisurely, not by
cramming. The Union Journal, in the number to Avhich
1 above alluded, gives some useful hints on this subject,
part of the substance of which I give in other words, and
with other examples: When you are studying a subject,
try to grasp it thoroughly, and to discover the reasons of
things. In reading history, do not use compendiums,
but go to the best books, and study the portions of them
bearing on the period you wish to read of.    To study a
92 Tlie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
period as a whole, observing how events grew out of each
other, and how various persons influenced society, is a
good and thorough mode. Thus, for instance, in studying
the period of Henry VIII., I would read the lives of the
men of the period, Warham, Wolsey, Erasmus, More,
Buckingham, Cliarles V., Luther, etc., and thus learn in an
interesting way the relations of various countries, and the
political and religious state of Europe at the time. Thus
only, by giving our knowledge a claim to our sympathy,
can we be said to have mastered it thoroughly. To
acquire the dates of a period after this would be a com¬
paratively easy process; it Avould be merely to supply the
outline of a picture which we have already impressed on
our mind. In studying the English language and litera¬
ture, we shall find a similar process the most helpful.
Poets are generally the exponents of the period they live in,
and teach us to understand it better than any one else can.
Through the changes in the language we learn to trace
the influence of the Norman over the Anglo-Saxon ; first,
Norman French is used, and then by importing this and
the Italian and Latin elements into Anglo-Saxon, the two
are gradually combined into a whole.
Lastly, What books are to be used? Considerable
latitude is allowed as to method and books, but the
following may be recommended for ordinary certificates:—
Common Subjects.—History, Tales of "a Grandfather
and the History in Freeman's Series. Geography, Ander¬
son's or Mackay's.
Special Subjects.—History, Mi-. Freeman's Series. The
same geographies. Arithmetic, Colenso's. Grammar,
Morell's.
For a solitary student, ignorant of analysis, and unable
to parse accurately, Dalgleish's Analysis and Bain's
Smaller English Grammar will be useful, because they pro¬
vide a key. No way of learning grammar and analysis
can be better than to ask permission to be present during
these lessons in the nearest board school. The same is
true of arithmetic. Another good way is to try to teach
some one else. Analysis is so interesting that it is not
difiicult to find a friend willing to learn it. A friend tells
us that she never heard of analysis until she was grown
up. She learned it by help of a good-natured amateur
pupil and Dalgleish's Analysis and Key, and confidently
asserts that the hours spent in the study were dehghtful
as well as profitable.    There are few families or neigh-
On Local Examinations for Women. 93
bourhoods in which a coaching-bee for grammar and
arithmetic cannot be got up in the long winter evenings,
if only there is some one energetic soul bent on passing
the local examination who will ask her friends to help.
With the help of a few hints, any intelligent woman
may, I should think, easily prepare herself for the examina¬
tion. For those who desire preparatory teaching, how¬
ever, and are beyond the reach of it, it might be worth
while to consider whether a system of tuition by corres¬
pondence, like that carried on in Cambridge, might not be
set on foot between such students and some qualified
teacher in Edinburgh, or other town in Scotland,
From what we have said, it appears that the local
examination is neither very easy nor very formidable,
neither beyond the reach of defectively educated women,
nor beneath the notice even of the highly cultured.
People who are always looking at the clouds cannot see
them in their relations to other things; and people Avho
are learning philosophy sometimes think philosophy is
making mistakes, while all the time it is onlj' their own
elementary knowledge which is at fault. This, like most
other evils, has its cure. J. Menzies.
III.
Next morning Konrad Lenz awakened in Castle Hal-
tenberg, after an extremely sound sleep; it was nine
o'clock already, and the August sun burned hotly on his
bed. As soon as he recollected where he was, and how
he had come there, he sprang joyfully out of the feathers.
It was certainly comical that the knight should actually
have packed him up himself in order to be sure of the
pictures!
Between the pulling on of each separate piece of dress
he ran round the room in order to examine the locality
more closely; for on the past night he had seen little,
and his restless spirit would not permit him methodically
to set about one business after another.
So he hopped on his stocking-soles to the Avindow, and
investigated the landscape in the backgr(.iund whilst he
94 Tlie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
tied his hose. There was certainly not much to be found
there. A high wall, somewhat impudently near, cut off
the horizon; behind this, however, was to be seen the
top of a wooded hill. That must be ascended the next
day I Before that, the artist wished, besides, to make
the acquaintance of the ladies of the castle, and to have
nearer intercourse with them ; for the knight was said to
have a beautiful daughter, whom he never allowed any
one to see. Even although, in this investigation of the
castle insido and outside, a fortnight should pass away,
there would be no harm done. St. Leonhard's Day falls
in the beginning of November, consequently there would
still remain two good months for the tiresome painting.
In the midst of these considerations the artist had
fortunately got half-way into his doublet, and now, while he
was draAving it rightly on, he traversed the vestibiile, his
future studio. This room jjresented an extraordinary
appearance. A fireplace, with a large overhanging
chimney-piece, stood against the wall, and beside it a
small cm-iously-shaped stove, crucibles and pots of all
kinds, bottles and retorts on the tables and shelves, all
being old dust-covered and broken vessels. The easel, with
the pictures and painting implements, had been placed in
the midst of this lumber.
The painter was just about to pull on his slippers, in
order to have a peep into the adjoining apartment also,
when the master of the house a])peared, followed by the
seneschal, who was bringing in breakfast. Polite greet¬
ings were exclianged. and the guest tendered his thanks
to his host for having lodged him so picturesquely; this
fantastic hall, especially, had quite the appearance of
having been made for an artist: Quintin Messis could not
have adorned his studio more thoughtfully with pleasant,
useless things; he might almost even paint it as a study !
But would his kind host only say what this hearth and
stove, with all the bottles and retorts, might mean?
Curtly and significantly answered the lord of Halten-
berg: " My father built this hall for an alchymist, who
received a great deal of money from him, and promised
to make a hundred times more with it. But one day the
alchymist absc'onded, and left nothing behind but some
black rags. Upon this my father caused all the windows
of this building to be strongly grated—as you see ; the
doors to be guarded by heavy locks and bolts—convince
yourself of that; and even the chimney he secured from
The Fourteen Deliverers. 95
the inside by good iron bars—look up ; it is quite impos¬
sible to clamber on to the roof through the chimney. He
hoped to get back the alchymist, or perhaps to get
another and a better one, and in this w^ay any repetition
of escape was obviated. But the old alchymist never
came back, for he had in the meantime been hanged at
Esslingen; and neither was any other one found. So
the rooms stood empty until to-day. But my father
has not made the bolts aii'l bars in vain, for now you
remain shut up here till all fourteen Deliverers are
ready. During that time you will neither see me nor
any other person, except my faithful seneschal, who will
be your gaoler and attendant. His face will not distract
you, as you have painted it already. 1 wish you a good
appetite for your breakfast!"
With these words the old man went out with his
servant, who locked and bolted the door with extraordi¬
nary agility.
In vain did Konrad Lenz call out to them the most
solemn protest against such a deed of violence—first
through the keyhole, and then through the window. "I
am a burgher of the Imperial city; it will free me and
avenge me I I am a Fellow of the Painters' Guild; it will
plead for me before Emperor and kingdom!" In vainl
Nobody heard him, except some sparrows before the win¬
dow, which flew away very much frightened.
Konrad's next resolve was not to touch a paint-brush
from this time, but instead to direct all his energies to
the task of finding out how he cculd either escape or else
give his friends news of him, so that they might procure
his freedom. But all attempts failed. The rooms were
light and spacious, not at all dungeon-like, only the
gratings and bolts were so firm that even an alchy¬
mist, who is certainly more expert in roguish tricks than
an innocent painter, could hardly have got out. The
seneschal did not bring niggardly prison fare, but, on the
contrary, excellent food and the best wine, and provided
all comforts. But no powers of persuasion prevailed with
the old bull-dog. and as long as he was in the room an
invisible hand held the door locked from the outside.
The rooms were on the ground-floor, as was to be expected
of the infernal kitchen of an alchymist, and the windows
looked out on a neglected garden, enclosed by the high
wall, over which peeped the distant forest summit; not a
neighbouring part of the castle nor a  person was any-
96 7 he Ladies' Edinhurgli Magazine.
where to be seen. And thus never was Carthusian in
his narrow cell more completely preserved from the dis¬
tractions of the world than was the artist in his remote
premises.
After he had done nothing for a week but loudly abused
the Knight, and gently shaken all the iron bars, he began
to find this simple occupation rather tedious. So he looked
at his coarsest bristle-brush and said, "If the lord of Hal-
tenberg compels me so coarsely to Avork, he for his part
shall only be served with this coarse brush. How a free
man can paint I have shown him; now he shall see how
one paints in bonds I"
And now with the bristle-brush he dashed off all the
still unfinished Deliverers nimbly and swiftly on the
tablets: Saints Erasmus, George, Egidius, Cliristopher,
Leonhard, and, lastly, St. Katharine also. They were
drawn like ginger-bread men, and coloured like tin
soldiers. Thereupon he sent the whole company to the
knight, Avith the message that, as the noble lord herewith
received his pictures, he might also now give him back
his liberty. But the seneschal brought the artistic
performances back without delay, with the answer, that
if Mr. Painter was in want of spirits and pumice to wash
the tablets clean again, a mounted messenger should
immediately fetch a sufficient store from the town.
M. E. Neil.
( To be continued.)
97
VII.—The Parliamentary Franchise for Women,
The object of this movement is to give to women house¬
holders,—that is, to women who pay rates and taxes as
men do, and are in every way legally qualified, except
that they are women,—the right to vote for members of
Parliament. It will be seen that this has nothing what¬
ever to do with married women, or with women living
with relations, or friends, or employers. It affects only
unmarried women and widows who annually pay their
rates and taxes in their own names; and the bill, Avere it
passed, would not compel them to vote, but only permit
them to do so if they wished.
WHien a number of persons make a demand of this
kind, before making up our minds on the subject one way
or another, there are two things to be considered—first,
the justice of the claim; and second, the advisability of
granting it. And unless we are certain that the inadvis-
ability outweighs the justice, we ought to grant it; not
only passively in om* own minds, but actively, doing all
that we can to further such a cause. For there are two
kinds of justice : negative justice, which means doing no
wrong; and positive justice, which means using all our
efforts to prevent wrong being done.
As regards the bare justice of this claim of women
householders to the Parliamentary franchise, there are
very few people who have thought about the subject who
are not ready to admit it. We know that at present
taxation is the basis of representation; that is, it has
been agreed that those people who pay as much as £4
rent in the year, with the rates and taxes accompanying
that rent, shall have the chief right of citizenship—a voice
in the election of their legislators. It is not considered
whether these people are educated, well behaved, or
physically strong. The vote of the man who is all these
is held of no higher account than the vote of the man who
is illiterate, a drunkard, and a cripple. Under the present
law, both possess equal qualifications, equal claim on the
attention of their legislators : because it is a recognised
thing that, no matter what kind of man he is, while he
pays rates and taxes out of his own pocket into the
public treasury, he has a right to look after the expendi-
No. 16.—April 1870. N
98 Tlie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
tiire of that money ; to vote for the man who he thinks
will best look after it for him in Parliament, Tlie franchise
is granted irrespectively of education, good behaviour, or
physical strength; and there is therefore no reason why
women should be debarred from it on the plea that they
are not mentally, morally, or physically strong enough:
yet the law holds good only in the case of men. It
ignores the fact that there are in every town over the
IJnited Kingdom women householders who pay their own
rates and taxes into the public treasury exactly as men
do ; whose taxes rise and fall in amount according to the
policy of the legislature, yet who are never allowed a
voice as to Avhat that policy shall be. While paying
taxes carries with it the right to vote for members of
Parliament, women rate-payers ought, as a matter of
simple justice, either to have that right conceded them, or
to be exempted from ratepaying.
Let us now consider the advisability of extending the
franchise to women. One of the remarks we most
frequently hear on this subject is, that the franchise
itself is not a prize worth fighting for, and that it would
be rather a trouble to women than a benefit. To vote
for a member of Parliament is not in itself a very serious
undertaking. Once in three or five years there is a
Parliamentary election in a town, and there are one or
two candidates put up at that election; and the house¬
holders in the town go to the polling-booths belonging to
their respective wards, and record their vote, by ballot, in
favour of the candidate whom they prefer. But this
right, simple as it seems, is an important one. Our whole
country is governed, for good or bad, by the men so
chosen. It is ihej who make and mend our laws. As a
body they direct the whole policy, foreign and internal,
of our kingdom. The franchise is a recognised power,
for which class after class has fought, as the men of class
after class have found that their ability to pass great
measures for their own and others' well-being was as
nothing until they had got it.
When any one class of people hold all the power in
their own hands, it is always found that they attend more
to their own interests than to the interests of other and
powerless classes. They may not mean to do so, but it
is impossible that they should help it. In every Parlia¬
mentary election the men ratepayers have all the power
in their own hands.    They can elect the men of whom
Woman s WorJc. 99
they approve to sit in Parliament, and look after their
interests for them. AVomen ratepayers have no share at
all in the choice of their legislators. And what is the
result? It is the duty of a member of Parliament to
represent the wishes of the people who put him into Parlia¬
ment. He sits in the House to look after their interests.
If he does not please them, he is turned out at the first
opportunity, in favour of somebody who will. 13ut the
women of his constituency did not help to put him into
Parliament, and cannot help to turn him out; therefore
he has no reason to consider their wishes. He may do so
if he likes ; and when they are identical with the wishes
of his men constituents, it will be easy enough for him to
do so. But supposing that sometimes these wishes and
interests clash, that what is Avashed for by women is
objected to by men, then in the present state of the
law, even if that member of Parliament is disinterested
enough to wish to further the claims of the women, it might
very justly be said that it is not his duty to do so, because
it is his first duty to pay attention to the wishes of those
people who sent him into Parliament.
At this time there are many questions under discussion
relating to the employment, education, property, and
treatment of women, which of course are of more imme¬
diate interest to women themselves than to men. Some
people assert that the interests of men and women ought
to be identified. They ought to be, perhaps, but they
are not: it is constantly found that laws have to be
made for the protection of women, their lives and
property, and it cannot be right that these laws should
be made entirely by men, who are chosen by men. Mr.
Forsyth has said, " Four-fifths of the measures which are
now before Parliament are such as directly affect women,
on which they are entitled to be heard, and upon which
their opinion would be extremely valuable." And yet it
is such an acknowledged thing that women are unable to
maintain their causes, that a member of Parliament has
been heard to say that to carry a Bill relating to women
in the House is as difficult as to pull a loaded artillery-
waggon without horse-power. If Avomen had tlie fran¬
chise, this state of things would be altered.
It is sometimes said that, if the franchise were extended
to women, they would become unwomanly, and would
neglect their household cares; and we should indeed be
sorry if this were the case.    But of such evils we must
100 Tlie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
not prophesy, but jiTdge from our experience; and we
have had a good deal of experience to help us. Women
in England do vote at present at municipal elections
(they are debarred from doing so in Scotland, because
the mimicipal vote here carries with it the right of Parlia¬
mentary voting). They are allowed to vote in both
England and Scotland at School Board elections ; and in
none of these cases have evil results been seen. No ugly
transformation has occurred among the women of Edin¬
burgh since three years ago, when they went up in large
numbers to the polhng-booths and voted for members of
the School Board. And this leads us to ask, Do women
want the franchise ? This also can only be answered
from the experience we have already had. No doubt all
Avomen ratepayers would not avail themselves of their
right; neither do all men. But it cannot be denied that
a great many women do sincerely wish to have it. Some
few years ago, just before a Parliamentary election, a
canvass was made of half the women householders in
Manchester, to iind out what proportion of them Avished
for the franchise, and would use it if they had it; and it
was found that 90 per cent, of them desired to vote. In
the municipal elections over England the proportional
number of men and women voters has been the same.
It is unfair to judge of the prevailing wish on this subject
by consulting only the opinions of women who are not in
the position of householders. It is unfair to ask only the
opinion of the more fortunately situated among Avomen,
whether they be householders or not. Those who are
happy never want anything. We ought also to consult
the women of the loAver and lower-middle classes; the
householders among the 3,000,000 of Avomen of England
who are at present earning their oAvn liA^elihood by their
brains or their hands, on Avhoiu the disadvantages of our
laAV press most lieaAnly. The majority of working women
will be found to take an intelligent interest in the ques¬
tion ; and it has been ascertained that the wives of clergy¬
men, Avho are necessarily familiar Avith the trials and
Avants of the Avorking classes, are almost unanimously in
favour of extending the franchise to Avomen. If women
householders were allowed to vote at a Parliamentary
election, is it to be supposed that they Avould neglect to
use this vote for the purpose of sending a man into Par¬
liament who Avould attend to their interests for them?
And if they would \oiQ, if these Avomen are qualified in all
Woman's Work. 101
particulars, and claim their right to vote, surely the pre¬
sent state of our representation is unfair ; surely the com¬
munity would be better governed if its legislators were
elected jointly by men and women, and pledged to guard
the interests of both men and women witli equal care.
This movement is by no means a new or unimportant
one, It was begun in the year 1866 ; and I believe last
year it was acknowledged that more petitions were sent
up for this than for any other question before the House,
except the Permissive Bill. In 1866 the first petition
on the subject was sent up to Parliament signed by
1500 Avomen; and every year since, petitions have been
sent \\j) signed by all kinds of people, men and women,
throughout the United Kingdom, always with increased
numbers of signatures :—
In 186T
13,4-.5 i
Signatures.
1868
f)O,0()0
do.
1869
76,475
do.
1870
.  109,761
do.
1871
186,976
do.
1872
.  350,093
do.
1873
.  328,206
do.
1874
390,000
do.
1875
.  415,622
do.
In 1867 an amendment was proposed to the New
Eeform Bill, to include women in its provisions for
representation; and seventy-five members voted in its
favour. Since that. Bills have been brought before the
House with the following results:—
1870 .
124 For.
91 Against.
1871 .
159 do.
228  do.
1872 .
163 do.
242  do.
1873 .
172 do.
239  do.
1875 .
170 do.
205  do.
It will be seen from this table that in 1870 the Bill did
actually pass; but it was afterwards thrown out in
Committee. It will be seen also that the interest in the
subject has steadily increased, and that last year the
votes against were less than they have been in any year
since that in which they were in a minority. In Scotland
the movement has gone on vigorously. Of the Scot¬
tish Members half are pledged in favour of Women's
Suffrage, and some are neutral. Last year a memorial
from 10,127 women of Scotland was presented to the
Eight Hon. B. Disraeli, and of the Scotch Town Councils
no fewer than sixteen jyytitioned in favour of the Bill.
102 Tlie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
Among   these    were   Edinburgli,   Aberdeen,   Dumfries,
Dunbar, Forfar, Cupar, Galashiels, Hawick, Jedburgh, &c.
Among the eminent women who have signed the
petitions we may mention—Miss Mary Carpenter, Mrs.
Cowden Clark, Miss Frances Power Cobbe, Mary Howitt,
Florence Nightingale, Mrs. Mary Somorville, and Siisanna
A\^ink worth.
The movement is being carried on this year with
renewed vigour. Petitions are now being signed through¬
out England, Scotland, and Ireland; and IMr. Forsyth,
Conservative ]\Iember for Marylebone, will bring forward
the Bill early in April.
In conclusion, we may say that this is not a party
question. The Bill was introduced in the House of
Commons last year by Mr. Forsyth, Q.C., Sir Robert
Anstruther, the Right Hon. Rnssell Gurney, and the
Right lion. James Staufeld ; of these gentlemen, two are
Conservatives, and two Liberals. Of the present Govern¬
ment, fifteen Members vote for the Bill. Mr. Disraeli has
voted for it four times. On the Liberal side of the House
the question has always met with warm support.
Flora Ma.sson.
lU'rolhctions of tire |3<ist.
Letter I.
My Dear Friend,—It has been said that the past and
the future often seem more real to us than the present.
This of course does not apply to all natures equally, and
must greatly depend on the relative degrees in which
memory, imagination, and hope prevail in the character.
The healthiest state of mind, no doubt, is that which, Avhile
it cherishes tender recollections of the past and cheerful
hope for the future, has yet that wholesome conscious¬
ness of the present which gives its true tone to life and
life's 'work. Yet as one grows older, and as advancing
years Avithdraw us from more active pursuits, how often
do " the sessions of sweet silent thought " summon back
much that is interesting to ourselves personally; and in as
far as possessing a connection with characters and events
of any note, may be interesting to others. At least so you
tell me, and in the meantime I will try to think so : and
Recollections of the Past. 103
to begin at the beginning, will, first of all, interrogate my¬
self to find out how far back I can carry my remembrances.
I have a faint vision of myself at about three years old
connected with a pair of black velvet shoes, objects of my
admiration, and given to console me when  carried to a
ladies' school, the mistress of which was to take charge
of me for a few days during the absence of my father and
mother.    It must have been about this time also that I
either remember, or it has been told me so often that I
think  1  remember, that being made a great pet of by
my grandmother, Mrs. Siddons, I utilised her as a play¬
mate, to tlie extent of requiring her to assume the charac¬
ter of my cook, and to receive my orders and admonitions;
which she did, I am told, with an endeavour to suit her
dignified demeanour to the occasion which was extremely
amusing to those  looking on.     She was very fond of
children, and being accustomed to be treated with awe and
respect, which after all must have been somewhat chilling,
the change to the perfect freedom with which.I ordered her
about and rebuked her shortcomings, seemed to be quite
an amusement and refreshment  to  her.       One  of her
leading characteristics, and one not unusual  as an ac¬
companiment to real genius, was extreme simplicity and
perfect trustfulness, which led her to put entire faith in
professions  which by many would have been received
as the mere civility and politeness of social intercourse.
This was carried to a great extent when her landlord,
•   Mr. Cokerill, the proprietor of her pretty little residence,
Westbourne Farm, requested her to do  as she liked in
ordering alterations which she thought would add to her
comfort.    She quietly announced one day that she meant
to order the roof to be taken off".    Her family suggested
that this would be rather an extreme measure, and might
startle the proprietor.   She yielded, but added, " Why, you
know he  said that I was to do what I hked with his
property."   A good deal, however, was done, and it was a
very pretty place, though rather small;   so small indeed,
that when the Prince Regent came to visit her, which he
occasionally did, the bystanders said the house looked as
if it had been built round these two stately forms.    In
this house there was a pretty modelling-room attached to
the  drawing-room, wliere my  grandmother spent many
an hour, and I remember her fine figure as she stood for
hours, wonderfully untired, at the work she loved so well,
I was quite a child, but she made me read to her while
104 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
she modelled, which I did with perfect unconsciousness
that it would have been considered an alarming position
by many people.
It must  have been  before  this, for it Avas almost in
my infancy, that  when my grandmother came to Edin¬
burgh  to act,  and was to perform Volumnia in " Corio-
lanus," my father being the Coriolanus,  and my mother
Virgilia,  it suddenly  occurred to  her   that    she   would
like   to   complete   the   family group   by  bringing  me
on   as  the   " grandchild to her blood."    My father and
mother were  tempted,  but after  a little struggle,  my
father said that he could not do it, as he was resolved
that no child of his should make the stage a profession.
So my " childish footsteps did not tread the stage."    It
was, however, no disrespect to the profession of an actor
that made my father so determined on this point.   He did
not look upon it as one in any way inc jmpatible with moral
or with mental excellence ;  but  he   did not  consider it
healthful to either miad or body to live in the perpetual
strain of nervous excitement, and in the constant exercise
of the imaginative faculties necessary to the attainment
of excellence in this art.    It interfered, he thought, with
the calmer, soberer views of life, which he considered, and
perhaps rightly, to be most conducive to happiness.   And
yet, is not this drawback inseparable from the practice
of all the fine arts %   Poets, painters,  musicians, all must
feel this,  they all must   "learn in suffering what  they
teach in song." Yet we cannot wish them not to be : they
are, in a great measure, the sweeteners, the refiners, the
elevators of our  every-day life.    One poet, the greatest,
seemed to be beyond this penalty, and, if we can judge
from the little we know, had not the irritability of genius.
To return to Westbotirne Farm. It was there I first saw
my dear " friend of many days," Lady Noel Byron, Avhose
love never failed me, and whose memory is very precious
to me. At that time she probably hardly recognised my
existence, but, a very few years afterwards, circumstances
led to my being an inmate of her house at Seaham, that
home she loved so well. She was in great grief and
suffering, and she has often told me that the interest she
felt for me—the occupation of teaching, playing with, and
loving me—brought her more cheerfulness and comfort
than anything else could have done. If I was a comfort
to her, what has she not been to me since'? a true, tender,
and maternal friend.   She has been thought cold by those
Recollections of the Past. 105
who did not know her, but I often think of those soft,
almond-shaped, blue eyes, which never looked on me but
tenderly, and wish that she could have been known more
truly as she was, and less as a somewhat reserved, shy
manner caused her to appear. She had a great admira¬
tion and respect for my grandmother; and I have the
letter in which she communicated her approaching mar¬
riage with Lord Byron; a letter so full of hope, that
the results which so soon followed seem sad indeed.
From Westbourne Farm we went to my uncle John
Kemble's house in Great Russell Street. I liked him very
much; his manner with children was gentle and kindly,
which, accompanied by his beautiful face and stately bear¬
ing, was very engaging. He was, however, very particular
about our mode of speaking, and certain expressions he
never allowed us to use. One most specially prohibited
was the word funny} If he caught the sound from our
mouths, he turned his grave, expressive glance upon us,
and said solemnly, " There is no such word as funny in
the English language. You may use droll, comical, enter¬
taining, but funny is not a word." This stern prohibition
remained on my mind for many a day. I felt funny a
word forbid, though I confess I sometimes snatched a
fearful joy ia using it, as it would occur to my ill-regulated
mind that comical, droll, or even entertaining, did not quite
meet the ideal meant to express by the word funny. But
I think I must always have done it with a sense of guilt, re¬
membering those expressive looks and tones. What would
these looks have said now to the words in frequent use ?
A wrong word, or one wrongly pronounced, must have
affected him as a wrong note in music affects a musician.
A story is told of him, that dining one day with a party
of gentlemen, Mrs. Kemble called in her carriage to take
him home, and sent up word tliat she was waiting for him.
Being, I suppose, very comfortable, he did not at once
attend her summons. She sent again more urgently ;
the servant gave the message, " Mrs. Kemble says, sir,
she is very bad with the rheumatis, and can't wait." My
uncle politely turned to Lord Giiildford, who was his
host, and asked permission to correct his servant, which,
' The adjective " funny " is not found in Johnson. " Fun " is described
as a " low cant word, " signifying sport, high merriment, frolicksome delight.
In Tod's supplement to Johnson (1818), "funny, " adj. (from fun), "comical,
» Northern word, and now common in colloquial language."
Ko. 16.—Aphil 1876. 0
106 The Ladies' Edinhurgh Magazine.
of course, was instantly accorded, and to the amusement
of everybody he addressed him, " Tell Mrs. Kemble I
can't come; and the next time you iise that word say ism."
Mrs. Kemble was a spirited, active, little woman, a
great contrast in every respect to her husband, by whom
her name, Priscilla, was changed into Pop, which some¬
how conveyed a good idea of her perpetual, quick, and
sudden movements. However, she was a devoted wife, and
his house and household were patterns of order and com¬
fort. Everything went by clockwork, and the clockwork
was oiit of sight and sound, a great comfort to a studious,
occupied man. He valued her highly, though sometimes
he could not resist a smile at her peculiarities. He said
that when about to travel in Italy he prepared himself by
carefully studying Dante, Tasso, &c., getting up his
grammar, together with treatises on the language; but,
he added, when the journey began, and he was consulting
dictionary and grammar, and endeavouring to address
landlords, waiters, and conductors in strains very likely
most unfamiliar to their ears, his faithful Pop, like a bright
little sparrow, darted into the midst of the somewhat
bewildered group, jumbled verbs, nouns, and adjectives
together, in most admired disorder—set grammar and
dictionary at defiance, but made herself perfectly under¬
stood, and produced all that was wanted, leaving him to
the enjoyment of his studies, but completely beaten from
the field.
When Mr. and Mrs. Kemble came to Edinburgh, we
were constantly with them ; indeed she made us come to
her every evening, and, with her usual activity of mind,
used to read to us, translating Madam Genlis' Tales of
the Castle, to improve her French, she said ; and draw¬
ing little morals for us as she went along. One of her
modes of entertaining us was of rather mixed enjoyment
to me. She delighted in telling us ghost stories, always
explaining them in the end, by way of curing us of
superstition. Now, as we had never been in the habit
of hearing ghost stories,'there was nothing to cure; but as
she told them very well, it happened before the explana¬
tion took place our nerves were worked up, and we were
left more impressed by the terrors of the tale than by the
sober reasoning at the end. One story I particularly
remember, of a poor girl who had lost her lover by death,
and who at a certain hour every night declared that she
saw his ghost.   Her friends, hoping to dispel this allusion,
Recollections of the Past. 107
dressed some one up exactly as she described the
appearance, who was to present himself precisely at the
same time, and then the poor girl was to be persiiaded
that this was what she had always seen. The hour came,
the false and true both appeared : she exclaimed, " En
yoila deux," and died. " Now, " said my aunt, " one was
the figure raised by her imagination, the other the figure
represented by her friends." Of this I did not pretend to
judge, I only knew that my imagination was fearfully
excited, and that I did not look forward to being alone
in the dark with so much composure as usual.
Mrs. Kemble had travelled in Ireland with my uncle
during the fearful times of the Whiteboys, as the rebels
were called, and she told a dreadful story of their putting
up in a country inn in one of the most disturbed districts.
The inn was in a very dilapidated condition, and they
could see through the boards of their bedroom into the room
below, into which the body of one of these poor men was
brought, he having been killed in a skirmish with the troops.
For some time I was haunted by the idea of the poor
dead Whiteboy, the name even conveying a very ghostly
impression to me. Nevertheless, we enjcyed these visits
very much, especially Avhen, owing to a short play, my
uncle came home before we were sent for, which was
the next best thing to going to the theatre. When he
took leave of the Edinburgh stage, my sister cried so
bitterly during the reading of the farewell address,
that my aunt tried to stop her, saying, " Come, come, look
at me ; I am not crying." " No," said my sister, " but you
are going home to sup with Lim." When he was told, he
said, "Why did you not bring her home to sup with me?"
The address was the very touching one beginning, " As
the worn war-horse at the trumpet's sound," written for
the occasion by Sir AValter Scott.^
We were often at Su- Walter Scott's at this time ;
indeed he was the first to welcome my father and mother
when they came to Scotland, literally receiving them on
the Border, at the house in which he then lived when in
the country, Ashestiel. My mother has told me that, with
characteristic nationality, he had ordered cockie-leekie
and haggis to form part of their first dinner. The
cockie-leekie was successful, but when he looked for the
haggis, he saw nothing but a covered dish. " Where is
the haggis, Charlotte?" he said anxiously to his wife;
' Scott's Poetical Works, " Globe " edition, 1869, p. 453.
108 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine,
who replied in her broken English, " Oh, my dear Scott,
it is so ugly I have made them to hide it in a deep dish."
My mother said that he seemed to take the affront to his
haggis quite to heart. Afterwards we used to go to
children's dances at his house in Castle Street, where he
was always kind and genial, giving special encourage¬
ment to the dancing of reels, and the necessary
accompaniments of good Scotch music. He did not care
for any vocal music, with tha exception of ballads; and he
used to make my mother sing "Young Lochinvar" to
him constantly, and always admired the expression she
gave to the arch and spirited words. Of my mother I
can scarcely venture to speak. There are still some few
who remember her, and who will not wonder at the deep
love and reverence she left in the hearts of her children. I
may, however, be permitted to transcribe here a sonnet
wiitten by one who has since distinguished himself as a
sculptor in Rome, and who at one time asked to be
allowed to take a bust of her; but she did not wish it,
saying that her features were not pronounced enough for
sculpture. He showed by these lines that he could
appreciate her character as well as admire her outward
grace.
To Mrs. Henry Siddons.
High aims, pure thoughts, deep feelings, and a mind
Bright with intelligence and light divine
Are Heaven's best gift to man, and they are thine.
Unchanging, tranquil, gentle, meek, resigned,
With every virtue in thy soul enshrined,
Thou'lt stUl be lovely tho' thy days decline.
And with thy vtreath of honour wilt entwine
The love, esteem, and friendship of mankind.
And bear them with thee to thy life's repose,
Surrounded by the peace and love of heaven,
With nothing on thy mind to be forgiven.
In morning's loveliness thy spirit rose.
And, though in noontide life it may have striven,
How calmly beautiful its evening's close !
And now, I think, in case you should feel yourself in
the position of the man who discovered the word by
w^hich a piece of machinery could be set in motion, but to
his dismay found that he had neglected to provide himself
with the countersign by which it could be stopped, I will
release you for the present.—Remaining always yours
very sincerely, E. H. M.
109
r.iiJo ®lalcljmg iht §cp:arlmg JItct of l^cncas.
jEnbas on landing on the coast of Libya is met by his mother Venus, who
envelops him and his companions in a cloud, in order that they may make their
way into Carthage unperceived. There, entering the Temple of Juno, they
see Illoneus and other of their friends whose ship had been separated from
theirs by a gale. Dido enters, and seating herself on a throne, proceeds to
dispense laws to her subjects, when liioneus, addressing her, relates the story
of his shipvrreck, and claims protection for himself and his companions. This
she readily grants, at the same time expressing a wish that j9ilneas, too, were
there ; immediately on which, the cloud by which the Trojan prince Ls con¬
cealed dispels, displaying him to view. Subsequent events, and the despair
and suicide of Dido on being deserted by JEneSiS, are well known.—j£neid.
Book I.
Gone ! and I am left alone—alone ! Oh, dying star
Of morn, that trail'st all pale in track of night's retreating car,
Or thou, white waning moon, that from my tower, wind-clasp'd and
I watch, low-hung and languid in the opal-tinted sky, [iiigh,
Could I, ye gods! but fade from out my weary life as thou
Dost fade in restful calm from out the kindling heavens now !
Oh dawn, that glimm'ring creep'st around the slow-awak'ning world,
Revealing to my burning eyes the swelling sails unfurled
Of him, my love, my faithless love who flies me, unto thee
Close darkness all her secrets deep doth yield, yet thou dost see
Naught, naught o'er all the wide-spread earth thy glance far-flashing
More bitter than these bitter tears Sidonian Dido weeps I  [sweeps,
Ye foaming waves that wildly wash my lone tower's weed-grown
base.
And fiercely hurrying seem the skimming sea-bird's flight to chase,
Come ye to me in triumph, to my stricken heart to say
That on your breast from me afar ye bear my love away ?
Oh, long-drawn sands, oh, dreary sands, in yellow richness rolled,
With sea-born lakelets glist'ning dashed—pale gems on field of gold,
No life is there, no moving form o'er all your sleeping space.
Where ere while bard-sung heroes thronged, born of the Trojan race.
Now gone, all gone, their footprints e'en smoothed by the sweeping
wind ;
Yes, gone, and naught but lone despair broods, longing vain, behind!
Only the green and curling surf breaks in its sparkling sheen.
Only the voice of the pitiless sea speaks to the desolate queen !
Yet Queen is she still.   See yon red level sun
O'er whose disc glide, dark-winged as the wild vulture dun,
His ships that I count as they pass one by one—
Ah, ne'er to return !
110 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
Doth that sun not encrimson yon temple-crowned height ?
Those palaces stately, and ramparts of might ?
And on the high shrine where tirst falleth tlie light
On gold doth he burn !
And all, all are mine, all were born of my power !
Oh, Carthage, bright Carthage, of cities the flower,
!Not the wide world doth boast of a nobler dower
Than thy fair demesne !
And still round my brow like a halo from heaven
The rich lustre glows by a diadem given ;
Nor e'er from my hand shall the sceptre be riven—
Ay, still am I Queen !
And o'er all the broad land, from mountain to sea.
Ten thousand heart-throbs speak allegiance to me,
Ten thousand keen blades at my regal decree
Would flash in the air !
What then ?—shall I ?—Yes ! Carthaginians, vmfurl
Your sails, let the waves round your flying prows curl;
Pursue him, and on his head fierce slaughter hurl—
Nay—I speak in despair.
And despair doth breed frenzy ! Oh, heart of mine, rest;
And be calm, throbbing brain !   Shall in death-seeking quest
The red shaft of vengeance by this hand be thrown
'Gainst that breast whose wild beating re-echoed my own ?
Shall that form these fond arms were in joy wont to clasp
Be doomed by my word to heave life's parting gasp?
No, ah no ! live, my love ! though forgetful of me,
Live, live for the glory that waitetli for thee.
And morning wind new-born, around me that sings
Wild music, with rhythm of murmuring wings,
Oh, waft him your freshness and breathe in his ear.
As coos the fond dove to his brooding mate near.
Amid the gi-een gloom of yon far woodland hill,
' Sad Dido deserted, yet loveth thee—loveth thee still!'
Ah rae ! mine eyes, deep springs of ever-brimming tears, look down
The long grey glade of thought with mem'ry's joy-lights star-like
strown.
And where those lights fall brightest, where a'rainbow radiance
I see a clearly pictured morn, a phantom morn that teems [streams,
With bliss unborn, yet born to die ere many moons had looked
Upon its rosy life.    I see a sun no cloud-bar brooked,
But widely wove its golden web o'er wave and wood and wold,
And spread its quivering meshes o'er the level street, where rolled
'J'he deftly guided chariot, and where thronged the crowd, and round
Enwrapt with it the soaring tower, and o'er the green rich ground
Trailed far its glittering glory: blazing on the milky wall
Of Juno's high-browed fane, I see the glowing splendour fall.
Dido Watching the Departing Fleet of ^neas.       Ill
And passed the portal rich, I find another splendour there
Of column tall, and gold, and gems, and pictured story fair;
And mount again in thought the throne mid faithful hearts set high,
Where, watched by waiting eyes, whose glance spoke deep theirfealty,
I, Dido, sat, and life and law gave to the listening throng;
And on mine ear, as in a dream, sweet as the night-bird's song
The Trojan accents fall, first heard when forth to wond'ring view
Stood Ilioneus sudden, while wrecked, wave-beat, round him drew
The dauntless men of Ilium, who Anchises' princely son
Far followed since the fiery night when Troy was lost and won.
I hear them refuge crave, and glimm'ring dim athwart the crowd,
See, soft in silv'ry faintness, float the goddess-given cloud.
Which, whilemyfuU heart murmured ' Would^neas too were here,'
In trembling haze dream-like dispelled, and showed the hero near ;
As when, with crown of Eastern gold, bright Phoebus breaketh
through
The clust'ring morning mists, so god-like shone he out;  and flew
Swift silent moments on, ere pulses learned to beat again
Stilled by surprise.—Oh, mem'ries sweet! oh, passionate and vain !
Plunge ye in Lethe's stream, and with its icy waters lave
This burning brain; and hide, ah, hide in pity 'neath the wave,
Thecreeping wave, the slow still depths that in their blackness shine,
The joy-wild thought of that wild time—he loved me, he was mine!
And now, ye gods ! now, what for me lone and left doth remain ?
Naught,naught butthesightof his breeze-wooing sails swiftthatgain
The sea-line's far verge, ere yon up-rolling sun rideth high,
To sink, slow engulfed where the wave mingleth blue with the sky,
To dim unknown seas !
Ah, is it the shivering rush of the keen morning air.
That freezeth my heart through the fire of its fevered despair ?
Or is it, Avernus, a wind on thy dark breast that wakes.
And drencheth my life with the chill of thy ghostly foam-flakes.
Thick tossed on the breeze ?
And is it a sound from the deep-hollowed echoing cave,        [rave,
Where moan the pent winds, and where white-lashed the long billows
That rings in the air ? Or, afar from the bleak Stygian shores.
Where wander the wan dead, a wild wail that ceaselessly pours,
And calls to me ' Come' ?
It pierceth my ear through my veil's saffron folds close enwound,
As pierceth the chill to my heart through this mantle around
Tightly drawn.    It telleth the swift step of death cometh nigh.
It speaks of the pyre that below i-eady piled standeth high,
In a voice never dumb.
Ah ! for me waits that pyre, withthe light of its blaze to illume
The shadowy pathway that leadeth adown from the tomb
112 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
To the desolate strand, where my shade 'mong the shuddering dead
Must wander in woe, ere the night o'er the dim world hath spread
Her hushed sanctity !
Oh,glad world,farewell! Ne'er again shall these eyes watch the gold
Of thy morn, or the spell of thy night: Soon, ah, soon shall unfold
To my lost love the death-beacon's glow flashing red o'er the deep,
The fate of lone Dido, by him left uupitied to weep.
And abandoned to die.
Melensa.
% ^horl iistorjT o{ Piss IoUit Saurkir.
Born in 1868—Dibd October 1875.
"Full many a flower is born to bkish unseen," is the
thought suggested to my mind as I sit down to write of
my departed friend Polly, the subject of the following
memoir. And yet the qiiotation is hardly applicable, as,
although she spent her whole life, with the exception of
early infancy, in a retired and beautiful home in the
Highlands of Scotland, she was heartily appreciated by a
large circle of friends. Indeed, the fame of her brilliant
powers of conversation was such, that in summer she had
often quite a levee of visitors from the neighboiirhood far
and near. It is this appreciation of the genius of a ftimily
remarkable for talent, that must be my apology for bring¬
ing her before the public.
Polly Lawley was born in the tropics, but was brought
to this country when quite an infant, and very soon after
became a member of the household in which she resided
until her death. Oddly enough, this took place through a
mistake. Dr. and Mrs. L— wished to adopt an older
member of the same family, avIio had already acquired
some education. By some stupid blunder, poor little
Polly, scarcely more than a baby, was sent off instead of
her elder sister, and arrived late one evening, frightened
and bewildered. To send her back on the long journey,
tired as she was, would have been too cruel. Compassion
insured her a home for a few days, and though she con¬
tinued shy and silent for a time, she soon endeared her¬
self by her winning ways to her guardians too much to be
parted with. Her remarkable talents were early of
developing.   As in all young people, the imitative faculties
A SJiort History of Miss Polly Laicley. 113
were the first to awaken. Being a good deal out-of-doors,
she soon learned the notes and cries of the various wild
birds and of the animals about the place.
She grew fast, and was apparently of a healthy and
vigorous constitution, showing no symptoms of delicacy
until her last illness. True, she had a severe attack of
Avhooping-cough, which she, as Avell as her friend
Mrs. L—, caught from some children near. But
although the cough was severe, and the whoop well de¬
fined, it did not seem to affect her general health.
Indeed, it was shrewdly suspected that much of its
severity was due to her inveterate love of mimicry, and
that she was slyly poking fun at the real invalids all the
time.
Polly's manners were in general lively and vivacious.
She could, when she chose, speak with refinement and
elegance of accent. As a faithful biographer, however,
truth compels me to add that she was apt at times to be
unguarded in her expressions, and to speak her mind
rather too freely. When she found perfect politeness to
be incompatible with perfect sincerity, the former invari¬
ably had to give way to the latter. Her temper was
hasty when offended, and if you happened to be a thin-
skinned individual, the remarks she made might chance
to cut rather deeply. To do her justice, however, she
generally warned you beforehand, " Take care; Polly
bites." No doubt my friend was a little eccentric, but
allowance must be made for her, as there was a touch of
insanity in the family. Miss Lawley had delusions
occasionally, one of which was that she held a high
official station at Court. Poor thing I she had never been
at Court in her life, and the office she claimed was one most
unsuitable for a female ; nevertheless, she constantly de¬
clared with great decision, " Poll's the king's trumpeter."
If doubt were cast on this statement, she had no hesitation
in saying, " You're a piece of impertinence." Miss Lawley
was extremely musical, and had that accomplishment, so
rare in a lady, of whistling with great ease and sweetness.
Besides performing the comparatively easy task of " The
Quaker's AVife" and " Yankee Doodle," she attempted
composition on her own account, and left an unfinished
piece of music at her death, called " Polly's Opera." She
practised this piece with great perseverance, repeating
the same notes each time she tried it, and often recurring
to it.
No. 16.—Apml 1876. p
114 Tlie Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
Polly's taste in dress was, unlike that of some of her
relations, quiet and ladylike. She was invariably to be
seen attired in a close-fitting suit of grey of two shades,
relieved by a little bright colour about the skirt.
My friend was very sound on ecclesiastical questions,
and held strong prejudices against Papacy. "No Popery"
was her watchword, and she was often heard to express
her admiration of a certain well-known leader of the
Scotch Protestant party, in terms more enthusiastic than
ladylike — " Begg's the boy." Her favourite hymn
showed her to incline to the practical—"Dare to be a
Daniel." Polly had a considerable talent for acquiring
foreign languages, being able to converse in French,
Gaelic, Irish, and Hindostanee. She was generally shy
at first with strangers, and was heard to greatest advan¬
tage by those residing in the house with her. Some¬
times, however, she would welcome by name a little
nephew, who was a frequent visitor—" A— L—, come
aAvay."
Her strongest afFections were reserved for her guardian,
Dr L—. Did she see him putting on his boots to go oiit,
she never forgot to bid him " Good-bye." Nor could
he remain long out of sight without her voice being heard
crying, " Where's Polly's good master ? " Perhaps it
may give a better idea of Miss Lawley's wonderful tact
and association of fitting ideas in conversation, and also
of the life and vivacity to be found in her society, if I
endeavour to recall the incidents which happened during
one day of a visit to her last summer.
But first, I must describe the rather unpropitious com¬
mencement of my acquaintance with her, which took
place some years ago. I had heard much of her famous
powers of talking, and when calling at my friend's house,
begged to see her. After being duly introduced, I
endeavoured to enter into conversation with her,—to no
purpose. Like some other great people when inter¬
viewed, not feeling inclined to converse, she did not exert
herself to do so. Her friend, ]\Irs. L—, excused her by say¬
ing she had a constitutional dislike to strangers, and
especially to being stared at. It was then suggested we
should leave the room, and remain within hearing. In
that case we might chance to overhear some witty remark
or comment on ourselves, as she was given to soliloquy.
We accordingly stood in the ante-chamber for some time,
but not a syllable did Miss Lawley utter, till in despair I
A Short History of Miss Polly Lawley. 115
said to Mrs L—, " I fear we cannot wait any longer ; good¬
bye." Than a sulky voice came from within, "Ta, ta,"
and so we parted.
To return, however, to our day with Polly last sum¬
mer. That morning, as on every other morning of my
visit, as the breakfast hour drew near, the bell was
sounded with great energy, and many times in succession,
by Poll's clever voice. I happened to enter the room first,
and was saluted with a curt and careless " Good morn¬
ing." Next appeared her beloved master, whom she
accosted in a deep rumbling bass voice, which seemed to
roll up from Avhere her boots might have been had she
been in the habit of wearing boots, " Good mawrning."
A lady visitor, coming in just behind, had her ears
pierced with a tin-kettle screech—" Good marning."
Then, on Mrs L—'s entrance, accompanied by her favourite
little dog, the latter was at once briefly and gruffly com¬
manded, in broad Scotch, " Tak your parritch, Pompey,"
a command which Pompey, doubtless, was only too
willingly hastening to obey, but had not time to swallow
a mouthful when Miss LaAvley called out in authoritative
tones—" Come here, Pompey. Come away, wee doggie.
Come, come 1 Beg up ! Beg up I" Then in a wheedling
tone—" Pretty wee dog. Poor wee Pompoo." This
latter was, as far as could be ascertained, a word of
her own coining. She frequently called the dog by it,
prolonging the last syllable in a very high key—" Pomp-
oo-oo."
Pompey bore all this chaff meekly, and remained beside
his mistress with apparent indifference, until she addressed
some trifling remark to Polly. This the little jealous
heart could not tolerate, aud with a yelp and a rush
he flew at the young lady, who thereupon forgot her
manners, and rudely cried out, " Eh! Would ye! Go
down, sir I    Bad dog."
After Pompey's feelings were soothed and quietness
restored we sat down to breakfast, but had scarcely
commenced when we were alarmed by Miss Lawley
suddenly declaring she felt ill. " Polly's sick—call the
doctor." I think now it could only have been a hysteri¬
cal attack, for she as suddenly recovered, and quickly
added, " Hang the doctor, call the cook. Buns and
milk for Pretty Poll," showing she required food rather
than physic.
Presently she seemed to think her behaviour had been
116 The Ijadies Edinburgh Magazine.
rather eilly, for she frankly announced, " Polly's a hum¬
bug. " Some one then took her at her word, and said—
" Indeed you are, Polly." But disparaging oneself, and
allowing another to do so, are very different tilings, as we
all know, so Miss Lawley at once retorted in her most
polished English accents, " Polly's a beauty. Polly's a
charming bird. PoUy-olly-oi-oi." Gentility soon palled,for
the next instant she relapsed into the broadest Doric, and
gratuitously informed us—" Ma name's Polly,—what's
yoor's f Really I begin to fear I have not chosen a day
for exhibiting my friend in her most amiable aspect, for
I grieve to say she was inexcusably rude to one of the
ladies of the party, who had cold in the head. No sooner
did the frequently required handkerchief peep from the
lady's pocket, than Miss Lawley at once anticipated the
expected result, and blew her imaginary nose with an
imaginary pocket-handkerchief! The maid came into
the room to receive some order, and before she could
answer her mistress, Polly mimicked her quiet, " Yes,
m'm," and then added on her own account, " All right."
When dinner-time came, Miss Lawley made no round¬
about hints as to the state of her health or appetite, but
boldly demanded, "Give Polly a bone. Polly wants
her dinner." She was never known to ask for a bone
except during dinner.
The afternoon being fine, our friend enjoyed some hours
in the open air. The sight of the surrounding woods
seemed to recall an adventure of her early days with pain
and remorse. " Polly was up a tree. Oh dear me. Polly
was up a tree.    Oh! the rascal."
A friend's baby came to call, and was introduced to
Miss Lawley, but she did not seem to appreciate the dear
little fairy so much as some of us. She looked sulky, and
remained obstinately silent. Jealousy, perhaps, was at
the bottom of this, as after baby left she was overheard
repeating her friend Mrs. L—'s words in a jeering tone,
" Speak to baby, Polly; speak to baby," followed by a
succession of those indescribable sounds supposed to be
suitable to the understanding of infants. After such
childish frivolity, our friend evidently thought it time to
improve her mind by practising her foreign languages.
" Comment vousportez-vous. Kimmer ach an dhu} Kimmer a
ha 0-0-0." Not being a Celtic scholar, I cannot vouch for the
' Ciamar tha sibh an diugh.
A Short History of Miss Polly Lawley. 117
correct spelling of the above Gaelic, nor for the following
Irish saying, which I believe means, " Give me a kiss, my
little girl," " T/mnum, pock mi callian og."^ Poll was quite
beyond my comprehension when she said, " Et tiree ma,"
but I leave that to Hindostanee scholars. All this seri¬
ous study was varied by little interludes, such as an angry
remonstrance to the cats, whose voices she took off very
successfully. " Miau ! miau ! oh thae cautsj I'll give you
a beating," followed by the contradictory remark, " Oh !
you darling." After a time solitude lost its charms, for
she cried loudly, '• It rains ; take Polly in."
I suppose she felt the air chilly, for when she was
brought in and placed on the floor for a few minutes, she
at once drew attention to the open window by imitating
the sound of shutting it, and said, " Polly's cold." " Shut
that window." " Shut that back door." She then asked
the maid to lift her to her usual place. " Madeleine, put
Polly up," and rewarded her for her trouble by saying,
" Give Polly a kiss."    " Oh, thank you."
Although fond of the open air, she had an inveterate
dislike to an open window, and would often say, " Don't
put it up."
Polly seemed to have got an extra good appetite by
her afternoon in the fresh air, and was in a great hurry
for something to eat.    " Give Polly her supper."
After tea we were engaged in lively conversation, in
which, however. Miss Lawley did not join. But though
apparently unheeding and indifferent to what was passing,
she must have been listening attentively, for during a
pause she uttered a most ludicrous and clever imitation
of confused talking, what one might imagine to be a
resume of the conversation in oral shorthand. Or it might
be termed a Polly-glottic synopsis.
It is hardly to be wondered at if, after a day of such
continuous garrulity, Miss Lawley should have felt fatigued
and anxious to retire to rest. Still I cannot defend her
manners that evening. Picture our feelings when we
heard her voice in the middle of worship demanding her
night attire. " Put on Polly's night-cap." Nor because
the chapter was a, little longer than usual, was it at all
polite to tell the reader in a very sleepy voice to " Go to
bed.    Go—to—bed, sleepyhead."
Ah I the uncertainty of life.    How little did I  think
' Thurum po gue ma coUcenogne.
118 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
when, soon after this, I bade adieu to my poor friend, that
it was for the last time, and that I should never see her
again.
A well-grown and healthy member of a hardy and long-
lived race, surrounded by all the comforts of wealth,
and the numberless little attentions of friendship. Miss
Lawley's life bid fair to be a long and happy one ; instead
of which she was cut off" in the full bloom of early
youth. She had, however, made good use of her seven
short years in acquiring about seventy different phrases,
Avhich she applied at the fitting time with almost start¬
ling exactness. She used often to declare her age with
a naive frankness, unlike the generality of her sex.
" Polly was born in sixty-eight."
Her illness was short, lasting only about a week. The
nature of the complaint was somewhat obscure, but was
supposed to have arisen from over-action of the brain.
Everything that the best medical skill and careful nursing
could do was done for her, but all was of no avail. She
did not seem to suff'er much pain, but shivered constantly,
and complained, " Poor Polly's cold, cold." With a
strange and only too true presentiment of her approach¬
ing end, she was heard to say, " Poor Polly's dead," in
this substituting her own name for that of a pet bullfinch
belonging to Mrs L—, which had died some time before.
During Bully's short life at D—■, Polly patronised him,
and instructed him to the best of her power. She would
peer at him with a most comical expression, saying, " Sing,
Bully, sing," and giving him the starting notes of his
tune. After his death Polly often sympathisingly echoed
her mistress's words, " Poor Bully's dead."
But by what strange intuition she transposed the phrase
to suit her own case must remain a mystery. If not by
reason, was it not then by a reflection of reason so closely
resembling the reality as to baffle distinction ? Polly clung
to her beloved master throughout her illness, and seemed
pleased to be beside him to the last. Poor wee Polly!
She begged for her nightcap in a feeble voice. It was
for the last time. Next morning she was found stretched
out, cold and stiff" and dead. M. S. T.
119
John   Harris.
Some one has said that there are twenty thousand living
poets in our land. Fortunately rarity is not now the only
test of worthiness ; and if any of us find interest in any
one of the twenty thousand, it is surely well to communicate
it to others. Every human being may be to his neighbour a
romance, a novel writ in prose, or a poem made rhythmic
in music ; and though by reason of the haste of our short
lives we cannot stop to study alike all the millions of our
species, we are very willing to pause before a man that is
either unique, or the representative of a small and uncom¬
mon class.
Such a man is John Harris. Born in Cornwall—not the
centre of modern educational advantages, nor the sphere
of the " inherited cultivation " so largely accredited now-
a-days—by the mere force of his poetic impulse, he has
conquered many difficulties, and taken a place among the
recognised poets of our day.
His parents were poor honest labom-ers, that feared God
and owed no man anything, but they could not afford their
son either money or time for much education. His only
school was a straw-thatched cottage, his teacher a one-
legged miner ; his curriculum ended before he was nine
years of age, and yet he has been able to make his mark.
He was sent to work in the fields until he was thirteen
years old, when he went down into the mines for twenty
years. During all that time, his relaxation, his delight,
was in thinking and writing poetry. It was often jotted
down under most extraordinary circumstances—scratched
on bits of rock, chalked on pieces of stone, scribbled on
fragments of paper, on old bellows, on anything, in fact,
that would retain it until he might write it down in his
short leisure. When his family grew up around him, he
often wrote verses Avith some of his children on his knee,
and the others playing round him ; presenting a very
different picture of life from that of the moody irritable
solitaire who goes a-hunting for ideas to pack into poems.
When he changed his darksome and dangerous toil
below ground for his present occupation of Scripture-
reader in Falmouth, one can well iinagine from his works
that his heart was glad at the change and satisfied with
his lot.
He presents  a contrast  in many  points to our  own
120 The Ladies' Edinburgh Afagazine,
Robert Burns, whom he resembles in others. Like him, a
son of the soil, labouring for his daily bread, with the
most intense appreciation of the beauties and charms of
that nature the sight of which he was for so large a por¬
tion of his daily life obliged to forego; uncultivated,
spontaneous, simple in his love of poetry and necessity of
expression ; touched, now by the grace, anon by the
humour of little things ; he used a music as perfect to
subjects as varied. But with him poetry has not been a
will-o'-the-wisp, a dangerous light leading to mischief
and darkness, but a steady home-beam, a guiding star.
Harris longed for self-improvement rather than enjoy¬
ment ; he loved not only nature, but its Creator; he could
be free under law and order, duty and right. While there
is perhaps no one'poem so beautiful as the Cottars Saturday/
Night, Harris presents to us many interesting records of life
and action, thought and feeling, besides very many beautiful
hymns and touching expressions of his religious feeling.
Perhaps the moral lesson which he most frequently incul¬
cates directly, is that of sobriety and temperance—one
probably needed at least as much among his fellow-work¬
men as elsewhere. But tlironghont all one feels that he
looks at life in a true light, without distortion or false
colouring. The large volume of his collected poems,
Wayside Sketches, ^-c, has many examples of this. For
instance:—
I look abroad on earth's great battlefield,
And on the hall of heroes, wrongly named.
I drag some laurelled wight, whose crimson robes
Are dripping in the blood his hands have shed—
I take the Northern Czar, him who, to build
A city, and to call it by his name,
Once sacrified a hundred thousand men !
I take him with his soul besmeared in gore,
And place him, crowned and worshipped and adored,
Beside this Christian miner, who, to save
His comrade's life, sublimely gave his own ;
I take them, and I place them side by side
Upon the world's great platform, and I ask,
Which of them is the Hero ?
In this volume he has several long tales, of Druids, of
Indians, of simple Cornish miners and their friends, rich in
interesiing descriptions of well-knoAvn localities in his
neighbourhood. These are chiefly in a semi-dramatic
form ; that is, the characters speak for themselves when
John Harris. 121
they appear upon the scene. Perhaps his chief fault is
indefiniteness of outline in the story and in character ; in
short, a want of the novelist's talent. But a pupil of the
leisurely Lake School may well be pardoned that. He is
essentially a landscape and not a figure painter. One
hardly knows how to select, but we open the leaves by
chance at " The Indian Tale :"—
Music amoug the mountains!    How it streams
Along the hollows where the fern-queen trills
Melodious matins by her door of moss,
Shakes the bright ivy shimmering on the rock,
Thrills through the thicket Uke a throbbing trump,
And overfJows the happy voiceful vale !
It is a queenly morning ; the great globe
Is rife with whispers from a world of wings,
Each bush and tree a temple.    How the psalm
Of the greenwood soars in a sound of praise,
And every quiver from the brambled brake.
Dew-pearled and gleaming in the rising sun.
Is like a priest conversing with the Lord.
I'll bow me down and worship.
But we must not leave the impression that he writes
only in blank verse. He has a very large variety of
measures, in all of which his language flows most smoothly.
The dedication runs thus:—
I.
Where slender harebells grazed the garden-hedge.
And granite pillars rose beside the door.
Split by the workman from the wondrous ledge.
With lichen covered, on the mystic moor ;
And torrents tumbled on, with foam and roar.
By giant boulders sleeping in the moss ;
And songful genii brushed the bracken o'er ;
A mountain minstrel, by the uplifted Cross,
Sang, when the heights were grand in evening's golden glogs.
II.
His father was with honest hinds enrolled,
Unskilled in letters, save the Book Divine ;
Some mountain sheep he kept, without a fold,
A steady horse, and some still steadier kine.
His mother's heart all gentle things enshrine.
Which filled his opening hours with rosy light.
As, fancy-fraught, he roved 'mid peak and pine.
And read the lore of nature's loneliest height.
And ever taught himself by all things pure and bright.
No. IG.—April 187G. Q
122 The Ladies' Edmburgh Magazine.
m.
Then came the darkness of the dangerous mine,
His daily, nightly tasks of tedious toil,
Where never star, or moon, or sunbeams shine,
But sulphur-wreaths around the caverns coil;
Which health, and strength, and mental might despoil,
Giving the feet of time a tardy pace
Through heated hollovps and rude rifts to moil.
When boyhood's blossoms opened on his face.
And greenness clothed the tree which gave his being grace.
IV.
His study was the shadow of a rock,
O'erhanging the meek moss and lowly thyme ;
Or flowery hawthorn, where the fleecy flock
Cropped the green herbage in the day's full prime.
And here he drank from rippling rills of rhyme.
Which lulled his spirit into blissful rest.
Till o'er the tree-tops rose the curfew's chime.
And the last wood-dove sought her sheltered nest.
And twilight lingered long, in dalliance with the west.
A lighter style appears in some of his shorter poems ;
in some of the poems written to please his children,
or where he addresses " The Mouse that gnawed his
Lexicon:''—
How darest thou, soft-footed elf.
With tiny open jaw.
To cram such crooked syllables
Into thy greedy maw ?
Would not some common household words
Such joy to thee afford.
Or crumbs that fall at supper-time
From off our humble board ?
But he never seemed to have any difficulty in wooing
the muse when he turned to write on Shakespere. He
seems the one object of the honest miner's idolatry.
Most people may be aware that Harris wrote the Ode on
Shakespere's Tercentenary, which won the prize in a com¬
petition open to all. The original MS., framed and
glazed, is retained in the Shakespere Museum at
Stratford-on-Avon; the poem is now published in this
volume.    The measure rune thus:—
Jolin Harris. 123
Dame Nature oped her store,
Her secret inner door,
Boldly he revelled through her wondrous cell.
And none the song-lines read.
Around and overhead,
Or knew the mystic chronicles so welL
But though that poem may be said to have been the
beginning of his fame, I frankly confess a preference for
other simpler Shakesperian poems. Time will not permit
us to follow his musings in "Shakespere's House;" but
we can imagine them, and follow him away to the fair
church by the Avon, where Shakespere lies interred :—
shakespere's tomb.
Drop lightly, footfall mine !
A King lies sleeping in the chancel dim,
And every atom of this sacred shrine
Is telling me of him.
With his intense enthusiasm he explores every nook
and corner of Stratford, dreams by the banks of the Avon,
and turns back by Shottery:—
SHOTTERY.
Oh Shottery, dear Shottery!
Sequestered in the dell,
Far-famed for sweet Anne Hathaway,
I feel I love thee well.
For thou hast hedges like my own.
With little glens of green,
Where primroses smUe out in spring
With violets between.
Oh Shottery, dear Shottery!
I oft have thought of thee
When reading Shakespere in my youth
Under the hawthorn tree ;
Nor did I dream in those joy-days
To see thee with mine eye.
And tread thy ever-hallowed ground
Under thy bluest sky.
* * * *
Oh Shottery, dear Shottery !
The breeze that passed along
Was full of sweetest melody.
And every breath was song.
124 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
The children playing in the lane,
The sheep upon the lea,
The very stones, the grass and earth.
Were beautiful to me.
The strange thing about this man's writings is, that
with his limited education, and more limited society,
his language, as well as his thought, should be so refined,
so free from provincialisms, so grammatically correct.
In the whole of his works I only noticed one slip in
grammar, and it is so common in the south of England
that it should not be counted. Now, when even Keats
could indulge in Cockney rhymes, and many others in
more serious grammatical errors, this fact is a thing
worth noting. It seems to point to the care of the
writer, and persistent endeavour towards self-improve¬
ment. I might suggest that I should imagine him to
be no Celt, though born in Cornwall, but a pure type of
Saxon character, with its strong ethical feeling, its repose,
its mass. Furthermore, his strange love of alliteration,
now so rare with us, occasionally suggests a preference
to that Saxon form over the mere modern rhyme. But
the connection is a fancy.
Besides being the author of many hymns and tracts
separately published, Harris has this year also issued
another smaller volume of poems, entitled Walks icith
Wild Floivers, and containing tloral illustrations drawn by
the author's invalid son. It chiefly consists of poems
written upon our favourite wild flowers, the harebell,
the daisy, the eyebriglit, &c. In concluding these notes,
we may quote a few lines to suggest his idea.
How costly are the temples of man's building
Where waiting ones convene,
The stained-glass pane, oak carving, painting, gilding.
Altar and shining screen I
God is as near in Majesty Supernal,
To heed the wanderer's hymn.
Where nature teaches through the Voice eternal,
As in cathedral dim.
And he who worships where the flowers are lowly.
And murmurs fill the air,
Feels in his heart the presence of the Holy,
Although no priest is there.
LuTEA Reseda.
125
IV.
In pure wrath Konrad pushed up his easel to the window,
in  order  to  place  the  gay  pup])ets  on  it  in   a   row,
and to examine them once more in the best light, that
he might laugh away his vexation by the sight of them.
He was  of opinion  that  his  performance   was   not   so
entirely worthless after all, for he had most successfully
burlesqued the rough-and-ready saint-painters.    Only it
seemed to him that a characteristic mark of the bungler
was wanting here and there, and so he seized his brush,
and put always a droller stroke to the absurd caricature.
Suddenly, however, he began to feel somewhat uncom¬
fortable.    Was he not committing a sin?    He certainly
meant, in the first place, to mock the knight; but was he
not, at the same time, mocking the saints as well?    A
master of the old school would certainly not have done
such a thing.    He would, perhaps, have served the rough
old knight much more roughly ; but the saints he would,
for God's sake, have painted as beautifully as he possibly
could.    " And what if the Deliverers should now become
really enraged with me ?    They freed the knight out of
the dungeon of the Turks ; can they not as easily cause
me to be confined for  ever in the knight's dungeon ? "
After this soliloquy he looked up.    And how astonished
was he!    Opposite the corner of the window, where he
sat before the easel, hung a mirror, and in the mirror
there   suddenly  appeared,   quite  bright  and   clear,   the
living image of St. Katharine—not of that St. Katharine
whom he had first painted, and afterwards  expunged,
but of the other and more beautiful one, whom he had in
vain wished to paint.    A vision!    Did the saint appear
to punish or to help  him?    For the first moment the
terrified painter really believed that it was a supernatural
apparition.    But the lovely girlish face was far too human
in its living freshness, and Konrad was no painter of the
old school, but the humanistic, civilised child of a new
time.    So he quickly recollected himself, remained quite
still, and painted away mechanically, meanwhile giving a
side-glance up at the mirror.    And, quick as lightning, he
reflected that, according to the laws of perspective, the
126 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
original of the picture in the mirror must be standing
close behind him, outside of the open window, watching
his work by stealth. Already, two days before, as he
awoke from his mid-day sleep, it had seemed to him as
if this same form had darted through the garden, past his
window; but as in his slumber he had just been dreaming
of the beautiful unknown, he had then taken the fleeing
apparition for the waking expression of his di'eam. What
Avas now to be done ? If he turned round, she would
be certain to run away again. The ordinary rules of
intercourse with ladies do not hold good with a prisoner.
Therefore he leapt with a regular cat's spring from his
chair, and when he had half turned, seized through the
grating the right hand which the watching girl had laid
on the window-sill, and held it fast. The maiden,
frightened to death, cried out, and struggled to free
herself, but it was of no avail; in an instant the painter
had seized her left hand also, and now held his captive
by both hands. She dared not call for help, for she
herself had stolen thither by forbidden paths.
But Konrad Lenz spoke with great politeness. " Pardon
me, noble lady, if I do not let you away again until we
have chatted a little. For weeks I have not dared to
speak to a human being, and so 1 feel now a dreadful
want of oral communication, especially out of so beautiful
a mouth."
But the girl softly lamented her curiosity, which had
brought her into this plight. She said she had heard in
the castle that an alchymist was again confined here,
and so she had been all too eager to spy out for once
how gold was made. But now she saw that he was not
an alchymist, but the friendly master plasterer, who had
lately in the town shown them the way to St. Katherine's
Convent.
At the word " Master plasterer " Lenz felt as if he had
been stung by an adder, so that he involuntarily let go
the girl's left hand, although he held the right all the
firmer on that account.
" I am no plasterer," cried he proudly, " I am a painter;
a pupil of the illustrious Christopher Amberger, who
himself was a pupil of the incomparable Hans Holbein;
and so my art descends in a straight line, and in the
second branch, from the greatest German master."
"The grandchildren are sometimes not particularly
like the grandfather," said the girl, smihng, and pointing
Tlie Fourteen Deliverers. 127
with her left hand to the tablet on which Lenz had just
been painting.
Horror-struck, he glanced at the coarse daub, certainly
a doubtful diploma of his mastership, and thrust his foot
against the frame, so that the picture fell down, and
fortunately—as bread-and-butter is in the habit of doing—
with the greasy side on the ground.
"1 only made these caricatures out of rage, because
they wish to compel me to paint by imprisonment. The
lord of the castle possesses very different works of my
brush, which will show you that I am no plasterer. And
do you really believe that they would immure me like an
alchymist if I could only make the caricatures Avhich
are lying here on the ground"?"
The last argument was quite apparent to the sensible
girl. But the painter hardly waited for her answer. It
was so long since he had got out a word, that he must
seize the moment, and have a thorough good talk. In the
pleasantest manner he charged his fair captive with being
answerable for his own captivity, and related how the
sight of her, on her way to St. Katharine's Convent, had
kindled his fancy to so bright a flame that he had felt
obliged to paint her, and actually as St. Katharine; but,
for all that, he had never been able to get her rightly
out of his head, and on this account the bespoken
Deliverers had got into such arrears, that the lord of
Haltenberg had at last confined him here, to compel him
to work. But, artist-like, the narrator knew how to group
the whole story so skilfully, and so to enhance it with
highly-drawn lights, that at last his enthusiasm for the
Unknown appeared as the only source of all the mischief.
At the beginning of the narrative he still held her hand
firmly, but as it proceeded he was able to set it free with¬
out any danger; the girl no longer tried to run away, but
listened attentively to the end; and when he then wished,
out of pure friendship, to press her hand once more, she
only drew a very little way back.
She seemed quite distressed about the poor man whom
she, so unconsciously, had brought into trouble. But now
a light broke on the unhappy Konrad: the unknown
could be no one else than the lord of Haltenberg's lovely
daughter, whom the tyrant, as cruel towards the beautiful
in nature as in art, kept concealed from all the world.
Therefore he begged that she would urge her father to
open the doors of this dungeon.
128 The Ladies" Edinburgh Magazine.
" I cannot do that," replied she, " nor does my
father dare to do it. He may use yon hardly, but he is
only doing what duty commands him."
" There we have quite the child of the old school,"
thought the painter. "A poor painter is tormented to
death, only that one's word may be kept to the saints to
a day and an hour 1"
As to the rest, he asked himself if it would not now be
more useful if he remained shut up some weeks longer.
Perhaps he might induce the young lady to come oftener
into the quiet garden; she seemed already very sympa¬
thetic. If he were sent into the town, he would never
see her again ; and if he worked at liberty in the castle,
he would immediately dry up the first spring of the
affection which he had opened in the beautiful child-
compassion.
So he quickly concocted a suitable plan.
He represented to her that he could only regain his
freedom if he finished the pictures punctually and beauti¬
fully. But in this killing solitude, without any human
conversation, this was quite impossible for him. More¬
over, he could never restore the destroyed St. Katharine
unless she lent him her beautiful face as a copy. She
would only require to come again, once or twice, for
a quarter of an hour; one could take portraits far best
chatting, and in haste. At the same time, he asked her if
her name was not Katharine also.    But it was Susanna.
At first she resisted the proposal, but at length con¬
sented to it—almost too quickly, as the painter afterwards
thought. Her father seemed to have reared her, in
solitude, as an innocent, pure child of nature.
M. E. Neil.
{To be continued.)
A Prize is offered for the best Article on any subject of Moral or Mental
Philosophy appearing in The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine till December 1876
inclusive.
The Sdbject op Debate for the next Meeting of the Ladies' Edinburgh
Literary Society, April 1st, is, "Have Animals any Recognition of Moral
Eesponsibility ?"
Those interested in these Debates are referred to the List published in this
Magazine for January.
129
|l«r0lUtliairs of the gasi
Letter II.
My Dear Friend,—It is somewhat strange to think what
an every-day matter it seemed formerly to hear familiar
mention of people whose names are now regarded as
almost historical; among many others those of Sir Walter
Scott, Thomas Moore, and Campbell. The latter was a
constant guest at my grandmother's, Mrs. Siddons', house,
and was a very ardent worshipper of her genius. One
day, after a long conversation with her, he said suddenly,
" 0 what a privilege it would be to be allowed to write
your life I" Her reply was, " Then you shall do it," and
she left her papers to him for this purpose. When the
time came, however, and all documents were sent to him,
many years had passed; he was much changed; sorrow
and time, with domestic trials of a very painful nature, had
shaken his nerves; he had become uncertain and dilatory—
so much so, that my aunt Cecilia Siddons wrote offering
to relieve him from a task which he seemed unable or
unwilling to commence, mentioning at the same time that
Mrs. Jameson^ would like very much to undertake it, if
he would make it over to her, with the papers in his
possession. This proposal, however, seemed to rouse him
to action, and at last the Life was written, but scarcely as
the young poet, who once so earnestly coveted the honour,
would have done it. His memory must have been a good
deal impaired, and though he could write from documents,
he had lost the power of reproducing, what long intimacy
should have enabled him to do, the earnest mind and
intense appreciation of her art which characterised her.
Mrs. Jameson, in the full vigour of her powers, would
have done it much better. She did write a short notice
at the time of my grandmother's death, which showed
how gracefully she would have fulfilled the task had it
been entrusted to her, but it could not be.
As a critic on art Mrs. Jameson was deeply interesting;
to go through a picture-gallery with her made one feel as
if education in a new field was begun. I do not know if
it is the case with others, but I always think that painting
requires more study to understand it than sculpture does.
' Authoress of Legendary Art, <t;c.
No. 17.—Mai 1876. S
130 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
The grand simphcity of the latter speaks to one instantly,
while old pictures, or most of them, require teaching to
thoroughly appreciate their excellence. At one time I
saw a good deal of Mrs. Jameson. She had known many
of my family. She remembered my father when she was
a child and he a very young man, and spoke much of his
amiable, kindly nature. This must have been about the
time of his leaving the Charter-House, where he was
educated, and before he entered on his professional hfe.
He had wished much to go to Oxford to pursue his studies
and prepare himself for the Church, but my grandmother
did not at that time feel herself in a position to incur
this expense, with four younger children to provide for ;
so he made a not unusual transition, and adopted the
stage as his profession, relinquishing with regret the quiet
studious life he had looked forward to, and which no doubt
would have suited him better.
There are, I suppose, incidents of romance in all lives;
there certainly Avas a very touching one belonging to my
father's youth, Avhich gaA'e me my godmother and my
name, not a family one. There lived in Lancaster a lady,
not young, but Avith a SAveet sad face, bearing the trace
of much suffering. She lived alone in the jointure-house
of the family in the toAvn of Lancaster; her brothers and
sisters Avere either married or dead, the elder brother
being in possession of the property, not far from the
town. Her story Avas a melancholy one. When very
young she became deeply attached to a gentleman, Avho
Avas in himself thoroughly fitted to secure her happiness;
but her friends did not think that he would be able to
maintain her in the position to which she had been accus¬
tomed, and they interfered so decidedly that the engage¬
ment was broken off. The young man joined the army,
got himself appointed to a regiment on active service, and
the account of his death soon reached her; and from the
sorrow this sad news caused her she never recovered.
She never changed the fashion of the dress in which he
had last seen her, and few things seemed to rouse or cheer
her, though she never neglected the duties which she felt
she OAved to those around her.
When my father, then first beginning his profession,
went to Lancaster to fulfil an engagement in the theatre
there, much curiosity was felt concerning the son of Mrs.
Siddous, and among others this lady, who always retained
a taste for the drama, Avent with her brother to see his
Recollections of the Past. 131
first appearance. Directly he came on the stage she w^as
struck with what she considered his strong resemblance
to her early love; and this likeness created so great an
interest in her mind, that she requested her brother to
call on him and bring him to her house, which he did, and
from that time a friendship was formed, on her side
blended with almost motherly love, and on his with the
tenderest gratitude. Her house, whenever he was in
Lancaster, was made like a home to him, for though he
retained his lodgings, he passed all his leisure hours with
her. Her brother also, the proprietor of Dallam Tower,
and her brother-in-law, the Bishop of Llandaff, were most
kind to one who seemed to bring renewed interest into a
life which had been so early blighted by a great sorrow.
After my father's marriage she extended her affection to
my mother and her children, who were taught to love
and reverence her as their father's dear and constant
friend. She had always encouraged his taste for writing,
and though, before he knew her, after what he called
scribbling his thoughts and feelings on loose pieces of
paper, he used generally to end by throwing them into
the fire, she made him promise to let her see them first,
and gave him every year a book to write them in, which
he was to read to her afterwards. This gave him an
interest which passed away many an hour in his solitary
lodging.
My father had, however, a very modest appreciation of
his own powers as an author, and though in after years
he occasionally published a novel of very simple plot and
construction, it was generally done for the purpose of
obtaining a small fund for the carrying out of some little
plan of enjoyment for himself and his family, such as a
lodging for a time out of town, for he loved the country,
and always escaped there when he could. His poetry
was of the simplest kind, though breathing the sentiments
of his loving sensitive nature. As a specimen I copy a
few lines sent to his dear old friend when absent from her,
and passing a short time at Scarborough:—
LINES WRITTEN AT SCARBOROUGH.
Why sinks my soul while nature pours
Her'choicest treasures to my view,
Whilst ocean spreads her spangled stores,
Reflected from high heaven's own blue ?
132 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
Why does my eye survey the skiff
Which flutters with the cheerful gale ?
Why from gay Scarbro's towering cliff
Hail with deep sighs each parting sail ?
Say, Melancholy, say, sad power.
Why by thy necromantic wand
Pale spectres at the midnight hour
Weeping before my pillow stand ?
It is because the peaceful glow
No more pervades my softened breast,
That heightened hope, that brightened woe,
And lulled each turbid thought to rest.
Now dumb my muse, and listless grown,
I idly rove, but ill at ease ;
My books aside neglected thrown.
Whom have I now to wish to please !
Yet cheering Fancy o'er the gloom
Commands me thus resume the pen ;
Beligion tells me, From the tomb
We rise to meet our friends again.
I think that tliese hnes must have been written after
the death of his second sister, Maria.
Maria Siddons, my grandmother's second daughter,
was -extremely beautiful. She died previous to my
father's marriage. Sir Thomas Lawrence painted her
frequently, and, it was believed, was much attached to her.
The stories connected with this attachment are, even in
our own family, rather conflicting, some saying that his
admiration of beauty made him somewhat changeable in
his attentions, which were directed now to the one
sister, and now to the other. Be this as it may, one
story that appeared in some late memoirs I can pro¬
nounce utterly without foundation. It said that the elder
sister, who had more talent and force of character, tried
to divert, and succeeded in diverting, his attention to
herself. No one who really knew her would for an
instant believe this. She was of a high and noble nature,
bearing the trials of feeble health with patient firmness,
and so unselfishly anxious to spare the feelings of those
she loved that she strove hard to hide fi-om them how
much she suffered. If Sir Thomas Lawrence ever varied
in his feelings towards the younger and lovelier sister,
it must have been as unsought as unwished by the other,
Recollections of the Past. 133
who at the time of her death was engaged to Charles
Moore, younger brother of Sir John Moore, and son of
Doctor Moore, the author of the novel of Zeluco. Sir
Thomas Lawrence never married. He continued to re¬
present beauty exquisitely where he found it, and almost
to create it where he did not; and it is singular that the
last sketch he ever made was the very beautiful one of
Fanny Kemble, taken immediately after her first appear¬
ance and success in London.
I saw Sir Thomas LawTence once or twice when I was
young, and was taken to his studio.   Occupying nearly the
whole of the end wall of tlie room was his historical picture
of Milton's Satan, " Awake ! arise, or be for ever fallen,"
but on historical painting he could never have built his
fame.  At the same time that I saw Sir Thomas Lawrence,
I also met Campbell.    I was young enough not quite to
appreciate a poet in a wig which it appeared to me that
he wore, but he had fine expressive eyes, and I remember
his leaning over the back of a chair and saying that he
had been often told that he resembled Kean, not Charles
Kean but Edmund, the greater genius though the less
cultivated  man.     Of Edmund  Kean  my  remembrance
dates so far back that  I cannot be considered a good
judge, but I remember that I admired him much, and my
mother always considered  him,  notwithstanding  faults
and mannerisms, to have the true touch of genius.    He
was superior both to his son and to Macready in being
able to forget himself in his art; he looked to the perfect
representation   of the   whole  play  sufficiently  to   yield
willingly the first place  to those acting with him when
the general effect required it, giving his meed of appro¬
bation to what was good, and sharing  his laurels   un¬
grudgingly.     In this, from some cause or  other,  both
Charles Kean and Macready were deficient.     These last
were both educated men, but it has always seemed to
me that the fashion which came in with them, and which
they carried to excess, of intense attention to the minuticB
of stage arrangements, was a mistake.    The poetry jmd
acting seemed to fall into the second place, instead ot
retaining the first.    Exactness of costume, perfect repre¬
sentation in scenery, were made too much of; the appeal
became more to the senses than to the intellect, and too
little  was left to  the imagination, which may often be
trusted to supply what dresses and scenery will never
effect.    No one would wish jjow that Othello should be
134 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
again dressed in a bag wig, or Macbeth in a field-marshal's
uniform, but I, at least, should wish that enough only
should be done in this way to prevent the illusion being
too roughly disturbed, but not enough to distract atten¬
tion from essentials. The grand simplicity of the old
Greek drama bears me out, I think, in this view; will you
not agree with me that it is yours also %—Always yours
very sincerely, E. H. M.
(tn^txxtwtt   anil   Jntuition.
" To know
Eather consists in opening out a way
Whence the imprisoned splendour may escape,
Than in effecting entry for a light
Supposed to be without.    Watch narrowly
The demonstration of a truth, its birth,
And you trace back the effluence to its spring
And source within us, where broods radiance vast.
To be elicited ray by ray."
Paracelsus.
There are in modern psychology two schools of thought;
there is a discussion, rising sometimes into bitter contro¬
versy, between what are usually termed the Empiricists
and the lutuitionalists. The former maintain that all
human knowledge is deduced from the experience of
sensations, and that we have no ground for believing
there is any idea, feeling, or power in the human mind,
whose origin need be referred to any other source than
experience: the latter believe that there are a priori
principles, facts of consciousness ultimate and simple,
not acquired by experience, but the conditions under
which all experience and all mental phenomena exist;
facts which cannot be reduced to " generalisations by
experience."
I wish in this paper to leave the modern battle-field,
and glance at the warfare as it was waged two centuries
ago, with less bitterness, though probably not less ability,
making only this remark—that whatever may be the
truth, the Empirists have done good service in resolving
many a dogma and prejudice Avhich had lived in honoured
sacredness as an indisputable innate idea, into a mere
generalisation of experience.    The transcendental school
Experience and Intuition. 135
have abandoned many such ideas, treasured by their
predecessors, in no way, however, thereby affecting the
strength of their position, which one a priori fact proved
or admitted is sufficient to maintain ; and it is asserted
bv them that their antagonists have never been able to
advance a theory wliich does not demand some a priori
element in the constitution of the human intellect.
In an age of prejudice and intolerance, John Locke
proved  himself by his  writings to  be of a singularly
unprejudiced and tolerant disposition.    He was emphatic¬
ally a man of action, and his first writings were occa¬
sional ; that is, elicited by circumstances, and published
in self-defence.    A reaction against prevailing error is so
common in occasional literature, that it can be no matter
of surprise if we trace it in the works of Locke.    Sur¬
rounded as he was by prejudices defended on the ground
that they were necessary truths, he denied altogether the
existence of such truths, referring all human knowledge
to   sense-experience.    So  the first chapter of his Essay
on  the Human   Understanding raises the  crucial point  of
difference   between   opposing  schools   of thought;   the
debate between Empiricism and Transcendentalism. Time
has  not  left  this   question  behind,   discussion  has  not
settled it, and recent advances in science have changed
some of its  aspects without  deciding  the  main issue.
Without pretending to argue on the matter  ourselves,
we may read both sides with a certain comprehension of
attack and defence, as a beginner may watch a champion
game of chess. Only, unlike chess, the student of philosophy
probably feels impelled to choose one side rather than the
other, as defending the fuller, larger truth ; so it seems
best to say here candidly that 1 believe that Locke's
empirical philosophy expresses  only one side   of truth,
and is erroneous in its negation of all innate ideas ; that
this theory will not serve as sufficient foundation for the
excellent practical precepts with which his works abound;
but that if thought out, it leads to Materialism or Nihilism.
I think the key to the failure of Locke's speculations may
be  found in  this  question:   Has  knowledge   an  active
character, or is it purely passive ?    Is it put into a hand
which can  grasp and use—or drop it; or poured into a
cup which must receive it—willing or no ?    Is perception
a free personal act of the mind, piecing together sense-
experiences, according to its own nature, through its own
power; or is it a fleeting series of sensations, only aware
136 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine,
of itself as a series ? Now, Locke maintains the personality
and free agency of man, but also insists on the purely
passive receptive character of the undei'standing. I doubt
whether the two can be made to agree. We may observe
that Hamilton is with Locke in the first of these opinions,
and against him in the second, while Mill of course is the
reverse.
The great formula of the school of experiential
philosophy is Aristotle's dictum, " There is nothing in
the intellect which has not been in the senses," or, as it
is read, there are no innate principles in the mind, which
is a mere blank organism; the source of all human know¬
ledge is in the senses. Locke maintained that there was
also in man a faculty of reflection, or that the understand¬
ing employed itself about those ideas it got by sensation,
thus generating other ideas he calls ideas of reflection.
This may, however, be summed up in Condillac's state¬
ment, that " Our ideas are nothing more than transformed
sensation," as nowhere does Locke acknowledge anything
native to the mind beyond what has been introduced by
the senses.
If human experience be then the sole source of know¬
ledge, must not real truth be entirely outside the sphere
of human knowledge % Locke infers this when he argues
that the assent we give to any proposition must be
always and only in proportion to the evidence for it.
But how great soever may be the number of particular
experiences in support of a universal truth, we should
never be able to assure ourselves of its universality by
induction, unless we knew of its necessity by reason.
The foundation of our certainty in regard to universal
truths is in the ideas themselves, says Leibnitz; and
further, " though the ideas of sensible qualities come
from the senses, the foundation of the truth in these
contingent and particular things is to be found in the
just connection of these sensible phenomena, according
to the laws of reason."
In morals, Utilitarianism seems the only legitimate
outcome of Locke's theory, for the motive of acting so
as to secure the greatest amount of sensible happiness
to ourselves, and, as far as it may minister to our own
happiness, to others, is left undisturbed by any of those
convictions of an immutable diiference between right and
wrong which require confirmation by consciousness—an
innate idea.    Experience of the apparent results of actions
Experience and Intuition. 137
upon  happiness   gives  a  very  fluctuating  standard  of
morals.
No doubt Locke's philosophy, to be held in its integrity,
requires a degree of faith that would be considered out of
date by many of his modern disciples. He himself was
a theist and a Christian, with a niiud so practical that he
seems hardly to have cared to carry his theories beyond
the working point. Like a true Englishman, he aims in
his teaching at immediate usefulness rather than at the
reasons of things, the problems of existence, that have
ever occupied the Greek, the German, and the Scottish
mind. Hence perhaps he has never held the place in
Scotland or Germany assigned to him in England; while
French thought, with its merciless logic, has, while
endorsing Locke's opinions, carried them out to their per¬
haps legitimate conclusions, scepticism and materialism.
Locke supposes the mind to be like a sheet of Avhite
paper, void (jf all characters—a blank organism—till the
inflow of sense-experience. Is this quite thinkable ?
It may be said that this definition means mere faculties,
but such cannot exist, says Leibnitz, because faculties
without an act or a tendency are inconceivable. It is not
the ideas themselves so much as the forms and tnachinery
for working up sense-experience into ideas, that we con¬
tend are innate and necessary. Is Locke's ultimate idea
of the mind a zero flowed in upon by sensations from
without? What can the experience of nothing be I and
if there is anything before experience, that is a priori.
Mill gives us feelings and their associabilities fur this
xdtimate idea of mind as a sufficient foundation for all we
perceive to be true. He says that the mind is a series of
sensations aware of itself as a series. Supposing this to
be granted, surely the feelings and associabilities that go
to make up a man's mind are innate and a priori; otherwise
how does it turn out to be a man's mind at all, and not
sometimes something else? A derived a joriori element,
the mere result of ancestral associations and experiences,
can scarcely be seriously given as an answer. The
doctrine of evolution, if we held it, does not account for
the agreement of all intellect; for while all would agree
that chien chasse de race, no one would be likely to contend
that by adopting an unprejudiced baby from some race
untroubled with arithmetical knowledge, we would find
it probable that, when the time for sums came, for want
of ancestral experience, its mind would not receive the
Ko. 17.—Mat 187C. S
138 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
dogma that 2 and 2 made 4. The inherited differences
between mind and rnind are not essential, though no
doubt they can be traced.
Further, there seems no need for Mill to tell us, as he
does, that his definition just quoted, " a series aware of
itself as a series," is a paradox—a series meaning one
thing succeeding another thing; and the being aware of
itself as such, palpably a second power introduced, which
destroys the unity sought for in his definition of this
mind, wholly consisting of sense-experience. Much
more intelligible is Ferrier's definition,—" Along with
every object known, we are aware of ourselves as
knowing,"—which is no paradox, is consistent with ex¬
perience, and from the basis of our own personality
makes us recognise personality and will elsewhere.
The senses are often deceptive : " even our most trust¬
worthy senses—sight and touch—at times delude us," says
Huxley. It is by the laws of universal reason that we
correct the confused perceptions of the senses, and to
those who deny the objective validity of these laws, a
paralysing doubt descends upon all things ; not the doubt
commanded by unsatisfied reason, but the doubt of the
legitimacy of our faculties, which tends to overthrow,
instead of to enlighten, reason. Does not Locke take the
first step which involves the rest, when he virtually allows
but one source to human knowledge—sensation, simple or
transformed—instead of further admitting the first prin¬
ciples, whose authority we may not safely question.
Do we not long for truth, justice, and beauty, because
our nature is formed to correspond with them in their
essence? And such desires, Ave believe, did not evolve
themselves out of particular experiences, but are the
aspirations of the soul towards her final ends.
Speaking in detail of innate ideas, Locke says the
character claimed for them is universality, in contradis¬
tinction to the limited maxims of experience ; but uni¬
versal consent proves nothing; as (for instance) the
fundamental axiom—" Whatever is, is "•—is not assented
to by children and idiots; that their discovery by reason
proves too much, for that is applicable to the maxims
derived from them, " thus all mathematical demonstrations
as well as principles must be received as innate principles
of the mind;" that certain less general principles—as
that green is not red—are assented to by those utterly
ignorant of the general maxims;  therefore the former
JEjsperience and Intuition. 139
being earliest in the mind, cannot be founded on accep¬
tance of the latter.
To this Leibnitz replies, that the essential note of a
necessary belief is not precisely universal consent, but
rather recognition of it when heard, and the impossibility
of thinking the contrary. You must also postulate
understanding as the condition of all thought, and thus
exclude children and other incompetent persons. Further,
such necessary beliefs are potentially in the mind when
not actually in the understanding. For instance, ordinary
actions and affairs are based upon the implicit acceptance
of the principle of non-contradiction, and, its constant
application to particulars. An idea is innate, because its
source is within us ; if we conceive it, we do so without
going beyond ourselves; so the rules of geometry and
arithmetic are really innate to the understanding, though
some persons may never know them.
On innate practical principles, Locke says there are no
moral rules which receive even so general an assent as
" whatever is is," and such maxims; none which have
not at some time and by some people been ignored or
denied. But he allows, as intuitive practical principles,
a desire for happiness and an aversion to misery; saying
this makes nothing for innate ideas, which are to be
principles of knowledge regulating our practice. This
admission is, however, enough for Leibnitz's argument,
who replies that it is the function of the intellect, with
its conceptions of duration and futurity, to point out
where and in what true durable felicity—the highest
good—is to be found. And from the moral point of view,
that there is a right and a wrong seems a universal
belief; what is considered right and what wrong being
doubtless in great part a matter of education, circum¬
stances, and experience.
Thus are handled in turns the subjects of Number,
Infinity, modes of thought, &c., Locke ever attempting
to resolve all into sense-experience; Leibnitz claiming a
double origin for each idea. I shall only mention the
one I had occasion to quote above, the mental conception
of Duration.
The idea of Duration or fleeting extension, says Locke,
is derived from experience of the constant succession of
our own ideas, which is the measure and standard of all
other successions; an instant is the point at which we
recognise   no   succession,   eternity  is   adding   ideas   of
140 lite Ladies' Edinhurgli Magazine.
succession to each other ad infinitum. Leibnitz considers
that the train of perceptions indeed awakes the idea of
Duration, but does not create it. Our perceptions are not
uniform and regular changes, as are those of time. Time
is thus the measure of movement: an instant has no
parts, it is a mere extremity; Duration is known by
equal periodic movements; the idea of eternity postulates
that the same reason exists for going further, and it is this
consideration of the reasons that completes the notion of
infinitude in possible progress.
Locke does make use, in his own sense, of the word
intuition. Intuitive knowledge, he considers, consists in
the immediate perception of the agreement or disagree¬
ment of tAvo ideas. In that the greatest possible certainty
is found. Demonstrative knowledge is that Avhich
requires the introduction of two or more ideas,—of some
intervening process to prove it. It begins in doubt, and
is never so clear as the former. We may contend that
his intuitive knowledge is the knowledge of axioms, or
necessary truths, that cannot be proved by anything
more certain; and that demonstrations based only on such
axioms are as clear and certain as the axioms, though
reached by a process of reasoning. May there not also
be an immediate perception of agreement between two
ideas, that may prove merely fortuitous and accidental
on further examination. For instance we may have an
immediate perception of an axiom. '• When will those
two straight lines I have ruled meet I" "When you
slope them."    "But if I do not slope them? "    "Never."
Or we may have an immediate perception of accidental
agreement based on association of ideas. "Wliat noise is
that?" "Thegong—come to dinner." Both perceptions
are perhaps immediate, but certainly for very different
reasons.
To conclude. When we cast a backward look over the
history of the human race, it is all a succession of changes.
Powers rise and fall again, nations emerge, develop,
flourish, and decay; opinions also have their day, and
vanish. Only very foAv things are always the same. Is
it not reasonable to believe that these few things have a
different source from the multitude of confused experiences
and observations, which, by degrees, through their cor¬
rections, are brought toAvards symmetry and order—that
they are what is called " necessary truths."
One such thing is Numerical value. It emerges from
the earliest dawn of history,  assured as noAV; and on it
Experience and Intuition, 141
is founded the science which has measured the earth
and soared to the stars, which keeps man abreast of
his material wants, and makes existence in our crowded
little globe possible. Human thought cannot think it
variable; every child recognises it when put before it,
and all the discovered laws of the universe echo back its
truth.
Always the same also are the necessary laws of
thought, the three great principles of logic which under¬
lie every reasonable idea within us, and all our inter¬
course with each other.
Another thing constant amid changes is the desire for
a perfection of existence, never attained, which underlies
the moral sense, the idea of right and wrong. Here, too,
we may recognise a progressive tendency in humanity,
sufficient to make our now crowded existence bearable,
though not sufficient to alter the reality of the choice
between good and evil which presents itself to every
one. For, much as surroundings and circumstances
alter, the history of the individual varies comparatively
little. He comes he knows not whence, and in something
less than a century he passes away; and the possible
higher development of the race, which some propose as
the answer to all his aspirations, becomes nothing to him.
His life is a mere point in duration; his globe a mere
point in magnitude, compared to the durations and the
magnitudes that he calculates, through his innate powers
working on the results of his observations. But this
sense of mastery over the secrets of immensity enables
him to contemplate it without being overwhelmed by its
vastness. Again, surrounded by dangers and misfortunes
he cannot guard against, with death and its unknown
terrors haunting his steps, he can pass through all with
a high courage, the sure result of a satisfied moral sense ;
and a firm determination to be on the side of right.
Thus he is superior to the absolute laws of causality,
which inexorably rule the physical universe.
May we not then conclude with Leibnitz that "these
necessary truths contain the determinative reason and
the regulative principle of all existence, and of the law
of the universe"? "I do not know," he says, "how a
man can render truly an account of his ideas otherwise
than by ascending, with the unconscious instinct of
mankind in general, to the first ideas, of which no
account can be given,—that is, to the absolute attributes
of God." E. J. 0.
142 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
I.—Yesteeday.
Softly stealing, sweetly smiling,
Flows the gentle tide ;
Little waves in silver streaming,
Purple, green, and azure gleaming,
See it onward glide !
Golden sunbeams stoop to bless it,
Fair white seabirds' wmgs caress it,
And the rippled sands rejoice
In its glad returning voice.
Oh, thou lovely, peaceful sea.
What can ever trouble thee %
The calm wave whispered—" God."
II.—T 0 - D A Y.
Raving, roaring, madly pouring,
Comes the angry tide;
See the long white billows curling.
On the black rocks madly hurling,
Bafiled in their pride.
At the shore they clutch and tear
Like the pale hands of despair,
Dashing, crashing, as they break,
Till the shattered ramparts shake.
Oh, thou awful, angry sea,
What can ever quiet thee ?
The wild wave muttered—" God ! "
M. A. S. M.
i^hc 4^"^^^^^ '§t\\xtxtt%.
How completely had the appearance of this child of
nature altered our painter! He rejoiced in his captivity,
for she would come into the little garden again to¬
morrow. And now, for the lovely Susanna's sake, he
would paint the still unfinished saints as enthusiastically
The Fourteen Deliverers. 143
and faithfully as an old master could ever have done for
God's sake.
It was already inconceivable to him that he could leave
the castle again without being betrothed, or even mar¬
ried, to Susanna. But here two totally different trains of
thought crossed each other.
He loved Susanna as violently as only such a boister¬
ous, hare-brained fellow could love a girl whom he had
already twice seen and spoken to, and he wished to win
her because he loved her. But he also wanted to win
her in order to beat her father with his last trump. The
old man had outwitted him, and shut him up to force
the pictures from him. And so the captive would now
outwit the old man, and force from him his most precious
gem, his so-well-guarded daughter. An alchymist can
be put under lock and key, but when a young painter
and a young maiden are shut up, then the painter at
last sets himself free, and the maiden into the bargain !
With this double poean of love and revenge he began
to grind an entirely new tablet for St. Katharine.
The accommodating Susanna came again, and stationed
herself for a chat before the window-grating, which, in
conventual language, she called the spreclujitter. Since
no person in the castle dared approach the deserted garden,
in order that the painter might be protected against
distractions, their intercourse was quite secure.
The first days brought warm and cheerful weather;
Susanna could sit there by the hoi;r without catching
cold. Konrad painted his St. Katharine extremely slowly,
so as to make sure of its being quite a success.
But in September came rain and mist. The painter had
reserved St. Erasmus and the other male figures for the
wet days.    Susanna did not appear.
But the rainy days continued too long for him, and he
discovered that he painted the men worse when the
young lady was not inspiring him by her cheerful pre¬
sence. As a matter of necessity, therefore, she was
obliged to come in the rain also. Indeed, the rainy days
became the finest of all. Wrapped up in a cloth—um¬
brellas were not yet the fashion in the country—Susanna
leapt upon the window-sill (formerly she had stood
under the eaves) and pressed herself firmly against the
grating, so as not to fall down. Then it happened very
naturally that, in a pelting rain, the painter stole from
her the first kiss.
Hi The Ladies" Edinburgh Magazine.
She was almost always cheerful and waggish; her
sunny disposition suited the jovial young man exactly,
and soon they protested mutually that they were born
for each other, and must remain each other's for ever;
nor could they now believe that there had been a time
when they had not known each other.
Konrad had, in truth, thought it would have been
somewhat more difficult to win the love of so distin¬
guished a young lady. But that, probably, was all
owing to her secluded youth. The birds which are
kept in the cage, are the most eager to fly away. And
Susanna had not seen anything of the world, except the
neighbouring town; but Konrad promised to take her
with him far into the world, even over the Alps as far as
Rome and Venice.
Only in a few things she was quite old-fashioned in
strictness. She hardly ever ventured to sj)eak of her
father, out of pure reverence ; she seemed to think of him
rather as her master, and of her mother as her mistress,
according to the old ancestral custom. She even called
the former, without any hesitation, the Lord of Halten-
berg, as wives used, in old times, to style their husbands
as lord by title and name.
After the two had fully settled their love at the
sprechgitter, they began to talk of marriage. But then
Susanna did not conceal that her father would have
great hesitation on accovmt of the rank of the painter;
he did not place artists particularly high, and this one,
shut up in the alchymist's cage, he considered a
very wild scamp. " But these are prejudices of rank,"
Susanna thought, " that I am quite above." Indeed, it
seemed to her even a finer calling to paint beautiful
pious pictures than to gtiard an old castle that nobody
had ever captured within the memory of man.
The painter was delighted that the young lady spoke
so sensibly, and strengthened her in her enlightened
views.
Meantime the autumn was always advancing ; Konrad
hastened his work, for the season was gradually becoming
too cold for the artistic inspirations at the open window.
And so he actually finished the whole collection of
pictures a fortnight before the appointed day, and the
last tablets were more bearitiful than the first; but St.
Katharine was by far the loveliest pictxu-e of all.
The day of triumph and revenge appeared.    On the
Tlie Fourteen Deliverers. 145
23d of October, Konrad Lenz sent word to the Lord of
Haltenberg that the last Deliverer had received the last
touch of the brush, and that if the knight would step
into the hall in the afternoon, he would find all the
pictures placed in a good light.
In the forenoon he had arranged for a last consultation
with Susanna. Unfortunately the rain fell in torrents,
so that the girl had to sit on the window-sill and press
quite close to the grating. Konrad wanted on this very
day to step before the knight with the confession of their
secret oath. The knight's prejudices of rank made him
indeed more timid than ever, and therefore he tried
to speak away his anxiety by relating once more to
Susanna how high the great Italian painters were now
placed, and also how his forefathers had by no means
sprung from the burgher rank, but from the patricians of
the free imperial city of Boppingen. But when his
great-grandfather left that city, he had given up his
right as a patrician, which was considered equal to the
inferior nobility.
From time to lime he interrupted this already oft-
repeated stoiy by more poetical exclamations, and pressed
his head, with a great deal of trouble, through the iron
bars, by which means he came in somewhat closer contact
with Susanna's mouth than was necessary for merely
rendering his speech intelligible.
But the knight had been t_(;irmented with a curiosity
to see the completed pictures at once ; about the good
light he cared very little. lie had entered the hall
with the seneschal, with his iisual resounding step,
but between the rush of feeling and tlie rush of
rain, the pair at the sprechgitter had not heard him.
He listened quietly for a time to the painter's boast of
his distinguished artistic and patrician rank; but when
the latter squeezed his head through the grating for the
third time, he tapped him on the shoulder. Konrad was
about to draw quickly back, but instead remained
sticking fast, for it was only by slow and ingeni(ms
deliberation that his head could be drawn in again.
Susanna screamed out and fled.
The artist found himself in a pitiable plight. He had
intended to step before the knight's face so proudly and
firmly, and now, here he was, sticking like a fox in an
iron   trap!   And  that   Susanna  should have run  away
No. 17.—Mat 187G. T
14r> The Ladies^ Edinhurgli Magazine.
Avas quite too childish ! She ought to have remained
standing heroically there, in spite of rain and knight.
Yet all this lasted only a moment. The painter buret
out laughing, the knight laughed Avitli him, and the
seneschal laughed in echo, and then the head got free.
Any other man but the painter would by no means have
laughed, for in spite of liis laughter he was terribly vexed
that the knight should have joined in the laugh, instead
of storming and raging ; and this vexation gave him back
all his pride.
Firmly and solemnly he stepped in front of the old
lord. He pointed to the splendid pictures, and then said
without faltering, that these tablets had turned out
at last so well and so punctually, not through the tedium
of the prison, but solely and only through the assistance
of the charming Susanna. She alone had saved the
knight's word with the Deliverers. He did not wish the
hundred golden guldens for a work extorted by violence ;
for that which he had done when at liberty, he had
already Avon the highest price—Susanna's love. No power
could tear their hearts aAvay from each other again, for the
afftiir was as fully accomplished as the Fourteen Deliver¬
ers.    And therefore  he asked from him Susanna's hand.
The knight laughed again and again, until the arches
resounded. " You wish to marry Susanna I Well, I
have certainly nothing to say against it, even if, as lord
of Haltenberg', I could raise any objection; but you
should first ask the girl's father, "and he pointed to—
the seneschal.
But he, on his part, stepped forward and said, " If
Susanna is ever married, it must be to a man who is in
regular service, and has his bread sure, and to no flighty
painter, who requires to be shut up that he may perform
his obligations."
Konrad did not knoAV what to make of it. Covered
with blushes, he was only able to stammer out confused
questions, which the knight on the other hand hardly
understood; at last, however, he succeeded in explain¬
ing to the painter that Susanna was not his daughter at
all, but his wife's maid, and the child of his faithful old
servant, the seneschal. The seneschal had in the mean¬
time brought back the girl, and placed her opposite the
poor painter, to undergo, as it were, a strict cross-
examination.
Konrad noAv woke out of deep shame to boiling wrath.
The Fourteen Deliverers. 147
He saw himself deceived by Susanna, who had played
the lady before him, perhaps quite in confederacy
with his two gaolers. So when the girl approached him,
with tears in her eyes, and yet with a glimmer of hope,
he pushed her away, and cried, " I thought to have sworn
Live and faith to an honourable lady; to a coquettish
serving-maid my word is not binding."
Susanna had heard enough of what had gone bcfure
to understand the meaning of these words. Silently,
deadly pale, with trembling lips, but full of noble defiance
and pride, she withdrew.
But the knight fetched her back, and stepped in front
of the painter. Sharply, sternly, and yet quietly, he
said, " 1 am a man of the old school, and you fine young
gentlemen probably understand life better than I. One
thing I may tell you—if 1 had fallen in love, I should
not have gone so blindly into the concern. But if I had
once given my word to any girl, I would also have kept
it to her, even if I had afterwards learned that, instead of
a lady, she was only a maid."
These words brought the painter back to his senses.
He lookt;d at poor Susanna, who stood there, greater and
nobler than himself. No ! such a creature could not have
deceived him with premeditated cunning. Andimmediately
it occurred to him that she had never called herself the
knight's daughter, but rather had always spoken of him
as her master. It became clearer to his mind. He him¬
self had deceived himself, and in the tumultuous intoxi¬
cation of his passion had completely misheard what
ought to have led him on the right track. Artist-like, he
had invented and sketched out to himself what he wished
to see, not what he saw.
But now, too, he was stricken with remorse for tlie
imspeakable wrong of which he had been guilty towards
Susanna.
He asked to be allowed to speak alone with her for
a moment. At first she refused this, but then yielded,
and they withdrew.
The knight, meanwhile, examined the last freshly-
painted Deliverers. Over one of the pictures he shook
his head very doubtfully.
When Konrad and Susanna came back again, the
moment had lasted almost half an hour. They held each
other's hands, if not so firmly as the first time at the
grating,   yet   with    decision.     Even   the    old   knight
148 The Ladies Edinburgh Mugaziiie.
became soft-hearted when he looked the two in the face,
and he himself interceded with the seneschal that he
would overcome his prejudices of rank against the
painter. What his master desired the seneschal could
not refuse. He laid his bony hand on the clasped hands
of the lovers.    It was almost touching to witness.
In romances, the heroes, in all important moments,
think exactly what they ought to think. But in real
life it is often quite otherwise. AVhen Konrad felt the
benedictory hand-pressing of this unexpected father-in-
law, in spite of all the tumult of emotion, he cast a look
of comparison on the father whom he had painted as a
breakfasting satyr, and on the daughter whom he had
painted as a saint. And he thought to himself, Susanna's
long-deceased mother must indeed have been even more
beautiful than a saint; she must have been quite angelic¬
ally beautiful when, owing to the surplus of her beauty,
such a father could now manage to have such a daughter.
It is often well when one makes the acquaintance of
one's parents-in-law for the first time after betrothal—
especially for a painter.
But now the knight came forward with a serious ob¬
jection. He held the new tablet of St. Katherine against
the light, and cried, " That is not at all the right
Katherine, but Miss Susanna-—to the life ! Am I to set up
our quondam maid in the castle-chapel for the Avorship of
my family and my servants ? Had you painted my real
daughter Avith the martyr's wheel, there might have been
some sense in that. It still wants a fortnight to St.
Leonhard's Day.    You must make a new tablet."
The painter declared that he woiUd be delighted to
take back that picture, his best painting, the fruit and
witness of his most blessed hours. And if the knight
wished very particularly that he should paint his daughter
among the Deliverers, he would do this also; but only this,
to please him. But the lord of Haltenberg repented
already of the Avord which he had spoken so thoughtlessly.
He was seized Avitli a sudden terror of this diabolical
painting. Who Avould assure him that his own daughter,
by sitting, would not also, at last, fall in love with this
irresistible scamp of a painter?
For a third St. Katherine, however, Konrad would by no
means contract. He would keep the picture, and would
paint no new saints. St. Leonhard's Day came; the artist
was no more to be had.    He Avas in the toAvn preparing
Memories. 149
for his marriage, and there was every chance of there
being finally only thirteen Deliverers.
But the resolute knight took, with a bold hand, the St.
Katherine painted with the bristle brush, which was still
standing safe in the corner, and ranged it alongside of the
others in the chapel.
Later generations took this painting, in spite of its
horrible execution, for a very ancient, and therefore par¬
ticularly sacred piece : and so it attained to the reputa¬
tion of a miracle picture, and enjoyed the universal
veneration of the people. The thirteen fine pictures were
scattered among different galleries at the time of the
Revolution; but St. Katherine still hangs, surrounded by
burning tapers, in the chapel of the castle.
KonradLenz lived exceedingly happily with his Susanna,
and at their golden wedding, blooming grandchildren
adorned with fresh garlands the sacred art-treasure of
the house—the other tablet of St. Katherine, the wonder¬
ful bridal-picture of their grandmother.
(^Concluded.)
W tmtixxt .'j.
M. E. Neil.
d^'
I TRAVEL back to years gone by,
And see an old familiar scene;
Our tall dark yews, a gleam of sky,
And boys at cricket on the green.
Those merry boys ! they used to shout
For very joy of breathing there ;
They could not seem to Hve without
The happy sky and bracing air.
And I Avas young, and longing sore
For limbs like theirs, and strength to race ;
When tide was low upon the shore,
And feel the sea-wind on my face.
And find new wonders every day,
And build great castles on the sands,
That in the night, they used to say,
Were stolen off by fairy hands.
150 Tlie Indies  Edinburgh Magazine.
Ah nie ! those boys of years ago
Are grey old men with feeble limb,
Or changed as only God can knoAV,
P'or some have travelled home to Him.
So in the dusk I lie here still,
As I have lain for long calm years;
And patient is my wayward will
That used to fret at hopes and fears.
And still there lives, while here I lie.
The same sweet old familiar scene.
Our tall dark yews, a gleam of sky,
And boys at cricket on the green.
Those merry boys ! they little know
How dear their laughter is to me.
Or how I watch them when they go
To race and scamper by the sea ;
Or how I listen as they walk
Back to their homes with slower tread,
Hearing half-catches of their talk.
That is so lightly thought and said.
They will not know when they pass my gate,
Some eve in the tender gloam,
That a gentle voice, for which I wait.
Hath called me, the poor cripple, Home.
Naomi S. Alder.
%\\  J r i s h   1 a 2 a a r.
Two years ago I happened to pay a visit to a sister settled
in Ballycorrig, in the south of Ireland. I had not been
there many hours before becoming aware of an under¬
current of excitement and expectation pervading the
entire household, down to the children and servants, and
which Avas considerably augmented on the arrival of some
visitors, who, while partaking of that most confidential of
meals, afternoon tea, gave vent to phrases such as these,
somewhat bewildering to an uninitiated person : " Mrs.
Blake has got five most elegant cushions." " I have been
promised six hams and three turkeys, and ]\Ii'8. Fitzgibbou
An Irish Bazaar. lal
has said that  she will  provide  two   gallons   of oyster
soup," &c., &c.
A commissariat of such enormous dimensions sounded
very like provision for a pic-nic on a gigantic scale, such
as we might imagine our friends on the other side of the
Atlantic to give; but on enquiring. I was informed l)y an
enthusiastic matron, with a smile of pity for my ignorance,
that it was a fancy bazaar which was to be held in three
days for the behoof of a certain hospital, of which my
sister was one of the managing committee, or governesses,
as I think they term themselves. My sister was to
have the refreshment table, with an efficient staif of
saleswomen, among whom I was enrolled on the spot.
So, as I have a decided weakness for sales of work, and
generally waste all my pocket-money on raffles on these
occasions, I no longer wondered at the excitement of the
different stall-holders, and entered heart and soul into the
discussion as to how far six hams and ditto turkeys
would go to appease the hungry multitude who were
expected.
It is rather a trite observation, and one in which I
think even Hibernians themselves must agree, that as a
nation they are not remarkable for tidiness, nor for keep¬
ing their public buildings—not to speak of their own
dwelling-houses—in that state of repair which might be
desirable. Consequently, I was not very much surprised
on going, the day prior to the sale, to the building kindly
given by the municipal authorities for the purpose, and
which was grandly called the " Athenseura " (so designated
as it was supposed to bear a faint resemblance to that
famous building), to find it sadly impaired by the ravages
of time outside. While the hall and lobbies were almost
impassable with workmen's ladders, hods of lime, and
boxes of materials brought by the various stall-holders,
in the vain hope of having their work arranged in antici¬
pation of the morrow. If the appearance of the building
outside was somewhat damping to the expectant spirits,
they sank altogether when the unutterable confusion of
the interior of the hall presented itself to our view.
Workmen were everywhere, singing, whistling, laughing,
and chafiing over their work, taking things as easily as
only Irish labourers can, nailing up evergreens, putting in
panes of glass in the cracked and broken cupola roof,
mopping up pools of water in the uneven floor, which
had fallen through the previous night, assuring us with a
152 The Ladies' Edinhurgh Magazine.
merry twinkle in their eyes impossible to resist, and which
must have presented a ludicrous contrast to our woe¬
begone faces, " to kape our moinds aisy, for by the help
of the blissid saints the hall wid be ready in the marnin."
With this assurance we were obliged to rest content,
though it seemed as if it would require superhuman
efforts to reduce order out of chaos. The hall consisted
of a long wide room, with a large rounded end raised
some six steps above the body of the building, Avhich
was the part set aside for the refreshment table. It
extended right across, leaving considerable spaces on
each side, that nearest the hall containing small tables
and benches, so that the buyers might refresh themselves
in comfort; the other giving sufficient room for us
saleswomen, a gas stove to heat our tea and soup, and a
small room partitioned off, where we kept a one-eyed
old Irislnvoman constantly employed washing dishes.
The eventful day dawned, and I and my nephew, a
boy of eight years of age, started soon after breakfast
for the scene of our labours. As a matter of course,
a select group of beggars (and nothing can exceed in
utter wretchedness and misery the a23pearance of an
Irish beggar) had stationed themselves around the door,
through which we had almost to fight our way.
One more on the alert than the others bore down
upon us before we had crossed the street, and dropping
a low curtsy, accosted me. " Good morrow to ye, me
lady ; and what a beautiful bhoy as yir son is ; he's the
livin' image of yirsilf."
I immediately hastened to disclaim the relationship;
but the woman, not a whit abashed at her mistake, broke
in with " and shure wasn't I afther sayin' to meself as ye
came along, the lady is intoirely too young to have a
grate bhoy that soize at all. But God's blissins on ye
bouth, and it's you that have got the kind heart for the
poor on yir face, and wid nivvir refuse a poor crayture a
copper."
Of course I was fully aware the woman was humbug¬
ging me, but flattery has a most subtle power, and to be
told that benevolence is so strongly marked on your
countenance that "he who runs may read," is surely
worth a penny!
For the next two hours we were very busy, and by
the time the room began to fill with strangers, our
table presented quite a pretty appearance, with, in addi-
An Irish Bazaar. 153
tion to the more substantial turkeys, hams, oysters, &c.,
flowers, fruits, jellies, boxes of all manner of sweets, and
large cakes of all descriptions, an unlimited supply of
which we had below the table to supplement deficiencies
as the day advanced. The centre ornament was a
very large and rich iced cake, made from a receipt from
the Queen's own kitchen, and given by a rather eccentric
gentleman, who desired that each slice should be sold
for no greater or less a sum than twopence. Before the
real business of the day commenced, some of tis took
a turn round the room to survey the work, and to see how
the finishing-touches to the hall had been given in
so short a time.
It presented a very hastily-tidied-up appearance in the
usual rough-and-ready style of our sister country ; the
Avorkmen's feet, fresh from the muddy streets, had left
a very noticeable impress on the floor, making us fain
to loop up the flowing skirts we would in a clean room
have been only too proud to display.
Seeing the first visitor to our table approach in the
shape of a solemn-faced boy of about six years old, I ran
back to assist him. He slowly walked from end to end of
the long table, carefully examining each sweetmeat, and
mentally testing its qualities, till, with a sigh of relief,
he pointed to the Royal cake, and asked for a slice.
I thought it far too rich for a boy of his age, but it was
not my place to remonstrate. Four several times did the
young epicure return, each time with the requisite two¬
pence in his hand, and after the same careful examin¬
ation of the table demanded a slice of the heavy cake.
My conscience smote me as I tliought of what his subse¬
quent sufferings would be, but the interests of the bazaar
overcame the instincts of humanity, and I cheerfully
received the money, while stifling considerable qualms of
remorse.
It really was very amusing, from our vantage-groiind
overlooking the body of the hall, to watch all the people—
the eagerness of the fair saleswomen, the amount of flirt¬
ation, which was chiefly carried on over tea and coffee,
at our table; to note the frank coquetry and good-
humoured banter of the bright-eyed Irish girls with the
officers of the — regiment; to listen to the racy sayings
of the country people in the rich brogue of County
Cork; but we had not much time to continue our observ¬
ations,  for  from  one   o'clock  till  we   went home  late
No. 17.—Mai 1876. U
154 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
at night our hands were seldom one moment idle, sup¬
plying the wants of the constantly returning multitude;
more especially as the chief task of so doing devolved
on my sister, another girl, and me; for although we had
two others with us, they were quite useless, both being-
engaged to be married: the one sat engrossed with her
attendant squire, or read us little lectures on the im¬
morality of fancy sales in general; Avhile the other
young lady was rather a drawback than otherwise, for
when her innamorato was absent she was wrapped in the
clouds; and when present, she followed him up and down
the tables, plying him with all our chief delicacies at
quite nominal prices.
In the centre of the hall, on the steps of the rotunda,
was a large box made of splints of wood with spaces
between, and over this was suspended a placard with the
words, " ' The Irish Diamond,' to be raffled—tickets, one
shilling each."
A great crowd was always to be seen round this: in a
leisure moment I ran down to satisfy my curiosity as to
the value of a jewel which required so large a box to
contain it. Judge of my surprise to hear a grunting
noise over the hum of the people's voices, and to see a
little white pig, about two months old, inside, looking
particularly foolish, with a blue satin rosette somewhat
like a fashionable Charlotte-Corday cap on its head, but
which, having fallen to one side, added considerably to
its grotesque appearance. Of course we all took tickets,
moved thereto by the hope of experiencing the novel
sensation of having a pig for a pet, and not knowing what
to do with it. The remarks on its beauty and appearance
amongst some farmers, their wives and families, who had
come into the room, were most amusing.
One young couple, who were evidently about to set up
liouse together, walked round about the cage, casting
longing looks at the animal; and as I passed I heard the
young man say, " It's as purty a bonaveen as ivvir ye'd
wish to see foreninst ye. If St. Patlirick plased that the
luck be ours, Norah my darlint, that's the peeg for us, and
we moight go before the praste at oncet."
I gathered from this remark that no household in Erin
would be complete without the ornamental adjunct of a
pig-
We raffled a good many of the larger cakes, dried fruits,
and boxes of sweets at cm- table, but owing to the amount
A 71 Irish Bazaar. 155
of families of the same name present, it was extremely
difficult to steer clear of blunders. There was " Mrs. Jim
Murphy," " Mrs. Bill Murphy," " Mrs. Paddy Murphy," and
so on ad infinitum, till within a quarter of an hour I
counted eighteen different Mrs. Murphys in the room at
one time ; so, to save after-disputes, we initialed all the
names on giving them tickets.
Anything worse arranged than the manner of conduct¬
ing the raffles I never saw; in fact, I got into very bad
odour for suggesting some improvements and gently
insinuating the superiority of the management of such
affairs in my own country; but the Irish, however many
estimable qualities they may possess, are remarkably
easy-going, and have a rooted prejudice to all reform.
The consequence was, they manfully stuck to their own
way; for instance, when all the tickets for a certain
article were disposed of and the wheel turned, instead of
some one being selected to draw out a number, that
number being the one to whom the article falls, as is
generally done, every single name Avas read over aloud,
all other business in the room being totally suspended till
the last and lucky number was arrived at, and even then
some dissentient voices on the outskirts of the crowd
were heard to mutter that their names had never been
called, and must have been overlooked.
The person who read the list had no sinecure, for an
agonising band would insist on playing, with a stentorian
chorus accompanying, " Stolen kisses are the sweetest,"
which, being evidently considered by the musicians as
especially appropriate to the occasion, they gave us
several times, and the sound was deafening. Then my
sister and I besought them to reduce the prices of the
things in the evening, as the sale was flagging dreadfully ;
but they rejected the advice of " foreigners " in a disdain¬
ful manner, and the consequence was that hundreds of
things were kept in reserve to be sold privately—if
jwssible.
Suddenly there was a crash of falling glass, two or three
shrill shrieks, a rush of every one to a particular corner of
the room, ourselves among the number, to find the cause of
the uproar exactly what might have been expected. When
will the Irish learn that a " stitch in time saves nine," or
that the day on which a ball or some public entertainment
is to be held in a certain building, is not the day on which
to commence to make hurried reparation of the effects of
156 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
most culpable neglect? And to hear them now! one
would have thought it was entirely owing to their super¬
human exertions that no material damage was done or
life lost.
A workman on the roof had struck his ladder lightly
against tlie framework, and the single touch was sufficient
to loosen several panes of glass, wliich fell crashing on
the contents of the stall below, and within an inch of the
head of the stall-holder, a pretty, fair young matron, who
suddenly found herself the heroine of the hour, and was
standing pale and trembling, half laughing, half crying,
receiving the congratulations of the company on having
escaped unhurt.
" Really something must be done for the hall; who
would have thought it was so dilapidated ? After all,
there's no damage done, and it's not often used." '• It'll
hold out another year or so—it's the climate. What
building under heaven could stand such damp ?" Of course
it was the fault of everything but the townspeople, and
we strangers were obliged, if not to acquiesce, to stand by
foolishly silent, and resume our duties, after the little
digression got up for our amusement.
But the great hit of the day Avas a picture-gallery
organised by a very clever and amusing young officer in
the Engineers, to whose untiring efforts the success of the
bazaar was mainly due. A small anteroom opened off one
side of the hall; it was innocent of any repairs, the floor
had given way in one corner, and the rain poured through
the roof in several places. The price of entrance was a
shilling, including a printed and numbered catalogue
given at the door. To most of the pictures was appended
the name of a local celebrity, so that the humour of the
thing can scarcely be appreciated by any one not knowing
the habitues of the city ; but the same idea might be
adapted to any other place and bazaar with different
names; indeed, I was told that this one was borrowed
from a fancy sale at Inverness.
A crowd was pouring out at the door as I and some
friends pushed our way in. Most of the people were
laughing while discussing the pictures, but one country¬
man, his face red with rage, was exclaiming in angry
tones, " Be jabers, and to call them picturs ! If oi kitch
a hould av that dhirty little Englisher, it's meself that'll
tache him to stale the money av an honest blioy that
works for his bread!   He ought to be ashamed of himself,
An Irish Bazaar.        ' 157
he ought, and ye all a-laffin at him and encouragin' av
him! Mebbe and if he see the show he is a makin' of
himself, he'd not look so plased at all, at all."
On entering, we looked roimd the room and could
discern  no  pictures   on   the  rough   boarded walls,   till
Mr. , who with  a long stick  was doing the  part of
showman, directed our attention to about twenty coarse,
unpainted wooden frames of about a foot square, in each
of which was suspended some small object. I remember
only a few of them, but they will serve to show the style
of painting.
1. "The Disinherited Heir" (contributed by a lady).
The object suspended in this frame Avas a chignon, and
the name attached that of a fashionable hairdresser in the
city.
2. "The Return from the Oaks."    Frith.
An acorn was hung in this frame.
3. " A View in the Isle of Wight." Rosa Bonheur.
This consisted of two small wooden cows from a child's
Noah's Ark.
4. " Drawn from Nature." The presumed artist, the
name of a well-known dentist; the object a tooth.
5. " An Old Hunter," by Landseer.    (A screw.)
6. " Eve's Temptation," by Etty.    (An apple.)
7. " An Irish Native," by MacHse. (An oyster), and so
on.
Upwards of thirty pounds were made by this gallery
alone the first day.
The same young officer was indefatigable in auctioning
the various things the second evening. His quaint
humour, ready wit, together with his stolid countenance,
for he had a most perfect command of feature, kept the
people in fits of laughter, and many who were only
attracted by a wish to hear his remarks, and with not
the smallest intention of bidding, Avent away considerably
poorer. We enlisted his services to dispose in a like
manner of our more perishable goods ; and on the express
stipulation that he should receive the very richest cake
we had as his payment, he consented.
Seizing a large bell to attract attention, he leapt on a
form, and for nearly two hours lie went on selling jellies,
tarts, biscuits, all sorts of things, handing samples round
among the laughing crowd so that they might judge for
themselves of their quality, assuring them they would
never have a better opportunity of giving a party to
158 Tlie Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
their friends at a cheap rate, insisting on the unhappy
purchasers of the jelly devouring it on the spot as the
glasses belonged to the confectioner ! He talked himself
perfectly hoarse, and we were as tired with laughing at
him, but he succeeded in clearing the table in a most
effectual manner, and we all went home in high spirits late
at night, very fatigued, but completely satisfied with the
large sum we had obtained, and the amount of amusement
we had derived into the bargain.
Martyn Hay.
fhirsical i^crms as ajjplicfl U the Pinl
It is interesting to note how much there is in physical
states and peculiarities which corresponds to something
in moods and forms of mind; and without giving the
rein unduly to fancy, we think the resemblance might
be studied much more than it is with great advantage,
as affording a clue to the best mode of dealing with the
more abstruse subject.
We are all familiar with the expressions "open-handed,"
" close-fisted," " thick-skinned," " thin-skinned," " hard-
headed," " long-headed," and many such, used not to
designate any physical peculiarity, but mental moods or
natures to which we instinctively give names which
properly and directly belong to the physique. It may be
doubtful whether this implies anything more than that
we feel that a natxu-e which gives freely and liberally is
like an open hand, whereas a greedy selfish nature
desires to hold its possessions close, as a closed hand
does, and so on. Nevertheless, we are disposed to think
there is more than this in such expressions, and (whether
or not it was in this way that the secondary meaning
came to be connected with the words) that there really
may be traced generally a connection between the
physical and the mental peculiarities not only in shape
of head and expression of face, but in other peculiarities
not so commonly connected in our minds with any special
indication of character.
Even the natural posture of the hand seems, we think,
to have an expression ; and although its education and
daily employment may so materially modify this as to
Physical Terms as applied to the Mind. 159
make it not a very distinct or safe indication hy which to
judge a full-grown person, any one who notices little
children, or still more little babies, will find that they
differ from each other most amusingly and strikingly in
some of these things. Whereas one infant has his hand
spread out habitually, and can scarcely be got to give a
friendly clasp to the finger a baby-lover instinctively puts
into it, another has his little fist closely clenched as its
general attitude; and any one who notices this cannot
fail to see as much difference of expression between the
two, as Ave all see between a firm, close-set mouth and
a hanging lip.
Again, we incline to think that thin-skinnedness,
mental and physical, do generally go together, and that
physical thick-skinnedness is generally concomitant with
a less firm and sensitive nature. We may perhaps hint
here, that as regarding thinness of skin indicating fineness
of nature, the same mistake may be made as to the symp¬
toms, mental and physical. A skin is not necessarily thin
because it is easily hurt; it may be only unhealthy ; and a
mind is not necessarily of a fine and sensitive kind
because it is easily wounded: it also may be merely
unhealthy—morbid—what we familiarly call "touchy."
And this very word " touchy" suggests the means of
distinguishing between the false and the true thin-
skinnedness. If we see the same person who winces at
a touch, rough and ungentle in his handling of his
surroimdings, we may safely conclude that he is not " all
over " thin-skinnedness, but probably has some rmhealthy
tendency which causes a special and not inborn tender¬
ness ; whereas, if we see the person who seems afraid of
a rough approach from without, habitually delicate and
fine in all his manipulations—the sort of person to whom
we might trust our finest china and crystal without
anxiety—we do not suspect any want of health, but
thankfully recognise a real fineness of physique.
And do we not see the same in the mental world?
We occasionally find people Avho are for ever taking
offence at, or being hurt by, casual words of others, who
yet are so rough and inconsiderate of the tenderest
feelings of other people, so utterly regardless as to
whether their remarks are likely to be pleasant or not
to those they address, that we are forced to the con¬
clusion that whatever may be the cause of their sensitive¬
ness (on which perhaps they plume themselves not a little).
IGO The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
it certainly is not fineness of nature. It is very different
Avith the sensitiveness of real refinement. Even it, if
extreme, may be regretted as exposing one to the
danger of being easily wounded, and therefore less fit for
roughing it in what is at the best a somewhat ungentle
world ; but no one, himself candid and fairly kind, would
grudge a little extra care not to vex one who is as
sensitively alive to the feelings of others as to his own,
Avlio is habitually gentle and considerate, ever ready
with a wise word to take the edge off casual unpleasant¬
ness, and to brighten the lives and smooth the paths of
others by his genial kindliness and Christian courtesy.
Practically, we believe the one kind of thin-skinnedness
is not inflicted by nature, to an undesirable extent,
any oftener than the other ; but wherever it is found
excessive, it is disease brought on by mismanagement,
and by no means incurable if proper means are taken to
deal wisely with it. It is well known that a blacksmith's
hand becomes thick-skinned by his work, though very
probably as a baby he Avas as thin-skinned as the little
lady at the castle. And hers is probably thicker and
less easily hurt now tlian in those early days, if she has
not been a mere cumberer of the ground, b^ven so it is
with our mental thin-skinnedness. There is nothing like
making a habit of occupying our hearts as well as our
hands with things and people external to ourselves. In
refusing to do so we may indeed cultivate an apparent
fineness, and a very great shrinking from roughness in
others, but by such a course we shall never attain to fine
and delicate manipulation; on the contrary, from want of
practice, our best-meant actions will be so awkward and
clumsy and rough, that others, more really refined but
more healthy than we, will shrink from our society and
dread our approach.
Marjory.
A Prize is offered for the best Article ou any subject of Moral or Mental
Philosophy appearing in The Ladies' Edhihuryh Magazine till December 1876
Inclusive.
The Subject op Debate for the next Meeting of the Ladies' Edinburgh
Literary Society, May 6th, is, "Is the Mind conscious in Sleep?"
Those interested in these Debates are referred to the List published in this
Magazine for January.
161
^I^e (Bmtma of a Sianbarb oi Caslt.
In spite of the great authority of Burke, who, in the
Introduction to his work on " The Sublime and Beauti¬
ful," declines to encumber by a definition the investi¬
gation he proposes, I think it will be advantageous, for
the sake of clearness, to state, in part at least, what
I mean by Taste which I hold to be regulated by a
certain Standard.
Ideas may vary as to how much is meant by the power
so named, but all will probably agree in this as at least
a partial definition, viz. that we mean that mental
faculty which enjoys, admires, approves of, or condemns
the subjects presented to it; or in the words of Blair,
Taste "is the power of receiving pleasure from the
beauties of Nature and of Art." ^ He considers this
power more akin to Sense than to Reason, no process
of the intellect being required to call it into exercise;
though Reason assists Taste to a great degree, especially
when the sphere in which that faculty acts becomes
enlarged by the cultivation which we bestow on the
power which is born with us. This power is inborn
more or less in human nature, as universally, I am bold
to say, as any of the physical senses ; and indeed the
universality of its existence is strongly demonstrated
by the name we give to it, Avhich expresses, as no other
could, the kind of test by which the mind tries the
subjects submitted to its approval, though as the term
applied to this mental faculty is a somewhat figurative
one, we must not expect to find in it the strict accuracy
of a scientific definition.^
I do not say that in the above definition we have an
exhaustive description of the mental faculty called Taste ;
nor, while pronouncing it inborn, do I refuse to admit
that it is a loss common portion of human nature's
heritage than the faculties usually known as the five
senses: perhaps because, belonging only to the orna¬
mental side of liie, it is less necessary to the well-being
of man. This faculty is capable, as every one will
admit, of the highest improvement by culture, and in
' Lect. on Rhet., lect. 2, p. 18.
" Int. to E-iSai) on SuUime, p. 4.
No. 18.—Joke 1876. X
162 Ihc Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
this indisputable fact I find the first argument which
assures me that there is a " Standard of Taste." How
could the power be cultivated if we had not an ideal
before our mind's eye,—a point at which we are aiming %
Furthermore I consider (and here I am borne out by
Hume in his essay on the Standard of Taste) that
there must be a standard, because there are certain
principles of approval or of blame which guide the
operations of the mind, just as there are other principles
which rule the decisions of the palate. The physical
sense is identical in all human beings; sourness and
sweetness, pungency and insipidity, are not matters of
opinion but of fact. So, too, beauty or deformity, gran¬
deur or delicacy, pertain to certain objects in nature,
or to the productions of the human mind and skill, and
the verdict of Mental Taste is as universally alike
as that of the palate on the qualities of the food sub¬
mitted to it. It is true that monstrosities and ugliness
are esteemed by some misguided minds, but we say in
such cases that the mental faculty is undeveloped or
vitiated, as we do of the physical sense of an earth-
eating African savage, or the Norwegian peasant
swallowing assafoetida and corn brandy. Again,
Hume is surely right in considering the existence of
a standard as proved by the universal practice and ne¬
cessity of comparison between the different degrees
of excellence. Here, as well as in the cultivation of
Taste, the exercise of reason comes most powerfully
to the aid of the natural instinct, and the principal point
on which it is called to decide, is the question whether
the work submitted to its judgment, be it picture, poem,
statue, musical composition, building, costume, or what
you will, serves well the end for which it was designed,
and gives pleasure through the physical senses to the
understanding. Once more, we see that there is and
must be a standard, because if there were none, it would
follow that all Tastes are equally good. A proverb
familiar to us all asserts this to be the case, but though
the fallacy it contains may remain undetected as long
as trifles only are in question, we have but to apply the
saying to more important matters, and its absurdity
will at once be manifest. It may serve to point a sneer
at all higher aspirations, but it will carry no weight in a
serious argument. If all Tastes were on a level, the
Member  for   Stoke  would  rank  as an orator equal  to
The Ejcistence of a Standard of Taste. 163
Pitt or Burke, to Lord Derby or to Mr. Bright; the penny-
a-line coiTespondent of a third-rate journal as au
historian like Gibbon or Grote; and the public works
which we owe to Mr Ayrton's patronage would afford
as sincere delight to the lovers of the beautiful as those
due to the Taste of a Medici or a Maximilian I.
Granted then a Standard—can we admit the existence
of diversities of Taste without contradiction of our
proposition ? Yes, I think that we can in questions
of Taste, though not in those concerning right and
wrong, because it is necessary to bear in mind two
causes at least which must modify considerably, though
not totally unfix, the standard whose existence is
maintained. These causes are, as Hume's essay reminds
us, the different humours of men, and the special manners
and opinions of different ages and countries. The same
qualities do not please equally at all stages of the
individual growth or of societies, and I think that the
reflection shows us that it is because so much allowance
has to be made for these reasons that the impression
has arisen of there being no standard; and this false
impression is greatly strengthened by the proverb to
which I have alluded, which is true enough in one sense,
though very misleading as usi;ally applied. If all Tastes
are held to be worthy of consideration because their
immense variety testifies to the marvellous variety in the
human mind, and in the objects of its admiration at
different stages of its progress, 1 have no fault to find
with it.
It must also be remembered, in speaking of the causes
which modify the standard for which I contend, that as
all excellence does not meet in any one work of nature
or of art, and as the power to appreciate all forms of it
is not equally developed in every mind,^ we have here
two considerations which will account for much of the
uncertainty, indefiniteness, and perplexity attendant
on any endeavour to fix with precision a " Standard
of Taste."
Where then shall we look for this shadowy and seem¬
ingly changeful thing ? How shall we obtain help from
it in judging of the excellence we already perceive, and
in reaching forth to grasp that which is still concealed
from us ?
' Mod. Painters, vol. ii. Part 3, ch. 3.
164 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
First, we must recollect that Mental Taste is not, like
the physical sense whose name it bears, a wholly passive
thing. It has indeed an inborn passive element, but
the mental faculty consists also of a power of active
recipiency,^ and it is on this that reason chiefly acts,
and which is elevated by culture to enjoyment of the
highest, purest, most refined kind. This recipient power
will of course be most developed in those persons, nations,
or societies which have attended most thoroughly to
the cultivation of the mind. In the gradual elevation
and refinement of their Taste, we shall, I think, find a
trustworthy standard which shall guide less qualified
judgments.
I have already remarked that the first question with
which reason is concerned in matters of Taste, is whether
the work it is called on to approve does or does not
answer well the end the designer had in view. This
test strictly applied will, I believe, go far to adjust and
regulate our " Standard of Taste." How much of
tasteless deformity we shoidd be spared, say in modern
architecture and in dress, if this simple rule were only
borne in mind: but alas I the ideas of the builders of
old times are too often adopted for ludicrous misappli¬
cation, and the mindless Mrs Malcolm, in Miss Ferrier's
novel Destiny, would probably be matched in any company
both before and since her own time by others whose
dress, like her own, would seem to consist " chiefly of
bows that tied nothing, and ends which had no end
to answer save to swell the milliner's bill." The same
rule applies as much to details as to the general whole,
and, in questions concerning ornament, will greatly
purify Taste.
It may perhaps be objected. If we are to set up a
standard, and to rule all our admiration thereby, shall
we not be in danger of becoming narrow and fastidious '?
of shutting our eyes to beauty because it is inconspicuous
and does not come up to our ideal"? Even if the fear were
a well-grounded one, fastidiousness Avould be a less evil
than the obscuring or degrading of our own sense of real
truth, beauty, and goodness; but we need not think that
such will be the consequence. Narrowness is no sign
of a true pure Taste; on the contrar}^, as Mr. Ruskin
gays,   "our purity of Taste  is best tested  by its uni-
' Reed's Lect. on Eng. Poetry, p. 23.
The Existence of a Standard of Taste. 165
versaUty ;^ having its senses exercised by careful training,
and sound judgment to discern between good and
evil, such a Taste is sure to be wide, tolerant, and quick
in perception."
Some people seem to find it difficidt to enjoy the
humbler kinds of beauty and excellence less than they
deem the highest. They scorn, for instance, the fair
scenery which nourished the poetic thoughts of Words¬
worth, Southey, and Christopher North; they have no
admiration for Rydal, because it does not " come up to "
Loch Awe, or they are blind to the glory of a Highland
glen, with its rich colouring defying the painter's art.
They look for the savage grandeur of an Alpine pass, and
finding it not, they miss at the same time the beauty
which lies before them of purple heather, grey rock, and
yellowing fern,—the birchen copse in its delicate livery of
white and green, with here and there a rowan tree
touched by autumn's fiery finger. Let such vulgar and
narrow minds go and learn (if they have a grain of
teachableness and humility) what to admire in literature
from such a one as Charles Lamb, for whom " Shaftesbuvy
was not too genteel, nor Jonathan Wild too low," ^ or
how to look at nature from such a heart and such eyes as
Charles Kingsley's, discerning beauty wherever it may be
found, on a Lincolnshire fen or a Cornish moor, in a
Devonshire combe, echoing with the thunder of the waves
rushing up the limestone beach, or by a silent, clear trout
stream, slipping almost noiselessly over its chalky bed
through the dewy Hampshire meadows. They may
awake under his guidance to some other perceptions also,
which narrowness of any kind is apt to obscure. A bare
hillside, with a bush or two of blossoming gorse, may tell
them, under some such teacher,
" That the wisest word man preaches
Is the humblest he can speak." ''
An English scene of homely simplicity may suggest that,
to lift our hearts on high,
" Needs no show of mountain hoary,
Winding shore or deepening glen,
Where the landscape in its glory
Teaches truth to wandering men."'
' Essays of Elia, " On Books and Reading."
' Mountain Oorses : Mrs Browning.
* Christiun Year, 1st Sunday after Epiphany.
166 Tlie Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
Or they may study the beautiful under that great art-
critic and writer of some of the noblest prose our language
can produce, John Ruskin; and from him they will learn,
in the passage referred to already, that " if we can only
admire this thing or that, we may be sure that our cause
for liking is of a finite and false nature. But if we
can perceive beauty in everything of God's doing, we may
argue that we have reached the true perception of its
universal laws. Hence, false taste may be known by its
fastidiousness, by its demands of pomp, splendour, and
unusual combination, by its enjoyment only of particular
styles and modes of things, and by its pride also, for it is
for ever meddling, mending, accumulating, and self-
exulting ; its eye is always upon itself, and it tests all
things by the way they fit it. But true taste is for ever
growing, learning, reading, worshipping, laying its hand
upon its mouth, because it is astonished, casting its shoes
from off its feet, because it finds all ground holy, lament¬
ing over itself, and testing itself by the way that it fits
things." The rest of this passage I refrain from quoting,
as it is concerned chiefly witli taste as applied to pictorial
art, but the following words have to do with the exercise
of the faculty in every department, and are well worthy
of the greatest attention. " There is ... a duty more or
less imperative attached to every power we possess. . . .
This duty evidently is to bring every sense into that
state of cultivation in which it shall both form the truest
conclusions respecting all that is submitted to it, and
procure us the greatest amount of pleasure consistent
with its due relation to other senses and functions.
Which three constituents of perfection in sense, true
judgment, maximum sensibility, and right relation to
others, are invariably co-existent and involved one by
the other, for the true judgment is the result of the high
sensibility, and the high sensibility of right relation,"
And again our author says: " The temper by which right
taste is formed is first patient. It dwells upon what is
submitted to it; it does not trample upon it, lest it should
be pearls, even if it should be husks . . . it is distrustful
of itself, so as to be ready to believe and try all things,
and yet so trustful of itself, that it will neither quit what
it has tried, nor take anything without trying. . . . Now,
the conclusions of this disposition are sure to be eventu¬
ally right, more and more right according to the general
maturity of all the powers, but it is sure to come right at
The Existence of a Standard of Taste. 167
last, because its operation is in analogy to and in har¬
mony with the whole Christian moral system, and that
which it will ultimately love and rest in are great sources
of happiness, common to all the human race, and based
on the relations they hold to their Creator."
These are stirring words, and should urge us to the
earnest quest after that truest, highest beauty, of which
Spenser says that it is not
" as fond men misdeeme,
An outward show of things that only seeme ;
But that faire lampe from whose celestial ray
That light proceedes, which kindles lovers' fire,
Shall never be extinguisht nor decay ;
But when the vitall spirits doe expyre,
Unto her native planet shall retyre ;
For it is heavenly borne, and cannot die,
Being a parcell of the purest skie." ■
Irene.
Letter III.
My Dear Friend,—Looking over some papers the other
day, I found a small packet marked " Letters of Samuel
Rogers ;" they were most of them addressed to my aunt,
Cecilia Siddons, but one or two were to my grandmother,
Mrs Siddons. The first thought that occurred to me on
reading them was this, what a decided " Poet of Society,"
if one may use the expression, Rogers was! These letters,
or rather notes, are all in relation to visits, calls, evening
parties, &c., pleasantly and courteously written, but only
one expression, and that in a P.S., seemed to hint of
interest in other things : speaking of an evening he was
to spend at my grandmother's, he adds, " May we flatter
ourselves that we shall have Lear % " Yet he was a poet,
as far as graceful diction, pretty thoughts, and musical
arrangement of words go ; and he was a benefactor to
society also, inasmuch as he caused his house to be a
meeting-place for the gifted in various departments, and
' Hymne in Honour of Beautie.
168 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
also made it a fit place for such meetings by adorning it
with much that was exquisitely beautiful in art and
interesting in literature. His breakfasts were noted, and
certainly must have deserved to be so, as they were de¬
lightful enough to overcome the all but universal dislike
to that particular mode of hospitality. So he aided in
the cultivation of the beautiful in his own way, and though
one could imagine a greater mind depicting in loftier
strains the " Pleasures of Memory" and the various
phases of " Human Life," yet there is always a cultivated
grace and polish, and occasionally even a gentle tender¬
ness, Avhich lends a great charm to words and thoughts,
even though they do not seem drawn from very deep
springs in his own nature.   Of such, I think, are these:—
" Hence, away !  nor dare intrude ;
In this secret shadowy cell,
Musing memory loves to dwell
With her sister Solitude.
Far from the busy world she flies,
To taste that peace the world denies ;
Entranced, she sits from youth to age
Eeviewing life's eventful page,
And noting ere they fade away
The little lines of yesterday."
They have, I believe, been set to music, and they are in
themselves melody, especially the two last lines, Avliich
have a peculiar charm.
Is not the want of melody a fault in our more modern
poets? they speak to our intellect, they rouse our thoughts,
they bring out ideas of grandeur, even rising to the height
of the sublime, but there seems to be a neglect of that
flow of musical measure which distinguished the poets
of the earlier days, and which neither the height nor
depth of feeling, not even the " whirlwind of passion,"
gave an excuse for neglecting. Hamlet, I think, would
have given the same advice to the poets as to the players,
and admonished them even under such circumstances to
" beget a smoothness," without which poetry, as such,
must be defective. A worse fault still of these days appears
to me to be an occasional bringing forward of ugly images,
putting things before one grotesquely, which looks as if the
writer meant to say, " Now I will bring something disa¬
greeable before you, and yet I will triumph over it, and
Recollections of the Past. 169
make you still acknowledge it as poetry." He may do
so, but why bring the ugly image at all if only to get the
better of it ? " Not to speak it profanely," it reminds one
of " Tom Thumb ;" " he made the giants first, and then he
killed them."
Thomas Moore as well as Rogers may be called " A
Poet of Society," and yet there was a great difference
between them. Rogers was rich, Moore was poor ; the
former entertained, the latter was usually in the position
of a guest, though a highly-honoured and sought-after
one. Rogers, 1 think, was somewhat cold, though
always courteous and polished. Moore, with his excitable
Irish nature, pleasure-loving and pleasure-seeking, was the
life of every circle in which he appeared, bringing tears or
causing laughter at liis will, as he sang his own perfect
songs, with little voice, but with an expression unequalled.
I remember one in particular which I heard one even¬
ing in my mother's house. It described the meeting of
two ships on a solitary sea, the joy with which they
hailed one another, their brief greeting and regretful
parting—
" Soon, too soon, they part in pain,
To sail through silent seas again."
He gave it with a sweet undertone of sadness most
exquisite.
When Moore was in Edinburgh, he went to the theatre
with Sir Walter Scott; and I remember the burst of
enthusiasm which greeted their entrance, which evidently
came from the hearts of the audience : they both stood for
a moment perfectly still, neither choosing to take the
honour to himself. I think it was the orchestra playing
" St. Patrick's Day " which caused Moore, urged by Sir
Walter, to acknowledge the reception, in which acknow¬
ledgment, however, the latter was soon forced to join,
and they both remained to the end the principal attraction
of the evening. From the theatre Moore went to fulfil
an engagement, good-naturedly made by him with an old
lady, well known in Edinburgh society at that day, who
had promised him a " Crush of beauties," as she termed it;
but she so overdid her invitations in her wish to please
all her friends, that the little poet hastily withdrew,
declaring that her " Crush of beauties " would speedily
crush him out of existence. One cannot think of Moore
without a very sweet image presenting itself at his side;
No. IS.-JcNB 187C. Y
170 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
that of " Bessie," his beautiful and amiable wife. A
creature more devoted, unselfish, and unpretending, can
scarcely be imagined ; she had not in herself any literary
tastes, but she sympathised with him, and greatly
enjoyed his success; and when anxieties and troubles
came, she strove hard to take the heavier burden on
herself, and to shield his sensitive poet-nature from what
she knew he would sink under sooner than she would.
They had many trials both in their worldly affairs and in
their domestic circumstances, and that he appreciated the
comfort and support he found at home there can be no
doubt.    The beautiful lines beginning
" I'd mourn the hopes that leave me
If thy smile had left me too,"
were addressed to her in some such season of sorrow.
One does feel a little inclined to wonder why, loving
her as he did, he was satisfied to leave her so much alone,
while he was enjoying gaiety and society, which their
very moderate means, and her domestic avocations, pre¬
vented her sharing in ; though when she did appear, her
beauty and simplicity made her an object of great ad¬
miration. But, after all, Moore's was not a character from
which one could expect great depth of feeling or any
self-sacrifice, of which latter-named virtue she apparently,
though unconsciously, possessed enough for both : there
is no doubt, nevertheless, that they were happy together.
Mrs Moore was the eldest of three very beautiful sisters
of the name of Dyke ; the second married a Mr Duff", and
went to America, the youngest was the first wife of my
uncle, Mr Murray. " Bessie " died only a very few years
ago, and it is pleasant to know that she was able to remain
in the pretty cottage at Sloperton, which had been their
home together for so many years, surrounded by " all that
should accompany old age," including " troops of friends "
among the rich, who loved her, but especially among the
poor, to whom she was a benefactor, adviser, and
helper: so long used to live for others, she did so to
the last.
Moore, in his thoughtful and touching lines entitled
" My Birthday," pays a tribute to her which may well
conclude our recollections of her sweet domestic life.
Speaking with natural regret of all the time he had
" lavished unwisely, carelessly," and saying how much
of the past he would willingly forget, he adds.
Recollections of the Past. 171
" All—but that freedom of the mind
Which hath been more than wealth to me,
Those friendships in my boyhood twined.
And kept till now unchangingly ;
And that dear home, that saving ark,
Where love's true light at last I've found.
Cheering within when all grows dark
And comfortless and stormy round."
^loore has been blamed by some and defended by others
for the part he took in publishing a Life of Lord Byron
after he had consented to destroy the one in his possession.
One need not now go over the grounds on which either
of these views was taken, but one may be permitted to
regret that such a Life ever was published. Many who,
while disapproving Lord Byron's conduct, admired his
genius, would willingly have drawn the veil of oblivion
over his faults, and would most earnestly have desired
that nothing should be remembered of him but the higher
and purer breathings of his poetry, and that his last act
was one of self-devotion, and, as it turned out, of self-
sacrifice, to a cause he thought a riglit and noble one.
Such would have been the wish, even of those who had
cause to feel deeply injured by him ; among others, of the
person whom he so bitterly attacked in his lines, " Born in
a garret, in the kitchen bred." This person was really a
kind warm-hearted woman, who bore him no ill-will what¬
ever, being no underhand adviser, and though most deeply
attached to Lady Byron, no flatterer; for I have heard her
speak out frankly, and give an honest opinion when she
thought herself called on to do so ; therefore she was held
in respect by Lady Byron herself, and also by all her
friends.
I think in one of Lord Byron's letters he mentions Lady
Byron's poetical powers with respect. She was a very
unpretentious versifier, and infused more of thought than
imagination into her poetry ; not that she was without
the last-named quality, for, on the contrary, it was power¬
ful within her, but she had a reficence which prevented
her giving way to it even in her poetical compositions.
She sent me once a short poem, which gives a very good
idea of her style of writing; it was intended to be read or
sold, I do not remember which, at a bazaar for poor idiots,
and arose from a discussion on the subject.
172 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
A  CONVERSATION.
" The idiot walks through life, and why ?
Oh for some Delos to reply !
See what he does, for we should err
In thinking that the mind must stir
Within the man, to make him more
Than Cypher, when are counted o'er
The units of the human race.
Not uselessly he fills a place :
He wakes a consciousness in those
Who tend him, that he nothings knows.
And needs their help ; that he is born,
If none care for him, most forlorn ;
That they who own a spirit-dower,
Should freely give him of their power.
They might have been like him who stands
With idly-hanging lip and hands.
These are the thoughts to nature true,
A heartless jest could come from few.
See what he does ; he makes the wise
Look up to heaven with awe-struck eyes.
And turn from controversy's pride
To feel one key to them denied.
Thus is he missioned to fulfil.
Like gifted seers, the holy wiU,
And 'neath a cretin's form to be
An angel gathering charity ! "
—Always yours very sincerely, E. H. M.
^ u b 111' 13 »j a u i i c s.
Something about the contour of her head.
About the gentle grace
Of the mild sweet face,
Pleaseth me well;
Yet I cannot tell
Where the beauties lie ;
'Tis what they convey
E'en more than they
Makes the heart swell.
They speak of a soul so fair,
Self has no centre there,
And the grace of humility
(The virtue so rare to see) ;
So she pleaseth both heart and eye.
Joaj: Scott.
173
Chapter I.
Only six months ago! and yet it seems a century since
I lode down the leafy lane leading from our house to the
village street, brimful of life and spirits; rejoicing, as the
young have a right to rejoice, in my manhood and my
good looks, my pleasant life and happy prospects.
I thought there never was a lovelier view than that
seen from underneath the eaves overhanging the veran¬
dah of our house, which opened out on a wide grassy
terrace, where grew a spreading beech and oak tree side
by side, rivals in age and beauty. Beyond, the terrace
dioped suddenly down with a rugged slope to the edge
of a broad, stately, silently-moving river, whose gurgle
and swish, as it eddied into shallows in the bank, made
music in the early summer stillness, which was the
loveliest music I had heard from my childhood till now.
The mossy, grey, rich-toned arch of the old bridge over
the bend of the river some hundred yards further on, was
the perfection of architecture to me; the wild birds of the
wood answered my notes, and were like human friends.
I knew the peculiar sougli and sigh which the wind took
in the different tree-tops; the woods were my ever-new
delight, for I loved nature with the passionate love of a
com.try-born child, and I was never so happy as when
careering along on my spirited horse through the wide
meadow-land, or joining in some sport with the young
men of my age in the neighbourhood. For I had
never known what ill-health was. Indigestion I I scarcely
knew Avhat the word meant. I had slept as soundly by a
Highland tarn on the springy heather as in my own com¬
fortable bed; I only knew fatigue as a pleasurable
sensation, enjoyed rather than otherwise, afterthe toilsome,
heart-expanding ascent of some Alpine peak. Un-
happiness I had heard of, had witnessed, had indeed
sympathised with in an absent half-hearted manner, but
had only felt so slightly and passively as to make me the
more keenly relish the many enjoyments of my life. And
now f This view has lost its charm for me; nay, some¬
times I close my eyes to shut its hateful vision out. Never
more will I scale the slippery glacier, or stalk the antlered
deer, or Avade the  Highland river while I idly lash the
174 Tlie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
stream ; life is over for me as far as my youth, and my
fire, and my energy are concerned; for that sunny morning
I spoke of, when I rode down the leafy lane with a song
of thanksgiving in my heart to God for my happy, happy
existence, I was brought back a bruised and senseless
body.
That day was the boundary shutting in the memory
of hours when it had been a glory and joy to BE; out¬
side lay a barren waste of moorland bounded by a
grey horizon, over which, if I lived, I must be carried a
weary burden.
I lay for weeks speechless, suffering agonies; then a
dull period of utter prostration (convalescence they called
it) ensued ; then they placed me on this chair on which I
now recline, and I waited as patiently as 1 might for the
day when the doctor would give his permission to walk
across the room and try my feeble strength again.
I was tired asking the question as to when I might
move; evasive answers, skilfully differing the one from the
other, met my querulous demands. Jly father, poor old man,
left his beloved books to sit half an hour with me every morn¬
ing and would say, " Wait a bit, wait a bit, my boy," then
suddenly leave the room with a compassionate sigh.  My
aunt, his sister, who looked as if every distinctive colour in
dress, manners, and mind had been washed out of her, wept
over me, and begged me " to turn my mind to other tilings,
and not fight against the dictates of Providence."    At
last, a month ago, after a night spent in painless weari¬
ness, the lagging hours filled with vague misgivings that
more was meant by the pitiful compassion doled out to me
than met the eye, cold  perspirations breaking over me
as the thought took form  that  perhaps they  knew   I
would never be better; I turned fiercely on the three, my
father, my aunt, and   the doctor, and asked " If I was
getting on as they said I was, what was the reason of
these gloomy looks f   A silence followed, broken only by
the sniffing sobs of my aunt; my father shuffled from one
foot to another;   and the doctor, after some preliminary
" hems" and " haws, " said,   " My dear boy, we hope for
improvement certainly, but it may be some time yet: we
dare not limit mercy."—"My   dear doctor," I broke in
impatiently, " I don't  want  your hopes   or speculative
ideas.    I will be treated as a man, and not as the baby
you all seem to consider me.    I ask you on your honour
as a gentleman, and your knowledge as a professional
My Window. 175
man, do you think I shall ever walk about again % " He
did not speak ; my poor old father hastily left the room;
my aunt held up her trembling hands, and began some
platitude about patient bearing, the doctor cleared his
throat preparatory to some discursive theory. I could
stand no speech ; I waved them all away, sternly begging
to be left alone,—left alone with my lot. Good heavens !
my lot! and I am only twenty-four, and men stricken
like me often live till seventy. The thought was
maddening. Not till it died so hard, and with such
pathetic struggliugs, did I know how fervent hope had
been within me, did I feel the passionate yearning and
regret of my strong, young nature upheaving my soul,
and tearing my poor feeble body asunder.
My neck would not bend to the yoke, my breast was
fired with bitter rebellious thoughts which I fed and
nurtured day and night—fed and nurtured all the more
as I saw the grave, horrified looks on the faces around
me, and heard the half-whispered comments of strangers
on " the manner in which he takes his affliction." I made
no secret of my sullen despondency and boldly-uttered
anger, except before my poor father, whose keen grief at
my accident and its terrible consequences was too
apparent, and suppressed with a too-evident effort, not
to make me anxious to appear more cheerful. Poor old
man! I was his only child, and already he had been greatly
disappointed that my predilections were not like his own
for books and study; he had sighed frequently over my
love of field-sports and outdoor amusements, a feeling of
regret I only understood when I measured it by his
delight, when, contrary to all expectations, and only be¬
cause I put on a spurt at the end, I got my degree. The
nearest approach to any warm expression of approbation
I had ever heard from his lips, was a week or two before
the fatal morning of my accident, when I went to
announce to him that Lord C. had off'ered to take me out
to India as his secretary ; a prospect which filled me with
unbounded delight for the future, when I pondered, not
as I suppose I should have done on the duties of my
position, but on the untrodden lands and happy hunting-
grounds of the far East. Now all that was over with me
for ever, and the father's disappointment in his thoughtless
son was lost in sorrowful sympathy with his stricken boy.
And yet that sympathy wearied me, for, trying to
interest me in his own pursuits, he brought dusty old
176 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
folios, whose dimly-lettered pages dazzled my haggard
eyes with their old-fashioned s's and mediaeval e's and as;
disquisitions on old editions and lost MSS. paralysed my
mind, and the hours he spent with me were a weariful
duty to each.    But my aunt was worse, much worse.
She preached to me by the hour; submission and
resignation were words never out of her mouth ; she took
away the books of fiction she found lying on my table, and
substituted volumes of sermons and tracts with horribly-
sounding titles, or doggerel verses Avith well-meaning
truisms and most ill-sounding rhymes; she walked
creakily on her tiptoes over the carpet, as if I could not
bear a sound ; and abstained from giving me one word of
news of the little village-world outside, which might have
brightened my life. She brought three or four dreary old
women, such as herself, like the same books in diiFerent
and rustic bindings, who purred incessantly over my trial
as if it was a signal instance of heavenly favour, for which
I was not half thankful; and who left me shocked at my
assumed levity or dogged sullenness.
My aunt also brought, on the slightest pretext, often
indeed without any pretext at all, her favoiirite preacher,
to reason with me on my wickedness : she might a great
deal better have left it alone—it only hardenedme the more.
It was an amusement—a very dreary one, certes, but
still an amusement—to horrify the old ladies; but I steadily
maintained an utter indifference of manner at the prosy
preachments of the minister, Avho talked at me as if I had
the mental and bodily insensibility of a stock or stone—
1, who was quivering in every inward wound, who was
yearning with a sickening longing for my dead mother's
breast on which to lean my burning head and weep out
my sorroAV.
But Avlien, in a last attempt to rouse me to penitence,
he asked me solemnly if I did not recollect any particular
aggravating sin of Avhich this Avas the accompanying
judgment, and instead of repining at being mercifully
spared from death, I should be thankful I had not been
speedily destroyed like Korah or Abiram, 1 turned upon
him, and in no measured language told him " that I
believed his sins were as black as mine, and that not the
least part of my punishment was the having to sit still
and listen to his irrcA^erent twaddle." After this they
left me comparatiA^ely alone, to eat my heart away in
bitter murmurings.
My Window. 177
Resignation ! I would not, could not be resigned. How
could I, who had loved life and all its joys so well, bend
my will, at once and all unprepared, to the knowledge
that I must submit to the inevitable ? Resigned ! would
I not be resigned if I only knew how, rather than feel my
fresh hearty youth rising up within me, and dashing itself
blindly against the iron walls of my irrevocable doom.
Resignation! if they only kncAv how I prayed for it to
come quickly, as come I knew it must sometime, if I lived
long enough.
I beat against my cage till my wings were bleeding and
trailing in the dust, but not the dust of humiliation ; that
was not yet come, ah ! nor yet to come for many a day.
I fed upon bitter memories of past happy days; I thought
of the bright looks I got as I entered the drawing-rooms of
the party-giving people of our neighbourhood, f(^r I was
a favourite partner in the dance, having all that chivalric
fondness for and devotion to women common to men of
my temperament. My servant, who had known me for
years, and in whose eyes "Master Arthur" was at once the
most troublesome tyrant and the embodiment of every
virtue, gave me the only sympathy which touched me
deeply, and whose outward signs consisted in constant,
unremitting devotion to my every whim, in the hasty tear
brushed aside, the gentle hand supplying every want, the
coaxing entreaty to allow him to pull me about on the
terrace in a Bath chair. " Master Arthur, if it had only
pleased the Lord to lay it on me," he falteringly said to me
one day. " But it did not please Him, you see."
I cut him short with a dreary smile, for I could not bear
my trouble spoken of.
I had moved from the old room of my boyhood, looking
through the high iron gate to the village street, to the
other side of the house which gave on the lawn and
river, so that no inquisitive eye might behold my help¬
lessness. Even there I could hardly be persiiaded to go
out of doors, for a riglit-of-way, rarely used indeed, but
liable at any hour to be put in requisition, existed between
the Manor-House half a mile further up the river, through
our grounds, and so round to the further end of the
village. Left to myself, I sank into a moody misery,
which at length alarmed me. Those near me did not
comprehend, with their passions deadened with the
natural decadence of declining years, the terrible ordeal
I was undergoing in the absolute, forced remmciation of
No. IS.-JcNE 1876.
178 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
every tie, and hope, and joy of my existence. I let my
brown curly hair grow long, I was scared at the pale hag¬
gard ghost of my once handsome face. I caught sight of it
in the mirror; it was fast assuming an expression of evil,
instead of the good-humoured bonhommie natural to it. I
neither read nor spoke, but sat for hours at the long
window opening on the verandah, brooding in hot-headed
rebellion over my accursed fate. Lufra, my faithful dog,
would sit watching ray immovable face, then suddenly
crawl near me and lick my hand, or rest his head upon my
knee. The silent sympathy of the faithful brute, sore for
my sorrow, struck deeper than did all the more
demonstrative human kindness I received.
Chapter II.
A month passed away in this morbid gloom, when a
circumstance, slight and shadowy in itself, woke me once
more to something like a transient interest in my fellow-
creatures. This window at which I sit had become a part
of me. All through the long winter I had Avatched the
snowdrift choking up the rents in the bare gnarled stems
of the oak and beech trees in front of the terrace, or the
bleak north wind tossing their brown knotted branches;
and now in the welcome spring I opened the sashes to
lean out of my chair, and breathe the wafts of spring
gladness which came to me down the silent, green,
cathedral aisle of the river-side footpath. Never did
chorister in storied pile sing such a glorious anthem as
the young green leaves and murmur of the river made ;
nor could ever the light from stained glass window and
pointed arch be so varied or resplendent as the trembling
flecks of sunshine peeping in graceful playfulness through
the green transparency of the leaves overhead.
Hut the willow tassels and fringes of larch, so exquisitely,
delicately green, though they filled my poetic senses with
a dreamy pleasure, brought to me no spiritual message of
hope or joy: my face was still the dismal index of a still
more despondent mind. During all these weeks I had
seen no being pass my window, save at rare intervals the
gardener from the Manor-House above; or once or twice,
when I was unusually early at my post, a little girl, whom
I supposed to be the daughter of the house, tripping along
on her way to school, a roll of music or her school-books
in her hand, loitering to pull the primroses in her path, or
My Window. 179
to cast a furtive glance at our half-hidden house. Twice
I had found, when I had wheeled myself over to my
accustomed place, a little bunch of narcissus on my win¬
dow-sill ; their star-like purity and delicious odour filled
me with a soothing sense, and their unlooked-for presence
there gave me something to think of in wondering from
whence they came. Neither my aunt nor my father ever
dreamed of sentiment; they might possibly have been
deposited by my old servant James, but yet it was not
like the action of a man, and certainly most imlike him.
I had not long to wait ere the mystery was unravelled.
One morning, impatient of the world and more notably of
myself, I leant over the broad low window-sill with my
head clasped in my hands shading my eyes, which, how¬
ever, were taking in the surrounding scene, though I was
scarcely conscious of looking at anything.
Within my range there suddenly came the fignre of the
little school-girl. She made a pretty adjunct to the jubi¬
lant youth and freshness of the full bright spring, albeit
her limbs were long and awkward like those of a young
lamb, and her skirts too short for her fast-growing pro¬
portions.
Her long chesnut hair hung rippling over her waist,
and when the playful wind tossed it lightly about, a dull
bronzy glow touched its edges; the blue ribbon tying it
back, and the blue and white cotton dress she wore, con¬
trasted finely with the soft tints on her round child-like
face.
At right angles from the house she slanted from the
path across the terrace, evidently with the intention of
approaching, when the same instant that I perceived a
bunch of narcissus in her hand, she observed me, and
stopped short suddenly like a frightened fawn. Only for
an instant, however, for with a tender pity shining out of
her beautiful eyes, she walked right up to the window,
and was about (thinking I had not seen her) noiselessly
to deposit her little offering, when I unclasped my hands
and sat up. We each looked at the other silently for a
few seconds, then with a sudden passionate burst she cried,
" Poor hoj, poor boy I I pray morning and night that
God will make you better I "
" I will never be better, they say, till I die," I answered,
contrasting her radiant buoyancy with my own miserable
inertness.
" And you are not so very much older than I am," she
180 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
sighed, the tears running down her cheeks. She had
taken my hand as she spoke; quickly she bent down and
pressed her lips to it, and before I was hardly aware of
her action, her little figure Avas disappearing round the
bend of the avenue. The incident was so rapid, so
startling, so dreamlike, that I rubbed my eyes to make
sure I was not still asleep ; but no, there lay the bunch of
pure white blossoms, preaching a lesson to my rebellious
nature, and assuring me that out beyond my narrow circle
in the world I deemed so cold, one gentle being, filled with
love to her fellow-creatures, unknown, yet bound in the
great all-embracing bond of human suff'ering, prayed daily
for me. I waited impatiently for the afternoon that I
might see the child pass again. She smiled and nodded
as she returned, but to my chagrin did not this time cross
the terrace. It was dusk of the same evening when I
heard a firm, manly tread in the hall, and in a few seconds
Owen, the bosom friend of my college days, stood by my
side. I had not seen him for months previous to my
accident; he had written at the time telling me he would
come to me when he could, but circumstances had arisen
connected with his parish duties to prevent his fulfilling
his promise till now. I saw him start as he marked the
change on my peevish contracted face, but suppressing
all further sign of surprise, he came cheerily forward, with
the bright, quick manner wliich carried a thousand old
memories in its train, and laying his hand on my shoulder,
said, " Old fellow, you know I would have come to you if
I could. God knows, when I heard it, 1 would sooner
have lost my right hand ! " Then, without waiting a
reply, he sat down and talked to me of the woi'ld with¬
out : all the chit-chat and town gossip and political
squabbles, the hundred and one things Avhicli Avere the
very things I wanted to divert, interest, and amuse me;
and lastly, he ran over a list of our particular " chums,"
and told me the careers each had entered on.
" They all have their work in this world except me,"
I said bitterly, as he paused for breath.
"Lad," he said, and this time there was a solemn
grave ring in his sympathetic voice—" Lad, God has
trusted you so, that He has given you the greatest work
of us all to do, because it is the liardest. When we are
sick with disappointment, and weary in the battle, Ave
will come to you to learn hoAv to endure, and I know you
Avill not belie that great trust."
My Window. 181
With that he left me, while I lay and pondered on his
words. It had been an eventful day to me, for Love
and Faith had come in tender guise to tell me there was
something yet in life to be thankful for.
" Now, old fellow," said Owen next morning, " for
something to occupy those idle hands and brains, nothing
is to be too trivial for the one, nor too lofty for the other.
You used to be a little bit of an amateur artist, especially
in the way of caricaturing. From illuminating a lady's
album to illustrating a magazine, there are loads of things
to do to keep your hands busy; and as for the head, it
shall produce something else for the magazines besides
the pictures. You have plenty time to arrange your
fancies and digest your thoughts, and I look for great
things by-and-by."
He stayed with me a week, and I had not been so
happy for many a long day. He caused me to be carried
out under the beechen shade, where he lay smoking for
hours beside me, enjoying himself and comforting me,
laying bare his inward thoughts and doubts, not, I could
see, so much for his own sake, as that I might forget my
selfish burdens in sharing those of another. He carried
me in his great strong arms into the boat on the river,
and pulled me up and down in the pale twilight; while
the silvery reeds shivered in among the long shadows,
and the day died in a soft murmur of sound. It was
more in my mood to sit still and indulge in pensive or
morbid reverie ; he made the echoes ring with his breezy
laughter, and his influence was such as none could with¬
stand. I missed him sadly when he went, but he left
behind him a current of cooler, freer air, which played
about my fevered heart.
Since his coming I had not seen my little friend, nor
found any flower on the verandah; but the very morning
after he left, she stepped over to my window. " May I
come and speak to you sometime ? she asked in her
childish treble. "I am not old and clever Uke the big
friend who has gone away, but still I am somebody, and
the days are long."
" Of course you may come," I answered, looking at the
girlish features. "I have looked for you everyday. Do
you know that you brought the first gleam of comfort I
have had for many a day ? You are like the dove who
brought the first fresh green leaf to the Ark. What is
your name 1 "
182 Tlie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
"My name is Nita, but they call me 'little one.'"
" It is a pretty name.    I shall call you ' little one' too."
" I have known you so long," she said quaintly, " with¬
out speaking to you, that I feel like an old friend. I did
not like you half so much when you splashed past me in
the muddy lane with your horse prancing about, and you
looking so proud and contemptuous; but I have watched
you since—since your illness—from behind that tree, and
you looked so sad and lonely that I could not say my
lessons at scho(jl for thinking what I could do to comfort
you. And I thought I would put the flowers there first,
and watch to see if you threw them away; and if you had,
I would not have come again; but you took them up as if
you liked them, and I was very glad."
It was like a page from a fairy tale of my childhood,
to find myself tied to this chair listening to the bird-like
voice of the little child, who spoke to me, like an en¬
chanted godmother, in grave words of wisdom. " I was
sorry to see you always so idle, but I did not blame you
very much ; and when I saw the big friend's face, I knew
he would put everything right, and make your face
look as it did when you were up and well."
" Little one," I said, for the words touched me strangely,
" you will help to keep me to my work, and tell me when
you think I am falling back into the old despondency."
" Oh yes," she answered gravely. " I will tell you;
but I hope it will not be for a very long time."
How quickly the summer sped away ! She came every
afternoon on her way home from school, and lingered
half an hour by my chair, prattling of her lessons, her
simple home life, the Manor-House, her gentle mother.
" Oh, Arthur, I want you to let mamma come and see you,
she knows you so well from all I have told her; and she
says she loved your mother dearly, but that something
came between the families, and so they stopped knowing
each other. Would it not be nice if we made them friends
again % "
" I can answer for my father," I replied, " that as far
as he is concerned all old feuds are forgotten; and your
mother will be very welcome if she cares to come and
talk to a cripple like me."
" Arthur," she said, holding up a warning finger, " I
thought you promised not to call yourself names."
Mrs. Leslie came often to see me. My father and aunt
were only too glad to have the old quarrel patched up.
My Window. 183
and my existence enlivened at the same time. It took
the amusing of me off their hands, and they must have
rojoiced, poor souls, to see a more contented expression
at last on my face. I taught my little friend drawing,
and we read " The Lady of the Lake," Wordsworth's
and Adelaide Anne Proctor's poetry, and other lyrics
suited to her age; and if she was too young a companion
for the interchange of much deep thought, it was the
more pleasant to be looked up and appealed to as a being
of superior intellect; while her quaint wisdom taught me
many an unconscious lesson.
" You are such a child," I said one day the following
winter to her, when our drawing and reading had to be
undertaken close to the wide old fire-place in my com¬
fortable room.
" I am not such a child," she cried petulantly; " it is
because of my size and my name that you all think so.
I shall be sixteen in spring."
" Sixteen ! " I echoed with dismay, thinking how soon
she would be a yoiiiig lady, taken up with a girl's
delight of coming out, and finery, and conquests.
" Yes, and Mr. Lyttleton—Cousin Robert, you know—
says I must give up all my childishness when I am sixteen.
He writes me such long letters, and makes me write to
him and tell him all I do, and he is coming here by-and-
by to see us. Mamma thinks him very sensible, and
takes his advice."
" And you % " I asked.
" Oh I think him very, very sensible too," she replied,
shaking her head with mock gravity; " but the difference
is, I don't always take his advice. 1 call him Cousin
Robert when he is nice and good, and other times I call
him Mr. Lyttleton, and I think it is oftenest other
times."
I had never seen this cousin ; only knew him in a vague
way, that he exercised some kind of supervision and
authority over Mrs. Leslie's affairs; but an undefined
distrust of him took possession of me on the spot. " Does
he know that you and I have lessons together ?" I
asked.
" Yes," she answered, " he knew that long ago. What
would I have to write about all these months except you
and what we did 'i but," she added slowly, " I don't say so
much about it now. What is a paragon, Arthur % " she
abruptly asked, changing the subject.
184 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
" A paragon ! why, it's a—it's a     What   do you
want to know for 1"
" 0, because in one of Mr. Lyttleton's letters he said,
' who is this paragon who seems to occupy your time to
the exclusion of everything else ? ' and 1 asked mamma,
and I think she was vexed too, for she said the term was
quite misapplied, and Cousin Robert must come and
judge our friends for himself."
" Your mother is a sweet woman, little one, and I pray
God no one may ever come to mar the close friendship
between us three."
" No one shall ever come," she made answer vehemently,
" at least between you and me. God sent me to be a
friend to you when you were very lonely, and you have
been more than a friend and teacher to me this long time
past, when I wanted somebody to tell all my foolish
thoiights to ; and if ever we are less to each other, it must
be you who will do it."
She held out her hand as she spoke, and in silence she
closed the compact. I was half disposed to laugh at her
childish passionate outburst on such a trivial occasion,
but I loved her too well to wound her by appearing to
treat the subject less solemnly than she did.
Martyn Hay.
(To be continued.)
^]xTtt  § r a n s I a 110 n s,
FROM  THE HUNGARIAN  POET PETOFI.^
I.
Had 1 not loved her all her gentle life,
My fair-haired child, my dear and loving maid,—
Yet must my life, my love, have been her own,
When I beheld her low on death-bed laid.
How fair, 0 fair! on that dread couch she seemed:
As the swan's flight when dawn is kindling red,
As purest snow upon a perfect rose.
So hovered death's pale shadow o'er her head.
' Through the medium of a German translation.
Three Translations. 185
n.
It is not true, as I am told so often,
That death will come to ease the heart's deep woe ;
Had it been so, 0 best beloved angel,
I had been laid beside thee long ago.
Nay, grief is no keen axe, that smiting surely
With one stroke parts the tree of life in twain;
But grief is as a worm, that slowly, slowly
Gnaws inward—and we cannot cheat the pain.
m.
My love is like the ocean,
Yet now, with giant's motion.
No more its billows surge in wrath 'gainst earth and sky
'Tis hushed, as—sleep prevailing,
After long tears and wailing—
For very weariness a cradled child doth lie.
The placid waves dividing,
My soul seems gently gliding,
By thought, as in a skiff, rocked ever to and fro ;
From the dim future ringing,
I hear low tones of singing—
0, sweet as nightingale, blest Hope, thy strains I know.
Enna.
Jtt llfimcmbimnt^ of India Jf'^I^onrr S^\"x^tx,
MRS HUGH MILLER.
In the summer of 1831, Lydia Falconer Fraser, then a
young girl of eighteen, returned from finishing her edu¬
cation in the South to her widowed mother's house
in Cromarty. Owing to misfortunes in her husband's
business, Mrs Fraser, though connected with many of
the ancient and historical names and associations of
the district, had been left in her widowhood in far
from affluent circumstances, and her daughter quitted a
luxurious home, offered to her by wealthy relatives in Eng¬
land, bravely to share and lighten her mother's poverty.
Young, talented, and very pix'tty, and coming with the
No. 18—Junk 1876.
186 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
iclat of an education among the literati of Edinburgh,
where she had lived in the family of Mr George Thomson,
the correspondent of Burns, and among the literary circle
who frequented his house Miss Eraser's arrival was natur¬
ally an event of some interest in the little homely town.
Small and homely as it was, however, Cromarty was in one
respect richer in these days than many a more aspiring
place, for it could boast among its inhabitants two men of
undoubted genius—Mr Stewart, its learned and eccentric
minister; and the poet stonemason, Hugh Miller. It is
characteristically recorded of the first of these, that shortly
after Miss Eraser's arrival from her southern home he
found, or made, occasion to warn his flock, from the pulpit,
" Not to have their heads turned by fine ladies coming
down from London with all the fashions." It was not
long, however, before he discovered that this "fine lady
with the fashions," who had so appalled his imagination
at a distance, was altogether another sort of person than
he had supposed; and intellectually attracted doubtless at
first by the keen wit and rapid insight displayed in her
conversation, the good man's heart was altogether won
when he found that this slight, brilliant, fairy-like girl
could control with a word his class of wild fisher-lads,
whom no man in Cromarty had hitherto been able to
manage. Henceforth the minister was one of Miss Eraser's
firmest friends.
On the other of these two men her influence was to be
of a deeper kind. We have Hugh Miller's own account of
their first meeting; how the young stranger lady came
down to inspect " the curious old dial-stone of Sir Thomas
Urquhart" and " the Cromarty poet" at one and the same
time, and how his " day-dream lady," his "bachelor's wife,"
who, in his " solitary Avalks for the preceding fourteen or
fifteen years had often walked in fancy by his side," by
some strange transformation, about this time, "utterly
forsook him," and a vision clothed in flesh and blood took
her place ! The story of the five years' courtship which
folloAved, as gleaned from the pages of My Schools and
Schoolmasters, and Hugh Miller s Life and Letters, reads
with the charm of an old idyll, from the days of the
unconcerted, but nevertheless mutual evening Avalks on
the Hill, where they " did sometimes meet, and witness
together, from amid the deeper solitudes of its bosky
slopes, the sun sinking behind the distant Ben Wevis,"
till the day arrived when, as Hugh Miller writes, " after a
In Remembrance of L'jdia Falconer Fraser. 187
long, and in its earlier stages anxious courtship of five
years, I received from the hand of Mr Ross that of my
young friend in her mother's house, and was united to her
by my minister, Mr Stewart." The bridegroom's wedding
gift to his long-sought bride was a pocket Bible. Two
verses I will quote from the inscription which he wrote in
it, as representative of the feeling with which this young
and gifted pair began their married life.
" O, much beloved, our coming day
To us ia all unknown ;
But sure we stand a broader mark
Than they who stand alone.
One knows it all; not His an eye,
Like ours, obscured and dim ;
And knowing us, He gives this book,
That we may know of Him.
Then 0, my first, my only love.
The kindest, dearest, best :
On Him may all our hopes repose,—
On Him our wishes rest.
His be the future's doubtful day,
Let joy or grief befall;
In life or death, in weal or woe,
Our God, our Guide, our all."
It must have been a humble home, the first which this
young couple set up after their marriage, while Hugh
" was gradually becoming initiated behind the back
counter" and " picking up" geology " in his leisure
evenings along the shore," for he tells us, that though
his wife continued " to teach a few pupils, the united
earnings of the household did not much exceed a
hundred pounds per annum ;" but the tone of an old
idyll runs through it all. We hear of " the long Saturday
afternoons, when the weather was fine" and the two went
out together, and " not unfrequently anchored in some
rocky bay, or over some fishing bank, and provided
with rods and lines, caught a basket of rock-cod or coal
fish for supper, that always seemed to eat better than
the fish supplied us in the market." Then came the
deepening of the household happiness by the coming
of a little child, and then the sad blank in both parents'
hearts, when, two years after, the little golden head was
laid " beside the old chapel of St. liegulus, with the deep
rich   woods   all   around."    Some  lines  written   by   its
188 'rhe Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
mother, in this " sweetest of burying grounds" a few
weeks after its death, must find a place here, both from
the intrinsic poetic merit of some of them, and from
the glimpse they "give of the mother's heart. " Awa, awa"
had been one of the few words of the little vocabulary.
" Thou'rt ' awa, awa,' from thy mother's side,
Thou'rt ' awa, awa,' from thy father's knee ;
Thou'rt ' awa' from our blessing, our care, our caressing,
But ' awa' from our hearts thou'lt never be.
All things, dear child, that were wont to please thee
Are round thee here in beauty bright—
There's music rare in the cloudless air.
And the earth is teeming with living delight.
Thou'rt ' awa, awa,' from the bursting spring-time,
Tho' o'er thy head its green boughs wave ;
The lambs are leaving their little footprints
Upon the turf of thy new made grave."
During these quiet happy years in Cromarty, Hugh
Miller was gradually but surely rising into fame, first as a
man of letters, and then as a man of science. Even
before their marriage. Miss Eraser's " fine critical faculty
had been employed in giving deft and delicate touches
to his books; " so much so, indeed, that his " Scenes and
Legends of the North of Scotland," the first pubhshed of
his prose writings, was alluded to by him as " our little
book," and her interest in and assistance to his work,
both literary and scientific, never flagged. In itself the
work had a deep interest for the keen and eager intellect
which in her early girlhood had prompted her to work in
algebra and metaphysics unaided and alone—how doubly
interesting now, when heart joined with head, and loving
the work for its own sake, she loved it also for his.
But those calm, happy Cromarty days of united work
and united recreation were to have an end. By and by
the call came to a more public and less peaceful sphere of
labour. Dark clouds were gathering round the liberties
of Christ's Church in Scotland, and the call came to Hugh
Miller in answer to his loyal-hearted question, " Could I do
nothing for my church in her hour of peril % " It came in
the form of a request from the Non-Intrusion leaders in
Edinburgh, to undertake the editorship of their projected
newspaper, T7ie Witness. It was no light task to which
he was called, " to stand," as he says, " in Ishmael's posi-
In Remembrance of Lydia Falconer Fraser. 189
tion, against almost the whole newspaper press of the
kingdom." It was no small sacrifice to the man of peace,
who " for full twenty years had never been engaged in a
quarrel on his own behalf;" nor was it a small sacrifice to
the rising man of literature and science, to resign the
calm and leisure so essential to both, for, as he antici¬
pated, " a life of strife, toil, and comparative obscurity."
But he believed it to be God's answer to his question, and
neither Hugh Miller nor his young wife were of the stuff
to shrink from the sacrifices it required. Christ's true
soldiers, they were willing only, for their part, " to care for
His charge, and leave Him to care for their rest."
So at the "close of the financial year " of 1839 the con¬
nection with the Commercial Bank was brought to an
end, the happy little Cromarty home was broken up, and
Hugh Miller set out for Edinburgh, followed soon after by
his wife and the infant daughter Harriet, who had come
at once to remind them of and comfort them for the little
one they had laid to sleep in the old churchyard of St.
Regulus. Like her husband, Mrs Miller sympathised
deeply in her church's struggle; and her first publication,
a story called " The Heiress," in which the views of the
Non-Intrusion party were enthusiastically advocated, ap¬
peared anonymously about this time.
Sixteen years of Edinburgh life followed, during
which three other children—two boys and a girl—
were added to the family circle. Mrs Miller's little
book, called "Cats and Dogs," which has since become
one of the minor classics of natural history, was pub¬
lished during these years, and her ready pen was
ever at its old work of helping in her husband's
labours. Mr. Bayne gives an interesting anecdote in his
memoir, illustrative of the quality of the help thus ren¬
dered, " Once," he says, " when Miller returned from
breakfasting with Chalmers, he told his wife that the
great man had complimented him on one of Tlie Witness
critiques, and that he never felt so proud in his life as
in saying that it was by his wife." Years these, full of
varied interest and excitement—brilliant yet trying years,
while Hugh Miller fought bravely the battles of his church
in the columns of The Witness, and won for himself a fore¬
most place in the world of science ; and the elite of literary
and scientific society gathered round the Cromarty stone¬
mason and his accomplished wife.
But to this, too, there came an end, and at what a cost
190 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
to mind and heart the noble work had been done the
sequel too sadly showed. Well do I remember the bright
Saturday forenoon of December 20, 1856, when I, then a
shy school-girl, alighted at the Portobello station, and
made my way to a large square house, which stood in
grounds within a high wall a little off the street, known
by the name of Shrub Mount, and then the Millers' home.
Well do I remember the museum with its many wonders,
and the plates in the " Testimony of the Rocks," which
was then passing through the press, all of which the
great geologist explained with as patient a care and as
stately a courtesy to the little school-girl as if she had
been a savant like himself. Still better do I recall the
pleasant luncheon table, and the charms of the conversa-
ti(m there. The editor of The Witness was writing what
proved to be (though how little any one could have
guessed it then) the last article of his that was ever to
appear in its columns, and the conversation at that Satur¬
day's luncheon-table turned on Gerald Massey's poems,
Avhich Avere to form part of the critique. Well do I recall
voice, and look, and gesture as he recited that most touch¬
ing of Massey's lyrics, beginning
" Within a mile of Edinburgh town
We laid our little darling down,
Our first seed in God's-acre sown ; "
and the brilliant criticism and remark to which I listened
in the Shi'ub Mount dining-room that day. On the Thurs¬
day following, I was in that room again: but what a
change had passed over the spirit of the dream. The
weather had changed too, as if in sympathy, and the day was
bitterly cold, Avith a grey dull sky and occasional drizzling
showers, half sleet, half snow; and well I remember the
shudder of awe with which I felt the old stone walls shut
me in from the outside world, as I stood again at the door
of the square house, and thought the shade of the great
leafless tree that overhung it the very shadow of the valley
of death—for between that Saturday and that Thursday
the over-strained cord of the grand intellect had snapped,
and the awful tragedy had been enacted that closed the
earthly life of Hugh Miller. Shall I ever forget the feeling
of those rooms,—four days ago so bright, and now so
desolate ? Shall I ever forget above all that little room
upstairs, opening from the library, where I stood, with
his daughter by my side, looking at the grand still head
I
i
In Remembrance of Lydia Falconer Fraser. 191
that lay upon the pillow—or that other room downstairs
where the light was darkened, into which I was taken
before I left the house, where lay the new-made widow,
and felt her tears upon my hand as she raised it to her
lips. Her daughter's closest school-friend, I had known
her before as the authoress, the brilliant conversationalist,
the accomplished and intellectual lady, whom I regarded
with a far-off, rather frightened admiration; but it was
there, in that darkened room, that I first drew near,
and behind the keen intellect felt the throbbing of the
woman's heart, and learned to know and love Lydia
Miller.
" Your delicate tenement is o'er informed by spirit,"
Hugh Miller had written to her in the old days of their
courtship, and his words proved all too true. A delicate
woman always, the awful shock of her husband's death
shattered at one blow the sensitive, high-strung nervous
system ; and the nineteen remaining years of Mrs Miller's
life were all, more or less, a vain search for recovered
health. But despite bodily pain and mental oppression,
" the ruling passion" was still strong Avithin her; and
besides the able assistance which she rendered Mr. Bayne
in compiling " The Life and Letters," she devoted the fine
powers of her keen and cultivated mind to the editing of
the unpublished portion of her husband's works. " The
Footprints of the Creator," " The Sketchbook of Popular
Geology," and " Tales and Sketches," all bear prefaces
from her hand, the literary beauty and scientific insight of
which have attracted the admiration of the most com¬
petent judges. The spirit in which she undertook this
labour of duty and affection may be judged of from the
following extract, in the Preface of " The Sketchbook of
Popular Geology." " God forbid," she writes, " that one
entrusted with such sacred guardianship should seek to
pervert or suppress a single truth, actual or presumptive,
even though its evidence were to overthrow in a single
hour all his much-loved speculations, all his reasonings so
long cogitated, so conscientiously wrought out." Oh
brave heart, so willing to lay down on Truth's altar
speculations and hopes far dearer than your own !
During all these years I had often recurring oppor¬
tunities of intercourse with her; and in spite of pain and
weariness, and the isolation of almost constant confine¬
ment to a sick-room, her brilliant powers of mind and the
keen edge of her intellect never seemed blunted. " Litera-
192 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
ture and science," writes one who had the best oppor¬
tunities of observation, " had become too much an atmos¬
phere of her existence ever to be wholly laid aside, and to
the end she preserved the freshness of her interest in
them. Even when utterly prostrate in body, her mind
sprang up with energy to discuss the bearings of new
discoveries or theories." Yet what struck one most
remarkably of all was the curious mellowing and sweeten¬
ing that year after year was adding a wider and more
tolerant sympathy, a more loving grace, to a character
always so generous and true. But year by year the
"delicate tenement" was growing more and more imfit
for the ardent spirit it enshrined, and at last on the llth
of March 1876, at her youngest daughter's house, at
Assynt, in Sutherlandshire, the struggling captive was set
free.
Nineteen years of pain and weariness are passed, and the
grave in the Grange, first opened that sad Christmas week
of 1856,has been opened again, and the mourner of these old
days now sleeps by the mourned,—the same gTceu grass
above them, and the Lion of Arthur's Seat keeping watch
over their rest, till " this corruptible shall put on incorrup-
tion, and this mortal shall put on imraortaUty." And the
little school-girl of those old days would fain lay these
few words of loving remembrance on the new-closed
grave.
Jeanie Morison.
A Prize is offered for the best Article on any subject of Moral or Mental
Philosophy appearing in the Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine till December 1876
inclusive.
The Subject op Debate for the next Meeting of the Ladies' Edinburgh
Literary Society, June 3d, is :■—" Has Scepticism produced a worse effect on
Society than Superstition ?"
Those interested in these Debates are referred to the List published in this
Magazine for January.
193
Letter IV.
My dear Friend,—Even before the days I have lately
Avritten of,—those of Rogers, Moore, and Byron,—Mrs.
Siddons numbered among her intimate friends a lady
belonging to the times of Samuel Johnson,—Mrs. Mon¬
tague, Miss Burney, etc. This lady was Mrs. Thrale—
Johnson's Mrs. Thrale as she is often called, in conse¬
quence of her intimacy with the great man of those days.
I think, however, that the friendship formed with my
grandmother commenced after poor Mrs. Thrale had
fallen into disgrace with most of her older associates and
admirers, in consequence of her second marriage with
Mr. Piozzi. Johnson especially emptied the vials of his
wrath upon his poor little friend; and even Miss Burney,
once her most ardent admirer, seemed to think of her in
the character of a delinquent. Now, we have all been
taught to look on Johnson as a philosopher, but still the
question presents itself. Was it quite philosophical to
expect that Mrs. Thrale, a bright, kind-hearted, good-
tempered little woman, no doubt, but one whom he was
perpetually rebuking for speaking without thinking
(therefore often very inaccurately), also for small faults of
vanity and love of display, should suddenly show strength
of mind and firmness when left entirely to her own guid¬
ance, and exposed to the temptation of yielding to the
attachment of a not unworthy object. It would have
been wiser, perhaps, and more dignified, to have remained
as she Avas. She had daughters, and she had friends; but
wisdom and dignity were not her chief characteristics.
Mr. Piozzi was amiable and much attached to her; she
became_ his wife, and was a very kind and devoted one,
for during many years after their marriage, Piozzi's life
Avas one of great suffering, owing to constant painful
attacks of rheumatic gout.
Johnson was indignant; because Piozzi was not only a
musician, but even a teacher of music. Mrs. Thrale said
that he was of a very good Italian family, reduced by
misfortune, and in himself a perfect gentleman, and she
did not think that the widow of a brewer had made an
unpardonable descent in marrying him. Be this as it
may, her friends should hardly have felt such indignation
No. 19. -JuLr 1876. 2 B
194 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
as to forget her many good qualities and former kind¬
nesses because she showed a want of strength of charac¬
ter which they might have known that she never
possessed; nor should the great Samuel Johnson have
broken the poor little butterfly upon the powerful wheel
of his ponderous displeasure.
The friendship between Airs, Siddons and Mrs. Thrale
Avas certainly an instance f)f regard and affection existing
between very opposite characters. The first so grave, so
full of deep thoughtfulness, so utterly devoid of vivacity,
though with great appreciation of humour; constant in
her affections, though not general in the bestowal of them ;
the second bright, intelligent, and affectionate, but not
very thoughtful, not very discriminating, her words
flowing so rapidly that they could not always be
weighed in the strict scales of exact truth, althoTigh her
errors may often have been quite unintentional, and were
never, I believe, tinged with unkindness or uncharitable-
ness. Yet, notwithstanding these differences, a real
affection did exist between them. Mrs. Piozzi was older
in years than her graver friend, but not in tem|)erament,
for it is on record that after her second widowhood she
went to reside in Bath, where, on her 80tli birthday,
she gave a grand ball in the rooms, and opened it herself
with her nephew, Sir John ; the name has escaped my
memory.^
This lady forms a connecting link between the circle
which numbered among its members Dr. Johnson, Sir
Joshua Reynolds, Mrs. Montague, and others, and the
later one, comprising those of my grandmother's acquain¬
tance, already mentioned. About this time Sir Joshua
must have painted his famous picture of her as the
Tragic Muse, when she received from him the graceful
compliment which, though often mentioned, I may venture
to repeat here. AVhen she stooped down to examine what
seemed to her a tracing of a border round her robe,
she found it was composed of the letters of the
great artist's name. " Yes," he said, " I wish to go down
to posterity on the hem of your garment."
Devoted as all the Kembles were to Shakespeare, it
seems strange that the works of so many inferior authors
' An amusing and graphic account of the concert, ball, and supper given to
between six and seven hundred people on the 27th January 1820, taken mostly
from the description of the author of "Piozziana," an eyewitness, will be
found in ]Mr. Hayward's " Life and Letters of Mrs. Piozzi," vol. i. p. 361. Sir
John is there called her adopted son. — Edit.
Recollections of the Past. 105
were selected for the exhibition of their great powers by
the prevailing taste of the day. We should now say
that those powers were, to a certain extent, wasted on
such pieces as " The Mourning Bride," " Pizarro," " Jane
Shore," and others, which are now nearly forgotten. The
first part from Shakespeare which my grandmother played,
after her fame was established in London, was that of
Isabella, in "Measure for Measure." The next, Queen
Constance, in " King John." I think that Lady Mac¬
beth came next, to which part she gave much anxious
thought and consideration. Among other variations from
the established manner of acting this wonderful part
on which her taste and judgment determined, was one
that excited at the time much alarm and anxiety among
her friends. She resolved that when she came on in the
sleeping scene she would place her candle on the table
instead of retaining it in her hand. On this becoming
known, she was assailed in all directions by those who
thought that "the breach of custom" in this case "would
be breach of all;" and on the very night when she was
preparing and trying to compose herself in her dressing-
room, Sheridan forced his way in, to make a final effort to
prevent the fatal mistake, as he considered it. She, how¬
ever, was firm; and the result was so great a triumph,
that, as she said, " Mr. Sheridan came in and ingenuously
complimented me on my obstinacy."
She never considered herself to be personally the
proper representative of Lady Macbeth. In her opinion,
she must have been a slender, faii-lookiug woman. She
said such women were often of a very determined char¬
acter. She had a friend who she considered represented
the outward bearing of Lady Macbeth perfectly; to this
friend she used to apply the description of Constance de
Beverley, in " Marmion," during the trial scene in the
fearful vault—
" Her looks composed, and steady eye
Bespoke a matchless constancy ;
And there she stood, so calm and pale,
That, but her breathing did not fail,
And motion slight of eye and head,
And of her bosom, warranted
That neither sense nor pulse she lacks,
You might have thought a form of wax
Wrought to the very life was there—
So still she was, so pale, so fair.
196 Tlic Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
It was a fearful sight to see
Such high resolve and constancy
In form so soft and fair."
Such was her ideal of Lady Macbeth, while she herselt
was the ideal of all who had ever seen her in the
character.
Among the new parts my grandmother played about
this time Avas one she made entirely her own. It was that
of Jane de Montfort in Miss Joanna Baillie's tragedy, " On
Hatred," one of the few by that gifted authoress which
kept the stage for any time. It is said that the fine de¬
scription of the noble Lady Jane given just before her
entrance on the scene was meant as a picture of the re¬
presentative, and was always acknowledged as such.
The lines I allude to are these:—
" Page.  Madam, there is a lady in your hall,
Who begs to be admitted to your presence.
Lady Freybeeg. Is it not one of our invited guests ?
Page. No, far unlike them ; it is a stranger.
Lady F.  How looks her countenance ?
Page.  So queenly, so commanding, and so noble,
I shrank at first in awe ; but when she smiled.
For so she did, to see me thus abashed,
Methought I could have compassed sea and land
To do her bidding.
Lady F. Is she young or old ?
Page. Neither, if I guess right ; but she is fair ;
For Time has laid his hand so gently on her,
As he too had been awed."
Joanna Baillie's was a very charming character, gentle,
domestic, and high-principled, with a fine vein of poetic
genius pervading her whole being. Every one who knew
her loved her. Her peaceful life at Hampstead with her
sister Miss Agnes Baillie is pleasant to think of. She
lived on to a good old age, and her sister, who survived
her, celebrated her hundredth birthday among nephews
nieces, and attached friends. Two of Miss Baillie's plays,
those most popular after "De Montfort," were represented
occasionally in Edinburgh, " The Family Legend," and
" Constantine Pala^ologus."
I have a letter of Joanna Baillie's, written in her own
sweet spirit of love and gentleness to my grandmother
when sending to the latter a small book she had pub¬
lished on religious subjects. Miss Baillie had seen cause,
she thought, to make some modification of her views on
certain doctrinal points, and seemed to have felt it right
Recollections of the Past. 107
and candid to make the change known more especially
to her immediate friends.    She therefore sent the book to
my grandmother, who, in replying, while she  gave her
full credit for her truthfulness and sincerity, professed
her own perfect satisfaction with the view she herself had
always held, in accordance, she believed, with the teaching
of her Church.    In answer to this  communication,  Miss
Baillie wrote so beautiful a letter that one cannot but feel
convinced on reading it that the alteration in her views
proceeded from her conscience and her heart, but that she
entirely admired and loved the gentle humble spirit that
could yield an unquestioning faith on all points.    She says,
"You have treated my little book very handsomely, and done
all that I wish people to do in regard to it, for you have read
the passages from Scripture, I am sure, with attention and
consideration.    That after doing so your opinion on the
main point should be different from mine, is no presump¬
tion that either of us is in the wrong, or that our humble
sincere faith, though different, will not be equally accepted
by the great Father and Master of us all."    She adds, " No
part of your letter, my dear madam, has pleased me more
than that short parenthesis, ' for I still hold fast my own
faith without Avavering;' and long may this be the case !
The fruits of that faith in the course of your much-tried
and honourable life are too good to allow any one to find
fault with it."
Among the many authoresses who enjoyed public
favour, dramatic composition, though often attempted,
seems seldom to have been successful. Miss Mitford and
Mrs. Hemans, both justly admired and popular, althougli
they produced plays which were admitted to be well acted
and interesting, did not really add to their fame by so
doing. On the contrary, it seems more as if the esteem
in which their other writings were held imparted an inter¬
est to all they did, and for a time rendered their plays
successful, but they did not continue to be performed ;
and to keep the stage must be the test which settles
whether they have the real fitness for it. Mrs. Hemans,
though graceful and touching as a poet, had scarcely force
or robustness enough for the requirements of the stage;
indeed, from one cause or other, her writings have lately
been somewhat neglected ; and yet how beautiful in tone
and feeling many of them are, such as " The Dying Girl
to Her Lover," " The Evening Prayer in a Girls' School,"
and others, full of beautiful thoughts and tender feelings.
She was in herself also  refined, gentle,  and  amiable.
198 Tlie Ladies' Edinhuvgh Afagazine.
and had experienced much trouble during a hard struggle
to do her duty to her sons, who were left entirely to her
care. They seem to have repaid her efforts, and to have
regarded her with enthusiastic love and admiration. I
have a letter written by one of them to my mother, enclos¬
ing some very interesting lines which had never been pub¬
lished, and which were Avritten while Mrs. Hemanswasin
Edinburgh, As you may like to see them, I copy them
here.
TO A REMEMBERED PICTURE.'
They haunt me still, those calm pure holy eyes !
Their piercing sweetness rises on my dreams,
The soul of music that within them lios
CJomes o'er my soul in soft and sudden gleams ;
Life, spirit-life, immortal and divine.
Is there— and yet how dark a doom was thine !
Could it! oh could it be, meek child of song!
The might of gentleness on that fair brow ?
Was that celestial tovich no shield from wrong ?
Bore it no talisman to ward the blow ?
Ask if a flower upon the billows cast
Might brave their strife, a flute-note hush the blast.
Are there not deep sad oracles to read
In the clear stillness of that radiant face ?
Yes ! even like thee must gifted spirits bleed,
Thrown on a world, for heavenly things no place :
Bright exiled birds, that visit alien skies.
Pouring in storms there suppliant harmonies ;
And seeking ever some true gentle breast
Whereon their trembling plumage might repose—
And their free song-notes, from that happy nest.
Gush as a fount that forth to music flows.
Vain dreams ! the love whose precious balms might save.
Still, still denied, they struggle to the grave.
Yet my heart shall not sink ! another doom.
Victim, hath set its promise in thine eye ;
A licht is there, too quenchless for the tomb.
Bright earnest of a noble destiny,
Telling of answers in some far off sphere,
To the deep tones that find no echo here.
Always yours very sincerely,
E. H. M.
' The picture was that of Rizzio at Holyrood.
109
It! ir   W i lut 0 \i\
Chapter III.
I HAD an opportunity before long of judging for myself
of the Mr. Lyttleton in question. If I had not known of
the fact of his arrival, I should have been aware that some¬
thing unusual was happening at the Manor-House by the
cessation of Nita's daily visits. When she did come, it
was a hurried race down the avenue to spend a few
breathless minutes outside the window.
" It is so tiresome, Arthur ; he has plans for every half-
hour, and if I am absent ten minutes he is sending for me,
and I hate being hunted about in this way. It is very
naughty in me, 1 daresay, for he is very kind and fatherly,
and takes great interest in all my doings—even in yon,
Arthur—and says he is coming to see you very soon. He
was quite surprised yesterday when I told him your age.
He thought you were quite old—older than he is."
Her innocent prattle opened my eyes and showed me
that the secret of his assumed interest was to see how
fiir it was safe for his young ward, child though she was,
to be left to the daily companionship of a man but ten
years her senior ; and already I saw he was trying to effect
a partial separation.
I bitterly resented his intrusion, but confessed with a
sigh that he need not have been afraid of a helpless
cripple, and besides " the little one " was such a child.
She brought him the next time to see me, and tlio
instant my eyes lit on him, I knew that Mrs. Leslie
would be as a willow-wand in his hands. As to Nita, if
he could not bend her will to his, he would break her
spirit rather than yield his authority, if he possessed any
legally, which was exactly what I did not yet know.
He was a tail handsome man of about thirty-seven years
of age, with cold blue eyes and a grave impassive
manner.
Nita said he had been amazed to hear my age, he
therefore chose a role accordingly, and talked to me
with the condescending kindness of a man of the world
towards a sick boy. It nettled me almost beyond endur¬
ance, but in the hours I had had to ponder over what the
child had said, I had made up my mind I should not, if
possible, be the subject of quarrel betw^een the Leslies
and hitn.
200 The Ladies Edinhurgli Magazine.
"My little cousin tells me you have been reading-
Scott's and Wordsworth's poetry together. All young
folks like that style of verse; I could almost wish I were
at an age again to think it grand and fine."
" I think WordsAvorth will suit any age," I answered,
quietly, looking him full in the face; " and Scott, whose
poetic genius was not to be despised, was considerably
older than I am when he wrote the poems; but Nita and
I have dipped into deeper things ; haven't we, little one ? "
I said, turning to her.
My speech to him was meant to show I divined the
meaning of his thus placing me beneath the level of his
own capacity, and my appeal to her was meant to show
him at once that our friendship was of too long and too
assured a footing to be dissolved at his desire. He
answered me by a long look from his cold blue eyes,
which I bore unflinchingly, and I knew that we were
enemies.
The morning he left, Nita appeared, in drooping spirits,
to tell me that Cousin Robert had arranged to come back
the following week to escort her mother and her to
Germany, where they were to remain a year.
" He says I have been wild too long, and am learning
country ways and habits, and a number of other horrid
things ; and oh ! Arthur, what am I to do without you ? "
The imexpected news struck chill to my heart. I knew
it was to break the habit of our daily intercourse that
this sudden resolve had been come to, and I resented it
in my heart.
What was I to do all the long winter months without
ray child-friend ? What her cousin could not do by force
of will, absence, unaided, might effect; and althoiTgh we
parted with mutual promises of undying friendship and
frequent correspondence, I saw her go with a very heavy
heart.
• • • •
Fifteen months passed, now slowly, now quickly, away,
Owen came down to me when he could, and cheered me
to further exertion ; my bodily health was good, and my
mind had almost regained its wonted equilibrium, but
not the old exuberance of spirits, nothing would ever
bring them back again ; they could not survive the ter¬
rible shock of that morning, which changed the whole
current of my life. But, except for the hourly-felt loss
of my   " little   one,"   I  was  happy.     I   wrote dashing
&»
My Window. 201
cynical articles, half morbid, half humorous, as my
present mood happened to be, which I saw my father
perusing with delight, and even my aunt read surrepti¬
tiously, as if doing some wicked thing.
I had a tool-chest, and carved wooden frames and
knick-knacks to fill my weary hours, and do my best to
kill a hope which had risen within me during the past few
weeks. The very thought of it made my head grow
dizzy and my heart sick ; 1 was almost frightened to
})ray for its fulfilment, for the conviction was also strong
in me that it would come to nothing; but yet it would not
be stifled. It was that in the time to come I might so far
regain the use of my limbs as to move about on crutches I
Hitherto they had had little feeling in them ; now I could
move them slowly to and fro on the floor; and once when
James was out of the room, and a tool I wished lay
beyond my reach, I had leaned out of my chair so as to
rest my weight on my legs, and had not suffered from
the unwonted exertion. I had told my own doctor, who
shook his head pityingly over me, telling me not to put
too much hope on the venture, but that I had better see
Sir J P from London.
I had not written anything of this to Nita, but we had
interchanged many letters. Hers were bright, girlish,
free letters, telling of all the wonders of the old German
town, with its quaint castle looking down on the silver
river in the valley, of the long-haired German students,
the rusty English tourists, of her studies, &c., and all
ending off with the longing wish to be back again at the
old Manor-Hovise and her dearly-loved seat at my \vindow,
Mr. Lyttleton seemed to have gone several times to
visit his relatives in Germany, and superintend in person
the training he had selected for his ward, whom, I felt
certain, he intended to make a yet nearer relative when
her education was completed; but that he was taking
the best way to secure his prize I was not so certain,
judging by the tenor of Nita's last letter to me. It was
short and hurriedly written, and that evidently not in the
best of humours. " Dear Arthur, you must think my long
silence strange, but since Mr. Lyttleton has been here he
has contrived that I should do nothing I wish to do. I
know you are beginning to scold and look grave, you
dear old Mentor, but I am so much naughtier this week
than I have ever been, and I do want you so much. I am
scribbling this up in my own room for reasons I need not
No. 19.—July 1876. 2C
202 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
enter on here, and I want you to tell me if it really is a
bother to read and answer my long rigmaroles, as I
wish to know particular It/, for a reason of my own, which
you would never guess, and which I am never going to tell
you !" Dear innocent child—not guess it! She had told
me as distinctly as if she had penned the simple truth,
that her cousin had tried to stop the correspondence
between us, and that there had been high words in conse¬
quence.
It Avas difficult to answer her note, and cost me much
thought and anxiety. " Dear Httle one," I said in reply,
" your happiness is so dear to me, and my gratitude for all
your past kindness such, that, great as the pleasure is of
receiving and answering your letters (indeed it is the
keenest I have), I would forego it at once if the doing so
would satisfy the scruples of any one whose authority
you think you are bound to respect. I can say no more,
but leave the matter, feeling sure you will never misun¬
derstand your old friend."
In a short time came her answer, and I knew that
my little girl had no knowledge of the world to help her
to battle with a man like her cousin. " I wish mamma
was not quite so much influenced by Cousin Robert; he is
BO clever he can make her tell him anything without her
knowing it; and you know I can never have any secrets
from mamma; so I showed her your dear last letter, and
next day Mr. Lyttleton was angrier than I ever saw him,
and told me he wished I had more of my mother's
womanly nature, and that if I persisted in teasing a man
with my school-girl scribblings, he would beg that I did not
make him the subject of my letters; and then he seemed
sorry, and has been so kind ever since ; and sometimes
he is very nice and gentle, though he is so clever, and
speaks to me about home so, that I hope to persuade him
to shorten the time of our stay here." The few subse¬
quent letters I had were all in his praise. I well knew
the influence a man of his age and acquirements would
have on the enthusiastic, clinging nature of a girl like
Nita; how she would come through all the stages of
antagonism, passive rebellion, and fruitless wilfulness to at
last acknowledge her master. I knew now her sweet im¬
pulsiveness and pretty Avayward ways would be moulded
in his hands to a cold and even behaviour; I pictured
how a look from those steely eyes would chill the rippling
laughter on her lips,  and check the playful gestures of
My Window. 203
her girlish years, and I prayed God to keep her from such
a fate.
She might learn to love him, removed from other and
more congenial society, but it would be the Hame kind of
affection a trained and tutored hound feels towards a
stern master.
Turning from these thoughts, I pleased myself much
about this time thinking of the surprise I had in store for
her; for the great doctor from London had been down,
and instead of checking my budding hope, had encour¬
aged me to try the use of my limbs with the aid of
crutches as much as possible, and he did not despair
but that I might in the course of years walk about like
other people, only supported by sticks. I would never
be fully strong, but—to walk about again ! To know
that T was no longer tied to my arm-chair and the window,
which had been at once a prison and a paradise to me!
And to know that she would share my joy! The even¬
ing the doctor left, I made my first feeble essay, and
sitting down, fairly burst into tears of happiness. I was
in danger of over-taxing my newly-found strength, for,
not satisfied Avith creeping about in my room, 1 limped
slowly up and down the soft grassy terrace in the long
summer afternoons. I had not heard of the Leslies for
some weeks, and was wondering if they meant to return
before the autumn glory had quite left the woods, when
one afternoon, as I stood leaning on my crutches in the
middle of the room, I became aware of something darken¬
ing the window. I turned suddenly—to greet my little
one. It was she indeed, but not the " little one " I used
to know. This was a tall slender girl with banded hair,
and a sw^eeping dress which fell round her in graceful
folds, looking at me with her grey eyes clouded with a
dim shadow of bewilderment.
" Arthur," she said in a low troubled tone, " is it you,
and standing 1 I saw the seat empty, and feared you
might be ill."
" Yes, little one," I answered, smiling, as 1 hobbled
over on my crutches to the window-sill to grasp her
hand. " I did not write, because 1 wished to enjoy the full
measure of your sympathy and surprise when you saw me
here."
To my utter amazement she did not speak, but, laying
her head against the window-frame, cried bitterly for a
204 77i« Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
few moments. " Little one, are you not glad ? " I ejacu¬
lated, after a pause.
" 0 how wicked I am!" she said, dashing aside the
tears, " and how heartless you must think me. I will be
glad, I am glad ; but for a moment I was sorry, for I
thought I was coming back to the old Arthur I left; and
this Arthur," she added, timidly touching my arm, " has
no more need of me."
"Oh yes, he has," I said, smiling, "for I am only learn¬
ing to walk like a year-old baby; but neither are you
■quite the ' little one' of long ago,"
Ah ! it was too true. We had each looked forward to
this meeting, forgetting the years we had lost, forgetting
that if you close the book of your life-story for ever so
short a time, you cannot open it at the same fascinating
page. I had never taken into account the sudden leap
she had made from her youth to her maidenhood. We
had had so much to say, and we said so little ; we looked
into each other's eyes, and looked away again, she with a
faint tinge on the lily fairness of her cheek; our hands
unclasped, and lay there as they dropped ; we had broken
the spell of our long child-dreams, and emerged into
dangerous enchanted ground, in which she was a beau¬
tiful maiden, and I was no longer an utterly helpless
cripple. Given the power, would I have gone back the
last eighteen mouths and been helpless again for the
solace my helplessness would bring l It was a question
difficult to answer. I asked it over and over again
during the next few weeks after the old intercourse was
in part established, but I had not the same incentive to
try my strength as before, and resumed in great measure
my old sedentary habits.
Mrs. Leslie accompanied her daughter once or twice a
week, and except that we were no longer children, and did
not enjoy such close and daily companionship, the old life
was resumed. Sometimes she came alone down the leafy
glade with her work or her sketch-book, and we sat as of
yore, and talked under the wide oak branches, but our talk
bad long silences now and then; and if our souls enjoyed
deeper communion than they used, such a communion
was followed by seasons of unrest, on my part at least.
" Cousin Robert is coming for a long visit in No¬
vember," she said to me one day; " yo\i and he must
get properly acquainted, and then I think you will ap¬
preciate each other."
My Window. 205
I was sceptical on the point, and muttered an
unintelligible reply.
" I am to ' come out' at the Hunt Ball ; he wished me
to be chaperoned by his aunt. Lady Mary Lascelles, but
mamma wishes to go with me herself, and I wish it too ;
and he is so anxious about my dress and the rest of it,
that I am quite tired of all the fuss."
" I wish I could have seen you dressed for your first
ball," I sighed.
" So you shall; I'll stop the carriage and come in as we
drive past, and you can think of me dancing and coquet¬
ting all evening, and shocking Cousin Robert horribly."
Mr. Lyttleton came, but I at least did not appreciate
him on further acquaintance, nor, to judge by his manner,
did 1 stand much higher in his opinion than formerly.
Naturally I saw less of Nita when he was at the Manor-
House ; when I did, there was a shadow of trouble on her
eunny face, and she was doubly kind in her manner, as if
to make up for what I was suffering at the hands of her
cousin in my absence. I saw them often together on the
river and in the woods, and I saw that this self-contained
man had given all his heart, such as it was, to the young
creature beside him.
The knowledge of it stung me so cruelly to the quick
that it forced on me the reluctant consciousness that what
I had considered solicitude for her happiness was the
caring for my own, and I told myself that the " little
one " had grown dearer to me than life itself, and that the
very hopelessness of possessing her made the burden of
my enforced loneliness more bitter to bear.
The evening of the ball was a sharp, clear, frosty night.
1 had moved to the room which fronted the road down
which the Leslies must drive on their way to Aston.
Lost in thought, I started to hear the sudden jerking of
horses brought to a standstill close beside me, and a voice
demanding impatiently the reason of the delay.
" I am getting out a moment here," said Nita's gentle
voice.    "1 shall not detain you a minute."
" For what, pray'? " demanded Mr. Lyttleton.
" I promised ages ago that Arthur should see me dressed
for my first ball," she replied hghtly.
_ "Nonsense, Nita I If you have no notion of what's
right and proper yourself, surely, Mrs. Leslie, you will not
allow her to go, besides spoiling her dress getting out
200 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
" Nita, darhng," began the quavering voice of her mother,
when the girl gently interrupted her.
" Mamma always taught me to keep my promises, and
my dress will not spoil any more dismounting here than
at the ball-room door," and with this she tripped into the
house.
Very lovely she looked as she ran into the room, lightly
shaking out her long billowy train behind her, and
wheeling round slowly before my admiring eyes.
" Do I look nice, and shall I have any partners ? " she
asked, folding her hands demurely; then with one of
those sudden changes which were so charming in hei', she
ran up to me, and putting her gloved hand on my arm,
said, *' Dear Arthur, it seems a shame to go out and
dance, and you left here. If you had only been there to
have the first waltz with me ! "
" If I only had," I answered so hoarsely that she looked
up, and meeting my eyes turned away, and gathering up
her skirts gave me a hurried good-night.
I expected her all next day to give me the promised
account of the ball, but she did not make her appearance
that day or the following ; when she did, it was in com¬
pany with Mr. Lyttleton, when she seemed to have little
to relate, except that her anticipations had been pitched
too high, " all the same it was a pleasant ball."
A few days after this I was sitting in the verandah
feeling intensely wretched, bodily and mentally, when she
appeared. "Mr. Lyttleton has gone to Aston, and I am
free," she sighed, as if flinging off some heavy weight
oppressing her; " free to make believe I am a little child
again, and not hedged about with all the nonsensical
proprieties of a come-out young lady, of which Cousin
Kobert is always reminding me," she added petulantly.
" Little one," I asked abruptly, " do you like your
cousin ? "
" Do I like him ? " she repeated slowly, looking away
from me and playing with the tendrils of a creeping
plant as she spoke. " Yes, I like him. I am sorry for
him, he has told me so much of his lonely life at East¬
wood—his place, you know—and of his having no one
to take any interest in his pursuits since his mother died.
When he is kind and good like that, I like him very
much; and mamma likes him, and thinks and talks to me
so much of his opinion and wisdom and judgment, that it
seems to me I must drift by-and-by into thinking so too."
My Window. 207
I understood the pressure that was being put upon
her, and for what reason; but why did she speak
of it to me of all men ?
She was too guileless, and spoke in too calmly passive
a tone, to mean her words as a warning to me to guard
my own heart. I was the only friend, outside her small
domestic circle, to whom she could talk on any subject
dear to her.
" There are some things," she resumed after a pause,
seeing I did not speak, "in which he and I would never
agree, and—and—Arthur !" she cried suddenly, " I want
your advice so much, and I have nobody to go to. Of
course there is mamma, but she is on his side, and there
is only me on mine. He wants me to marry him, and
mamma wishes it too; and he says he vnW. wait
ever so long till I like him better, if I only promise now.
But if I promised I would never break my promise;
and I think he knows that, and the liking might never
come—and what am I to do ? "
Never was man placed in a more difficult position than
I was at that moment. Loving her with my whole
heart, knowing how worse than selfish, how impossible
it was for me to ask her to unite her fate with mine,
especially now that she had opened her heart to me,
how was I to put the only brightness out of my
life, and give my little one to my enemy ? I paused
for some moments before replying. " Little one," I said
at length, and my voice sounded far away, " no friend,
however true, can decide a question like that. If your
heart tells you that you can give up your wishes and
desires and friends even at his bidding, and do it gladly,
then  I suppose you love  your  cousin;  if you  cannot
let nothing persuade "
" What are you two so earnest over ?" said a loud voice
behind us, causing me to start guiltily as we recognised
Mr. Lyttleton in the intruder. Nita was quicker to re¬
cover herself than I was, and answered lightly, but, as she
ever did, truthfully. " I fear the topic ran, as it always
does in novels, on the romantic one of 'Love's young
dream.'"
His brow clouded momentarily, but he answered
deliberately, " I think, Nita, it shows a want of your usual
consideration of the feelings of others to choose a subject
like that with one set apart from the region of romance
as Mr. Cleland is by his great misfortune."
208 The Ladies Edviburgh Magazine,
The blood mounted to her face, and she made a move¬
ment as if she would have shielded me from a blow,
while I replied hotly, " My great misfortune is most
felt when I long to resist the brutality of those who
use it as a means of wounding, a thing Miss Leslie is
utterly incapable of doing ! "
This episode only widened the breach between the
houses, and I was left for a week, cursing the folly of
my hasty answer, and racked by anxiety to know if Nita
had accepted her cousin; at the end of which time
I only saw her for a few moments in the room with her
mother and my aunt.
That he was not finally rejected, was evident from his
prolonged stay at the Manor-House, and the care taken
that Nita and I should meet as seldom as possible, and
never alone.
I was astcmished one morning to find Mrs. Leslie alone
in my room, her manner agitated and nervous. She
seemed anxious to unburden her mind of something,
while at the same time afraid to begin. At last she
said, " Arthur, I have ventured to come and talk to you
as I should not otherwise have done, knowing how
completely you have the interests of my little daughter
at heart."
1 bowed; I felt what was coming, but I was determined
not to assist her in any way.
" You are aware she has no near relative but me. I
am not strong, and it has been a terrible thought to me
that she might be left alone in the world at an age
most requiring a mother's care. Her cousin loves her
dearly ; he is all that can be wished in every respect as a
husband, and I should die happy if I could see my child
in his care. But—but unfortunately the slight difference,
misunderstanding, call it what you will, existing between
you and Mr. Lyttleton has made such an unhappy
impression on Nita, that she will not promise to look
upon him in the light he wishes. Arthur," she said
pleadingly, " you have such influence with her that one
word from you would settle it all."
"I can scarcely believe that it is so," I answered as
steadily as I might; " but if the decision did rest with
me, I would not dare to give her to a man who I feel
convinced would render her life miserable."
" Indeed you are mistaken, Arthur. I thought you
would have rendered me this small service; but if you
My Window. 209
will not, there is another way in which you will surely
help me, and that is to deny yourself to her, to us, on any
pretext whatever, for some days till this is settled."
" Mrs. Leslie," I answered, " I feel assured that never of
your own accord would you have come' here to propose
such a plan, and Mr. Lyttleton must be a craven suitor
before he would win a bride on such terms. You are
asking a favour the hardness of which to grant you can
never conceive: do you know you are asking me to act a
lie to myself and to her ? "
But so strongly did she urge me not to destroy her
daughter's prospects and happiness, and so feelingly did
she plead our past friendship, that before she left she had
extorted a reluctant promise that I would deny myself to
all the inmates of the Manor-House for three or four days.
What use would be made of it I did not know ; the end I
clearly discerned, and the next three days were days of
torture to me. What could Nita make of my steady
refusals to see her but that I had taken dire offence at
her cousin's words, and included her in my displeasure ?
I had been strongly advised to try some of the German
baths for my lameness, and I very nearly made up my
mind to start for the Continent at once without letting
any one know, but I could not tear myself from the place
withovit knomng the fate of my lost " little one." The
fifth day after my interview with Mrs. Leslie was a close
sultry day. All afternoon I had watched the black clouds
coming up from the west, gathering strength as they
approached, till about five o'clock they burst in a terrific
thunderstorm which lasted for hours.
I had felt unnerved and miserable all day; the room
was so close I could hardly breathe. I opened the
window, although the rain, which was coming down in
straight lines, was driving into the verandah, and sat
down not far ofli". The lamp on the table made a weird
circle of light in the middle of the surrounding gloom.
Presently above the sound of the steady rain I heard a
light splashing on the sodden turf, and in an instant a
white face looked in at the window. I started up, and,
steadying myself on my crutches, advanced to the figure.
" Little one ! " 1 ejaculated, " out on this night! " Her
hair was dripping wet, and hvmg in straggling curls round
her face; she threw back the long cloak which covered
her from head to foot, and disclosed her pale-blue evening
dress, fastened at the bosom with a white rose.    A fairer
No. 19.—July 1876. 3 D
210 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
vision I had never seen, heightened as it was  by the
surrounding darkness.
" Yes, Arthur, it's me, and never mind the wet. I have
only an instant to stay, or they might miss me. They
never imagined I would venture out on a night like this, 0,
I am so miserable, Arthur! I have no pride, they tell me,
else I would not come. They, at least he has told me
Buch things, that you were tired out of all my coming
and going, and were only too glad to avail yourself of
any pretext to shake me off. There were a hundred
other things, but—but I did not believe one of them,remem¬
bering what you said long ago, that I would always be
' littlo one' to you till you willed it otherwise; and
now—now, " she cried, with a sudden catch in her breath,
" it looks like it, for I have come here these three days
past, and each time I have been told you would not see
me; but I could not give you up without seeing you once
again, and asking you face to face, when I cannot be
deceived, if it is quite, quite true. "
My blood boiled at Mr. Littleton's treachery, but I sub¬
dued my anger sufficiently to say quietly, " Do you think
it lilke>/ to be true, little one "? "
"Forgive me, Arthur; I never really believed it. I
wish I was an old, old woman, and you an old man, and
I could come and take care of you, and be happy as we
used to be."
The light from behind me was shining full on her fair
upturned face; I forgot my resolution, my extorted
promise, my prudence. " Little one, they have broken
faith with me, and tried to separate us entirely. I re¬
sented such separation coming trom them," I went on in
a sad and broken voice, " but the torture I have endured
the last three days has made me know that such separa¬
tion must come from myself. I know—your cousin took
care I should know—that by reason of my misfortune I am
cut off from the hopes men of my age indulge in, but he
could not even with his cruel words kill the feelings I
share in common with himself. Little one, I love you
so passionately that I cannot longer bear to be near you
every day, and hear your voice and feel your touch, and
know that you can never, never be more to me than the
little girl 1 knew so long ago. I am going away to
Germany, and I will not come back till I have learnt to
unlove you." This I tried to say with a feeble smile.
" To unlove you so far as that I can bear to look on my
My Window, 211
little one in the keeping of another.    Now go, for I am
too weak to endure more at present."
She did not stir—her eyelids had foil en as I spoke, and
in the faint lamp-light I could see the colour come and
go on her cliildish face. I leant forward on the window-
sill, feasting my eyes with the last look they would have
for months, and waiting for her to go. I heard a low
ripple of laughter mingle with the falling rain, then a
mischievous yet tremulous voice said, " Then I shall not
have to wait till I am an old woman to come and take
care of you after all."
She bent down suddenly and kissed my hand as it lay
beside her on the window-sill, and ere I could rouse
myself from the giddy maze of delight into which her
words threw me, she had gone, and I could hear
the hasty plash-plash of her step over the drenched
grass. I looked around to make sure it was not all a
dream, but there lay the rose from the bosom of her dress,
and a tear w^as on my hand. It was my " little one," her
very self, who had been there; the same child and the same
action of the first day of our acquaintance.
I did not go to Germany alone; she has been my wife
for two years now, and a happy two years they have
been. I shall never be a strong man, and shall never ride,
nor hunt, nor shoot, but I am able to drive, and enjoy
social intercourse, and walk—feebly, it is true, but more
firmly than of yore—about her property and mine. Owen
comes to see us often, and we tease him about his celibacy.
He says he remains a bachelor because he has never met
with a wife like mine, but that he will wear the bonds
whenever he finds her equal; and looking at my friend
and my wife, I bless God with a thankful heart for the
day He sent them to me, and rescued me from the morbid
bitterness which might have ended in a living death.
Martyn IIat.
212 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
§\u ^iiicjcr in ilu |li(jtit.
" Therefore well in thee
To look not on eternity, but time. "
—Balanstion's Adventure.
Breaking the night's deep stillness
With notes so clear and ringing,
I heard a minstrel singing,
While softly fell the starlight,
And the breeze of night
Was hushed to a mere breatL,
For nature in her soul,
Owned as I did a sweet control,
Which held us as if spellbound,
Listening unto the sound
Of that strange minstrel singing,
In notes so clear and ringing,
The songs of life and death.
Of Death he sang, with music soft and low.
Like footsteps of a child who does not know
The way he takes, yet passes onward, pleased to find
Beauties half veiled to his mind.
Thus wonderingly, with bated breath—
With reverence,—with joyousness,
Sang he of death.
But when of Life, 'twas in a diff'rent strain ;
The minor notes kept telling forth his pain.
And words conveying doubt and fear
Were borne unto mine ear—
"0 Life ! 0 Beautiful! if I should fliil
To read thy meaning ?—or if sin prevail, "
And drag me from the heights I fain would tread!—
0, what if sleep o'ertake me while I live!—
Thou death-in-life, 'tis thee I dread,
Thou poison working in the soul.
Thou barrier 'twixt me and my goal;
Binding to poverties and narrow ways.
While fitful glimpses of the glorious days
Which should be mine, are seen but as in dreams !
O Life ! 0 Beautiful! methinks I know the key
To all thy meaning; that one word which hath haunted me,
And caused my yearnings towards the light.
And my impatience of the night,—
Tlie Singer in the Night. 213
'Tis " Progress"—the soul Godward tending.
Earth and all Earth's pleasures blending
AVith her divinity.
Thus I conceive of thee, 0 Life,
So name thee beautiful, tho' the strife
Be hard, through problems so perplexing.
And circumstance so vexing
To our infinity.
Yet to despair is to deny !—
My God, to Thee I cry ;
Help me to live, 0 God !
• ■ ■ •
Then I went forth when beamed the morning bright,
And nature seemed repeating
In every floweret's greeting
The lesson of the nighty
That Life not death demands our care and thought;
Should we forget this, or if aught
Lower the pulse of life,
0, let us list to soft rebukes that lie
In all the beauties of the earth and sky;
The tender chidings of om- mother's voice,
Which make us weep—and yet rejoice.
Joan Scott.
•t)arious ^nstocrs to iht (^luslion—®l|)n is it?
Crito. Let us rest here a few minutes, my friend, and
finish our conversation. In spite of what you have just
said, I cannot but think you philosophers often dispute
about nothing, and create difficulties in order to have the
pleasure of explaining them away,
Philalethes. That is partly true and partly false.
What is "nothing" to a blind man, being unperceived,
may be something very real to a perceiving eye. In tho
same way we do not " create," but discover the difficulties
by opening our eyes to them. Now, the blind man feels
his way step by step unconsciotisly round things that we
bear straight down upon, translating one sense into
another.
Crito. I was just about to advance, as a further objec-
214 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
tion, that yow do not bear straight down upon things, but
proceed in a roundabout, zigzag, unexpected way.
Phil. Explain yourself more fully.
Crito. It goes very hard with one who has not learned
the royal art of disputing, when he attempts to explain
himself to one who has. But is it possible that a philo¬
sopher can give a plain answer to any question whatever ?
Suppose I were to ask you, "Why does this marble statue
stand at the entrance of this grotto ? what then ?
Phil. I would give you a Scotch reply—ask you the
question, What would you yourself answer I
Crito. That is so like you. I should probably say,
Because the sculptor chose to put it there. You would
not answer so briefly.
Phil. No. It would take more words for me to answer
the question. Your brevity does not tell me why it is
marble, why it is white, why of this shape and size;
why in this position ?
Crito. It seems to me that it suits its surroundings,
and I suppose the proprietor and sculptor agreed between
themselves that it did so. I cannot think of any other
cause of its being as it is.
Phil. Since you have named the word, it does appear to
you that there must be some cause; that it could not he
without that ?
Crito. We do not require philosophy to tell us that
there must be a cause for everytliing.
Phil. Then whether was the sculptor or the proprietor
the cause of the marble ?
Crito. You mock me! Neither of them. The marble
is independently of them.
Phil. Might not one find then in the marble a cause of
the marble statue ?
Crito. No ; for, left to itself, it remained for ages under¬
ground, simply marble. The chisel has made it what
it is.
Phil. Then it seems to you that the chisel was the
cause of the statue ?
Crito. It seems to have been so.
Phil. And how did the chisel know the outline?
Crito. Of course I mean to include the mental design.
Phil. How does the mind affect the marble—by merely
willing it'?
Crito. No ; or we would all Avill remarkable changes in
matter.    I, for instance, would have such another statue
Various Answei'S to the Question—Whi/ is it?       215
willed out of a lump of marble I often sit upon. The
mind must have instruments—it must have a skilled hand
and a sharp chisel to execute its ideal, but it is the moving
power.
Phil. Then you think the mind the cause of the statue?
Crito. Surely we shall at least agree upon that.
Phil. Yet you said, a minute ago, that the mind was
not the cause of the marble ?
Crito. But that was only the matter. The mind is the
cause of the form.
Phil. That seems to you higher than the matter I
Crito. Yes.    That makes it to be what it is.
Phil. Why did the mind choose to give it that form,
and make it what it is ?
Crito. An hour ago, I think, I should have answered
that the man wanted to make some money.
Phil. But you would not say that now, because you see
that at least cannot apply to the proprietor's mind. Why
did he move the sculptor's hand ?
Crito. Because he wished to increase the beauties he
possessed.
Phil. Then does it not seem as if the proprietor's love
of beauty had set everything moving?
Crito. It does. If he had not cared for such things, this
would not have been.
Phil. How do you connect its being with the love of
beauty ?
Crito. It is made in order to satisfy it.
Phil. Then the satisfaction of that desire is its end?
Crito. I would say yes, but you have made me fear to
assert anything rashly.
Phil. You are right. But does it not seem to you that
if aw_y of these antecedents were absent, the thing would
not be as it is—that, in fact, they are all equally causes, in
one sense ?
Crito. They do. Explain more to me. I begin to be
interested.
Phil. You begin to feel how natural to the human
mind is philosophy. " Man may philosophise well or ill,
but philosophise he must." We only strive to do it more
clearly by weighing the thoughts of other minds with our
own. You have just discovered for yourself the four
causes of Aristotle.
Crito. I am glad of that, though I am not aware of
what they are.
216 Tlie Ladies' Edinhurgh Magazine.
Philo. You found out that one cause was the love of
beauty—i.e. the final; another was the conception in the
sculptor's mind—i.e. the formal; and what would you say
of the chisel'?
Crito. That was an instrumental cause.
Philo. Aristotle called it the efficient cause. And are
you still quite certain that the marble had nothing to do
with it ?
Crito. No. In one sense I would call it a material
cause.
Philo. Then you would use Aristotle's very name for
his fourth cause. Taking them more generally, we might
say there were two, matter and form. Are these equally
necessary to the statue 1
Crito. I should say they were.
Philo. Yet was it not complete in all its details in the
sculptor's brain.    Was it not then a statue ?
Crito. Yes. But not a marble statue. It was unex¬
pressed.
Phil. Nevertheless it could have been expressed in
wood, in bronze, in clay. Does the material affect the
form?
Crito. Not if you keep up the distinction of the four
causes, because the statue in the sculptor's mind was
simply the formal cause. But if you combine the formal
and the final in one, the material does affect the whole,
because there is a more full satisfaction of the love of the
beautiful in this pure crystalline textm-e than in dull, dis¬
coloured clays.
Phil. Your distinction is valid. You have begun to
philosophise. Do you think you have exhausted the sub¬
ject ? Are all these causes themselves uncaused? This
material cause of the statue, this marble—can you conceive
a time when it was not ?
Crito. Easily. I know a smattering of geology, and
how the submarine calcareous deposits became indurated
into the crystalline stone.
Phil. And what was the cause of that change ? Was it
the previous condition, the water, the heat, the pressure,
the atmospheric influence ? or what ?
Crito. If it were any of these, it must have been
all combined. But I do not see here the distinction you
have just proposed. Stop. Eureka! Its previous con¬
dition must have been its material cause, these influences
its ejicient cause.    The final cause must have been in the
Various Answers to the Question — WJiy is it?       217
will of God to give us the benefit of the possession of
marble; its formal cause must also have been with it iu
the mind of God who conceived it, His idea thereof.
Phil. You do not then consider God as the efficient
cause or the material cause ?—the cause of the matter
of marble ?
Crito. Do not take away my breath. Of course He
was, but not at that particular point of time. It was
" in the beginning" that He created the heavens and the
earth, which I suppose include all that we call " matter."
I see where I went wrong. If these influences are the
efficient cause, they are so only in a secondary sense,
as the chisel was of the statue ; for there must have been
a hand guiding them, though that hand is unseen. God
changes the texture of the marble just as the sculptor
changes its shape, and I feel a difficulty here that has
troubled me before. I cannot make clear to my mind
what relation these external influences have to the two
conditions of the marble; or to the difference between
them; wherein their action lies, and whence is the
result.
Phil. You have broached the vexed question of
physical causation, which you must study for yourself.
In the meantime I can only say a word. You yourself
said that " you know that everything must have a
cause." Human nature contains that knowledge. But
when you come to the physical world, thoughtful ob¬
servers must be puzzled as you have been. They fail
to see the connection of effect and cause. But it was
Hume that first boldly asserted that we can see no more
in physical causes than invariable antecedents, " where,
if the first had not been, the second never had existed."
They show us no power of affecting the one the other;
no necessary relation to each other; in fact, they
do not occupy the whole sphere of our definition
of cause.
Crito. That is what I meant, but could not express.
None of these influences had knowledge to make these
deposits into marble, nor power to do so; but they
seem to be links in a chain whose one end is grasped in
the efficiency of God's hand, and whose other end drags
after it, what may be called its effect.
Phil. Yes, to continue the somewhat antiquated phraseo¬
logy with which we have accidentally started, God is the
formal cause of marble as marble, but He had been the
No. 19.—July 1876. 2 E
218
The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
formal cause of matter as matter; at the same time
as He was its material cause, l^he final cause lies in His
will; and He is the ejjicient cause of matter in all its
changes, only in these latter, as man makes a chisel to
serve various purposes, He makes conditions or laws
his instruments as efficient cause.
Crito. Yet the same cause has not always the same
effect:   fire sometimes hardens, and sometimes softens.
Phil. There must be some difference either in the
object affected, or in the conditions which you now know
are a modification of the cause.
Crito Of course. But is it not strange that God
chooses that what are called causes should invariably
precede effects?
Phil. Has not that also a cause 1 Is it not to teach us
what to expect ? To enrich us, with limitations, with
the gift of prophecy?—with the sense of power? To
permit us to produce any particular effect by inserting
ourselves as a link in the chain, and modifying it by
our will? As Bacon says,—" AVe must obey in order
to command nature." The sculptor applied the blows
of the mallet to the chisel, and the chisel to the marble,
in order to make the statue.
Crito. I see. God made the connection of the con¬
ditions ; and when the sculptor obeys the first set, he
produces the second. Yet 1 cannot but feel that he is
a real cause—that in him the formal controls the efficient
cause.
How can mind control matter ?
It cannot itself control it, but its instruments
But is not the hand itself matter 1
. But it is living—does not that make a difference
Phil.
Crito
can.
Phil.
Crito
to mind ?
Phil. What a small proportion of living matter is
affected by mind! To us all other bodies are virtually
dead matter, and we can at best only infer that other
men are alive.
Crito. That sounds strong. But has not the mind
power over the living matter in its own body ?
Phil. How can soul have a body ? Is the mind homo¬
geneous with the hand, and material ? Or the hand a part
of the soul, and spiritual ?
Crito, They are different and distinct: the one is
matter, the other is mind, but they both belong to me. . .
Various Ansivers to the Question—W/12/ is it?       219
Is it that a certain quantity of matter is allotted to us, and
becomes living by virtue of an animal or vegetable soul,
that stands as a mediator between spirit and matter 1
Phil. Many philosophers have thought so. Yet that
leaves the difficulty still unsolved. If such animal
spirit be material, the mind acts on matter m it; if it
be spiritual, the mind acts on matter through it.
Crito. I see I must lay aside my ignorant ambition
to solve the question for myself, and ask you to explain
it to me.
Phil. That I cannot do,
Crito. How you disappoint me! I expected a full
solution of the difficulty.
Phil. We are only "lovers of wisdom;" we cannot
be " wise men" in this present sphere. Let us grant
that by some means the hand obeys the mind.
Crito. Yes, and I see one important difference : I
could not at all see how matter moves matter, and
it seemed an impossibility that I ever could ; but though
1 cannot see how mind moves matter, I feel as if it were
only my own ignorance that concealed from me the
relation. But in looking at the efficient cause for recon¬
sideration, what shall 1 take first! The chisel, and
its antecedent conditions, its matter in the iron ore,
its form in the tempered steel well shaped; its efficient
cause in the labourer's toil; its final in the man's
purpose ? Or shall I take this wonderful hand that
guides the chisel, and find its matter mere flesh and
blood, and bone and muscle living; the efficient and
formal cause thereof in God's will, who designed such a
servant to the mind imprisoned in flesh; and the final cause
in satisfying thereby its desire of action.
Phil. You are a most encouraging convert; and this
conception, the formal cause in the sculptor's mind, what
of that ?
Crito. The mind made it, but how ?
Phil. Aristotle says, " The mind is the form of forms ; "
but needs there any matter for this form 'i
Crito. Yes ; what he had seen was the matter of his
idea.
Phil. Describe to me what you seel
Ckito. a lovely female figure, gracefully draped, with
eyes upturned, hands upreaching, wings outspread ; one
beaiitiful foot touching, yet spurning the earth she is
preparing to quit.
220 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
Phil. Good. But had he, think you, ever seen such
wings springing from such shoulders'?
Crito. No, he must have imagined it.
Phil. Can he then create new things, as God does ?
We see it now in God's marble ; but when it was in the
sculptor's brain, was it altogether his own creation ?
CuiTO. No and Yes. Is it not that what he had read
of angel-forms, seen of lovely women, of winged creatures,
of fellow-workers' expressed ideas, were the matter, the
material cause; and that his artistic imagination, which
combined and reproduced, was the effi-cient cause of the
form ?
Phil. I agree with you.    And the formal cause ?
Crito. You said the mind was the form of forms. The
whole mind, then, was the formal cause of this conception.
Phil. But if God created the mind, did He not also
create the form ? and are not all other causes thereof very
much like the " invariable antecedents " we spoke of in
physical causation ?
Crito. No. For there is thought, liberty, life in mind ;
the man could have imagined another form had he
pleased.
Phil. But would he have pleased to have imagined
another form with all the antecedent conditions identical ?
Consider that.
Crito. You are too subtle for me. Yet I see whither
your question tends. Of course I am prepared to grant
that God created my mind; that the " inspiration of the
Almighty giveth me understanding." But I cannot help
feeling free. Yet I repeat, I allow him to be the cause of
the mind.
Phil. The cause ?    In what manner ?
Crito. Materially/, efficiently, and formally, from His own.
I can see no final cause in man but himself and his own
completeness ; for God could not require in any way to
create us.
Phil. You state it truly ; man is an end in himself.
We shall not now discuss the great question of the free¬
dom or necessity of his will and thought. Whether, then,
God or the mind be considered as the formal cause of the
form of the statue, it struck me that you passed very
lightly over what concerned the matter of this form. You
said it Avas gained from Avhat the sculptor had seen and
heard; that is to say, his perceptions; but what are
perceptions ?
Various Answers to the Question—Why is it?       221
Crito. They are what we know of surrounding objects.
Phil. Certainly,  but  we  are  all   mind,  whereas   we
agreed that all things else are to us mere dead matter.
Now, how can mind receive presentations of matter ?
Crito. By means of the senses.
Phil. Yes, but you have already experienced a diffi¬
culty in conceiving mind to act upon matter. Does it
seem any easier to you that matter should act upon mind
—i.e. present itself within its sphere by any means what¬
ever ?
Crito. You have made me see the difficulty, but have
not cleared it to me.
Phil. That I can never do. Only it is a subject well
worthy of consideration. I drew your attention to it at
present, in order to show you that perception is much
more complex than the thoughtless allow it to be. For
instance, in vision you see nothing but colour.
Crito. Surely I see outline.
Phil. What outline have we but that of one colour
bounding another ? If all nature were colourless, or
were one imiform shade of one colour, what figure could
things assume ? Colour is the mode in which extension
shows itself. And all we really see is one flat expanse of
colours transverse to our line of vision.
Crito. Come now, surely you will not insist that it is
flat. Surely I see distance, roundness, &c.; at least I
believe I do.
Phil. Your belief is confused. You do not see dis¬
tance, but have learned it by innumerable past acts of
experience, of comparison, combined with an unconscious
muscular exertion of the visual organs ; and what you
think you see, is a synthesis of what you see, what you
remember, wha.t you judge, and what you have judged in
past time. I only bring this before you that you might
see that the mind as mind is partly the material cause of
the matter of the form, for the sculptor did not merely see
wings and lovely women, and then combine them, but
even to the presentation of these things was needed a
whole group of representations and comparisons. And
as to the Jinal cause of the form 1
Crito. I see how incomplete I have been. The final
cause of the form is our love of beauty, but the final cause
of the whole statue is our love of expressing our con¬
ceived forms, of incarnating our ideas in order to render
them permanent, and capable of being  understood by
222 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
others; in order even to make them representative to
ourselves at other times, after our attention has been
directed to other forms. There are many admixtures that
complicate the final cause of the statue that do not affect
the final cause of the form of the statue.
Phil. And what, then, do you call this pure final
cause ?
Crito. The satisfaction of the desire of the beautiful.
Phil. Does there not seem to be three notions here;
the beautiful, the recognition of it, and the desire of it ?
Crito. Yes, I see a further vista of thought looming
before me. I imderstand better now what you meant
when you implied that the form was in the mind of God,
and the sculptor could not but make it, because, in giving
the mind the notion of beauty, He gave also its laws ; yet
how ? Is it to all mind, or to some particular mind ?
How do people vary so much in their opinions, each one
believing he has the standard ?
Phil. Men do not quarrel so much about the pure
notion of beauty as you think. But they mix up other
ideas, such as that of agreeableness, utility, attainability,
into some one mental phrase, and then quarrel about the
definition of the word by which they express their
conception. I hold that all false theories, all contentious
dispute, must die out before one unmixed expression of
pure formal beauty, because God is both matter and form
of beauty, and of the idea beauty we find within us, and
He is one. Have you anything to note about the final
cause ?
Crito. No, for I seem to see nothing further than what
we have already noticed; its causes rise through the
mind to God.
Phil. And you say nothing of the sculptor wanting
money ?
Crito. I should feel rather ashamed of such a mercenary
idea at present.
Phil, Yet you need not. As human beings, we require
food, shelter, comfort, and desire luxuries, power, &c.
These things are supplied by money, therefore they are
the final ends of making it, and not the mere gathering of
coin to coin. And as physicians call predisposing causes
of illness a weak constitution, bad uprearing, foolish
habits, &c., without which the cold, the heat, the infection
would not have been powerful enough ; yet that cold, that
heat, that infection, is also called the exciting cause, or in
Various Answers to the Question—Win/ is it?       223
popular language, the cause of disease; so in the sculp¬
tor's mind, training, habits, and thought might be
jyredisposing causes, the desire of expressing his conception
of the beautiful might be temporarily dormant, and his
Avaiit of money might rise into importance as the excit¬
ing cause of his labour. Nay, this may be more—it
may be the cause or antecedent of all the predisposing
causes ; for unless he had known he would have required
to win his bread somehow, he might never have given
liimself the training and the habits that made such an
expression a possibility. You, for instance, contain within
yourself the other causes, but what could you do towards
making a statue ?
Crito. 8imply nothing. I now see that I ought to
have combined his skill with the instrument and hand,
as part of the efficient cause, as the formal cause of its
efficiency. So my scorn of philosophy is put to shame,
and my careless question of Why is this? has led me up
from things to men, and from men to God. Truly I am
lost in admiration at the answers that may be returned to
—Why is it so ?
Phil. There is a circle in knowing, where the greatest
returns into the least, and the deeps of knowledge border
the deeps of ignorance. Their answer to this question
would be (me—" Because it is so I" There is a reason
in being for being. Perfect knowledge recognises this,
blank ignorance accepts it, unknowing. But round on the
curves of this great circle hang many an intermediate
thought, resembling each other as they present a mixture
of knowledge and ignorance, differing in the proportion of
each; differing in proportion, as from their position they
can see the light.
Crito. I should like to run round the whole circle!
Phil. Calmly! I should advise you to begin with Des¬
cartes. He will teach you Method. He worked back
through all dependent causes, doubting everything, not
that he might rest in doubt, but that he might find some¬
thing sure. He doubted until he could doubt no further,
because doubt became transformed into a certainty when
he saw it as an effect; for the material, efficient, formal,
and final cause of his doubt was his own mind, which
must be to be a cause.
Crito. Had he found nothing certain beyond mind ?
Phil. Nothing. But he found much certain in it. A
few first principles, from which we evolve all our ideas of
224 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
the Good, the Beautiful, and the True, and one strong
necessity to recognise itself as an effect, and find its
cause in a higher, purer, stronger Spirit, Omnipotent and
Eternal. But I must not go further now; time passes,
and you have done a good deal for your first day's
digging in philosophy.
Crito. I wonder how I have hitherto failed to learn the
true definition of the word.
Phil. "Philosophy," says Novalis, "is properly home¬
sickness, the wish to be everywhere at home."
Crito. The disease has attacked me.
Phil. Let me Avarn you that it is a disease in which
your thirst increases as you drink.
Orito. I wonder what you would call the predisposing
causes thereof in my case ? You must consider yourself as
the exciting cause of my "home-sickness." And pray, Avhat
would our marble statue have to do with it 1
Phil. That I shall leave you the pleasure of working
out for yourself.
Charlotte Carmichael.
Lines.
'TWAS in the shady gloaming
That first I heard his feet;
The blue, blue skies grew solemn
Above the heavy wheat.
And he came down the pathway
Where scarlet poppies grew ;
And the yellow corn made rustling
As glad to let him through.
'Twas in the bitter winter
That my love went away ;
The cold was long and cruel,
The snow fell fast that day.
They bore him down the pathway,
The poppies all were dead;
And barren fields looked upward
To sullen skies o'erhead.
B.
225
llcrolhctionfi of the ^ix^l
Letter V.
My dear Friexd,—My recollections have not followed
one another with much regard to continuity, for I am
aware that I have been taking most eccentric leaps back¬
wards and forwards, as first one event then another pre¬
sented itself to my memory. This last-named faculty
does indeed seem to annihilate both time and space in
its excursions, and is like the spirits in " Macbeth," " who
will not be commanded." So while I am one minute a
child, gazing with a child's wonder on those dear relatives,
who I even then know were the objects of admiration and
assembled crowds, I am the next a woman, no longer
young, with only the remembrance that " such things Avere
that were most dear to me," and knowing how difficult it
is in words to reproduce, or indeed to give any idea of,
the power which existed in them to sway the hearts and
excite the enthusiasm of those who heard and saw them.
This indeed is the actor's bane; he cannot leave a memo¬
rial of his art. The painter, the musician, the sculptor,
bequeath their works to future generations. The poet
writes more for them than for the present; but although,
" By the mighty actor brought,
Illusion's perfect triumphs come.
Verse ceases to be airy thought,
And sculpture to be dumb"—
yet, alas ! who can restore or give more than the faintest
picture of what they were who influenced the minds and
raised the imaginations of theii' day? Even the few who
remember them can only say, and say sadly,
" I hear a voice you cannot hear."
Of one of those now passed away, Mr. Murray, I may be
allowed to speak, even although he was a very near rela¬
tive of my own—my mother's brother. His talent was
peculiar to himself. There was something that I at least
never saw or heard of in another. His line was princi¬
pally comedy, frequently what is called low comedy ; but
in his hands this might seem a misnomer, for he touched
all things Avith a singular grace; and while you were
laughing at something utterly ludicrous, a tone, a turn of
expression, might suddenly convert the ridiculous into the
No. 20.—August 1876. 2 V
226 The Tjadies lullnlnirgh Magazine.
pathetic, and you found yourself remembering that there
is a soul of pathos in true humour. In parts where this
was possible he reached his greatest triumphs. In the
purely comic he probably had many equals, but in this
higher Avalk I think his rivals, if he had any, were few.
Endowed by nature with a musical ear, yet not know¬
ing practically one note of music, he was the amazement
of the orchestra, never singing a false note, and going
through the difficult part - music of " Figaro," in the
opera so called, and also in the " Barber of Seville,"
only requiring his part to be played over to him a few
times by the leader of the band; while he sang Avith the
first singers of the day, to their wonder and delight.
His acting in melodrama was of the same character with
his singing. A false or ungraceful movement was as
impossible to him as a false note in music; he seemed to
move with it in perfect harmony, and how much pathetic
beauty is to be expressed by melodramatic action, was
shown in his rendering of the dumb slave Kasserack in
"Aladdin," and some may still remember his fine attitudes
in "Dominique the Deserter." Sir William Allan painted
him in the latter character; and the picture, both in like¬
ness and expression, is excellent.
Later in his career he attempted the part of Shylock
in " The Merchant of Venice," persuaded hj one to whom
indeed he greatly owed the standing he obtained in his
profession; for in consequence of his nervous temperament
he would adventure on no new piece alone, and wanted
support and encouragement at every step. His adviser
felt that as he got older it might be well that he should
exercise his more serious powers, but for this part there
was something wanted which he could not give. The
deep passionate nature, the strength of will, the con¬
centrated rage of the Jew, were absent. The reading was
faultless, as far as good sense and good taste could make
it so; but that which makes the fearful revenge of Shylock
appear possible—the burning sense of injury to race—was
not brought out, and he was too good an actor not to be
aware that in that part he fell short of himself; and
though the performance was received with favour, as all
he did was, he never repeated it. Indeed, when he was
called forward to receive the plaudits of his admirers, he
said that he had acted Shylock for the first and last time.
His adviser also felt that he was right in his decision.
In another of Shakespeare's characters he was for more
Recollections of the Past. 227
successful, that of FalstafFin "Henry IV;" andhis Cassio in
" Othello " was perfect. In the drinking scene, although it
was full of humour, he so represented it that your respect
for the man was not impaired. There was much pathos in
the stunned despondency of his return to the sense of
what he had brought upon himself. There was also great
beauty in the tender sorrow the faithful soldier felt for
his general in the last sad scene, and in the pained,
shocked expression with which he heard the words,
" Your power is taken off, and Cassio reigns in Cyprus."
These were fine touches, and showed a true and serious
study of the character.
Among the purely comic of his representations I
remember one of " The Burgomaster of Amsterdam," in
Avhose education the small item of reading and writing
had been omitted. The manner in which he obviated the
difficulties in his magisterial career which this rather
awkward want involved him in, was extremely ludicrous.
He escaped by wonderful ingenuity from committing him¬
self, but once when a paper was put into the hands of
one of the characters, and he saw a look of surprise and
confusion come over his face, he burst out triumphantly,
" He cant read ; I know what not being able to read is ! "
To the audience, Avho of course were in the secret, the
eff"ect of this, as it was rendered, was indescribably comic.
Another very amusing scene is that in which he receives
an imposing state document, which he insists on holding
upside down ; and when the high functionary who brings
it gently hints that it is so, he annihilates him with a
look of ineffable contempt. " Don't you know, sir, that
it is the privilege of a Burgomaster to read which way
he pleases ? " if I remember right, the worthy Burgo¬
master got through all his difficulties, and no one wished
for his discomfiture.
Among Mr. Murray's gifts was one of versifying in
a bright and pointed manner, as his many addresses
still extant show. He wrote also occasionally for his
own amusement, and that of his friends. I copy some
lines he sent in answer to a lady who had asked for a
copy of verses.
TO A FRIEND.
" Vainly you bid me etrilie the lyre !
My soul of song is fled ;
The little of poetic fire
I ever had is dead.
228 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
My days now pass in making one
And two amount to three ;
Arithmetic, fair friend, you'll own,
Destroys all poetry.
Both deal in numbers, wit can prove,
But different paths they go ;
One seeks its treasure from above.
The other digs below.
The merchant loves the crowded dock,
The bard the lonely rill
That prattles down the ag~d rock,
Or murmurs round the hill.
E'en place them by the self same sea.
They different pictures form ;
One views in thought his argosy.
And one the coming storm.
'Tis past— the toil of life is done.
The latest struggle o'er ;
The merchant sleeps in sculptured stone
Amidst the city's roar.
In distant plain the poet lies.
Beneath the willows' shade,
Where gentle zephyr softly sighs
Along the silent glade.
Thus 'tis in vain, dear Mistress B ,
To hope you e'er will find
Arithmetic and poetry
In one poor head combined.
So ask not for another line,
My versifying's done ;
A long farewell I bid the Nine,
And stick to number one."
In thinking over, with natural regret, the evanescent
character of acting, and acknowledging the great draw¬
back that character is to its holding the rank it would
otherwise deserve as an art, may one not draw some
consolation from remembering that its power is great in
impressing the minds of those who come under its influ¬
ence—not only the minds of the cultivated and refined,
but of those whose lives seem to shut them out from other
glimpses of a world of poetry and art. Indeed, it seems
so great an engine for the purpose, that one mourns over
the frequent neglect of its opportunities, and that repre¬
sentations, coarse, vulgar, and demoralising, should ever
Recollections of the Past. 229
take the place of the high, the heroic, and the morally
beautiful.   I remember when in Leeds going to the theatre
there.    Owing  to   circumstances—partly indeed  to the
spread of Methodism and other branches of Dissent—the
theatre was regarded with intense disapprobation.     My
mother  and I went into  a  shop to ask our way to this
much-detested place, and were repelled in a manner that
made me rapidly retreat, Avith no addition to our know¬
ledge of its whereabouts.    However, we made our way at
last and attended the performance.    The audience, with
few exceptions, were composed of hard-working, stern-
looking men, who seemed to have dropped in from the
neighbouring works for an hour or two of relaxation.    I
forget what the play was, but I remember that in the course
of it, when some noble sentiment clothed in poetic lan¬
guage was uttered, there came a response from the audi¬
ence as if a chord was touched, which one felt might lead
to the softening and elevating of character in persons
generally far removed from such influences.    Such should
be the uses of the art.    Why does it descend from its
high vocation to indulge bad taste, and lay itself open to
objections which are not inherent in itself, but are called
forth by the abuse of its better and nobler powers ?    An
old writer (I think Thomas a Kempis) speaks with re¬
spect of dramatic performances, which he admits to be
allowable and harmless.    He concludes, however, by re¬
marking " that the performance should not take place in
the church, and the clergyman should by no means play
Harlequin."    To these small restrictions the most liberal
of us, I should think, would submit; but we would Avish
that the stage might find encouragement and elevation
among the good, the right-minded, and the lovers of the
beautiful, that by their presence they might encourage
its efforts, and turn them in the direction   not only of
amusing but of improving their fellow-creatures.    Do not
our people Avant amusement ?    Why are they driven to
seek it in scenes depraA'ing instead of elevating?    Why
may they not feel that they have qualities that can bo
exercised in the  company of the educated  and refined ?
Why, in short, is not the stage aided, nay compelled, to
march Avith the times, and bring its powers, which are
great, for the good of humanity"?    I'he love of the drama
"springs eternal in the human breast;" why not "turn that
necessity to glorious gain ? "
Always yours very sincerely, E. H. M.
230 The Ladies' Edinbwgh Magazine.
Jnjuiiious to |lcli_9ious J^ti^?
By Religious Belief, as the term is used in the question,
I understand the acceptance of certain facts as assuredly-
true  which   concern  the   spiritual needs of our nature.
By Physical Science, here  and elsewhere, is of course
understood the  knowledge  and  comprehension   of  the
facts   relating  to  the  material  universe,   its   elements,
and the laws which govern it.     The last named can be
and  are  gradually unfolded  to   our  minds   by the re¬
searches   of our  intellectual  powers;   the  former  class
belong to an exalted region,   whence the most soaring
intellect,   unaided,   falls   back  with   baffled  wing.    God
hath revealed them unto us by His Spirit.    \ij searching,
a man can not find out God.    Yet though the provinces
of Revelation and Science be thus distinct, let me not
for a moment be thought to sever them to all eternity
one from the other.    1 believe that reason and intellect
emanate from the same source as faith, and must even¬
tually return there; and I cannot therefore suppose that
the tendency of their proper  exercise is  to  injure  the
spiritual faculty  whereby  man  lays   hold   of   spiritual
truth.    I    do   not   see   how   a   thoroughly   instructed
believer   can  possibly grant, as  the  inevitable  and  in¬
herently necessary  result of scientific  study,   what  to
him must be such a deplorable and terrible conclusion,
and  for  this  reason;   that   whatever   the  perplexities,
the difficulties, the shock to preconceived and ill-founded
opinions (resting on no genuine testimony), which beset
our darkling groping after scientific truths, the believer
knows and is  persuaded  that  behind  every  such fact
which man can discover,  conceiving of every plan which
unfolds itself to   our  eager  and  searching  gaze,   there
is a mind which purposed it,   a poAver which brought
it about, and he is unable to fear that any real   dis¬
covery can eventually lead away from and not up to Him
who made the eye, and planted the ear,  and inspired
the faculties which apprehend these truths.    Yet there
is a  very prevalent  idea that  the necessary tendency
of scientific study is to undermine faith; and it is true
enough that much is forced upon our notice which looks
sadly like  a  confirmation  of it.    Whence   comes   this
/•.' the Study of Science Injurious to Religious Belief? 231
error, as 1 certainly hold it to be ? Abler pens than mine
have pointed it out, and I shall simply direct your
attention to what they have said upon the subject.
Professor Pritchard, in a very interesting paper read
before the Brighton Church Congress in the autumn
of 1874, thus sums up the very painful conclusions
to "which, in some persons' opinion, the most recent
science seems to be tending:—
"1. That the potential of all things terrestrial, in¬
cluding man, with all his povi^ers, intellectual and moral,
was originally contained in the atoms of one of those
nebiilous patches of light, thousands of which are brought
within the ken of the modern telescope. How this
potential got there is not stated.
" 2. That the present state of things has been brought
about, not by the subsequent intervention of any Supreme
Cause or Governor of all things, but through the natural
interaction of these atoms or atomic forces. Combin¬
ations and recombinations throughout unnumbered ages
have ensued, and the fittest have survived. Of living
organisms the powers have descended by inheritance,
have then been modified by their environments, and
again the fittest have survived. This succinctly is said
to be the origin of man by evolution.
" 3. It is asserted that throughout nature there are no
certain tokens of design; wonderful adaptations are by no
means denied, but they are referred to the influence
of successive environments and natural selection.
" 4. This philosophy asserts that if there be an
intelligent Author of JSIature, an absolute Supreme, He
is to us unknowable. Such, so far as I understand it,
are said to be the legitimate philosophical conclusions
of the most complete and refined science of the day."
After pointing out that the ultimate results of these
conclusions must be "human life without an adequate
motive, affections with no object sufficient to fill them,
hopes of immortality never to be realised, aspirations
after God and godliness never to be attained," Professor
Pritchard goes on to say : " Now I am old-fashioned
enough not to accept any of these postulates of the new
philosophy in their entirety: there seems to be just
a sufficient substratum of truth in each of them to render
them specious, and to some minds attractive; but in
their entirety I am unable to accept them, not because
I am a Christian, but because I am a student of nature."
232 The Ladies Kdinhunjli Magazine.
He proceeds to declare not as an uninstructed believer
might do,  but as one able to judge both as a man of
faith and a man  of science, that all the difficulty and
uneasiness which besets the subject, arises from a needless
confusion between Avhat science can do and what may
be expected of it, and that which lies wholly out of its
province.    This   confusion  is  most   common,   as  might
of   course   be   expected,   in  the  minde   of   unscientific
believers; but there are many also, more or less famihar
with scientific subjects, who, in the words of   one well
qualified to judge (Very Rev. the Dean of Manchester),
" assume  too rapidly  that  their  interpretation   of the
book  of nature is   correct,   and, still more erroneously,
that the theory built upon the interpretation must be
true."—(Sermon before the   Church   Congress   at  Edin¬
burgh,  1874.)    Another very common error, not wholly
confined   to  unscientific  minds   either,   is  forgetfulness
of what a theory really is.    Those who give themselves
the  trouble to  use  language  accurately,   know that a
theory   "is  not  a settled law,   but  a  convenient way
of correlating facts;" and Mr. Justice Grove, who holds a
distinguishecl place among living scientific writers, says,
" Were a theory open to no objection, it  would  cease
to  be   a  theory, and  would become  a law;  and were
we   not  to  theorise  or  to  take   generalised   views   of
natural   phenomena    until   these   generalisations   were
sure and unobjectionable—in other words, were laws—
science would be lost in a complex mass of unconnected
observations, which  would probably   never   disentangle
themselves."    lie  says  again,   " To think on nature is
to theorise," and warningly adds, that "if theories are
allowed to gain an undue influence, they seduce us from
that truth which is the sole object of our pursuit."    Yet
how often are theories thought of and dealt with  as
if they were immutable laws, with the result of much
that is painful, much that is harmful ?
However great the apparent want of harmony may be
between a scientific theory and a revealed fact, we need
not distress oiu-selves (as ill-instructed believers often do),
nor have scientific men any right to demand the relin-
quishment of our faith because we do not see how to fit it
to the theory. In these days of active research and
wonderful imfolding of so many of nature's secrets, it
would perhaps be well for the re-assurance of some dis¬
quieted hearts to bear this in mind, that great as are the
Is the Stiuly of Science Injurious to Religious Belief^ 233
strides which modern science has made, and much as
knowledge has advanced within the last hundred years,
yet there are still more theories known to us than ascer¬
tained laws. Professor Birks has declared, in a paper
read before the Brighton Church Congress in 1874, that
" no later step in the advance of science can rank, in
simplicity, grandeur, and fertility, with Newton's great
discovery; that for forty years no primary law has come
to light; that while the materials of science have vastly
increased, and secondary laws are traced and compre¬
hended, immense fields of knowledge are still untravelled,
and more than one of the mighty problems with which
science is concerned rests on a basis of laws which are
still wrapped in mystery, and of which we know as little
now as we did in the days of Newton."
I believe another reason why scientific study is looked
on by some as perilous, by others as altogether evil and to
be shunned, is this: that at this particular time there is a
wave of unbelief passing over the minds of men, as it has
done more than once before in the world's history, seeking
always to draw within its sweep the most prevalent
tendencies of the day. The sceptical spirit, finding scien¬
tific inquiry to be rife just now, is only too glad to ally
itself therewith, and by Avearing its garb and making
science its mouth-piece, scepticism does undoubtedly
obtain a temporary advantage. But if we believe the
true aim of science to be, in the noble words of the
founders of the British Association, " To glean fresh
harvests from the fields of nature, to promote the com¬
forts and augment the resources of civilised man, to
conduce to peace and minister to piety, and to exalt
above all and over all the wonder-working hand of
Heaven;" and if we agree with Sir Isaac Newton, " that
to discourse of God from the appearances of things,
certainly belongs to natural philosophy,"—we must give
no weak, bewildered, terrified consent to the unholy
alliance claimed by scepticism. The scientific mind has
not always displayed antagonism to religion, but has been
united in many eminent instances to a truly Christian
spirit. Among the mighty dead we may add to Sir Isaac
Newton's name those of Kepler, Volta, Halley, Sir David
Brewster, as bright examples of such a union; and we
may be sure that there is no reason why antagonism
should exist, if it be duly remembered that genuine dis¬
covery of the laws of nature means the unveiling of actual
No. 20.—August 1876. 2 Q
234 The Ladies Eclinhurgh Magazine.
facts. The more we know of these laws, the more we are
learning about Him who gave them, and we need not fear
that any true interpretation can contradict the revelation
He has made to His children. Perhaps I cannot do better
than close these brief and inadequate remarks by showing
you, in a few quotations, how the scientific pursuits of
many, some of them ranking very high in the various
walks of philosophical investigation, have been conducted
with that remembrance ever before them.
"At last, 0 dear and great God," a great astronomer
once exclaimed as a discoveiy dawned on him, " I think
one thought of Thine!" Lord Bacon prayed "that
human things may not injure the divine, nor from in¬
creased kindling of natural light any unbelief or midnight
darkness arise towards divine mysteries."
One of the last acts of Sir John Herschel was to form
a MS. collection of all the passages in his own writings
where he had referred to the tokens his discoveries had
aflx)rded him of an inteUigent Will in nature. Hugh
Miller and Faraday would have indignantly denied that
their faith was imperilled by their glorious discoveries;
and in the tripartite work of Principal Shairp of St.
Andrews, Professor Tait of Edinburgh, and Mr. Adams-
Eeilly, the Life of James David Forbes, we have the
portrait of one equally admirable as the devout Christian
or the man of science. In a letter of his, in 1864, he writes
as follows of his pleasure in the perusal of a beautiful
book, Dr. Norman Macleod's Earnest Student: " His"
(J. Mackintosh's) " buoyancy in his first tours awakens
my own earliest recollections when I felt the charms of
nature and solitude with a rapture not a whit inferior to
his They were perhaps the most thrilling hours
and days of my life 1 can indeed thank God for
having disclosed to me the hidden charms of His beautiful
world, and I could live content to any age in the joyful
recollection of them."
Among living students of natural science I would refer
to Professor Clark Maxwell, who, writing on evolution
theories and molecules " which continue this day as they
were created," points out that from the ineffaceable
characters impressed on them we may learn that those
aspirations after truth in statement, and justice in action,
which we reckon among our noblest attributes as men,
are ours because they are the essential constituents of
Him who in the beginning created not only the heaven
Is the Study of Science Injurious to Religious Belief f 235
and the earth, but the materials of which heaven and
earth consist. And Professor Pritchard concludes the
paper already referred to, which drew much attention at
the time as a strong utterance on the Christian side, Avith
the following words :—" For my own part, a lifetime spent
in the pursuit and communication of natural knowledge,
so far from effacing or obscuring the faith in which I was
brought up, has served to deepen and to render more
intelligent the conviction that the sacred Scriptures,
properly interpreted, are to us the Word of God; that
the great Father of all has rendered Himself knowable to
mankind by the manifestation of Christ, and that in this
knowledge consists their higher life; that He has re¬
deemed them by the atonement of His Son, and illumi¬
nates and strengthens all who come to Him by His
Spirit." Ir^NE.
Jingling  Journal
In the Rhythm of " Kalevala"    In Two Parts.
" Si tu veux faisons un rSve,
Montons sur deux palefrois,
Je t'emmdne, tu m'enleves,
L'oiseau chaute dans les bois.
Allons-nous en dans I'Autriche,
Nous aurons I'aube sur nos fronts,
Tu seras grand et moi riche,
Puisque nous nous aimerons.
Nous entrerons dans I'auberge,
Et nous paierons I'hStelier
De ton sourire de vierge,
De mon bonjour dMcolier.
Tu seras dame et moi comte,
Viens, mon coeur s'^panouit,
Viens, nous conterons ce conte
Aux ^toiles de la nuit."
V. Hugo.
Prologue.
J. M. Last year, when the leaves were falling.
Did I read in some sweet ballad
Words that seemed to come from dreamland,—
" Si tu veux, faisons uu reee?"
Did it tell me of a country
Wild and rugged, free and fearless.
Where friends say, when they will wander.
236 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
"Montons sur deux palefrois?"
Did it speak of some brave Viking.
Who woiild travel with his comrade,
Saying thus, to give him courage,
•' Je t'emmene, tu m'enleves,
L'oiseau chante dans les bois?"
Then the pretty tale spoke further
Of two travellers in a country
AVith no inns, where all the coinage
Was of smiles and salutations.
But it finished by returning
To the stars whence it had wandered.
For awhile I pondered o'er it
Like a dream when one is waking;
Then it went its way to dreamland.
This year, when the leaves are falling.
Comes again that dream, and bids me
Write the tale of its fulfilmeut;
And I write in tranquil evening
Till I am again in dreamland.
Riding with my friend the Viking
O'er the glorious hills of Iceland.
Go, then, tale of summer gladness,
Say to those whom iron duty,
.   Chains of custom artificial.
Care or grief, are reigning over,
That this earth has many places
Where men may be free and joyous,—
True to nature, simple-hearted.
Do they doxibt it ?    Bid them wander
O'er the glorious hills of Iceland.
Part I.
Scene—The Geyser, where we have just pitched our tent.
(ASTRIDA—GUDRUN.)
G. Merrily then spake Astrida:
" This is now the place of wonders,
Full of steam from mighty kettles
Boiling up from depths sulphureous."
Viewed she then the many kitchens,—
Silent some, and others noisy,—
Jingling Journal. 237
Clapped her hands, and said " In Blesi *
We will cook our fowl for dinner."
Then she stood, the valiant maiden,
Half an hour in rain unceasing,
Just to see that greedy Blesi
Might not swallow down our dinner—
As he swallowed once a pony
Who unwitting fell into him,
Foolish prey for greedy Blesi;
For the pool with no less relish
Took him than did we the curry
Cooked by him for us so kindly.
Oh ye cliffs and rocks sulphureous 1
Is it brimstone this or sulphur ?
Is it blood of murdered Titans
Which thus mocks the light of heaven 1
Blood-red banks instead of verdure ;
At your feet the streamlet winds o'er
Yellow bed its tepid water,
Soon to cool it in the trout-stream,
Which so near these steaming caldrons
Laves their walls in vain with coolness.
Strange that underground some fathoms
Lies a mighty pent-up caldron.
Covered, hedge-hog like, with chimneys,
Each one different from the others;
And we wander o'er the surface.
Peering into all these chimneys,
Marking one out from the other,
As his sheep the shepherd telleth.
Nearly all in spiteful humour
Are these chimneys, but one only
Can weak mortals make more angry,
And they do provoke poor Strokkur.
As a mighty man whose throat is
Far too narrow for his body.
So that tiny morsels choke him.
So is made the luckless Strokkur.
Thus the joy of all who go there
Is to cut of turf large pieces,
And with these to choke poor Strokkur;
Down into his throat to throw them,
* Blesi is a boiling pool, so called from its resemblance to a pony called
Blezi or Blaze, owing to the mark on its face.
238 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
Till he, in a fit of choking,
Foam about the mouth, and boiling
Up into his well or chimney,
Toss up with a violent spouting
Bits of turf and streams of water.
But the great and wondrous Geyser,
Goal of all our aspirations,
Will not thus be made a plaything.
Silent he, and self-containing,
Seems to slumber in the basin
Of silicious rocks volcanic.
Standing white around his margin.
Till beneath the ground a booming,
Loud as roar of mighty cannon.
Heralds that his day is coming.
Here then now poetic Gudrun
Sang the praises of the Geyser.
"Where the caldron of the north
Spouts its boiling waters forth,
From the caverns far beneath,
Where they ever lie and seethe.
And with steam and hiss and boom
Send a tremor through the gloom,
Till, above, the solid ground
Vibrates with a dull rebound.—
In that place I stood, and saw
Things that filled my soul with awe.
Where the sunset of the north
Sends its radiant colours forth,
Turns the sulphur rocks to blood,
Glows upon the steaming flood,
Paints the pools with ruddy light,
Turns to brighter day the night,
Till, in darkest place, the sky
Wears a glow of sympathy—
In that place I stood and gazed
Till my spirit was amazed.
Where the boiling torrent flies
Upward to the morning skies,
Shakes itself through air around
With a wild and hissing sound,
Wears a robe of mist to hide
All the angry rising tide,
Jingling Journal. 239
Till above the mist it parts,
And to earth repentant darts,
In her bosom to assuage
All the madness of its rage—
In that place I stood, and found
That it was enchanted ground.
Where the vessel it has left
Of its presence all bereft,
Feels itself exposed and bare
To the unwonted summer air,
Deems it yet akin to death
To be cooled by such a breath,
And with fierce and fervent heat
Scorches men's invading feet—
In that place I witnessed how
Still the caldron seethed beloAv.
Quivering with thwarted pride,
Sore to spend its seething tide.
Still for ever bubbling up
Towards the margin of its cup,
And with utmost speed and strain
Longs to lave its brim again.
Quiet then awhile to lie
Till the secret sorcery
All its former rage restore,
Bid it rise with hiss and roar,—
This I saw when to the north
VaUiantly I sallied forth.
Oh ye powers of rain and tempest,
Ever ready on the outlook
To annoy the luckless traveller!
Two nights and a day untiring
On our tent the rain descended.
Wetting all both outand in side.
Gratefully the thirsty Geyser
Swallowed down the heaven-sent moisture,
Boomed again to say, I'm coming,
Ere he rose in flight majestic.
But the second morning, Ivar
Said, " I think that we must go now.
Else the tent will be too heavy."
Strove we then to coax poor Strokkur
Once more to display his anger,
240 The Ladies EJinhwgh Magazine.
' But, o'erpowered by mighty Geyser,
Simmering low he answered nothing.
A. As we packed our pots and kettles,
Raised her voice the brave Astrida,
Of our wandering life thus speaking:
" Ah ! when I was not in Iceland,
Land of all my aspirations,
Bourne of all my greatest efforts.
Had I not a private chamber,
Bath and tables, chairs and towels,
Clothes all dry, officious maiden,
Ready to comb out my tresses f
Here a vagrant life we folloAV.
Would you dress? like nuns in cloister.
Always 'tis the same old habit.
Would you wash ? behold the river—
Far it lies o'er dewy hillocks,
Overlooked by miles of moorland,
Miles and miles of waste and moorland,
Shelter is there none; but courage !
Zero marks the population.
Had I not in far-off Scotland
Feather-bed and finest sheeting,
Quiet room and midnight stillness I
Here upon my lowly cork-bed.
Lying straight for fear of rolling.
On the grass all beads of moistiire.
Wrapt in plaid of roughest home-spun.
Moonbeams glimmering thro' the canvas-
Dream of my bed in Scotland.
Dream ! to speak so is to slander;
Iceland air makes Iceland slumbers
Far too sound for dreams and visions.
Free and fresh the roving camp-life ;
Home is everywhere and nowhere.
G. Thus we left the famous Geyser,
Cantered off across the bogland,
Over mire and stony pathway.
Till we heard a roar like thunder.
'Tis the Bruara, which, foaming
O'er the gulley in its centre.
Offers but a plank unsteady
For the feet of daring travellers.
Jingling Journal. 241
Nothing daunts the wiUing ponies,—
Trembling plank or rushing rapid ;
Oh ye blessed steeds of Iceland,
Bed of stream or side of mountain,
Stones or mud, or road uneven,
Over all ye pass securely.
A. Down the next hill as we trotted.
Out then spake the brave Astrida,—
Does he think, this son of outlaw,
Son of outlawed hardy Norseman,
That we shall trot down this mountain ?
Never will I press my steed here.
Roads I've seen of many nations.
Good and bad, and worse than no roads,
Hill roads, peat-moss tracks in Scotland,
Alpine passes and Italian,
Wildest Pyrenean goat-tracks;
But such roads as those in Iceland,
Never, never crossed my fancy.
Take great boulders round and slippery,
Twice the size of average bolster,
Pile them up like steepest staircase,
Flood the Avhole with mud quite yellow.
Reaching often to the stirrup,—-
There's an average road in Iceland.
There are worse as well as better,—
Better when the lively ponies
Scamper on o'er softest greensward.
Flashing through the fjords of silver.
Were I Scald of inspiration.
Thee I'd praise, my brave Cream-colour.
Forty miles of dashing on, where
English horses would have fallen,
Only served to prove thy mettle.
Never didst thou stay nor stumble.
Oh! the rushing and the riding,
Oh ! the hurling here and thither
After erring baggage ponies !
Oh ! the blind paths leading nowhere,
Tangled heath and sheets of lava.
Never didst thou make a blunder,
High-maned, quaint-eyed, cream-white pony.
G. Now again avc reach Thingvocllr,
Hallowed haunt of ancient Norsemen,
No 20.—August 1876. 2 G
242 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
With its hill of laws, the Loegberg,
And its Gja, the great Almanna,
Gaping with its gulf of blackness.
With its tales of bygone ruin.
Radiantly now shone the sunshine
O'er the haunts of ancient heroes,
O'er the chasm of the Almanna,
And the torrent roaring near it.
Hobbled are the weary ponies
As they pasture on the greensward ;
And while Ivar, with the priest, is
Chatting o'er the cordial wine-cup,
We upon the turf are basking
In the scorching sun of Iceland.
Here no sheltering trees are growing,
Only heavy shadows, lying
At the feet of rocks fantastic.
Give the shade we crave and long for.
But 'tis good that shadeless Iceland
Is not altogether sunless.
" Now a truce to lazy resting,"
Said the ever-ready Ivar :
So the morning of the third day.
All the cavalcade in order.
Ponies, burdened, loose, and mounted.
Forward up the steep Almanna
Went to seek for new adventures.
And that day, with much rough riding
Over cliffs and stones and bogland.
Fording rivers wide and rapid.
Came we in the cool of evening
To the beer of Fagravedur,
Hoping to receive a welcome.
But with arm upheld in anger.
Gleaming eye, and voice upbraiding.
Spoke the priest, " For you no welcome ;
You have ridden o'er my tuui." '
Quietly then pleaded Ivar
For a welcome to the travellers.
Till at last the priest relented;
Ushered them into a chamber
Full of books, and very dusty.
And the floor! ye streams of Iceland,
' Tuni—infield of hay.
Jingling Journal. 243
Can ye not invade this dwelling ?
Human hand can never wash it.
A. One bright gleam illumes the squalor.
One grand book in Norse and Latin,
Tale of Gudrun and her lovers,
Tale of woe and joy and passion
Past so long, yet true for all time ;
Friends, whose love for one fair womon
Made them meet in mortal combat.
" Strike," said one, " I will not strike thee,
Give me Death, for thou hast Gudrun."
And the other struck and killed him,
But the dead was loved of Gudrun.
Once they roamed among those valleys
Young and gay, nor thought of sorrow.
Hardly would the land seem altered
Could they come again to-morrow.
All the morning Astrid panted
Only to be on her pony.
Flying far from Fagravedur,
Cantering o'er the flowery grasses;
But, alas ! in sad procession
Came a mounted funeral-party—
Two drowned sailors in their coffins,
Carried on the backs of ponies.
Then ecclesiastic Ivar
Said, " I fear we should not hurry ;
Funeral-rites are so respected,
We must join awhile the mourners."
Long they sang within the chapel,
Deep they dug the narrow dwellings,
Long they prayed and sang and chanted,
Compassed by the solemn mountains,
In the vast and lonely valley,
All that lived—yet death among them.
Twelve o'clock began the funeral,
And at four was not yet ended.
G. Mounted then Astrid and Gudrun,
Tired of the delay, their ponies.
For at Reyjkjavifc that evening
They must be, whate'er the weather.
O'er the mountain steep and rocky,
Down by Mosfell in the valley,
244 TJie Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
Round the headland, by the sea-beach,
Came they on in merry canter
To the capital of Iceland,
There to rest them from their journeys,
There amid their friends to tarry.
Till fresh vigour they have mustered
To depart on new adventures.
E, T. Oswald and J. Menzies.
—o-
The prevailing impression after a visit to the Royal
Academy this year is, I think, one of disappointment.
True, there are many "vvell-known names in the catalogue,
many familiar styles on the walls, and there are single
pictures of rare beauty which leave their mark on the
memory ; but setting these aside, we seem to full at once to
a dreary level of mediocrity, poverty of conception, prosaic
choice of subjects, with here and there a descent to still
lower depths of crude colouring and awkward composi¬
tion. There is doubtless much cleverness, much technical
skill; and many of the painters whose names have been
familiar guides for years, are there to charm us still. And
yet I found myself wondering whether the artists of the
present day at all realise their high vocation, to raise and
ennoble their age; or whether they are not content to
float along the stream with their fellows, and simply hold
up a mirror to what is passing around them. Painting,
above all arts, needs the " consecration and the poet's
dream," for while in music or poetry we must first have
the hidden fire before expression can be given to it,
painting begins with outward forms, and through the veil
of material things she seeks to seize the spirit of greatness,
or beauty, or pathos, which is contained in them. Thus,
historical scenes, instead of reminding us of a scene in a
play, should show us the strong human passions that
surged under armour or coif; homely subjects should
raise us above the level of every-day, not with a false
pathos, but by making us feel how true and genuine
feeling can raise and refine. All this might seem too
obvious for Avords, but when we see such pictures as 101,
a very conventional curate, seated at tea with mother and
daughter, fashionably attired, all the details given with
In the Royal Academy, 1876. 245
Chinese accuracy, we cannot but feel that here no en¬
nobling influences have been at work ; subject and treat¬
ment are alike frivolous.
But it is ungracious to begin by finding fault; and
indeed we need not look far to find a picture which alone
Avould make this year memorable. In " Over the Hills
and Far Away," 106, Mr. Millais has surpassed himself.
No work of his that I have ever seen approaches this for
beauty of conception and feeling, while the execution
seems simply perfect. The view may have been taken
from the top of Craig of Barns, looking northwards up
Strath Tummel, towards the mountains of Blair Athole.
It is difficult to know which to admire most, the exquisite
finish of the foreground, the reddening heather, the reeds
and mosses which grow in marshy places, or the lovely
vale with its woods and winding river, and the distant
Ben y Vrachie closing in the view. Note the freedom
and breadth of the atmospheric effects; the foreground
lies in shadow, but the distance is all bright with sun¬
shine, which pours down from a-rift in the clouds, while
on their edge gleams a broken rainbow.
Another remarkable picture is 156, H. S. Marks, best
described by its motto, from Romeo and Juliet—
" I do remember an apothecary,
And in his needy shop a tortoise hung,
An alhgator stuffed, and other skins
Of ill-shaped fishes ; and about his shelves
A beggarly account of empty boxes,
Green earthen pots, bladders, and musty seeds."
This subject is after Mr. Marks' own heart, and most
faithfully worked out. There stands the old man, keen,
eager-eyed; almost he seems to hold his breath as he
drops the poison into a little phial. Round him are the
lizards suspended from the roof—a skull—green glazed
pottery charmingly painted—and among the queer old
dusty things beams out a delicate pink flower in a glass.
Another picture that bears the unmistakable mark of
genius is 249, "An Audience at Agrippa's," by Alma-
Tadema. Mr. Blackburn, in his Academy Notes, justly
remarks how this picture tells, notwithstanding its email
scale, and the highly-coloured pictures on each side of it.
One of these, let me say in passing, is a portrait of a
lady   in   blue   velvet,   looking    full   at   the   spectator,
246 Tlte Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
with two straight arms descending from two square
shoulders, and hands hidden in a muff. It seems
wonderful to find the name of Millais appended to this
portrait, though of course the velvet and fur are to the
life. " An Audience of Agrippa" makes you feel as if you
had been admitted to see a little bit of ancient hfe.
These people are not dressed up to look like Romans—
they are the very men themselves. Agrippa, attired in
scarlet, comes forward down the marble staircase, at the
foot of which lies a tiger skin, marvellously foreshortened.
Crowds are behind him—in front waits a deeply-interest¬
ing group. They have a boon to crave; old man, and
young man, and maiden, with an offering of cups and
vases. One longs to know their history, and one hopes
that they will depart after their audience with faces
brightened and at peace.
Some of the most attractive pictures in the Exhibition
have been inspired by Eastern subjects. Very charming
is No. 14, "An Intruder on the Bedouins' Pasture," by
F. Goodall. A negro mounted on a camel has arrived in
the midst of an encampment of Arabs resting in the hot
noontide. There is the glow and haze of intense heat; it
is easy to imagine how a mirage might arise over those
dazzling sands ; while in front, a little pool sleeps among
the reeds, and two bright blue birds skim along the
margin. No. 300 is another attractive picture—-full of
sunshine and of grace, of subject and treatment. It
represents the coixrtyard of a house in Cairo, by F. Dillon.
Quaint Moorish architecture, an old tree with twisted
stem, and a lovely effect of light and shade from the
play of the foliage, make a most agreeable combination.
No. 580 is a striking representation of " Sinai, the
Mount of God," by H. A. Harper. Those wonderful
cliffs of pale, pink granite, that rise so precipitously from
the plain beneath, seem destined by nature to be the
scene of events uneqiialled in the history of the world.
241—" The Daphuephoria," F. Leighton ; 943—" Ata-
lanta's Race," E. T. Paynter. These two pictures may
perhaps be classed together, both being large, long
canvasses, the subjects in both being classical, and
both seem somewhat out of the pale of ordinary
criticism. " The Daphnephoria," especially, a triumphal
procession in honour of Apollo, strikes one from the
peculiarity of the flesh colour and the hard tints of the
background,  and makes  one feel that  the  artist must
In the Royal Academy, 1876. 247
have laid down for himself other conditions than those of
ordinary art. " Atalanta's Race " is treated in a more usual
manner. It is said the stooping figure of Atalanta, if she
raised herself, would be much too tall; but it is impossible
not to be struck with the sicing of the figure aud flow of
her drapery as she stops suddenly in mid career. One
seems almost to feel the wind of her going.
Our Scottish scenery comes in for its full share of
attention. A very pleasing picture, full of truth to nature,
is G. E. Bering's " Pladda, Firth of Clyde " (7). " Har¬
vest Time by Loch Vennachar" (517, D. Cameron), is
also most faithful in its suggestion of " the summer of the
North." Mr. C. E. Johnson gives a well-painted picture
of the entrance to Fiugal's Cave (495), but it rather
makes us feel that the charm and wonder of Staffa are too
subtle to be conveyed on canvas. " A Highland Funeral
on Loch Shiel" (C. Goldie, 901) is full of poetry and
pathos.
A  very  charming  little  picture  is   330 —" Maternal
Affection," by T. S. Cooper—a donkey and foal sheltering
under a hedge in a snow-storm.    The drift sweeps wildly
past them ; the snowy landscape, the sticks and branches
in the foreground, are admirably indicated.    373, " Miss
Charlotte Richmond," by W. B. Richmond, is a quaint
and pleasing portrait of a little girl in an old-fashioned
brown dress reaching to her feet, her hair cut straight
over   her   brow,  a  broad   round   hat  at  the   back   of
the   head.     In   the   same   gallery  are   Millais'   pretty
" Getting Better" (387), a daintily dressed little girl and
her brother visiting a poor sickly child; and 412, by H.
Herkomer,  " Peasants of the Bavarian Alps in  Prayer,
awaiting the Arrival of the Priest who is to administer
the Last Rites to a Member of the Family."   This has much
beauty;   the  picturesque  timber  dwelling  and  distant
view of the mountains, the rapt and earnest expression
on the faces of the peasants, form a most impressive whole.
" Lowering Marble from the Quarry, Carrara," 460, 0.
H. Poingdestre.    This is seen best from a little distance.
Very wonderful is the white marble valley, and it gives
one a curious feeling of truthfulness, though certainly it
is like nothing one ever  saw.    The white  cliffs blend
most   delicately  with the turf that   grows   along  their
ridges ;    in   the   foreground  a   gaily-dressed  gi-oup   of
workmen who are raising a block of the marble, gives
the life and colour that is wanted.
2-48 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
No. 487. " Nearing Home." E.R.Taylor. This is truly
a fine picture, full of power and feeling; painted on a
scale which gives scope for expression in the faces, and
yet does not weaken the subject by too many details.
Three weather-beaten sailors look from the port-hole on
the line of shore which they are rapidly nearing. There
is an undefinable air about them of eager expectation,
yet blended with a certain habit of quiet waiting, which
is most characteristic. And the faces are so full of mean¬
ing, one feels as if one knew what each man must be
saying.
There is somethitig very touching in 507, " Children of
the Great City," F. W. Lawson. By the light of a caudle
standing in a bottle, we see two little barefooted children,
Avho would fain share in the rejoicings of Christmas. So
they have written " A IVIerry Christmas " on the wall, and
have ornamented their candlestick with holly; while the
boy is making a shadow rabbit on the wall, and his little
sister looks gravely on. We smile, but it is with a wist¬
ful longing to help these poor children, who may doubtless
be found by any who will take the trouble to seek them.
I particularly liked 537, '• Fording the Stream," by H.
Cameron. A girl bearing her little brother on her shoulder.
It is painted in rich, warm browns ; and there is some¬
thing in the whole picture that makes one think of
Gainsborough.
What shall I say of No. 411, " The Linen Gatherers,"
Val. C. Prinsepa ; a green hill which might be spread with
green baize ; zig-zag path; six or eight women descend¬
ing, carrying washing-baskets full of linen ? Or of " The
Sailor's Wedduig?" (280, P. R. Morris.) Are sailors
married after this fashion *? Why should this group of
people with lurid faces wander wildly along the shore, by
a sea which might be made of chalk ? And what is the
object of 899 (unless to be the delight of Sunday schools),
in which " the animals come by two, by two " I Elephants
lift their trunks, hippopotami open enormous mouths,
and roar to be taken into the Ark, while Noah's foot,
appears on the ledge of the windoAv in the corner.
Mr. L. J. Pott has a clever historical picture, " His
Highness in Disgrace" (936). It maybe the boy Louis
XIV., who has curled himself up so sulkily in the fauteuil,
flinging away his torn book. The queen-mother sits by
the table in dignified displeasure; opposite to her is the
cardinal preceptor, Mazarin,   I suppose;   and grim and
In the Royal Academy, 187G. 249
stern stands the figure of the cowled monk behind him :
an effective group, with carefully studied accessories.
Many interesting pictures have foreign names attached
to them. One that especially attracted me was " The
Village Lawyer," by C. Schloesser (1305). It is a hot
day, the sun is shut out by A^enetians, and the light is sub¬
dued, the colouring dark and cool. An old matron with
a sweet face, and shrewd lawyer, pen in hand, consult
together; on the table and floor lie a collection of old
books and parchments, scattered in confusion
And now after this very rambling and imperfect glance,
I feel that I have left many important pictures unnoticed.
But I do not want to degenerate into a mere catalogue ;
and if these Notes have any interest at all, it must be
that they are faithful reflections of what might strike
any ordinary observer. I wished, too, to bring a few
pictures vividly before the minds of those who may not
have visited the Exhibition.
There is one more picture, which, though not to be
found on the walls of the Academy, occupies so high a
place, that no account of the paintings of the year would
be complete without some mention of it. I mean Miss
Thompson's picture of "Balaclava after the Charge of
the Light Brigade." I think all women may feel en¬
nobled, that at last there has risen from amongst them
a female painter of the foremost rank. Come in what
mood you may to Miss Thompson's pictures, in one
moment you are silenced—subdued—awed by the power
of genius. I do not intend to describe a picture which
pages of description leave uudescribed; it will no doubt
be exhibited everywhere, and seen by all, The central
figure is very wonderful; he is on foot and unwounded,
but still mad with excitement: " dazed and drunk with
the strong wine of battle," he walks on—hearing, seeing
nothing, his hand still clenched on his sword. ^Ve feel
that we are indeed brought face to face with war in its
saddest, sternest aspect; and our whole hearts are filled
with yearning sympathy and sorrow for these shattered
remnants of a gallant force, and through them for all the
brave blood that has been spilt down the far vista of
the past.
Enna.
No. 20.—ACGCRT 1876
2 H
250 Tlie Ladles EcUnhurgh Magazine.
louj \u jjaKScd the ^omt Or\-aminatiott.
" I have examined
All that are candidates among the ladies,
And find "
It is well known that while in England the candidates
who come up for the Local Examination are numbered
by thousands, they have in Scotland only just begun to
be countable by hundreds.
The reason is partly this :—The English universities
stand in a miich more commanding attitude towards the
English people, than the Scottish universities do towards
the Scotch people. The former give an education of a
broader and more popular kind than that given by the
same institutions in Scotland; hence the Local Examina¬
tions are in Scotland less important for boys than they
are for girls, to whom any course of study laid down
by a university is infinitely superior to all other means
of education within their reach.
This is part of the reason, but not the whole; it is only
that part for which the imiversity is made answerable.
The other part lies at the door both of the Government
and of the candidates themselves. The small number of
candidates is partly owing to the state of secondary
education in Scotland. Going, as it did before the
introduction of the school-rates, hand in hand with
primary education, it left no parochial school in Scotland
imblessed with at least a smattering of Greek, Latin, and
mathematics, besides other branches. But since the
appearance of a vast compulsory surface, over which the
three R's. must be spread by the luckless schoolmasters in
exactly equal proportions, secondary education has either
been flattened down altogether to a level with this
elementary surface, or has been rudely torn from its place,
and cast out into the desert, to live or die as it shall
decide for itself Only twelve public schools in Scotland
have escaped this doom, and been relieved from the ne¬
cessity of giving elementary education. But twelve schools
are utterly incompetent to the task, which is at present left
chiefly to individual effort, and will be so until Government
shall have adopted some other course with regard to it.
Enterprising teachers are found here and there, who
impart to their pupils that amount of secondary educa¬
tion  which  is  necessary  for  candidates  at  the   Local
IIow loe Pas.fed the Local Examination. 251
Examinations. But these are painfully few in number,
and we cannot but feel apprehensive for the future
if the number does not increase, so entirely is this object
left to individual effort, and so great at present seem
to be the ignorance and indifference of the public
with regard to it. Let us look for a moment at
the centres for examination in Scotland. In England we
had last year ten centres, in Scotland only seven. True,
the mere numbers do not contrast unfavourably for
Scotland; but when wejook at the comparative sizes of
the towns, the deficiency of Scotland becomes evident.
Against London, Birmingham, Cambridge, Cheltenham,
Leeds, Liverpool, Manchester, Norwich, Plymouth,
Hugby, Ave have in Scotland (I speak of last year, the
new report not yet being published) Edinburgh, Green-
ock. Dollar, Campbeltown, Forres, Dunse, Auchtermuchty.
AVith the exception of Edinburgh and Greenock, not one
of these towns has more than 10,000 inhabitants. Indeed,
it seems to us tliat were it not for Greenock, the centres
might easily be comprised, or at least have an equivalent,
within Midlothian alone. Thus, Portobello is about the
size of Uunse, Musselburgh of Campbeltown ; and Dollar,
Forres, and Auchtermuchty are not larger than Dalkeith,
Prestoupans, and Midcalder. Glasgow and Aberdeen,
two of the most important towns, are supremely silent on
the subject, not to speak of the numerous towns which
number 50,000 inhabitants or more. It is chiefly in quiet
country towns, such as Forres and Auchtermuchty, that
we find a schoolmaster or mistress who is energetic enough
to prepare pupils for these examinations. The idea of
such a vast uninterested region is sufficiently striking;
yet still more so is the fact that last year not more than
fourteen schools in the whole of Scotland sent candidates.
Six of these were in Edinburgh, eight in other districts.
We sincerely hope the returns this year may show a
larger number of schools. The statement of these facts
suggests vast possibilities to our minds; if even one pre¬
paratory class were started in every town, either in con¬
nection with a school or not, what an immense increase in
thoroughness would accrue to the education of the country I
This seems a great demand to make; and for what
end? I hear some one exclaim. A word more, then,
in addition to what was said in a previous paper in
this  Magazine,^  on   the   advantages   of having  passed
' Vide number fur March 1876.
252 Tlte. Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
this examination. The highest authorities in educa¬
tion, those who have devoted the most time to the
subject, are agreed that girls in studying for this
object are doing what is best for them, and that those
who wish to improve the education of women cannot do
better than urge them to come to these examinations.
First, They will find here a test of the thoroughness of
their education ; they will know what they have learned,
and what they have not learned; and thus their teachers
will be enabled to appreciate or correct their own methods
of teaching. Second, These examinations place a definite
object before the candidates. Women are apt to be
desultory in their education, and it is desirable that they
should, as early in life as possible, learn " to convert the
desultory into the definite." Third, This definiteness,
along with conjoint study in a class or school, and con¬
joint competition with others, constitutes all that a imi-
versity supplies in its teaching arrangements to stimulate
the pupils, and facilitate their success. If such advantages
are needed for boys, they are still more so for girls, the
chief defect of whose education lies in want of concen¬
tration—in learning too little of too many subjects. The
best remedy for such faults lies in the studies pursued by
a preparatory class for these examinations. Fourth, These
examinations are useful at the present moment in holding
forth a stimulus to secondary education, which, although
much is now being done for the improvement, especially
in the case of boys, is still the weak point in the Scottish
system. By inducing both teachers and taught to join
their efforts for this object, it will, we hope, be found ere
long that this weakness has by degrees been changed
into strength.
Surely among the 500,000 and odd inhabitants of
Glasgow, individuals might be found who would set such
classes on foot; and the highly cultivated commimity of
Aberdeen might add its quota, not to speak of Dundee,
Perth, Paisley, and many other large towns. All of these, I
feel painfully certain, contain many young ladies, the
daughters of clergymen and other professional or mercan¬
tile men, whose minds are starving for want of higher
knowledge, and to whom this would form a stepping-stone
towards real progress. There are doubtless many such
who would welcome the formation of such a class as an
era in their lives. And for those forlorn beings whose lot
is cast among the wilds, possibly governesses, doomed to
How we Passed the Local Examination. 253
solitude amidst society, might not such have their long
winter evenings brightened and made interesting by a
system of instruction by correspondence, supplied by
some qualified teacher in Edinburgh or some other town ?
The good results of such classes and of such teaching are
incalculable.
Supposing, then, that a preparatory class were about
to be formed in some town, say in Dundee ; what should
its programme be ? A class of this kind was taught in
Edinburgh during the three months previous to the
examination. It numbered above forty students, all
apparently most eager to learn, and was taught by a
very able master, who did wonders in supplying the
deficiencies of early education. The subjects were :—Eng¬
lish grammar and analysis, history and geography, and
arithmetic. The class met on three days in the week,
and one of these three branches occupied its attention at
each meeting. It numbered among its pupils several
highly educated women, who were all of opinion that the
course of study was far from being so easy as the names
of the subjects would imply.
First, let us take Grammar, for instance. " Grammar,"
says Home Tooke, " though it be usually among the
first things taught, is always one of the last under¬
stood." When we contrast the system of teaching
grammar which prevailed a few years ago, with that
now adopted by our schools, we can have little hesita¬
tion in saying that almost every grown-up person
requires to learn grammar over again. We have heard
of a class of ladies, taught by a learned professor, " having
a paper set them, full of very profound questions on the
fundamental laws of Thought, on Logical Extent, on the
Analytic of Aristotle, on the Origin of Knowledge. But
among these was one unobtrusive, innocent-looking ques¬
tion : ' Give subject and predicate and copula of " It
rains," " I exist," " A word to the wise,"' &c. Great was
the surprise of the professor, greater still that of the
examiner, at the depths of ignorance revealed by the
answers to this question." Let us look at one of the
questions given in last year's examination. " Give a clas¬
sification of adverbs ; give an example of each class." To
the unpractised mind, two, or perhaps three, classes of
adverbs might at once suggest themselves: such as ad¬
verbs of place, time, and manner. Our strict grammarian,
however, points out to us no fewer than five classes, each
254 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.   ■
one of which is subdivided into two or three minor classes;
so that we haye adverbs of time, place, quality, quantity,
and mood, and may welcome the opportunity of giving
an example of each.    All goes well until we reach the
last kind; adverbs of mood I    These are subdivided into
affirmative, negative, and doubting adverbs, and repre¬
sented by no, yes, perhaps.    From such considerations we
pass to the intricacies of parsing and analysis.    Parts of
speech are not here considered as individuals to be parsed
and  set  aside   each  for  itself;   every word or  phrase,
Avhether tiny expletive or monstrous noun-sentence, must
be weighed in its relation to the whole, and valued accord¬
ing to the work it doesforthe community.   We do for a sen¬
tence, in thus analysing it, exactly what Ave do for a country
in describing its political economy; among the various
classes we first seek out the principal or principals, which
we place in the seat of honour, we then name the other
clauses according to their relation to the principal or to
each other;   and so  on.    To perform this  process tho¬
roughly, it is  absolutely necessary to know what other
words or plirases are substituted for nouns,—in what re¬
lations various clauses stand to  each  other,—what is a
direct   arid   what  an indirect   object,  and so  on.      The
distinction between simple, complex, and compound sen¬
tences was, throughout the time during which the class
lasted, a great difficulty to many of the pupils.    All these
points, and many more, with innumerable shades of dis¬
tinction, are fully explained by Morell in his Grammar
and Analysis.
2. Arithmetic. " Without arithmetic and grammar you
will do nothing," said a clever old inspector of schools;
" they are education." No doubt tliere are many women
who understand arithmetic well, yet it is not long since
we heard of a lady who always " keeps a ready reckoner
by her, and squares her accounts by means of an accumu¬
lation of halfpence in the drawer of her writing-table."
In the class above mentioned, the beginnings were purely
elementary; from simple multiplication and addition, the
pupils advanced to practice, simple and compound pro¬
portion, interest, and profit and loss. Great care was
taken that the sums should be stated correctly and clearly
at the outset; the Avorkiug was then proceeded with, step
by step ; and in this way, sums which at first sight ap¬
peared impossible, were gradually simplified until they
appeared  quite  easy.     This  was  in - fact  nothing but
How we Passed the Local Examination. 255
another kind of analysis ; the various factors Avere first
arranged in the order in -which each was to do his part,
and thus the way was prepared for the working. The sums
were generally written out by the master upon the board,
in order to show the pupils the method of Avorking them.
The chief rules given with regard to method in arithmetic
in general, apart from the special rules required for each
kind of reckoning, were these: Have all the working
clearly Avritten out; state clearly at the outset the mean¬
ing of each separate term, and write after each product
or quotient what it is meant to represent. The working
will thus assume a readable character, without which
you cannot trust to its satisfying the examiner.
3. Geography. The study of this branch was carried
on in a most minute and searching manner. It seemed
to be thought requisite that at the close of the course of
study each pupil should haA^e in her OAvn mind a complete
and accurate representation of the surface of the terrestrial
globe, or at least that portion of it occupied by the conti¬
nent of Europe. Ri\^ers AA'ere traced on the board by tlie
teacher, with their tributaries, the towns on their banks,
and any lakes, mountains, or seas Avhich might happen to
be in the neighbourhood. When it is remembered that
the candidate may, on the day of trial, be asked to draAv
from memory a map of any country in Europe, Avith all
its details, a degree of suspense is roused in the mind,
Avhich imparts to this study a certain excitement, pleasur¬
able or the reverse, as the case may be. For this subject,
more than for almost any other, great leisure is needed;
and it is well, for this reason, that the Avork of the class
is now to be spread over the winter, instead of being com¬
pressed into a few weeks of the summer. Chambers'
Encyclopaedia seems to me the best Avork on geography
to be had, though a somewhat ponderous one. Mackays
Geography is excellent, hoAvever, and most useful, after the
student has mastered its method.
AVith regard to the special subjects, French, German,
English, History, and Geography are those usually chosen
by female candidates. With French and German nothing
is needed beyond the usual practice of translation and
re-translation, Avith a thorough study of the grammar.
The adA'anced history and geography differ from the
same subjects in the preliminary course in nothing but
extent; English, however, now enters some new phases,
to interpret even one of which, as represented possibly
256 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine,
by a single question, requires much and varied reading.
The history (jf the English language, the origin of
inflexion, its gradual modification in P^nglish, with
prosody, a distinct knowledge of the varied metres used
in poetry, along with etymology, are indispensable, not
omitting, of course, the history of English literature.
These subjects are all treated of either in MorelVs Grammar
and Analysis, or Spalding's History of English Literature,
with the addition, perhaps, of Marsh's Lectures on the
English Language and Morris's Accidence.
The results of the class above mentioned have been
most satisfactory. Among the thirty who competed at
the examination, there were no failures, except three in
arithmetic, and many stood very high.^ The weak sub¬
jects were analysis and arithmetic, to which special
attention will be devoted next winter. The class will
be occupied until April with the common subjects, after
which the special subjects will be taken up.
Let us now suppose that, a few months hence, some
lady from the country, attracted by all she has heard of
the intellectual life in Edinburgh, the lectures, and various
means of improvement open to ladies, arrives to spend
the winter, as she hopes, in congenial society. Where
is this lady to live ? To what conversation, bearing the
town stamp of modern culture instead of the country
brand of primitive barrenness, can we introduce her ?
The want of a residence among persons of similar tastes,
for lady students who come to pass the winter months in
Edinbui'gh, is now beginning to be sensibly felt.
The subject of tuition by correspondence has already
been alluded to. It is a thoroughly practicable method,
having already been carried on with success a1; Cambridge.
It might, we think, easily be carried on so as to keep
pace with any preparatory class which might be in exis¬
tence at the time. J. Menzies.
' The total number of candidates was about 300 ; this compares well with
the 94 of last year. For particulars, see the small book on the subject,
published by Mr. Thin at Edinburgh on 1st August.
Since the above was written, we have been informed that three Edinburgh
schools have this year sent candidates for the first time ; another school will
send pupils next year ; and the heads of schools in various places have engaged
to prepare scholars for the Local Examination in 1S77.
' Those who either wish for information, or can offer any suggestions with
regard to the subject, or any of the others mentioned in this paper, are invited
to apply to J. M., 26 Greenhill Gardens, Edinburgh.
257
llccolhctions of the |3ast.
Letter VL
My Dear Friexd,—When I was a good little girl, or
rather I am afraid in this case I ought to say a naughty
little girl, I very much preferred to learning my lessons
sitting on the ground in front of the library, and pulling
out one volume of Shakespeare after another, reading,
and wondering as I read. Of course the interest of the
stories was at that time the cause of my great pleasixre,
but it was the beginning of my Shakespearian education.
Then came the great delight of seeing represented what
I had pored over. I did not go very often to the theatre;
I think that there was a little fear that it might prove
too fascinating to me, but the very rareness of the
pleasure kept it ever fresh and delightful. When any
great actors came, we usually were allowed to see them
once or twice during their stay, and if they were our
own people oftener. It was also a great interest when
we saw them not only on the stage but in private, as
some of them used to come occasionally to my mother's
house. Of Mr. Young, Mr. Mathews (the elder of that
name), and a very good actor, who was usually called
" Irish Johnstone," I have a clear remembrance. Mr.
Mathews was very amusing; he had., however, what
to himself, poor man, must have been almost a misery—a
peculiar nervous organisation, which kept him in a
constant state of excitement, when he would pour out
from the stores of his wonderful memory anecdote after
anecdote, placing the people concerned in these stories
before you with an ease and clearness that seemed mai'-
vellous. These were not common imitations—they were
identifications; for the time he seemed to become the
individual mentally as well as physically: when he spoke
as Curran, for instance, he gave not only his voice, but
his views and sentiments. If it was Sir John Stevenson,
the Dublin doctor of music, he did not make his repre¬
sentation absurd by exaggerating peculiarities or defects
—if they were there, he touched on them to pre¬
serve the truthfulness of the portrait; but it was the man
himself as he really was, spoke, and thought. Mathews
was a kind-hearted man with refined tastes, but apparently
had not a very good head for business, for with all his
No. 21.—September 1876. 2 K
258 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
professional success he failed to make a fortune. He
collected a theatrical gallery of portraits, which were
sold after his death; among them there was one of my
mother as Portia, taken when she was seventeen. It
was bought by a gentleman who left it to me in his will,
and is a very interesting picture; the artist's name was
Smirke. I believe a good many of the pictures in Mr.
Mathews' gallery were bought by the Garrick Club, and
are now there.
Mr. Matthews' " At Homes," as they were called, were
very attractive in their day. At first it seemed impossible
to imagine that one man, without any aid from change of
dress or scenery, could keep an audience not only amused
but delighted for nearly three hours without a pause;
and those who only heard of such entertainments, said
that they must be utterly dull and uninteresting; but
when once witnessed they were so popular that people
returned to them again and again, and seemed at last to
recognise every character represented as a personal
friend to whom they had become personally attached,
and felt that they were introduced to a new circle of
acquaintance in whose society they found constant plea¬
sure. Among these appeared the musical gentleman
who lived in perpetual dread that he had lost his G, and
broke in on the most interesting conversation by running
up the scales and down again to satisfy himself that the
precious G was still in full force; there was the kindly
and amiable, but enormously stout Welshman who was
always wishing he was thinner, and addressing to his
friend at every spare moment the very pathetic appeal—
"Do you think I am thinner?" Then there was the
wonderful Mrs. Macknight, learnt from Sir Walter Scott's
little friend John, or, as he was oftener called, "little
Johnnie Ballantine," the pith of whose long story, after
the oft-repeated " He was wat, vary wat indeed," cul¬
minated in the famous advice by the minister whose
pulpit the poor drookit gentleman had been brought to
fill—" Gang up to the poopit, and ye '11 be dry eneuch
there." These were received with unabated delight even¬
ing after evening, and in this last character he withdrew
his head for an instant behind his table, and reappeared
in a good old-fashioned mutch and shawl over his
shoulders, and his face expressing the unbounded dehght
of the wife in the gudeman's ivut.
Mathews was the  son of a  Methodist  bookseller in
Recollections of the Past. 259
York, and though he afterwards became a member of the
Church of England, this appears to have been still re¬
membered, for he used to tell a story of his acting for
some time in a provincial town, and just as he was
leaving receiving a letter from a Methodist congregation
in the place, informing him that they were very poor,
and in great want of a new Bible for their church, which
they requested him to send them; he at once complied,
and was much pleased by the request.
One of Mathews' finest imitations was that of Tate
Wilkinson, author of a book of theatrical gossip called
the Wandering Patentee. Another very wonderful, though
somewhat painful one was of Macklin, the first repre¬
sentative of Shylock as a serious character, it having
usually been performed, or rather transformed, to a sort
of low-comedy part. On this occasion appeared the
lines, " This is the Jew that Shakespeare drew." When
Mathews saw Macklin, he must have long before left the
stage, and his representation of him, though striking
and wonderful, was too painful to be pleasing, showing
as it did the state of chaos of a mind o'erthrown; but
Mathews had tragic power sufficient to bring this out
grandly, for though comedy was his line, he was a
passionate admirer of serious acting, and a great adherent
of the Kemble school.
I was much struck the other day, when reading some
papers published in the Atlantic Monthly, by my cousin
Fanny Kemble, to see some remarks she makes on the
effects of a theatrical life, and by her bringing forward
my grandmother, Mi-s. Siddons, as an example on her
side of the question. Speaking of the beginning of her
career, she refers to her parents as " not troubled, as I
am sure I then was, with a perception of the more subtle
evils of their calling;" and continues thus:—"I had
never heard the nature of it discussed, and was ab¬
solutely without experience of it, but the vapid vacuity
of the last years of my aunt Siddons' life had made a
profound impression on me,—her apparent deadness and
indifference to everything, which I attributed, unjustly
perhaps, less to her advanced age and impaired powers
than to what I supposed the withering and drying influence
of the over-stimulating atmosphere of emotion, excitement,
and admiration in which she had passed her life." I think
that in these remarks my cousin takes a most exaggerated
view of the case, and one calculated to give a mistaken
260 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
and painful impression of the last days of one who to the
end was clear in her intellect, earnest and sincere in her
religions views, and still capable of giving delight to
those around her who were privileged to listen to that
magnificent voice, and see the undimmed lustre of those
glorious eyes, when to her home circle she would breathe
the words of her beloved Shakespeare, feeling that she
discovered new beauties whenever she opened the book.
Life had indeed had many trials for her, even amidst her
successes—such sorrows as must have left deep traces;
and many loved ones had passed away from her, but she
was still beloved and prized by many friends. When her
health permitted, she paid them yearly visits, and her
home was cheered by the tender care of her remaining
daughter. I remember some lines which that daughter,
when Mrs. Combe, showed me, written on the occasion of
one of those yearly visits by her host, who had expressed
a hope that the visit was to be a long one. She said,
"But what do you call a long visit?" He sent her these
lines in answer to the question:—
A   LONG   VISIT.
" To define a long visit is something like saying
What people time creeps, trots, or gallops, among ;
On those it depends who the visit are paying,
Whether long shall be short; whether short shall be long.
If prejudiced pride, or formality prosing,
If smooth-tongued hypocrisy, vain affectation.
Curiosity pert, or stupidity dozing,
Should stay but a day, 'tis a long visitation.
If ignorance rude, or if slander's sharp voice,
Or a popinjay coxcomb should pester your ear,
Or if clamorous revelry stun you with noise,
Each minute's a day, and each day is a year !
But if worth unaffected, if friendship sincere.
If talents exalted, and wisdom refined.
If candour, good sense, and good-nature appear,
Enlarging, enlightening, enchanting the mind ;
How swift ilies the time, and how short is their stay !
Each day's but a minute ! each year but a day !"
My cousin Fanny and I have long had a friendly
feud on the subject of the manner in which she speaks
of the theatrical profession. I think, and always have
thought,   that she  does  not take   a high enough  view
Recollections of the Past. 261
of it. In these papers in the Atlantic Monthly she
mentions that there was always something which pre¬
vented her being a really good actress; perhaps these
very views explain what that something was. One does
not do thoroughly well that which one does not
thoroughly appreciate. Certainly her highest powers
did not come out until she became a Shakesperian reader;
and yet, strange to say, she introduced more decided
acting into her readings than my grandmother or my
uncle, Charles Kemble, did. This, however, only shows
that there are different ways of reaching excellence, for
certainly her readings were thoroughly delightful; and
if she did not enjoy them herself, she suceeded in giving
her audience the pleasing idea that she did so.
I have mentioned the readings of Fanny's father,
Charles Kemble: I believe that they were extremely
interesting. Owing to circumstances I never heard
them, but can imagine that they must have been marked
by judgment, good taste, and by a careful study of his
subject: they must, therefore, have given his hearers a
good lesson in the understanding of the great Dramatist.
My remembrance of him as au actor is, that, excellent
in the above points, there was in his tragedy a deficiency
of passion. There was force, energy, even vehemence,
but I do not think that he was ever carried away by
intense feeling: his comedy was brilliant, tasteful, and
refined, and aided by his fine person and graceful
carriage, he was nearly perfect in Benedict, Mercutio,
Charles Surface in the " School for Scandal," and other
parts requiring those gifts which he so eminently pos¬
sessed.
Charles was the youngest son of the Kemble family,
but there was another brother, Stephen, a man of ability,
but who in consequence of his figure, which was
enormously stout, was unable to play any parts but
those of FalstafF and Henry VIII.: his face was hand¬
some, and his kindness of heart and pleasant manner
made him popular with all who knew him. I remember
hearing that he found it very difficult to refuse any one
who asked charity of him, although he was warned that
he was doing harm by indiscriminate alms-giving. He
was one day accosted in. the street by a man who
requested assistance in this way; my uncle Stephen
thought that this time he would be firm, and resolutely
declined.    " Well," said the man in a solemn voice, " I
262 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
must do that which my soul abhors." My uncle was
horrified; he thought of murder, suicide, and other deeds
of violence, and hastily gave the money he demanded;
" but now, my poor man, what did you mean that you
must do ? " " Work, sir," said the man very coolly, and
went on his way, leaving Mr. Kemble astonished, a
wiser but perhaps not a sadder man, for he could not
but be amused at the man's composed impertinence.
Yours very sincerely,
E. H. M.
•   Jinijlittg  Journal
In the Rhythm of " Kalevala."    In Two Parts.
Part II.
(ASTRIDA—GUDRUN.)
G. Scorn we not the Vale of Mosfell,
Though we now have cantered past it.
Eight days later, on an evening
Calm as dew on sea-bird's pinion,
Mild as angel's smile, mysterious
As the veil that wraps some treasure.
Came we, as the midnight darkened,
Once again to verdant Mosfell.
From their feet the merry ponies
Shook the moisture from the river.
Which the train again had forded.
Carefully then took the pathway
Up the town, and at the church-door
Set down Gudrun and Astrida.
Oh! this bourne ecclesiastic.
Where our feet pause almost nightly,
Surely I might write a pamphlet
Titled thus, The Church in Iceland,
Where the baers of lowly natives
Could not, if they would, receive us,
Lo 1 the church throws wide her portal.
Truly catholic, to all men ;
Asks not whether Presbyterian
Or Episcopal oiir creed be,
Whether Calvin, Knox, or Luther,
Jingling Journal. 263
Pope or bishop, or False Prophet,
Be our guide in themes religious ;—
Says, " Whate'er your creed, I bid you.
Weary wanderer, to my altar;
Fear not, you may even sleep here;
And where, on the blessed Sunday,
Sit the earnest congregation,
You may drink your chasse and coffee.
Thus I condescend to serve you,
Am I not a church most liberal ?
Certainly the brave Dean Stanley
Would acknowledge me a brother:
And when you in distant wanderings.
Weak and weary, long for shelter.
You will bless the church in Iceland."
Dawned the summer day o'er Mosfell,
Gilding all the peaks with brightness,
Giving courage for the journey.
Snow-clad peaks are now illumined
With the genial smile of summer.
And the lava-tracts re-echo
With the birds' sweet song and twitter.
Pause w^e now where cliflFs of sandstone
Guard the stream, that in a cascade
Gently leaps into the pool, where
Trout and salmon come for pastime.
Take the rod, Astrida; gently
Cast the line o'er rippling surface.
To entrap the trout unthinking.
All in vain, the glowing sunshine
Shows them all thy wiles too clearly.
Leave the rod, and take the pencil
Which thou know'st to handle deftly.
Yet no longer stay; the ponies
Now have had enough of pasture,
And the rugged mountain-pass is
Waiting for our feet to cross it.
Oh, the warm Icelandic summer!
While our Scottish friends are shivering
In the cold east wind, and holding
Chilly fingers to the fireplace,
We in warm and sunny Iceland
Travel night and day unwearied.
Climb we now where great distorted
Horns and lumps of rock, once boiling.
26i The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
Point the way to upland plateau.
Then again into the valley,
Winding slow by rocky pathway,
Come we to the Hvalfiord, where
At the side of gleaming cataract
Halt we, when 'tis nearly midnight,
Not to eat or sleep; for such things
We are far too intellectual.
Iceland air is food and slumber,
And the scenery in Iceland
Fills the soul with awe and rapture.
Here we try to sketch the cascade, _
Which, beside a wide-mouthed cavern, ■
Rolls into the foaming river.
Soon, around another headland
Passing, come we where the waters
Of the fjord in gleaming inlet
Shallow flow in moonlight silver.
See we now the foremost horses
Turn their heads towards the water.
Presently the whole procession.
Laden, loose, and riding ponies
Through the silver gleaming water,
O'er its sandy bed are going.
With misgiving thinks Astrida
Now of treacherous quicksands, waiting
To entrap the luckless traveller.
And with drooping eyelid, Gudrun
Swimming seems to see the ponies,—
Drifting out into the ocean.
All the party with their baggage.
Then a snap is heard, and quickly
Leaping lightly from the saddle,
Ivar stands with active Sigurd,
Ankle-deep in flowing water.
Just to close the stupid box-lid
Which had chosen now to open.
Further no mischance befell them
On their passage through the water.
From the shore now backward gazing
What a moon enchants their vision !
Radiant, silvery, and yet golden.
Rose she o'er the rocky rampart.
Then said Ivar, wise in weather.
Ah! that moon is very windy.
Jingling Journal. 265
We shall have a gale ere morning.
Boreas as an invocation
Seemed to take this speech of Ivar's,
For ere they had passed the headland
To the place where next the waters
Far into the land pierce, spear-like,
Blew he forth a blast impetuous,
As to say, Too long quiescent,
I will rage now to the utmost.
Skirting now^ the narrow inlet.
Flit we o'er the stone and shingle.
At each step blown fiercely seaward.
And already of the morning
One hour and a half are over,
Ere we pause at Hrabnaburg, and
Pitch the tent in spite of weather.
All the next day, Boreas, blowing.
Said, Ye may not cross the mountains;
If ye try, expect like boulders
Swift to totter down the hillside
Right into the windy valley.
There to dash your bones in pieces.
All submissive we obeyed him,
Sallied forth with timid footstep,
Soon returning to our shelter.
Yet the next day he relented
So far as to let us travel
O'er the hill and down the level,
By the river 'mid the dwarf-birch,
Leading to the dreary lava ;
Till at evening from the saddle
Spring we, for our steeds have brought us
To the sulphur springs of Reykholt.
Here the only bath in Iceland,
Fashioned by the cleanly Snorro,
Points us back a whole millennium,
To the time when lordly heroes
Dwelt in halls of giant timber ;
Wielded spear and mighty blood-axe,
Hewed down trees in giant forests,
Paced proud halls in silk and velvet,
Or, in riding to the Althing,
Quarrelled oft, and slew each other.
Now their quiet poor descendants
Dwell beneath mere grassy hillocks—
No 21.—September 1878. 2 L
266 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
Baers they call them; they resemble
Cow-houses of Caledonia.
Oh that climate, now relenting,
Would smile genially on Iceland,
Floating from the south, would clothe her
Once again with lordly forests.
Battling with those arctic breezes,
Bid them cease to feed the glaciers.
Which, as learned men are saying,
May in time elFace all verdure.
Yet a truce to grave reflection,
'Tis enough that Snorro bathed here;
And that we, who of the Norsemen
Boast that we some blood inherit
Worthy of those ancient heroes.
Pause no longer now at Reykholt
Than to sleep, and in the morning.
Having ate the dainty plovers
Shot by Ivar, and by him too
Cooked in boiling spring sulphureous,
Hie we, ere the day declining,
Draw a cold dark curtain round us,
To the baer of Kalmanstungu,
Thence to view the ancient cavern.
Dark and dismal, named Surtshellir.
'Tis a saying of the poets,
" Each dark cloud is lined with silver,"
And perchance they would not question
The remark, that in all sunshine
Dwell some specks of cloud and darkness,
So, methinks, had found Astrida,
When, alighting from her pony,
Bent she low her lofty forehead
At the door of Kalmanstuugu,
Entered there the musty guest-room,
And for want of chair or sofa
Took her seat upon the bed, while
Willing maidens came with coffee.
Wofully then said Astrida,
Ah 1 the window will not open !
Oxygen, it seems, has never
Yet within this room existed.
See the rows of heavy garments
Hanging with their musty odours
On the unwashed walls; the floor too.
I
Jingling Journal. 267
Rather than set foot upon it,
On the bed I will take refuge,
Though I sink in stifling duvet.
Quite depressing was the vision
Of this strong and valiant maiden,
Sighing for fresh air so vainly.
Ivar and the merry Gudrun
Spoke to her in tones of comfort,
But in vain ; she quickly bounded
To the doorway, all impatient
To regain the air of heaven.
Yet, good lack ! when she but half-way
In her haste had crossed the chamber,
Well-nigh she her head had broken
On a huge projecting cross-beam,
Fastened there to prop the ceiling.
Smarting, wo-begone, she sallied
Forth into the air, and not till
She with sore abuse had spoken
Of the floors and walls and ceilings,
And the beds and baers of Iceland,
Would she smile, however faintly.
Green the grass of Kalmanstungu
Shone next morning in the sunbeams,
When the willing Bonder mounted
His good grey, while ready Ivar
Brought the black and the cream-colour
To convey us to the cavern.
Mounted he the high-maned piebald.
Which, with head and neck Arabian,
Cantered o'er Icelandic deserts.
Grave the mouth and eye of Ivar,
As he held the rope and torches,
Bidding us prepare for hardships.
Soon, in gay and swift procession.
Hide we up the heathy hillside
Quickly trotting till we gain the
Long and dreary waste of lava;
Walk we now with footsteps wary,
While the careful steeds are picking
Footway o'er the treacherous lava.
Till amid the blackened desert
Yawns the entrance of the cavern,
Strewn with heavy stones unwieldy—
Wondrous cave ! the work of ages;
268 Tlie Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
Frost and fire have worked together
And apart in ways mysterious.
Fire came first with mighty bellows,
Came then frost in stealthy silence.
Decked with icy gleaming grottoes
Walls that fire had rent asunder.
As we from the cave reissued.
Safely having viewed its marvels,
Low bowed Ivar and the Bonder,
Saying, " This day is a proud day
For the cavern of Surtshellir,
For within its walls till now hath
Never trod the foot of maiden."
A. 'Twas one morn a few davs later,
Riding on her dear cream-colour
O'er a vast expanse of bog-land.
Thus exclaimed the brave Astrida:
" Hail, oh Iceland ! grand and awful,
Land of fjord and rock and desert.
Land where warring frost and fire
E.est awhile in awful quiet,
Ready to resume the battle.
Only one thing here in nature
Love I not—the wild morasses.
On from tuft to tuft I flounder
'Mid the cotton-grass and rushes,
'Mid the bog's deceptive herbage,
Emerald-coloured, treacherous, trembling—
Flounder on in chase of Ivar,
Far in fi-ont and fiercely riding.
Hail, oh Iceland ! land of heroes,—
Long ago I read the Sagas,
Read the chronicle of Snorro,
Dreamed of long shi])s sailing southwards.
Sea-kings bold and noblest champions.
Loveliest maids and wisest poets.
Still the maids are fair, the bonders
Still recall a race of heroes ;—
Friends are many ; none mislike me—
None save Jonas of Westunga.
" Hail, oh Iceland! kind the welcome
Given to gentle and to simple ;
Jingling Journal. 269
Wide the friendly door stands open
To the passage, black and earthy,
Leading to the best—the guest-room ;
Best, and therefore with a window
Framed and glazed, not made to open.
Sweet air vainly sighs outside it,
Strangers vainly sigh within it;
All the oxygen and carbon
Grow combined in poisonous acid.
So in bleakest, wildest weather.
When the arctic north wind rages,
Rather would I spread my cork-bed
In the smallest wooden chapel.
Lonely 'mid its churchyard crosses,
Charnel-like with damp and mildew,
Pervious to the howling breezes.
Echoing all with ghostly clamour.
Oxygen beyond caloric,
Company, or calm, I cherish.
Three things thus displease in Iceland,
Bogs, and shut-up rooms in byres,—
Jonas, farmer at Westunga."
Thus descanted Astrid, praising
All things else in wildest Snjoland.
As she spoke they neared a quagmire.
Soon the others rattled o'er it—
Only Leir-ljos^ smelt and trembled,
Then collapsed beneath his rider.
Down she sprang upon the quaking
Black bog, shuddering 'neath her footsteps;
Wildly rolled poor Leir-ljos' eyeballs.
Head and neck alone appearing
O'er the treacherous mire he sunk in.
Quick to rescue rushes Ivar,
Drags out Leir-ljos, walks with Astrid
O'er the quagmire to their party,
Larger now than when he left them.
" See ! unless my eyes deceive me.
He, the man you praise," said Ivar.
" Fitting figure for the landscape—
And how ever came he hither,
Jonas, farmer of Westunga !"
' Leir-ljos—a pony's name, meaning darkish cream-colour.
270 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
But before our rhyme is ended,
Raise the praise of other Bonders—
Still I seem to see the baer
Large and clean, and fenced and stately ;
Hear the ceaseless dash of ocean.
Feel the fresh scent of the sea-breeze,
Where the waves are ever tossing
Round the pastures of Kirkvoge.
Still I see the lamp-light flicker
Ou the dark-brow^n wainscot chamber ;
Winds and waves without are moaning.
Laugh and jest within are sounding.
Where we feast, while Kettilbonder,
Strongest man of all the Syssel,
Sits apart and views us eating
At his hospitable table.
Pours his old and generous Bordeaux,
Brimming up the liberal bumpers,
While with skal and clashing glasses,
Health we drink to ancient Iceland. ,a
NATIONAL SONG.
Eld-Gamla Isafold
Astkoera foster-mold
Fiall konan frid ;
Megan thin muntu koer
Megan land gerdest sjser
Og Gunnar girdest mser
G]fi,r sol 8, hrid.
Translation.
Thou fire-old Isafold,
Mother of heroes bold,
Fair mountain queen ;
Dear to thy children thou,
While seas round islands flow,
While men love maidens so.
While sun has sheen.
E. T. Oswald and J. Menzies.
271
Scenes from \\u ^ifc of an Jrish ^Tandlord.
"Irish affairs" are a proverb and a problem. States¬
men look upon them as a great dilemma, from which
extrication is possible, but scarcely probable. Discontent
has become inherent and hereditary in the nationality;
the brain of man has never, and I think will never,
invent a scheme which will satisfy the restless heart of
Paddy. I believe Erin will continue to be the scene of
periodical eruptions till the end of time. The features of
these eruptions may change with the centuries in which
they occur, as the pike has been abandoned for the mus¬
ket, or the Fenian for the Home Ruler, but the keynote
to all will still be discontent. The Irish peasant will ever
be the prey of agitators. When the voice of a grievance
ceases to be heard in the land, then Irishmen will be no
longer Irish, and the spirit of Hibernia will have passed
away. But I have no desire to thrust my weak hand into
public concerns; I only want to record a few facts and
adventures, gleaned from private sources and experi¬
ences, which I know to be true.
A gentleman residing in Tipperary has told me some
strange stories of his life. Between forty and fifty years
ago, he came into the management of a property greatly
encumbered with debt. His father, a polished gentleman,
was weak in character, and no man of business. His estate
had emphatically " run to seed." Scarcely any of it
remained in his own hands, the greater part being let in
small tenancies of a few acres, and a large portion in
cabins and " haggarts " (little potato and cabbage gar¬
dens). Nearly all these tenants owed back-rent, some to
the extent of twenty years ! The old gentleman had a
soft heart, and was easily imposed upon. The people
would come to him on gale day with a well-concocted tale
of loss or misery, begging for " time," which he, duped,
would grant; and this, year after year. Sometimes a
man would drive in a promising "slip" (young pig), and
ask the "ouldmasther" to take it "instid of the rint." Its
value might not nearly cover the amount due, but he
generally got a receipt in full. Should the lease of a
small holding be run out, the wife of the tenant would
perhaps walk into the kitchen of the " great house " and
inquire for the " misthress." Having gained speech of her,
272 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
she would enlist her sympathies, and obtain her promise
to " spake to the landlord not to raise the rint, but let
Larry have the bit o' land at the former cosht." When
she had gained her point, she would produce a " little pre¬
sent for the misthress ; who had she but her f—and half-
a-dozen fine turkeys would find their way into the poiiltry-
yard. " Larry " invariably got his lease drawn out on the
old terms !
All over Ireland there were similar cases, innumerable.
There was scarcely an old county family to be found
which was not heavily in debt, and at the same time the
creditor of tenants who could not or would not pay.
Few cared to run the gauntlet of agrarian outrage by
proceeding to extremities with the lower orders, who
then as now deemed fixity of teniire their right. Num¬
bers of old families became bankrupt, sold their estates,
and sank step by step in the social scale so rapidly that,
in many instances, all trace of them has been lost; they
have merged into the people, and, in most cases, the chil¬
dren of their agent or attorney reign in the family seat.
Some few weathered the " bad times, " my Tipperary
friend among them.
When he was a little child, his grandfather's house¬
keeper bought him a little " bonneen " with six tenpenny
bits his father gave him. Under her care the bonneen
grew into a fat pig, which proved the nucleus of a for¬
tune. Years went by, the boy was a well-grown lad,
famed in the country-side as a runner, and thrower of the
" sledge ;" the pig (shade of Darwin !) had developed into
cows, and sheep, and a horse. His father borrowed of
the boy, and did not repay; but nothing could repress
him ; he was born to rise. Like an indiarubber ball, hard
hits only made him rebound. He determined to emi¬
grate, looking upon his heirship as worthless.
The night before I was to start, he said, we sat up
late, my mother and all of us. My chest was packed and
everything ready. I went to bed, and in the middle of
the night 1 was wakened by tears falling on my face. It
was my father, the poor man I
" John, don't go," he said, " or your mother and the
children'll starve!"
We talked all night, and at last I told him to give me
a month to consider; and at the end of that time, if I saw
any hope of saving the property, I'd stay.
Well, he consulted with a Scotchman he knew, Avent
Scenes from the  Life of an Irish Landlord.        273
into all the affairs of the estate, and at the end of the
month he stayed, and his father gave him up the man¬
agement of the property. That day he went round and
noticed the tenants to pay all rent due upon a
given day. They came in a body. How much money, do
you think, they handed him between them—all those
tenants, who owed him hundreds of pounds ?—£10 I
Every man had an excuse, but they had not the " ould
masther " to deal with now. What did he do ? he threw
the note into the fire before their faces, and told them he
wanted all or none !
Next day he served forty ejectments with his own
hands upon the most shameless cases, and from that hour
for forty years his life was never safe for a single moment:
every man's hand seemed against him ; the common
people sought his life, and the gentry shunned a marked
man, and condemned a course of conduct they were not
brave   enough  to   copy.    However, Mr. L  was too
busy to mind much what the latter class thought of him.
He tells a story of one spring morning, that he rose at
four o'clock, and went out to plough, that he might get
the work done in time to go out with the fox-hounds.
Towards eleven o'clock a neighbouring gentleman and
two officers from the nearest garrison rode past the field
on their way to the meet. Mr. L spoke to the gen¬
tleman, who seemed rather ashamed of his ploughman
acquaintance. They passed on, and Mr. L  over¬
heard a contemptuous remark upon his occupation. He
finished his ploughing, changed his attire, mounted
his horse, and rode off in their wake.    As he got to the
covert-side the fox broke.    Mr. L was a hard-riding
man, and got well away with the hounds ; so did one of
the officers, who was also a forward rider. On sped the
chase, the officer keeping well to the front,  a little ahead
of Mr. L ;  it was a race between the two men, by
tacit consent. At last down went Her Majesty's servant,
heels-over-head off the top of a big dyke into the  ditch
beyond. Mr. L came at the fence at the same spot,
leaped clear over the prostrate steed and rider, and as he
landed safe, calmly enquired, "What had become of the
ploughboy now?" and was the only man "up" at the
end of the run.
His stories were not always of such an amusing charac¬
ter. Some tenants had been served with ejectments, and the
customary angry feeling had been aroused.    A boy devoted
No. 21.—Septembik 1876. 2 M
274 The Ladies Edinhurgh Magazine.
to the service of Mr.   L  one day brought him the
following intelhgence.    He had fallen asleep in a corner
of a forge, situated upon Mr. L 's land, the night
before, covered with some straw. He had slept for some
time, "when he was awakened by voices talking near him.
Hie attention was caught by Mr. L 's name, and he
lay still and listened. The tenants, who were about to be
ejected, and others, were there to the number of seven ;
they were discussing the feasibility of different plans for
Mr.  L 's assassination.    The boy lay close, terrified
with apprehension of the consequences of discovery.
The conspirators at last decided that one of their number
should go to Mr. L 's house next day and inveigle
him into some lonely spot on a business pretext, then
shoot him with a pistol when his back was turned.    This
latter precaution was necessary, as Mr. L was well
known to carry arms, and to be so quick of eye and
action, that the man who fired at him and failed to kill
him, might well give himself up as lost. None of the
seven were willing to volunteer to incur the risk, so they
drew lots to decide the question. The boy knew the man
upon whom the lot fell; the party dispersed, and when all
was quiet the boy noiselessly left the place, and next
morning came straight to Mr. L with his story.
The man upon whom the lot had fallen appeared in
due course, and Mr. L  went out to the hall door to
see him. Throwing his gun over his shoulder, he asked him
to come down to a certain grove with him, and he could
say what he wanted as they went along.    Mr. L  led
the way across some fields, the man walking behind him
all the way; and when they had reached the grove, and
were   out  of sight  or hearing of any   one,   Mr.   L 
turned suddenly upon him and asked him "why he didn't
do what he had come to do?" The man turned pale, and
tried to pass off the awkwardness of the question, but Mr.
L reiterated it, asking again why he did not shoot
him now he had him in the lonely place. The fellow now
saw that he was discovered, but kept saying, " Shoot yer
honour—why would I shoot yer honour 'l "
" See here,   my good  man,"   said Mr.   L  sternly.
" I know all about you. You came here Avith a pistol in
that pocket " (pohiting to it) " to shoot me, but it will take
a better man than you to do it. I'll give you one chance
for your life. I'll give you a hundred yards' odds, and if
I overtake you before you're off my place, I'll shoot you
Scenes from the Life of an Irish Landlord.        275
as sure as my name is John L .    If you escape, I'll
never prosecute you; but if I ever catch you in this
country again, you'll not leave my hands alive! "
Mr.   L  was   no   ordinary runner,  and   even  with
such   odds   the   man   knew   his   chances   were   small.
However, Mr. L  did not want to overtake him, but
pressed him just hard enough to frighten him. He ran
straight for the forge, looked back, saw his pursuer close
behind, but evidently losing gi'ound, rushed into the
forge as if to take shelter, out again at the back door,
and away, keeping, as he thought, the house between
him   and   Mr.   L .     The  latter  saw  the  ruse well
enough, but it suited his purpose to pretend he did not.
He also rushed breathless into the forge, snatched up the
heavy anvil, and, brandishing it above the head of the
smith, called upon him to produce the assassin he was
sheltering. Mr. L—■— delayed parleying with him
till he thought the pursued had time to be out of sight;
then after searching the house, and vowing vengeance
against the conspirators by name, and terrifying the
smith, whom he denounced as the harbourer of murderers,
he went his way home.
Several months after, Mr. L  was returning from
a fair, across a road through the Bog of Allan. It was
a dark night, but he thought he recognised a man whom
he overtook by the roadside. He dismounted, and
coming up close to him, peered into his face.
" Didn't I tell you if I ever caught you in this country
again, you'd never leave my hands alive? What
brought you here ? "
Then he coolly lifted him up, and heaved him over
into the deep bog of stagnant water which separated
the road from the wild moor on either side. How the
man got out is not known, but I daresay he thought
himself lucky to   have   got   off with   a   good   ducking.
He had the   sense  never  to  come within  Mr.   L 's
reach again, and is supposed to have gone to America.
Many people, hearing this and other stories of attempts
made  upon  Mr.   L -'s  life,  have   expressed  surprise
at his never having prosecuted his would-be murderers.
Mr.   L  acted upon  a profound knowledge  of Irish
character. The class of peasants amongst whom agrarian
outrage is rife, regard with contempt a landlord who
seeks to protect or avenge his life by legal means; they
deem him something less than a man who does not depend
276 Tlie Ladies   Edinburgh Magazine.
entirely upon his own readiness of action and firm right
hand. The spectacle of a threatened landlord driving
about with a policeman on the other side of his car, is
food for laughter rather than sympath}^ It is regarded
as a confession of fear, and the temptation to " bully"
a coward generally proves too much for Paddy to resist.
Only a few weeks ago we had an instance of this, when
the presence of Mr. Patten Bridge's body-guard of the
Royal Irish Constabulary did not secure him from an
attack in broad daylight, in which he was wounded, and
his driver shot. The event proved that Paddy knew his
man, for Mr. Bridge drove rapidly away with an unharmed
left hand and an unfired revolver, taking his untouched
steward along with him, leaving the two policemen to
fight it out   with  the  murderers!     Mr. L ,  on the
contrary, has the reputation of a man who will fight to
the death, and large rewards have been off"ered in vain
for the dangerous office of shooting him. There are two
qualities which the Irish peasant knows how to appreciate
fully—courage and " even-handed justice." The land¬
lord who fears no man, and the magistrate who shows
mercy and " no favour," never fails to command respect;
though it may be out of the nature of things that he
should gain much love.      I remember a countryman once
saying that Mr.  L  had   " the chist of a giant,  and
the arm of a lion."
Mrs. E. 0. Leslie.
(7b be continued.)
If thou earnest by the pathway of the morn,
Dark'ning where souls expectant watch the light,
We should defy thee !
Or through the day, our time of toil and hope.
Chilling our pulses with a clammy touch.
We should defy thee !
Or at that night named Death, which cometh unto all,
(Mystic and beaiitiful I—perchance a veil
Betwixt our childhood and ovir riper years).
If then, we should defy thee!
The Mountain Top. 217
Or if at any time thou interpose
To shake the soul's grand confidence in God,
We should defy thee !
But if thou come, a quick'ner unto life,
Reproving thus—" Ye loiterers, will ye miss the goalV^
Or thus—" In you humanity may bear a stain,'^
Then welcome, Fear!
We'll bend us to the scourgings of thy rod.
And hail thee as the messenger of God.
Joan Scott.
A Parable.
" To reach the regions of light, you luust pass through the clouds.    Some
stop there ; others know how to go beyond."—Joubert.
" Once gain the mountain-top, and thou art free ;
Till then, who rest, presume ; who turn to look, are lost."—Keble.
There was once in olden times a peasant who lived
with his family in a narrow valley hemmed in by high
mountains. Three sons and a daughter shared their
father's hut, and lightened his labours. In the summer¬
time this valley was a sweet and pleasant place. Eich
grass, enamelled with a thousand wild-flowers, grew along
the banks of a winding stream which flowed downwards
to a deep, well-nigh impassable gorge, where it threaded
its way between steep cliffs till it seemed to lose itself
amid the recesses of the hills. Difficult as was this pass,
it was the only outlet by which the inhabitants of the
valley could commimicate with the rest of the world; and
consequently, it was rare for them to pass beyond, and
still more rare for a stranger to penetrate into this
secluded nook. The lower slopes of the hills were clothed
with chestnuts and other stately forest trees; higher up
came a belt of dark firs; and above these vegetation seemed
almost to cease, and bare peaks of naked rock, from which
the storms of winter had swept every vestige of soil, rose
grim and terrible, like giant guardians of the vale.
Old Arnold, the peasant of whom I spoke, had never
278 The Ladies Edinhurgh Magazine.
passed beyond the boundaries of his native valley, nor
had he any curiosity to know aught of the world beyond,
content to spend his days in tilling his little plot of
ground, and leading his cows to the mountain-pastures in
summer-time; while winter brought its own indoor occu¬
pations, as then all clothing, household utensils, and other
simple necessaries, were to be made. His sons, however,
were by no means without curiosity, and often did they
speculate on what lay beyond the envious mountains
which bounded their view.
One summer evening they were all assembled in front
of the cottage. The sun was near his setting; through
a rift in the mountain-peaks might be seen one far-away
crest on which the gathered snows of ages were flushed
pink in the waning light. Something of the same glow
was reflected in the face of Fid^e, who had silently laid
aside her distaff" that she might drink in the still beauty
of the hour. Her youngest brother lay on the grass near
her, also gazing; but in his keen eye and thoughtful
countenance was written something of restless aspiration.
He was the first to break the silence. " I do long to
know what is to be seen from the mountain-top," he said.
" I care not greatly to go through the pass, but to look
abroad on the world from above—that must indeed be
glorious!"
Fidele smiled quietly as she answered, " No, I cannot
wish to go beyond this my native valley; I shrink from
the thought of the great world without. And surely the
beauty that we see around—such tints as are gleaming
above us even now—might well content us through a
long life."
" Ah! but what I see here only makes me long the
more for the unknown beauties which must be visible if
1 were standing on one of the peaks up there," answered
CEil d'Aigle, the same who had before spoken. " How
say you, my brothers % the weather is calm and settled,
little fear of storms at this season. What if we were to
devote a long summer day to exploring the height above
us ? If we could stand on yonder peak that glitters in
the last rays of sunlight, and see the earth outspread
below us, like a virgin unveiled—ay, and perhaps learn
the mystery of the sunrise, and many, many things which
have often perplexed me—that would indeed be a moment
worth living for."
The next brother, who  had been   carving  a wooden
The Mountain  Top. 279
bowl, looked up smiling. " QEil d'Aigle was always a
dreamer. I daresay we should be no better on the
mountain heights than we are here below. What are
these wonders you speak of? Mere rock, clothed with
soil, which is, after all, but crumbled rock, and an outer
covering of grass. But I confess there are things I
should like to verify and discover. New plants are
ever interesting to me; stones, too, have taught me
many things, and I would fain know why those rocks
on the hill-face glitter as they do at times only; we
might chance to learn some useful secret from them.
And I have long wished to find the source of our stream
here ;   so, on the whole, I am willing to join you."
So spoke Fils-des-Nues, and looked towards his elder
brother, Tete-Baissee, who was tranquilly eating his
supper. Thus appealed to, Tete-Baissee smiled, and
gave his opinion as usual in few words. " A mad pair,
both of you ! As to ffiil d'Aigle, I did not expect much
better from him ; but you, Fils-des-Nues, what can you
suppose may be learnt from the glittering rocks? Of
course it is well known they do bat glitter before a rain¬
storm—a most useful sign to the shepherd. And what
advantage to us to find the source of our stream, so long
as the water continues to flow past our doors ? But I
will join your party, partly that I may take some care of
you rash youths ; partly, 1 cannot make up the full tale
of my sheep. Some have been missing for many days,
and it is well we should seek them."
By this time darkness was falling rapidly, and like
lamps suspended in the transparent depths of heaven,
the stars were becoming visible; so their frugal meal
ended, the family betook themselves to repose. Very
early on the following morning, while still the grey
shadows of dawn hung over the valley, the three brothers
met in front of their cottage. Each carried a stout staff,
and Fidele made it her care to see that they were pro¬
vided with food. They bade her adieu cheerfully, and
she watched their active steps up the first slopes till the
trees hid them from her sight. The day seemed long to
her, especially as towards noon clouds obscured the
sun, the sides of the mountains were enveloped in mist,
and she trembled lest the explorers should lose their way
and perish. But in the course of two or three hours a
light breeze dispersed the vapours; the sun shone out
again, and she watched with better hope till, while it was
280 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
still early in the afternoon, she descried Tete-baissee
advancing towards her alone. He had found the miss¬
ing sheep, he said, or rather he had come to a danger¬
ous precipice down which several had fallen ; the flock
must be watched more carefully when feeding in that
direction. He brought Fidele his cap filled with wild
strawberries.
" But," she asked, " where have you left our brothers ?
do you know nothing of them % "
" Oh," answered Tete-baissee, " I parted with them
after the first hour. It was hopeless for all to keep
together; neither would listen to reason. Qilil d'Aigle
was for mounting right up, turning aside for no obstacle
—ravine nor precipice could not stop him. Doubtless
he is a noble cragsman, and his eager courage carries
him over many a place that would daunt a feebler spirit.
But what good is to come of it all, say I! So away
he sprang, as though some one were calling to him from
above. As for Fils-des-Nues, he would follow the wind¬
ings of the stream, stopping at every turn to examine
some new plant, or knock off some fragment of rock to
see what it was made of, forsooth! So he was useless as
a companion, and I left him, and have spent my time as
you see."
About sunset, Fidele's anxious eyes descried another
figure descending the mountain, and there was a shade of
disappointment in her voice as she pronounced it to be
Fils-des-Nues, and alone. He soon reached them. On
his shoulder he carried a large bundle containing plants
and stones. He was footsore and weary, and before he
could tell them of his adventures he begged for rest and
food. After a time he became more communicative, and
laughed at Tete-Baissee for having so readily quitted
him.
" You have no conception," he said, " what you have
lost through your foolish want of faith in me. Wonder¬
ful are the discoveries I have made ; the whole nature
and history of our valley are no^v known to me."
" And have you indeed been where the flush of sunset
lingers on the mountain-summits as though loath to
depart ? " inquired Fidele.
" As to that," he answered, " what you speak of has no
real existence in fact. Those needle-points look well when
seen from below; I do not wonder you love to gaze on
them.    But their appearance is quite deceptive ; they are
The Mountain  Top. 281
at no real height, and what you might see from thence
Avith your feeble sight is far beneath the wonderful scenes
I haye to-day discoyered. But listen. After Tete-
Baissee left me, I followed the course of our stream past
many steep and difficult places, and I have here more
than one new plant, the properties of which will doubt¬
less be of yalue.
" Suddenly, as I mounted, I saw aboye me a curling line
of mist.    It seemed to unroll itself, and to advance to
meet me; in a moment I was enveloped in it—swathed,
as it were, in its clinging white folds—and earth and sky
were blotted from my view.    Strange shapes seemed to
rise and beckon to me in the dimness; rolling masses of
vapour swept past me, and I felt assured that no further
ascent was possible.    I had reached the limits beyond
which all must be vague uncertainty, and no foot of man
could rest in safety.    I still sought, however, to follow
my  guide, the  streams; and  after  a  time  the   clouds
lightened enough to show me that I had reached a spot
beyond which  none  could  penetrate.    Before  me rose
a barrier of rock sheer from the water's edge; no grass
grew there, nor any living thing might be seen.    Black
and  still, the river clove  its way between these over¬
shadowing walls; it seemed like the portal to a grave,
yet was it in truth a cradle—the birthplace of the stream.
But whence did the water come ?    I made a step forward,
and clinging to the face of the crag, swung myself round
the  shoulder.    On the further side the rocks widened a
little, and I found standing-room ; while in the hill-face,
dark and mysterious, appeared the mouth of a cave.    I
entered.    Would I could convey to you, 0 Fidele, the
wonders  that  I then beheld!    Above my head rose  a
vault as  of crystal—a   noble  archway  cut  into   quaint
fantastic forms, and all around me, strange and beautiful
shapes   glimmered   through   the  darkness—pinnacles—
columns—I know not what.    I found some driftwood on
the floor ; with my flint and steel I kindled a light, and
every corner of this exquisite cavern flashed and sparkled
with a diamond radiance.    Clear and swift, ever bubbling
upwards, the water rose from some subterranean depths
beneath my feet,  and issuing from the cavern, flowed
along its narrow gorge.    Here, then, I stayed my foot¬
steps.    What, indeed, could I desire more ?    I had found
the source of the stream, and was truly repaid  by its
beauty and strangeness.    I was well convinced that there
No. 21.—September 1876. 2 N
282 TJie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
was no possibility of ascending higher. The walls of the
cavern encompassed me like a haven of safety; I could
touch it, could measure its proportions if I so pleased ;
but outside, among the mists and vapours, a man might
wander till his very senses forsook him, and the shadowy
oiitlines of the clouds might seem to him more real than
the earth beneath his feet. So 1 sate me down for an
hour or two, eat and rested, and then retraced my
steps."
" I would fain see your cavern," said Fidele; " yet I
like not to hear you speak slightingly of our mountain-
peaks."
" They are well enough for you," answered Fils-des-
Nues. " I would not prevent you from gazing, but I
have outgrown such childish fancies myself."
Night came on, and Fidele watched anxiously for her
youngest brother; but he came not, and she was obliged
to resign herself to sleep and darkness. But before the
sun was high in heaven on the following morning,
(FAl d'Aigle was seen descending the lower slopes of the
hills. Though his step was somewhat slower than before,
his air was tranquil, and even joyous. Fidele would not
suffer him to speak till she had brought him a bowl of
milk and some cakes of maize ; then, as he lay beside her
on the turf, he told her his tale.
" Our brothers must have told you," he began, " how
we separated. They were occupied with the plants and
flowers of the mountains, but I longed, as it were, to
overcome the mountains themselves ; and I turned my
face upwards, and went on as straight as the steepness
permitted. I was walking among pine-woods, where the
ground was strewn with their needle-like leaves, and the
air laden with the resinous scent, when I first observed
that the sky was overcast, and soon I found myself
enveloped in thick mist. I cannot tell you how bewilder¬
ing it was. I thought if I still ascended I must be in
the right way, but suddenly I found myself on the brink
of a deep ravine, and had I gone a step or two further I
must have fallen headlong. It was vain to go on ; there
was nothing for it but patience. So I waited, trusting
that the mists would disperse, and thinking that as the
peaks were assuredly there, it needed but time and
resolution for me to reach them.
" At length the clouds began to draw together; here
and there, through a rift in the fleecy whiteness, appeared
The Mountain Top. 283
a shoulder or a rock on the hillside, strangely distinct
through that soft veil; and presently, as when one draws
aside a curtain, the mist rolled from about me, and I saw
distinctly where I stood. I had now reached a consider¬
able height, from Avhence I might catch bright and lovely
glimpses of the wider valley down which our stream
flows. The mist-wreaths circled in graceful eddies beneath
me, now floating past like a thin veil of smoke, now
brooding over some recess among the hills in a sun-
illumined cloud. But they held no further difficulty for
me : so, cheered by fresh hopes, I went onwards, and
after a time the noonday heat dispersed these roving
vapours, and no cloud dimmed the pure expanse of
heaven.
"I had now left the woods behind; round me grew
nought but mosses and some tiny flowers; and as I
still ascended, even these ceased, and I trod only upon
rock and the rough splinters and fragments which have
been worn off" in the course of ages. And now I looked
round me ; but still, as one eyes the glass of fair water
he longs for, but does not drink, I withheld my gaze
from the feast of beauty which was opening before me.
One summit lay in my path, steep, but yet such as a man
might climb. I climbed ; at every step the earth seemed
to narrow beneath my feet, and at length there was
nothing above me, but on every side blue depths of space.
I stood where I had so long desired to be. I flung my¬
self down, panting and exhausted, and felt indeed that
man could do no more. But ah! Fidele, how shall I
express to you all that filled my eyes and my mind as I
gazed % Things that I had dreamt of, that I had heard
of in whispers, seemed all revealed to me. I felt myself
drawn nearer to the heart of the universe ; my pulses
throbbed in unison with it; the very spirit that dwelt in
that fair world seemed to descend into my spirit, and fill
me with a deep, overmastering joy. It is easier to tell you
of what I actually saw, than of the feelings which the
sight woke in me. Below me stretched a wide and fertile
plain, through which a noble river ran in silver windings.
Towns and hamlets could I dimly see; and the whole
land laughed from golden corn-fields and rich pastures.
But again beyond rose the rugged and broken outlines of
a great range of mountains; purple shadows rested on
their sides, and far up into the azure depths of heaven
rose the glorious snow-clad peaks.    It needed but to turn
284 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
myself a little, and new wonders met my gaze. There
lay a sight which none of us had ever seen—the broad
expanse of the ocean stretching far away to the horizon.
Such a dazzling field of intense blue, touched with
changeful hues of purple and green, bordered by a line of
white surf where it touched the shore—the very sight
seemed instinct with life and freedom I And now the
sun drew towards his setting; he hung like a huge golden
ball above the dim line where sky and ocean met; and
his rays formed a pathway of burnished light along the
water. Beautiful are the hues of sunset as we see them
from our valley, but I cannot tell you what it was to see
the distant mountains catch the blushing radiance, glow¬
ing rosy-red, while light clouds floated round their
summits, changing, even as I gazed, fi'om orange and
gold to violet and grey. A breathless hush lay on all
things; Nature seemed to fall on her knees, and like a
maiden with folded hands and upturned eyes, wait in
silent adoration for the close of that beauteous hour. It
passed, and I bethought me where I was. It was then
too late to begin the descent, so I passed the night as
best I could, and often I looked forth to see the wondrous
scene under the light of moon and stars. And this
morning the splendour of the sunrise renewed all my
delight."
"How beautiful is all you tell me I " said Fidele; "but I
fear that, after having seen so much, you will no longer
care for our quiet valley. "
" Not so," replied CEil d'Aigle, " my mind and heart
are so filled with the wondrous spectacle, that the mere
remembrance will crown me with joy for the future. Man
could not dwell for long on those transcendent heights :
it is enough for us to know that such glories exist; and, "
he added with a smile, " my brothers even must confess
my journey has not been in vain, for I bring you a plant
of Edelweiss. Know you not the songs my father was
wont to teach us, in which he who finds the Edelweiss is
honoured indeed ? "
Fidele took the delicate white blossoms with pride and
pleasure. "A noble gift," she said : " 1 shall hang it by my
silver rosary."
Much talk passed between the brothers respecting their
different adventures. Then Fidele, who had been an
attentive listener, rose to leave them, but turned again to
say, " 'Tis well when they who have not the power to
Railroad Lines. 285
roam, have not the wish either. 1 am seldom out of sight
of home; yet, CEil d'Aigle, I too can see something of
these fair sights you tell us of. Full of beauty is the
moonlight reflected in our stream; the stars too look on
me with friendly eyes; and the sunset clouds float even
above our valley."
" Yes, Fidele, you are right," answered (Eil d'Aigle.
"Far and wide I gazed on mountain, and plain, and sea,
but above and beyond all was the illimitable vault of
heaven, and that you can in truth behold from beside our
door. Happy they to whom such teachings are revealed
in the midst of their daily life. " Enna.
|l a i I r 0 a d   1 i lu s.
Oh! hard unflinching lines of the railroad, which lead me
as though against your iron will through paths of mingled
sweetness. Straight, hard lines, which refuse to turn aside
and visit the wild nooks, you cannot keep me from treading
them. I am not unwilling to follow you ultimately, for
maybe you do not lead so far amiss, but I will dally and
wander on your banks, stopping for everything or for
nothing. I know your look in all the changing seasons—
at sunrise, in the broad day, and at twilight. I am con¬
versant with it all, and know how you pass through all
beauty and all ugliness for miles and miles, inexorable,
indifferent. I know how you carry thousands to welcome
or unwelcome goals, how you speed away those who
would fain linger, and are all the time unconcerned and
unknowing. I see you impartially separate twin hillocks
that have grown together, and now stand sundered, with
a gulf between; running through the midst of that wood,
and remorselessly tearing up its heart-strings. I am not
your slave, like the imprisoned ones who must follow your
course. I am but a foot-passenger on your road, and may
please myself with every sight and sound. I am not
travelling along the gay and open road to delight myself
with the people and the movement thereon. But neither
do I choose my own way across lonely brake and brier.
I follow no wild fantasy; I go where the lines take me,
an easy road through wilderness and wood, through moors
and fields. I see nought as a whole as those do who travel
in your fashion, but I pick up the little things, and they
286 The. Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
become me, and are mine ever after.    The high banks
may often  screen  I   know  not what beauties from my
narrow vision, but the little ones fill up my eyes.    It is
hard to believe I can be the same who used to bask with
bleached hair beside palings long since disused, and clasped
with the twining fingers  of frail, creeping plants.    The
walls of our cottage, built on the bank, turned a blind
wall to the lines.    So when a child I sat there as cut oif from
other existences as could be.    All the outside Avorld I
knew of was  the  rails, with the trains,  and the brief
glimpse of faces looking from them.    I was but a specta¬
tor, and went for nothing in it all.    I could take but small
part in the flower and animal life around me.    The butter¬
flies with their companions fluttered round the brilliant
flowers and took no note of me ; beyond the hedge the
cattle browsed and the sheep nibbled busily and heeded
me  not;   the  birds   alighted  as   I sat  motionless,   and
hopped away regardless of me.    Thus I played quietly,
sometimes for days, Avrapped in a dream neither glad nor
sad.    I lived for the most part a life of my own, made up
of wondering and gazing.    It is different afterwards.    I
know now how one  is bound and lirdved inextricably to
other existences and to our own identity by thousands of
invisible bonds ; how the  vain  vague hopes   of rushing
through  the   darkness   to   an   unknown   land   of   new
experiences,   over  which  a  new  sun  and   a   new   joy
should arise, have died away and become impossible ; how
in  one's  own person  is  brought an  intangible train  of
association and knowledge Avhich nothing  can  slay or
destroy.    It not only peoples the unknown places and
phases of life, but asserts itself all along the road to them,
making the unknown to a strange extent familiar.    So I
have ceased to long for the wings of the butterfly or the
bird, or to expect the hurrying train to bring me to any¬
thing totally new.    I will pick up in the days of my life
as on this railway the common flowers, and drink dehght
from every rill and every fountain.    Is there not enough
to hold me  captive, and to make the railroad, dead and
disused or in full vigour, one of the fairest places on earth
to me ?    Oh ! railway banks, through all the changes you
do not lose your scent or your colour!    Oh ! the bloom of
the broom and the fragrance of the roses growing side by
side !    Oh ! the fleeting radiance of the spider's web fink¬
ing them in its glittering meshes, which passes away in the
sun's ravs like the dream of early love when the fervid
Railroad Lines. 287
reality of manhood strikes on it. The light untroubled
birds hop and pause, and hop again fearlessly, over the tele¬
graph wires, till they finally settle on them and trill their
sweetest songs. A tiny rill twinkles and trifles alongside,
to lose itself like a drop in the deep and be at rest. The
souls in the trains, hurrying perhaps from sources as quiet,
are lost and merged in the crowds, but do not always find
rest. The bank that looks bare to some, is to me full of
the secret essence of flower and insect life. There, in
the stillness and the solitude, the scarlet poppies doze and
dream by the side of the tall straight daisies. The rov¬
ing butterflies and the velvet bees make it their chosen
resort. Ants and curious flies breathe and breed and die
day after day, and blend with the earth. I lie down with
eyes close to the fringed grasses and the delicate moss,
and strive to recall the old illusion of great forests and
their inhabitants.
It will not quite return at my bidding now-a-days.
The failure, however, does not sadden me, and the hard
glitter of the smooth rails beckons me forward. I dip into
the hollow, where the hum of the pigmy life going on in
the grass is replaced by the voice of the brook. I sing
the refrain it recalls to me, but it will not suit its music
to it now.
Then up again with a sharp curve, and the banks have
again vanished. A wide expanse of blasted corn, the
undergrowth showing rank and green as the healthy wind
turns it over, but cannot restore its marred promises. In
my narrow confines I do not see such universal ruin and
calamity, and I am not sorry when another dip in the land
hides the sight from me. Presently, however, the line
ascends, and we get into full view and hearing of the sea.
It is high tide, and for once it seems as though the crav¬
ing hunger had died out of its voice as it laps the beach
with a full satiety in its tones. There is nothing to inter¬
rupt the sound of it, for here are no greetings and bustle
of the road. The pointsman in his wooden box stares at
me like a ghost, and proffers no word. I look back as the
curves of the road take me from his sight, and find him
still regarding me, motionless and weird, with the sleepy
light full on his face. If they had inhaled the breath of
the abundant poppies, the few I meet with could hardly
look more oblivious and pensive. Those who come here
stroll and idle, and are not in search of adventure. We
want  no  brisk  hurrier   here;   only  the   lingerer   who
288 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
acknowledges the dreamy sway of the place, and is con¬
strained to wander for miles courting all that lurks unseen
and hidden to the careless.
Maxwell.
OUR   LIBRARY   TABLE.
Poems.   By Thomas White, Jun.
James Parker & Co.    1876.
Two characteristics of Mr. White's poems will not fail
to strike the reader's attention, even on a cursory perusal.
The one is their clearness of meaning, the other their
musical tone ; and these are valuable in the present day,
when the cry (not unwarrantable) is raised against the
obscurity and roughness of our poets. Nor does Mr.
White disappoint us when we look for deeper and more
important qualities. There is an exquisite purity in his
poems ; nowhere do we find the slightest taint of coarse¬
ness or sensuality. They are also deeply religious. We
have in them frequent traces of the struggles and suffer¬
ings which the thoughtful of this age must endure, but no
despair ; faith in God and immortality seems triumphant
over all. The union of humanity with the Divine he also
recognises very beautifully,—
Hid in the depth of human hearts,
Yet visible therein,
By all that foils the senses' arts,
And keeps us pure of sin.
We cordially recommend this volume to all lovers of
poetry, and would gladly welcome more from the same
pen.
Contributors are reminded that a Prize is offered for the best Article on
any subject of Moral or Mental Philosophy appearing in the Ladies' Edin¬
burgh Magazine till December 1876 inclusive.
The next Debate of the Ladies' Edinburgh Literary Society will take
place on Saturday, October 7th.
Those interested in these Debates are referred to the List published in the
January number of this Magazine.
289
|lj5([0lhttions of iht fast.
Letter VII.
My Dear Friend,—I have been so accustomed lately to
remain quietly at home, that even going from it for a
short time seems to disturb my ideas more than it should
do ; but fancies grow upon us, and if I do not take care, I
shall imagine that I cannot write but at my own table, or
think to any consecutive purpose out of my own arm¬
chair. So I must rouse up, and remember that " the mind is
its own place," that " home-keeping youths " (which I sup¬
pose applies to all ages) " have ever homely wits ; " and
having fortified myself with these maxims, proceed to put
down some of the thoughts which have been floating
through my mind while looking on sweet pastoral hills,
and listening to the sound of the bright clear rivers of
the so-called " South Country."
It is now some years since circumstances made me feel
it right to exert the powers Avhicli I believed that I pos¬
sessed for purposes so dear and sacred, that they overcame
in me a natural reluctance to bring myself personally
forward. At one time I should have thought such a step
impossible ; however, I had everything to make the effort
easier to me. I began among old and kind friends, all
respecting my motives, and ardent in my cause. I con¬
fined my readings to my own drawing-room, and never
but in very exceptional cases read out of it. It is difficult
to describe the peculiar feelings with which I began, and
how even to myself it at first seemed strange to find the
power I had to realise my own views, and take with me
the sympathies, and I may say the affections, of my
hearers. This has always been one of the chief sources of
satisfaction in what I may with all humility name my art
or vocation, that I found both with listeners and pupils
that heart as well as mind seemed worked on, and that
this gave me a power valuable in teaching especially, and
gratifying at all times. My work altogether was so satis¬
factory to me that I never for an instant regretted having
made the effort, for it certainly was one at first; and I
now feel that had I again to laegin life with my present
experience, I should select this Avocation, and feel it one
in which lay deep sources of usefulness as of interest.
No. 22. —OciOBBB 1876. 2 0
290 Tlie Ladiefi" Edinburgh Magazine.
Teaching elocution, as it is called, combines so much,
that with many of my pupils I felt it might be said the
benefit was mutual; for if when brought into contact with
minds of eyen average intelligence the interest is great,
ho^v much more when earnest, deep-thoughted men are
striving to make up, in this particular branch, for early
neglect so usual even among advanced students in other
Avays. I have had much real pleasure when such have
come to me for help, and have seldom failed to be grati¬
fied by finding a far quicker response than I could have
expected to the effort made to show them how that which
was working within could be made to give itself an out¬
ward expression.
And surely this is what elocution really means; not a
mere formal mechanical arrangement of voice, a dwelling
on certain sounds going up in one place and down in
another, to produce particular effects, but to know how to
bring out the meaning of Avhat you are speaking or read¬
ing, so as to reach the minds and hearts of your audience
or auditor; and this can only be done by feeling it yourself
strongly and clearly.
If my pupils were in the habit of composition, I often
asked them to bring their own productions, saying, " You
know how you want this to impress others; now bring
out your meaning. Do not be satisfied with merely
reading the words." This was often done to both our
satisfaction. Of course the minor but essential adjuncts
of pronunciation, clearness, avoiding provincialisms in
accent and tone of voice, required attention, though
forming but a small part of what I really wished to
impress.
For my own readings, they also are always a pleasure
to me. How strange it is that one wonderful man has left
us words that are indeed " a joy for ever!" My dear
friend Lady Byron, whose criticisms on my reading were
only too much drawn from her affectionate partiality, said
that she thought that I dwelt too long on words of beauty,
lingering over them as if I enjoyed the sound I was
giving out, and thus therefore sometimes losing the dra¬
matic in the poetical; and I can quite believe it. It was
at her request that I went to read in London, She had
arranged that I was to do so in her house—she had
indeed taken one in Piccadilly for the purpose, consider¬
ing her own too much out of the way; but the gentle¬
man she had taken the house from changed his mind just
Recollections of the Past. 291
before the final arrangements were made, and, to her
great disappointment, that plan fell through. The season
was passing, and as no other could be got that was con¬
sidered suitable, I rather thought of giving up the idea,
for the time at least; but she was so unwilling that I
should do so that I consented to a different plan, and
agreed to read in a room in " Long's Hotel." She was to
invite the people, and take charge of everything for the
first two readings (1 gave three more afterwards inde¬
pendently) : for these two I had no responsibility.
Nevertheless this new plan altered the thing to me in
a great measure; it took away the home feeling to which
1 had been accustomed. I felt that it would be a very
new experience, and one that I must work myself up
to meet; and I certainly did feel a great sense of strange¬
ness when I took my place on my platform, and looked
on a number of entire strangers, though every now and
then I saw a face I knew ; among them my cousin
Fanny Kemble and her sister Mrs. Sartoris, Mr. and
Mrs. Theodore Martin, Miss Emily Taylor, and my dear
friends the Scott-Russells. George Macdonald was there
also, and I remember remarking his tall figure as he came
quietly into the room after I had begun, for he had come,
on Lady Byron's invitation, from Hastings, and could not
arrive earlier. Miss Muloch, whom I had not known
before, was present, and came to my room to speak to
me after the reading was over. However, I felt as I
have always done, steadied and composed directly I had
fairly commenced my work, and heard my own voice re¬
peating the loved and familiar words from the beginning
of Romeo and Juliet till I reached that which always seems
to me to be the exquisite climax of Romeo's woe—" Oh,
Juliet, why art thou still so fair? " I did not therefore lose
my self-possession ; and indeed by the end felt very much
as I did in my own drawing-room. I afterwards read in the
eame room "Macbeth," "Hamlet," "Othello," and "As
You Like It."
It was rather a curious bit of experience for me, that in
London I was remonstrated with on the ground of my
being a little too fiistidious, and that I left out words and
speeches without sufficient cause. I urged that on com¬
paring my cuttings with those of my grandmother Mrs.
Siddons, I found very httle difference, and that I thought
she was a very safe standard in such matters. My critics
said that they thought I had arranged my readings for
292 Tlie Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
Edinburgh, where people were supposed to be more par¬
ticular. I said that I had done it as seemed to me best,
without reference to any particular place or set of opinions,
and that having done so after much thought, I preferred
continuing as I had begun. From London, circumstances
took me to Clifton, where I also read three times in public.
The first play was " Hamlet." The room was crowded, and
there was some difficulty about arranging the seats. A
very kind clergyman, who was introduced to us, came up
to us and said that he knew most of the people, and
would see that they were all comfortably seated, so that
we need not take any trouble about it. All went off very
well, but the next day my kind new friend came to re¬
monstrate with me in his turn on my leaving in too much,
and suggested various cuttings, to which 1 could by no
means assent. He said that he was very sorry, but that
he could not attend more of my readings unless I agreed
to his view of the subject. Of course I gave him the same
answer that I had given to my London friends, that I had
not acted without thought, both in what I left out and
what I kept in, and could not alter my opinions, though
very sorry to give offence to any one.
I saw no more of my friend; and as he was really kind,
I was very sorry for it.
I read also at Bath and Cheltenham, and while at the
latter place received a letter from Brecon requesting me
to come and read there. I was told that I should meet
with a warm welcome, and would find the names of
many of my ancestors in the churchyard. This was an
interesting if not a very cheerful inducement, and I Avas
really sorry that we could not manage so as to avail
ourselves of the suggestion.
In reading among strangers, it is curious how some¬
times a face suddenly catches your eye, and impresses
you as one which shows some peculiar interest in what
you are doing, different from the ordinary expression
of interest or amusement. This happened to me both in
London and Bath. In London, while reading " Othello,"
I saw opposite me a gentleman who at once gave me
this feeling, and I also knew immediately that he was one
to whom 8hakespeare was indeed a household word.
When I went to my room afterwards his card was
brought to me: it was that of the Kev. William Harness,
one of the oldest friends of my family. I had not seen
him for years, and was truly glad to do so once again.
Recollections of the Past. 293
At Bath also I had something of the same feeling—
always a pleasing one, as it seems to unite you with your
audience. This time it was a gentleman who had been
a great friend of Mr. and Mrs. Charles Kemble's, and
whom in former days I had met at their house. He
was an amateur artist, and in his ardour for sitters, or
" patients," as he used to call them, had made various
attempts at my likeness. He also came to me at the
end of my reading, and said that he had not known my
married name, but hearing that a granddaughter of Mrs.
Siddons was to read in Bath, and, as he said, knowing
my face very well, had recognised me immediately, not¬
withstanding the long time which had passed since we
met.
I remember well in those days the  long arguments
my uncle Charles Kemble and Mr. Harness used to have
about " Hamlet."    They were indeed " never ending, still
beginning,"   and   turned   upon   the   question   whether
Hamlet  was  really  mad,   or   only   feigned  to   be   so.
Now   Polonius,  who,   notwithstanding   his   courtiership
and his conceit, says occasionally very wise things, makes
the  remark  " that to  define  true   madness, what is   it
but to be nothing else than mad ?" and assuredly we see
every day how nicely shaded are the degrees from perfect
sanity to utter madness, making it difficult to pronounce
Avhere one begins and the other ends.   Indeed, some people
think that perfect sanity is more rare than utter mad¬
ness.    Shakespeare   himself,   wonderful   in   all   things,
must have been one of those rare natures which com¬
bine the  highest genius and  imagination with perfect
sanity.    But to return to Hamlet, it seems to me that
he  was  no more   mad  than   all high-wrought, nervous
temperaments may be said to be ; and I think, had he
been really mad, he would never have feigned madness,
as he evidently determined to do when he said,
" As I perchance hereafter may think meet
To put an antick disposition on."
It would be interesting to go through Shakespeare's
characters, and see how some impress you at once with
their complete sanity. I should say Banquo in "Macbeth,"
Kent in "Lear," Faulconbridge in "King John," were
eminently sane ; and though of a different type, and
living in the midst of wonders, I should add Prospero,
who is_ a great hero of mine, to the list.    None but one
294 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
possessed of a perfectly sane, healthy temperament would
have calmly laid down a supernatural power when no
longer required for the great ends of justice; and having
reformed and forgiven his enemies, and secured the
happiness of his friends, retire to live humbly in this
life, and to prepare for a better.—Always yours very
sincerely, E. H. M.
One morning in early spring, several years after the
events narrated in the last part of " Werburga of Chester," ^
as the Baroness Holme de Rehmar was sitting in her
morning-room writing letters, she was painfully inter¬
rupted by sounds which made it almost impossible for her
to proceed with her occupation. These sounds issued
from a pianoforte in the room above, which was being
tortured by very nimble fingers. Deafening chords and
ornamental passages, played with extreme quickness,
alternated with each other; while through all it was not
easy to recognise an operatic air, which formed the almost
superfluous theme, so hidden was it, and well-nigh
trampled under foot, by the fluent running variations with
which it was interwoven. One piece of this description
succeeded another for nearly an hour; at last, to the
intense relief of the Baroness, the pianoforte was re¬
linquished to gentler and less nimble fingers, which,
though they played imperfectly, did not obtrude their
imperfections so palpably upon the ear.
" How very unfortunate!" said the Baroness to herself;
*' the first lesson too I I cannot possibly dismiss him so
soon; but really this will not do." " Kandall," she said
to her husband while walking with him in the shrubbery
in the afternoon, " how could you fix upon such a teacher
for Anna ? He played dreadfully for nearly an hour, and
then only marked the fingering for her."
" My dear, I did the best I could," replied the Baron,
feeling painfully his ignorance about music; " he is the
master in Chester, I am told, out of sight the first."
" Poor Chester, I  pity thee!" said  Werburga, and a
' See the January Number of this Magazine.
The Masic-Muster Nonplussed. 295
remembrance of cathedral music passed through her mind.
All that evening she was very silent, and spent the next
forenoon at her desk, with an ominous-looking amount of
foolscap beside her. When the time for the next music
lesson arrived, she seated herself in the schoolroom, tell¬
ing Anna she intended to be present at the lesson her¬
self, and dismissing the governess. Anna, who was very
timid, felt her mother's presence an intense relief, and
hoped that it would entirely divert her teacher's attention
from herself.
" Good morning, Herr Donner," said the Baroness, as
the teacher appeared. " I hope Anna may improve under
your tuition. As I know you take an interest in all that
concerns music, I have brought with me to read to you a
paper on pianoforte tuition, which I have translated from
the German,"
" Ah, you are too kind," said Herr Donner in a very low
voice. " I shall be only too happy to hear it. The
present condition of music in all countries interests me
deeply."
" Ah yes," replied the Baroness, " in music too we see,
as in all other arts, that there is a real as well as a false
side to it.    As the poet says—
' Close by the tree of truth and nobleness,
There stands its mockery and counterfeit—
The tree of falsehood ; which, whene'er the other
Has put forth some fair blossom or rich fruit,
Mocks it with a mean semblance of its own.'
Does not this apply to music I "
" In what way? " said Herr Donner ; "may I ask you
to explain your meaning i "
" I cannot better do so," said the Baroness, " than by
reading to you an essay which I have translated from the
German, with the intention of publishing it, and which I
have prefaced with some remarks of my own. It is not
long, and will not curtail the lesson very much."
Herr Donner bowed in reply, and the Baroness began
as follows :—
" There is nothing true or real which has not been
mocked by spurious imitations. Thus religion has ever
been followed by the mask of hypocrisy; philosophy by
the vain reflections of empty minds. The arts, too, have
never wanted for imitators, whose efforts, while they do
homage to the art they travesty, prove their authors
296 The Ladles Edinburgh Magazine.
unfit to be her worshippers. So, too, with music. Music,
like the sacred fire in the temple of Vesta, must have her
flame nourished only by the few, while she attracts the
distant homage of the many. But the many, unsatisfied
with distant homage, have kindled strange fires, and
worshipped false deities of their own making. These
false fires are the strains of spurious music, which, re¬
sembling the true in some of their elements, are to it only
what the tinsel and the false jewels on an actor's crown
are to the gold and diamonds on the diadem of a
monarch. How is it, then, that the vulgar throng have
forced their way within the sacred precincts which are
the birthright only of the consecrated few ? If we glance
for a moment at the history of music, we shall have the
best answer to this question. In Germany, rather than
any other country, is that sacred grove from which music
issued at first, like a goddess born to command. Full of
mystery as the myths of her ancient legends, strong as a
youthful hero, beautiful as the dawn that gilds the
summits of the pine-clad mountains, she came forth to
conquer. For a long period she reigned calmly and
solemnly in the strains of church music ; simply and fer¬
vently in the national songs that flowed from the heart of
the people; fully and triumphantly in the fugues and
suites of her most devoted followers. But after a time,
gay France and ardent Italy looked upon her from a dis¬
tance, and then wooed her to their side with costly orna¬
ments and rich disguises. She went to them ; she was
adorned, overladen, with jewels of false brilliancy, and
flowei's that faded while being worn. She returned, no
longer the same ; her former simple self forgotten : her
few real friends Avept to see the change, while the many,
even more strongly attracted than before, pandered to
her newly-acquired taste for ornament. Then England
saw her. Ignorant of her true origin and ideal, England
received her as she now was, laden Avith her many and
A-arious ornaments, from whatever country they came.
Everywhere she was receiA^ed and admired. The daugh¬
ters of the many played, on their pianofortes arrangements
of the falsely-expressive melodies heard in public. That
Avhich had glorified public performers should also glorify
them. They Avould learn nimbleness of finger, brilliancy
of touch ; nothing should be Avanting to their playing but
heart and mind. The old fugues, suites, and forgotten
melodies of bygone days, were too antiquated for them ;
Tlie Miislc-Master Nonplussed. 297
let them perish with their old-fashioned composers.
Something more lively, more adorned, should be learned
now; something which should cause the hearer to say,
not, ' What a noble piece of music!' but, ' What a skilful
performer!'
" Thus poor human nature is always mixing itself with
everything it does, and forgetting the deed in the doer.
And in this lies the degeneration of art into mere accom¬
plishment. Art is the showing forth of beauty, nobility,
perfection, as they lie hidden in mind ; accomplishment is
the showing forth of the powers of man, mean and shallow
as they often are. This sad falliug-off in music has
affected both p]ngland and Germany, but the latter is
more to blame for it; she knew what was good, and did
it not. England, having in her the germs of little more
than dilettantism in music, only followed with shallow
insight the example of her more experienced sister. And
the very ignorance with which she began has caused her
to sink more hopelessly and more deeply into the mire of
low views on art. She hears bad music more commonly
than Germany does; she accepts bad teachers without
detecting them. Hence she requires to be told what is
true and noble in the musical art ere she can aim after it.
And nowhere, on the subject of pianoforte-playing, to
which we are at present restricted, can such truth and
nobility be better pointed out than in the following
passages, translated from a work by Dr. Karl von Raumer,
on Female Education. The author writes for a country
where music is more truly appreciated than in England;
but the English public is being slowly educated, and
not a few are now familiar with the tone of opinion pre¬
supposed by Dr. Raumer in his readers. He writes as
follows :—
"' On Pianoforte Tuition.^
" ' Pianoforte-playing is natural to none; it must be
learned like a foreign language ; while singing, on the
other hand, is but our mother-tongue in an exalted form.
Thus in learning to play the piano, we are acquiring what
is emphatically an art. The teaching of this art ought
to be entrusted to none who are not masters both of it
and of the virtue of patience. In the course of tuition,
a difference very soon makes itself observable between
' From a small book On Female Education, by Dr. Karl von Raumer.
Xo. 22.—October 1876. 2 P
298 The Ladies' Edinhuvgli Magazi
ine.
the various learners. Some, not sutisfiecl with a smaller
degree of accomplishment in playing, pass on to a higher
stage and more advanced tuition ; but by far the greater
number of girls are contented with a lower aim of less
difficult attainment. Even their circumstances not seldom
confine them to this. In the country, or in small towns, a
master is not often found who is able to teach advanced
pupils; instruction is commonly given by teachers of
schools. It were well if these had themselves invariably
been trained in a good music-school, and had their taste
so formed that they would teach only good music to their
pupils. As a result of this, we should find that, by the
correct and expressive playing even of psalm-tunes and
popular melodies, or of their accompaniments, a great
deal might be done to cheer and elevate the atmosphere
of home-life.^
"'With regard to those who wish to have higher musical
tuition, it is almost necessary for them to seek for this in
large towns. But there, too, we regret to say, after an
immense expenditure both of time and trouble, the result
is too often only heartless brilliancy of execution for the
sake of display. It is necessary', therefore, to find the
right teacher. Among the many good teachers I have
known, I can think of none superior to the Music Director
Forkel, in Gottingen, who with heart and soul belonged
to the school of the great Sebastian Bach, of whose son,
Emanuel Bach in Hamburg, he had been a pupil.
"' In Forkel's biography of Sebastian Bach we find a
description of this great master's manner of teaching.
'No master,' says Forkel, 'has ever been so instructive,
so clear, so judicious in his mode of tuition as he was.
The first object of attention was the touch. All beginners
had for several months to play nothing but single
passages for all the fingers of both hands, with constant
attention to purity and distinctness of touch.' For this
practice he wrote six short preludes and fifteen two-part
inventions. He then introduced his pupils to his own
larger works, in order more fully to develop their
powers. To assist them as much as possible in conquer¬
ing difficulties, he adopted the method of first playing
' "A little private imitation of what is good is a sort of private devotion to
it, and most of us ought to practise art only in the light of private study—
preparation to understand and enjoy what the few can do for \is."—Daniel
Deronda, vol. v. p. 9.
The Music-Master Nonplussed. 299
over to them the piece which they were to learn, saying,
' That is how it ought to sound.' Such a method is com¬
bined with almost incalculable advantages. The pupil
who has heard the piece played through as it ought to be
played, is now placed in a position to guess at its true
character; he has in his mind an ideal which he is to
seek, by the most diligent practising, to attain. This is
in exact opposition to the mode of procedure usual with
music-masters, who give their pupils a hint of how single
passages in a piece ought to be played, while they are
still entirely ignorant of the general character of the
piece, and what mode of expression and performance it
demands as a whole; and yet, unless such an appreciation
of the whole has first been attained, the single parts
cannot possibly be rightly performed.
" ' The above is not true of pianoforte pieces, which are
patched together out of various materials, and ornamented
in the most florid style of modern art, but only of such as
have a decided character pervading them. Thus, in the
case of Bach's compositions, every part belongs so entirely
to every other part, that the oftener we play them, the
dearer they become to us,—^just as our affection for a
beloved friend continues to grow during all the time of
our intercourse with him. Coming thus, as it were, into
a personal relation with a piece of music, we cannot but
perform it with such a degree of fervour, that we shrink
from everything which might mar its beauty or degrade
it into a mere caricature. Would that teachers of music
were to be found, who, by endeavouring to teach in Bach's
manner, would again revive the pianoforte compositions
of that great master, with all their depth of feeling, in
which no trace of earthly passion lingers, but sacred
purity sheds its halo over all. Such music is most truly
suited to young girls,—immeasurably more so than the
falsely sentimental or extravagantly passionate com¬
positions which are too commonly placed before them,
" ' Though I am for fi-om thinking that a continued study
of Sebastian Bach's works alone is to be recommended
for young girls, yet I would strongly insist upon their
instruction being thorough from the very beginning.
Inferior imitative compositions ought never to be put
into their hands ; and it will be found that Bach's inven¬
tions and smaller preludes for beginners are not only
attractive, but possess the lasting value of true art. It
is generally allowed that children ought never to read
300 The Ladles^ Edinburgh Magazine.
anything of questionable influence, and the same holds
true in music. If, from the very first, they have never
either heard, sung, or played anything but truly good
music, their sphere of vision will widen as they grow
older; it will become to them a second nature to turn
away from the bad and ugly, and to discover and to love
the good and beautiful in any shape. They will value
the works of the great masters, however different from
each other: Palestrina and Lasso, Handel and Gluck,
not to speak of the simplest popular melodies, will all be
appreciated and loved. In the case of those, hoAvever,
who have early been accustomed to listen to inferior
music, how seldom are they able to conquer the lowering
tendency of this acquired taste, and to give all their
devotion to what is pure and lofty. A rare instance of
such a conversion in music, if we may use the phrase, is
found in a pupil of Forkel's. Having already acquired
some proficiency on the pianoforte, he wished to continue
his studies under Forkel. At the request of the latter,
he played a brilliant fantasia, quite, as he supposed, to
the master's satisfaction. When he had finished, Forkel
only said, "Now, my good friend, you must begin by
forgetting all that you have hitherto learned." Nothing
daunted by this advice, he became a diligent student under
his new master.    The story, as above, is told by himself.
" What has been here said of pianoforte-playing, is
mostly drawn from personal experience. To any one
who wishes to pursue the subject farther, I would
recommend Thibaut's invaluable work, On Punty in
Music, which has done marvels towards correcting and
improving the popular taste in that art. The editor of
the latest edition, Herr Ministerialrath Biihr, remarks in
particular, that by " purity in music" Thibaut does not
understand correctness in harmony or execution, but
something quite different; a higher, it might almost be
called a moral, purity. Hence he is a bitter enemy to all
that is meaningless or common, morbid or frivolous, and
wanting in depth.'
" The following passage in Thibaut's book is so full of
meaning that I cannot refrain from quoting it :—
" ' There are certain changes peculiar to the musical art.
In painting, anything ill-drawn or immoral tells its own
tale at once, and the eye is instinctively averted from it.
But under the veil of music, that which is morbid or
vicious may creep into the ear, and be received as it could
The Music-Master Nonplussed. 301
never be through the medium of the tongue or the pen.
If this be true, our composers and virtuosi have much in
their power. A descent to what is enervating, uncon¬
trolled, and to be avoided in feeling, is only too possible
by means of chords and strings. If the public have
become used to such a tendency in music, it will, with its
taste thus formed, insist on the continuance of such art,
and become a despot for the virtuosi.
" ' Plato, in his own time, fought his battle against per¬
nicious music. What would he say, could he listen to our
unnatural exaggerations and arbitrary combinations of
mild and melting, raving and excited moods, where we
are always striving to attain some end, but never reach¬
ing it, and still ceaselessly contending !
" ' Music, in its relation to culture at the present day, is
all artifice and ornament; difficulties without end; over¬
loading instead of the full clearness of harmony ; destitute
of all comfort and joy as its result, the gratification of
artistic vanity excepted. Hence all sensible ladies, when
they seek to beautify the region of home life, cast their
elaborate pieces of music to the winds, and are glad to
be rid of them.
" ' Music can only be divine, as she ought to be, when
she leads us into a realm of ideal feeling; and the com¬
poser who cannot lead us there, is nothing in reality but a
mechanic and a journeyman.
" ' Musical effect, that popular idol, is in general only a
result either of inability, or of that timidity which seeks
to please all. Nature does not advance by leaps; and
feeling, when it is healthy, does not wander anxiously
about, and does not soar beyond its true sphere. Your
favourite symphonies, fantasias, musical pot-pourris, are
therefore often the most ridiculous things in the world.
First a mysterious introduction ; then a terrible cannon¬
ade ; sudden silence ; all at once a waltz-like movement;
then, as if this had set the brain on fire, a hasty transition
into the meditative and lachrymose ; then immediately a
violent storm ; and out of the middle of the storm, after a
short and awful pause, comes a caressing movement,
which leads up to the finale, a sort of universal shout, in
which the various struggles of the piece end in a general
embrace and demonstration of affection. Yet all this is
popular; and why ?
" ' The worst of all is, that under this boasting title of
effect the rankest poison is hidden, and, by the mass of
302 The Ladies'' Edinburgh Magazine.
distortions, ravings, bewilderments, exaggerations thus
produced, the false in the nature of man is called forth, while
his sense of the true in music is poisoned and destroyed.
" ' In hearing music, our object is not to please the eye,
by looking at the fingers of the performers, and wonder¬
ing at their marvellous eflForts to produce nothing ; it is
the ear we seek to satisfy by what it hears, no matter
whether mechanical difficulties have been overcome in
the performance or not. We can excuse travelling
virtuosi for favouring us only with their extreme eflForts,
for the public generally prefers to see a rope-dancer stand
on his head, than to witness the representation, by a series
of elegant movements, of the ideal of gracefulness. But it
is deeply to be regretted that everywhere we see health,
time, and money thrown away in the eflFort to learn what
is empty and meaningless ; and that in this attempt to
gratify a whim, the art of performing simple pieces in an
expressive and flowing manner is almost entirely lost.
It is comforting to think that these exaggerated strivings
after eflFect are generally given up as soon as childhood
is over, and that those who in their youth were accus¬
tomed to hear simple and touching melodies, generally
take the greatest pleasiire in these in their riper years,
and on to the close of life.'
" These extracts Avill, I hope, induce those who have not
yet read Thibaut's book, to look into it for themselves.
After Thibaut, Winterfeld, who possessed, with a remark¬
able musical talent, the most extensive historical know¬
ledge, restored to light in his excellent historical works
much that had been forgotten in the history of the old
toasters and their works ; as, for instance, The History of
Eckard. I\Iay the nineteenth century, which, with few
exceptions, is so poor in musical productivity, bend its
efforts with success towards the revival of those master¬
pieces, so that they may again live among us as nobly
and as worthily as they deserve to do."
When the Baroness had finished reading, Herr Donner,
who had been listening most attentively, expressed him¬
self deeply interested in the essay. He soon afterwards
procured a copy of Thibaut's work, and the result was
such a complete revolution in his system of teaching, that
the Baroness had never again reason to complain either
of the loudness of his playing or the falsity of his method.
J. Menzies.
303
3;hau0ht  and  ^an5ua3«.
The first question which suggests itself in considering
this subject philosophically is, What is Thought? what
is Language ? in the aspects which fall under our present
discussion. Thought is popularly held to include all
mental operations, while its philosophical definition is
limited to the exercise of only one department of cog¬
nition, ■— viz., conception. Thought may be concisely
defined as classification.
Language, as its derivation implies, popularly means
speech ; either speech as a whole, or the speech of various
nations.
Technically, Language implies much more. The follow¬
ing table, quoted by Thompson firom M. Duval Jouve,
indicates its sphere :—
/ isr t     1       \ Conventional—Speech.
I j Absolute—Cries and gestures.
Languages are    - , Conventional—Emblems,    telegraphic
I  Artificial.   ] signs, hieroglyphics,  writing.
^ ( Absolute—Painting and sculpture.
Music should be included in the class of artificial lan¬
guage. I^he division of language with which this paper
has chiefly to do is speech, but the others are not
altogether excluded.
Language may be defined as materialised or external¬
ised thought; or, to borrow a Hegelian expression,
the other of thought. The meaning of the two de¬
finitions will, I hope, become apparent in the course
of this paper.
We next ask. Whence is Thought ? whence Language?
Are they properties or accidents of man %
The ultimate conception which Descartes reached, after
sweeping away all unreasoned opinions, is contained in
the formula, Cogito, ergo sum. This is not intended to be
an enthymeme {i.e. premises and conclusion), but mutu¬
ally implicative, and, in that sense, identical proposition.
The act of asserting individual existence, the conscious¬
ness and power of asserting / exist, implies Thought in
its higher and strictly philosophic sense; the exercise of
Thought implies the consciousness of individual existence,
the discrimination between the  ego  and  the   non-ego.
304 The Ladies' Edinburgh Afugazine.
Thought, then, is a property of man,—it is with him
identical with existence. The definition of man as a
rational animal may be received as indicating his chief
characteristic or attribute.
We have no historical knowledge of the origin of
articulate language, and the repeated experiments made
upon children have failed to elucidate anything of im¬
portance on the subject. We are therefore compelled to
work backwards, and seek light from other sources.
The various theories which have been brought forward
may be shortly classified as three,—viz., first, that
Language was of directly Divine origin; secondly, that
Language was the result of a convention of human beings
who found gestures and interjections insufficient for their
growing needs ; and, thirdly, that the cajmcity for produc¬
ing and using articulate sounds as signs of Thought is in¬
herent in man, and the production or rather eduction of
language coeval with thought.
It is unnecessary here to state the objections to the
two former theories. It Avould be assuming what is
still to prove, if I said that the first is untenable because
it would require the existence of Language to precede
that of Thought; and the second equally untenable,
because it would require Thought in its higher forms to
exist before and independent of Language. It is sufficient
to state that the third is the now generally held theory.
We can reach it first inductively, from the fact that
in all living languages man actually still exercises a
capacity for adding to Language such words as his
increased range of Thought demands ; and, secondly, Ave
may reach it by analogy. In all the exercises of
supreme power we observe that 'uniformly the simplest
methods to achieve a given end are selected; hence it
is improbable either that a special act of creative power
should be performed, or that the long and intricate
process of human invention be rendered necessary;—
that man was endowed with this capacity for producing
Language, is at once the simplest and most natural
solution of the difficulty.
Language may therefore also be regarded as a property
of man; and as such, its life, growth, variations, and
capacities, may be expected to be intimately connected
with his chief attribute—reason or Thought.
Passing over the many interesting questions here
arising, but  which  belong  more  to  philology  than to
Tliouglit and T^anguage. 305
philosophy, we next ask, How are Thought and Language
connected?    What is the nature of this connection ?
In order to explain this, it is necessary to premise that
in the study of psychology, human consciousness is sub¬
divided into certain parts, which the following table will
show:—
C    Cognition   or the     |     Presentation.
„       . knowing powers, <     Representation.
Consciousness      '. j-  ■ i j ■ i. I      r^ i.-
j. ., j .  . i divided into (     Conception,
divided into ' t-   ,• ^
I t eelmgs.
L    Desires and will.
Thought proper, as has been stated, is the exercise of
that division of cognition called conception. Cognition
consists of two other parts besides concepticm, viz., pre¬
sentation and representation. By means of the former
the mind obtains impressions of the external world; and
these, setting aside the debated question of mediate and
immediate perception, may be stated generally to be
obtained directly. Further, these impressions are only
individual objects. We apply the word percept to the
result in the mind obtained from them.
In representation, the impressions gained of the
external world by perception are ideally reproduced,
whether voluntarily or involuntarily. But mark that
these images are still only of individual objects.
It is not till we reach conception that we pass from
individuals to classes ; and here the product is obtained
mediately. The following is the process by which
we reach a notion or concept, the product of Thought
proper. We perceive an individual object; we represent
to ourselves similar object or objects formerly presented
individually to us; compare these, note or attend to
certain attributes common to both or to all; abstract
the attributes from the other dissimilar attributes, and
consider them as a unity. In other words, we exercise
the mental faculties of perception, attention, abstraction,
memory, and comparison, and the result of these is classi¬
fication. Percepts and ideas fade, and classes of things
take their place. The recognition of this unity of
resembling attributes common to an indefinite number
of objects, is the essence of the concept or notion,—and
it is here that Language steps in as an indispensable
adjunct of Thought. " At the first flash of reason as the
manifestation of the light within us, there we see the
true genesis of Language." ^
• MiiUer.
No. 22.—October 187G.
300) The Ladles' Edbihurgh Magazine.
There must be some rivet to bind together the concept
or notion; its meaning, technically called its content, has
a tendency to dissolve and be lost unless held together by
some artificial means, some mark by which it may be pre¬
served, recognised, and recovered without distinctly re¬
newing the whole process above mentioned. We accom¬
plish this by arbitrarily associating an articulate sign with
the connoted attributes—a sign which we learn by habit to
attach to each of the individual objects that possess these
connoted attributes. The verbal sign which thus fixes and
renders permanent the unity of the notion is a common
term. " The perception of objects—the feeling of their
resemblance in certain aspects—the invention of a name
for these circumstances of felt resemblance—what can be
more readily conceivable than this process ? " ^
That we should realise the nature of the connection be¬
tween the notion and the common term is not necessary,
for then there would be but one language, but purely
arbitrary and artificial. The sign has no natural or
necessary connection with the thing signified. It is in
this sense essentially non-significant. For example, the
words dog, chien, hand, cano, canis, have nothing in
common with the object they signify. Their connection
is brought about by our arbitrarily associating a non-
resembling sign with objects possessing certain groups of
attributes, the arbitrariness of this association implying
mind as the only efficient cause of such relation.
Some philosophers, notably Locke, Adam Smith, and
Brown, held that this verbal sign was applied in the first
place to one object, and after that to other objects pos¬
sessing one or more common resembling qualities gathered
out and regarded as a whole in the manner already de¬
scribed. Others maintain that class names have their
origin in the verbal sign let down upon the notion, and
that proper names even were originally general. The first
theory does not in any way controvert the kind of con¬
nection I have endeavoured to estabhsh between the
notion and the common term; for the parts of cognition
are so interwoven, that before a name could be applied
to a single object, the qualities of that object must be
regarded as constituting a collective whole; and this
gathering up of connection is in itself an act of thought.
It is but slightly lengthening the process to consider that
' BrowiCs PTi'dosojihy, Lecture xlv.
Thought and Language. 307
this sign is subsequently shared -wdth other individuals in
virtue of their possessing resembling attributes selected
according to an understood principle. Practically we
observe that children in learning to speak do apply words
first universally, and then to a more limited number of
objects, as they gradually attach defined connotation to
them. In other words, genera and species are at first
cognate ideas, and it is only by the exercise of Thought
that species are divided and regarded in their relation to
each other, and to higher and lower genera and species.
The notion we may regard as at once the germ and the
development of Thought,—and the common term occu¬
pies the same position in Language. The notion implies
and expands into judgment and reasoning ; the common
term implies and expands into all the parts of speech
necessary to the expression of reasoning.
We have seen that a common or class name is applied
to individual objects in virtue of their possessing certain
attributes in common with the other individuals to which
this name, term, or sign is also applied. This leads us to
note the fact that the name given does not necessarily
connect all the attributes of the object, but by indicating
certain attributes, it acts as a sign to us of the object as
a whole under a particular aspect. Hence the number of
terms which may be applied to the same individual,
according to the selection of the class or cluster of
qualities possessed by it in common with others. For
example, what is called in one aspect a dress, may in
another be called a covering; in another, silk, cotton, or
wool; in another, an accident; in another, a manufacture ;
and so on. We may, to speak logically, classify in five
modes, according to genus, species, difference, property,
and accident.
Another and an important point we must not fail to
remark is, that the notion and common term may be
regarded as respectively tmiting and expressing that
which is permanent, or we may even say essential, in
classes of objects. We naturally ask. What is this per¬
manent or universal something common to an indefinite
number of objects ? The endeavour to answer this
question has been a fjruitful source of dissertations and
disputations from the early days of philosophy until now,
and the broad division of opinions held into Nominalism,
Realism, and Conceptualisrn, has been the result: these
names being given according as the name, the common
308 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
attributes, or the mental conception of these attributes,
are held to be the real existence and the bond of union
between classes.
Language, then, is connected with Thought in a purely
arbitrary manner. We have found that there are three
distinct parts in this connection. There are the material
objects ; the notion formed of certain attributes common
to these objects ; and the articulate sign arbitrarily asso¬
ciated with the notion, and used as a symbol of the
individual objects.
The function of Language in its relation to Thought
falls next to be considered. It may be regarded under
two heads:—
1st. Language is the instrument by means of which
Thought is produced, preserved, and abridged.
2d. Language is the instrument by means of which
Thought is communicated to, and excited in, others.
1st. Generally speaking, the function of Language is
that of an instrument, but an instrument of such vast
powers that it may be ranked as almost, if not quite,
equal to that which it represents. Some philosophers do
indeed hold that Thought and Language are synony¬
mous ; but while granting that it is often difficult, if not
impossible, duly to ascribe to each their contribution to a
given result, I hold that, though intimately and insepar¬
ably connected, they are not identical. Certain elemen¬
tary stages of Thought we can undoubtedly reach without
the aid of Language. In common with many of the
lower animals, we can recognise and remember indi¬
viduals, iuvolving, as already said, certain exertion of
the conceptive power ; we can remember and compare
sensations; we can connect means with end, cause with
effect, but beyond this we cannot go. When we reach
Thought proper, and begin to compare and to classify, we
are absolutely helpless without the aid of language.
" Without language," says Schelling, " it is impossible to
conceive philosophical, nay, even any human conscious¬
ness." " It is in names," says Hegel, " that we think."
" Language and Thought," says Miiller, " are inseparable.
Words without Thought are dead sounds; thoughts with¬
out words are nothing The word is the thought
incarnate."
Here—referring to the table of Language given at the
beginning of the paper—I would remark, that although
Thought and Liuiguage. 309
spoken Language is the natural instrument by which man
aids himself in the elaboration of Thought, he is not
wholly dependent upon it. Those to whom this great
gift has been denied, have been taught the use of signs
to replace it; and it is an interesting fact as an objective
confirmation of what has been stated, that many of the
deaf and dumb (who thus employ signs to signify signs)
have stated that, until provided with an external set of
signs by which to rivet their notions, they were unable
to pass beyond the elementary stages of Thought above
indicated. If we analyse our thoughts, we find that we
are actually though silently employing words; some
people occasionally think aloud, generally unconsciously.
Another proof of the employment of Language even in
silent thinking is that, when we speak for some time in a
f(n-eign tongue, we find ourselves actually thinking in it,
the trains of thought being in no small degree affected
by the character of the language.
Another corroboration of the truth of the assertion is,
that not only do deaf mutes—Laura Bridgeman and
James Mitchell, for example—frequently move their
fingers unconsciously while engaged in thought, or while
dreaming—at other times, doubtless, having some kind
of mental conception of the signs ; but a gentleman who
was for long in constant communication with deaf mutes,
was frequently observed to move his fingers while
thinking, thus attesting the fact that Thought is
dependent in its exercise upon Language, though the
kind of Language is not necessarily articulate. " That
language in its most extended sense, i. e. some system of
signs, verbal or other, is essential not merely to the com¬
munication, but to the formation of thought, appears to
be proved by universal experience, and by the character
of conceptions as distinguished from intuitions." *
C. E. GuTHRiE Wright.
{To he continued.)
' Whately.
310 Jlie Ladies EJinhurgli Magazine.
Far in the soi;th, where the warm sun was glowing
On ruins deep in the desert sands of gold,
Broad-leaved acanthus o'er Greek vases growing,
There wheeled the swallows, they sang and they
caroled
"Art ever beautiful, how beautiful and old!"
Far in the north, where the sweet sun was shining
On terraced slopes that the pines overhung,
Ivy and fern over Greek vases twining,
There wheeled the swallows, they caroled and
they sung,
" Art ever beautiful, how beautiful and young!"
E. J. 0.
Scenes frflitt W\t life of an Jrish f andlonl.
( Concluded.)
Mr.   L   was much troubled with poachers, and he
was obliged to be his own gamekeeper as well as his own
ploughboy, though for a somewhat different reason. No
one who has not lived among the Irish peasantry can
understand tlie strength of a sort of undercurrent of
clanship which exists between them. They seldom or
never " tell on one another " to those aliove them. They
are extremly litigious among themselves, " taking the
la " (law) about the merest trifles; but should a landlord
wish his herd to prosecute a neighbour for trespass, he
will tell any lie, make any shift, rather than do it. A
herd has been known not to find out for weeks that an
adjoining farmer broke down the bounds fence every
night, and   let  his dairy cattle  graze all night  on Mr.
L 's land, and took  them   out, and made   up   the
fence every morning. Paddy dearly loves a hunt of any
sort. He loves his wretched shaggy mongrel greyhound
almost as he loves life. He has oiften been known to
work all day, and walk ten miles to some happy hunting-
ground on a moonlight night for the pleasiu-e of a course
or two.
Upojj one occasion Mr. L  and  his brother (quite
Scenes from the  Life of an Irish iMndlord.        311
a lad) were returning from the celebrated horse fair of
Ballinasloe in the west. The town of Thurles lay in
their route, and they stopped there to rest and refresh
man and beast. Thurles, as I know it, is a very fair
town, containing decent shops, a bank, a railway station ;
is the seat of a Roman Catholic Archbishopric, and the
site  of a  handsome   cathedral  chapel.     It  must  have
thriven since the time of which I speak, for Mr. L 
speaks of baiting his horses, and eating a chop at a
common public-house. He had two horses returning
from the fair besides the one he drove, brought so far by
a labouring man he had taken with him for the pm-pose.
This man he knew to be faithful. He had eaten his
dinner, and stood outside the house, leaning against the
wall. Through the open window of the room behind
him, he overheard a plot to attack him on his way home.
Twilight was closing in, and he thought, under the
circumstances, he had better start at once, while there
was any light left. So he quietly ordered the horses,
put his brother on one horse, leading the other; got up
on his car, and ordered his man up on the other side.
The man, who did not know the state of affairs, made a
moment's delay; a crowd gathered, and mud and stones
began to be flung.    Quick as thought, Mr. L  took
in the situation, and pointing to a very fat Avoman who
was making herself prominent in the mob, he called out
to his man—
" Make a feather-bed of that one, James !"
James  took  the hint,   caught the  surprised and  cor¬
pulent female in his arms, mounted the car with her, and
held her, kicking, screaming, struggling and scratching,
firmly on his lap.    Mr. L  plied his whip and they
drove rapidly away, followed by the hootings of the mob,
who threw no more stones for fear of hitting the captive.
Outside the town they put her down, and sent her home
in peace.
Here they   overtook   young  L   with   the   horses,
and the elder brother mounted, deeming himself more
equal to any emergency on horseback. Darkness soon
set in, black as ink. The hedges on either side were
indistinguishable masses. The danger was imminent,
for though our travellers could not see anything beyond
the black line of hedges, they themselves could be seen
from behind them. After a time they reached a high
deer-park  wall   which  ran   along  the   road   for   some
&12 The Ladles' Edinburgh Magazine.
distance: here, for obvious reasons, they deemed them¬
selves   comparatively  safe.     Mr.   L   was  riding  a
little in advance of the car. Suddenly, through the wall,
as it seemed, came a flash, a report was heard, and a
bullet whizzed passed him. He rode his horse straight
at the place, pistol in hand, but could see or feel
no one. Five shots in succession were fired at the party,
fortunately hitting no one ; but if the earth had opened
and swallowed the persons who had fired them, they
could not have disappeared more entirely. They were
nowhere   to   be   found.     Darkness   had  covered  their
retreat.     After  a fruitless   search,   Mr. L   and   his
companions continued their journey. The shots had
been fired through a hole in the wall.    So close must the
muzzle of the gun have been to Mr. L •, that next
day his horse's mane was found to be burnt by the
wadding.
Had  the spiritualists come across   Mr.   L ,   they
would certainly have turned him to account as a
" medium." Upon one, indeed upon two occasions, he
has had remarkable dreams, which he speaks of as
revelations. Such things are unaccountable, and some
people  profess utter disbelief in them  as facts.    I have
known too many well-authenticated instances, Mr. L 's
among the rest, to throw entire discredit upon what we
call in Ireland " sharp dreaming."
Mr.  L  had  attended  a  fair  at  a  long  distance
from home ; it was late when his business was transacted,
and as he was alone, and had several hundred bank-notes
about his person, he thought it best to remain all night
in the town. That night he dreamt that he was re¬
turning home in a covered car—that the car was stopped
by three men at a certain point on the road. These
men asked the driver if he was in the car, and when they
came to look into the vehicle he was not there.    The
dream was so vivid that Mr. L to this day believes
it Avas a vision. It produced such an effect on his mind,
that next morning he walked into the bank, ciit his
notes in two, put one set of halves into his pocket,
and asked the manager to send the other halves to him
by post. The impression was not lessened when he
found that an outside car was not to be had, and he was
obliged to set out in a covered one! Before the car
arrived at the spot where, in his dream, the men had
stopped it, h,e slipped quietly  out of the door behind,
Scenes from the Life of an Irish Landlord.       313
without letting the driver know what he was about
(any one who has driven in an Irish covered car will
know how easily this may be accomplished), and struck out
homewards by the fields. The car was stopped, at the
very spot he dreamt of, by three men, who asked the driver
for him : they looked into the car and found him gone.
It appears to have crept out that he had remained all
night in town, and would be home that day, carrpng a
large amount of money received for stock sold.
Such   are  a   few    of   the   adventures  which   befell
Mr. L   in  his   younger  days,  and   which I heard
from his own lips. I come now to some events
which   happened  within  my  own   experience,   while I
was  staying  in  Mr.  L 's  house.     In   the  year '69
the Irish Tenant League assumed a dangerous import¬
ance. The lower orders were in a ferment about fixity
of tenure. Inflammatory speeches were delivered to
assembled crowds in all parts of the country. The
Fenian agitation, which survived from 'G7, was
working itself off in this constitutional (?) manner.
Pseudo-patriots had given up the idea of obtaining
" Ireland for the Irish" by armed rebellion; it was now
to be wrung from the English Parliament in the same
manner as the great O'Connell had, with a better object,
obtained Catholic emancipation. Home Rule is the
ignis fatuus which poor Paddy now pursues. He is
made the butt (excuse the pun!) of an agitator, whose
debts (if report be true) made it advisable that he
should be a member of Parliament. But I am wandering
into the bewilderments of Irish politics; I had better
return to the thread of my narrative, lest I should lose
myself in the labyrinth!
Just when this ferment of opinion was at its highest,
Mr. L , who had lived in quiet for some years, be¬
came involved in a difficulty with two of his tenants.
His friends advised him to make any sacrifice rather
than move in the matter during the excited state
of public feeling. But he was not to be per¬
suaded to reverse the whole policy of his life; he had
risked many dangers, and would risk them again before
he abated one jot of his full rights. He might be shot
down in his old age, but at any rate he knew his duty.
and he intended to do it. So ejectments were served
on the two delinquent tenants, who at first seemed in¬
clined to go out peacefully enough.    The Tenant League
No. 22.—October 1876. 2 R
314 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
seized this opportunity; it was too good a one to be lost.
Mr.   L    became  a pretext.    They  took the tenants
under their protection, promising them moral and
monetary support; a Roman Catholic priest from the
neighbourhood joined the cause. The tenants an¬
nounced their intention of resisting the oppressor and
exterminator   to   the   death:   Mr. L   and   his  son
took their revolvers out of the cases in which they had
latterly lain, and the " ball" was fairly '' up."
At this time, as I have  said,   I was staying  in Mr.
L 's house.    We never knew whether he or his son
might not be carried home dead or wounded. The
utmost secrecy was observed as to their intended move¬
ments. If he was away from home, and a countryman
asked when he would return, that man was immediately
suspected of being a spy, and got an evasive answer.
It was not till then that I began to realise what sort of
life Mr. and Mrs. L  must have led for years;  the
constant watchfulness, and bracing of the nerves to meet
danger at any moment.    Driving along the road with
Mr.   L .   I   noticed   that   the    slightest   movement
could not be made within a field of the road on either
side without his seeing it, and this without any apparent
effort of attention. Long habit had made alertness
second nature.    Several times people dropped  in with
inquiries, saying they had  heard Mr. L  was  shot.
Once he drove me to a friend's house, and left me there
for the night; next morning I heard a report that he
had driven home by himself, been attacked and killed at
a named spot on the way. He received threatening
letters by post, and his yard gate was placarded with
a direful notice. A visitor came "croaking" to his wife
one day; at the end of a long catalogue of forebodings
she coolly remarked, " What can they do but shoot him?"
This ebullition of mischief was taken as matter-of-fact,
and the raven went away much scandalised!
Another time Mr.  L   was sitting reading at his
dining-room window, Avheu a black face peered in.    Mr.
L  recoguised it.    The man asked  him  if he  was
alone—Avas he  sure no one could overhear them.    Mr.
L  assured  him he might  say  what he wanted in
complete safety. He then said he had been offered a
sum   of money   (I forget how  many  pounds) to   shoot
Mr. L , but had refused; because one day, when he
and his family were starving, he had met Mr. L ,
Scenes from the Life of an Irish Landlord.        315
•who gave him half-a-crown; also adding that it was a
great temptation, as he was very poor, and they knew
that when they offered it to him.
"'Twas a pity you didn't take it," said Mr. L .
The  man   stared.     Mr.  L  repeated his   remark.
His auditor appeared to doubt his own sense of hearing.
" You might as Avell have taken it, for I defy you. or
any other man to sboot me.    I'd be too quick for you."
"Couldn't I shoot you now?" asked the man in
amazement, " What's to hinder me, and you sittin'
there ? "
For answer Mr.  L  presented a  revolver at him
through the window, before he had finished speaking.
The hero of the black face ejaculated " Oh—Ah! " and
recoiled.
Mr. L  and his son occasionally practised shoot¬
ing at a mark.    One day some labourers were standing
by, and expressed great surprise at some of Mr. L 's
capital shots. He laughed, and thinking it well not to
lose any opportunity of overawing the peasantry, asked
them " Do you see that snail there %" pointing to one
creeping up the wall. He fired, and cut the snail in
two with a bullet. Of course he might have fired at
it for half a lifetime before he hit it again, but the
occurrence served his turn, for the fame thereof spread as
only news in Ireland can spread, and I believe that happy
hit was eminently instrumental in preserving his life.
The day of ejectment came, and there was a pretty
little *' row." The work had to be done by force, but
it was done.    One of the parties, a decent old man, who
had lived all his life on the property, told Mr. L 
privately that it was not his wish to make any resistance,
but his life would not be safe if he did not make a show
of opposition;   such was the  pressure brought to bear
by   the Tenant  League upon   its proteges.     Mr. L 
allowed this man possession of the house for life, retain¬
ing the land himself
The other tenant, who had fought the battle of the
League in earnest, was thrown aside by its promoters as
a used tool. History records the fulfilment of none of
their   promises   of assistance;    and  after  a  time   Mr.
L   gave the  man £70 to   enable him to emigrate
and settle in America with his family. He could afford
to be magnanimous, having gained his point, thrown
discredit on the pretensions of the League, and gained
316 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
that respect which is the meed of a brave adherence to
right.
I have already Ungered too long over my subject,
and though numbers of other adventures start up in my
memory, 1 must leave them unrecorded. If any eyes,
not Irish, read these pages, I beg them not to form too
hasty and adverse au idea of our Irish peasants from
the data here given. Agrarian outrage has much de¬
creased of late years, occurring now in isolated and
unfrequent instances. Affairs are improving despite the
Home Rulers. Content appears as far oft' as ever, biat
the dove of peace hovers over our Isle, though as yet
she has not quite taken up her abode there. My little
tales have been chiefly culled from the shadow side (the
nature of my subject demanded that), but there is a
sunny side also; perhaps at a future time I may have
the pleasure of describing it. Erin's sons and daughters
will teach you how sunny it is, if you take courage and
eome and sojourn amongst them.
Mrs. R. 0. Leslie.
dtt Jnstru^tifltt h^ ^om^^aMtwct
" Sublimest danger, over which none weeps,
When any young wayfaring soul goes forth
Alone, unconscious of the perilous road,
The day-sun dazzling in his limpid eyes,
To thrust his own way, he an alien, through
The world of books ! "
Elizabeth Barrett BrowniKg.
Lectures for ladies are no longer an experiment; they
are a recognised part of modern city life, and their value
in giving unity and system to study is fully appreciated
by women. But their usefulness is necessarily limited to
those who spend the winter in town or within easy reach
of a lecture-room. The studious woman who lives in the
country is beyond their reach, and only feels the difficul¬
ties that beset the solitary student more keenly, when she
contrasts her lot with that of those fortunate persons who
are spared the previous question of, How shall I study ?
and the after-doubt whether their work has been tho-
On Insti'uction by  Correspondence. 317
roughly done or not. In England, the case of country
students has been met by a system of instruction by cor¬
respondence, which Ave are told answers exceedingly well.
We believe that a similar plan will be found to work well
if tried in connection with the Edinburgh Local Examina¬
tion, of which the centres are now so widely spread
over Scotland, and that a good starting-point for this
plan might be found by connecting it with the Edinburgh
Winter Preparatory Class taught by Mr. A. M'Glashan.
Corresponding students would then have the satisfaction
of knowing that they were working along with a large
body of i^o^'-workers; and if the same examination
papers were used, they might test their progress by com¬
parison. Nor do we expect that such test will show that
all the advantage is on the side of the students in the
Edinburgh class ; for, in some respects, it is more
advantageous to study in the country than amidst the
distractions of town life. Mid-winter and early spring
are trying months when spent in a lonely country-house
or in a Highland manse. There is deep snow on the
ground, or else the uninviting slush of a semi-thaw often
makes walking a matter rather of duty than of pleasure.
Of course everybody goes out, but even three miles to
your point and three miles home again cannot be spread
over more than a couple of hours and a half of existence.
There is no sitting out possible—lawn tennis on half-
frozen turf cannot be thought of—and only the hardy
can drive for hours in a pony carriage. In short, life is
carried on in the house, and leisure becomes more abun¬
dant as the days shorten. So far, the advantage may
seem to have been on the side of dwellers in the country ;
but let us not forget that there is a reverse to the pleasant
picture of much learned leisure among green fields.
For who that has not tried the experiment knows how
many of ihe long hours spent in toiling through stiff
books, chosen at random and read alone and without a
plan, appear, when looked back upon in after years, to
have been hours simply wasted %
And how can it well be otherwise ? we would ask.
Unless some competent adviser is at hand, how can a
girl know which books to select, still more, which parts
of these to leave unread, and which to study closely ?
Men are guided in all their studies, until they forget
how much they owe to their tutors ; and a scholar is apt
thoughtlessly to recommend the more elaborate books
318 The Ladies' Edinhui'gh Magazine.
rather than the elementary ones to some girl-student,
Avho is quite incapable of steering her way through the
shoals and quicksands which beset the beginner. If she
is exceptionally gifted, indeed, such advice may profit
her, for the greatest books are ever the best instruc¬
tors; but the chances are that the more she stands in
need of education, the more likely will she be to throw
these aside in disgust at their length and weightiness.
We remember how a learned metaphysician once told a
young friend that her best plan was to attack Kant at
once, and in German—for he had never been translated,
and was, in fact, untranslateable. The girl was a good
German scholar, but she timidly enquired which diction¬
ary she should use. Her informant replied, " There is
none worth using; you must have recourse to Grimm."
The writer was once advised in early days, long before
she had arrived at any idea of what was meant by moral
philosophy, to begin self-culture by reading the Ethics of
Aristotle in Greek, backed up by the Avholesome counsel
from the point of view of an Oxford classman, carefully
to eschew all translations. Another young lady was very
much puzzled by the epigrammatic advice, excellent in
its principle : " Never read any book that comes in the
book-box if you want to study in reality." Her counsellor
was quite right, but he spoke as the oracles did, in an
enigma, when addressing a girl who was in the habit of
industriously reading straight through all the polite
literature of the book-club, and who honestly thought
that she was doing the best she could to cultivate her
mind by ruining her eyes over this heterogeneous mass
of travels, biography, essays, etc.
Another ingenuous youth, fresh from the hands of his
coach, advised a good woman, across whose path of
district-visiting had fallen some shadow of reproach for
her bad political economy, "just to read bang through
Mill," by way of beginning that science, with a view to
its practical application! He found her hopelessly en¬
tangled in the fundamental principles of capital, darkly
feeling that though the sage was great and wise, yet
from his mind to hers had gone no spark of illumination.
What was to be done ? We are not fond of little
books, and blush to think that in this case we substituted
Mrs. Fawcett's Manual, knowing that we did evil that
good might come of it. But the sight of the treasurer of
a clothing-club, and a  successful stall-keeper at many
On Instruction hy Correspondence. 319
"charity bazaars," struggling single-handed with the
author of so many terrible sayings about " unproductive
expenditure," went to our very heart, and made us for
once forget our principles. To each and all of these
ladies how welcome would have been a system of instruc¬
tion by letter.
It may be m-ged, why set agoing a Scottish system,
when there is an English one already in operation ^ We
would reply—The Cambridge system is too expensive.
It costs £4, 4s. for each winter course, and we have
several times been met with the objection, "I cannot afford
it," when we counselled ladies to try this plan. For
Edinburgh we must have something decidedly cheaper,
if it is to answer at all.
Another objection is, that between the Scottish and
English examination papers there is a certain difference,
arising from different methods of instruction. Students
who have prepared in Scotland will be met by a some¬
what unexpected style of question in an English paper;
and, on the other hand, they will be judged by a slightly
different standard in the examiner's mind. And the same
would be true of students who, prepared on an English
system, should come forward to a Scottish examination.
It is a slight difference, but that it exists may be dis¬
covered by a careful comparison of, say, Edinburgh and
Cambridge examination papers, ^^'e ourselves were not
a little interested by discovering that a friend Avell
acquainted with both systems was able to recognise with
much accuracy which were English and which were
Scottish queries when they were read to her from the
papers of the Higher and Junior Cambridge Examina¬
tions, and from the Edinburgh Local Examinations,
and those set before candidates for the University
Certificates for Women in Literature and Science. In
the English papers a greater demand for minute accuracy,
especially in grammar, seemed to prevail; while the
Scottish examiners were, one might say, apparently on
the watch for anything that looked like original or
independent thought, and sometimes set questions to
test sagacity rather than study.
On another ground we would urge our young country¬
women to begin by preparing for the Edinburgh Exami¬
nations, even if they aim at after-distinction in Germany
or at Girton College. We refer to the all-important ques¬
tion of health, and we would beg them and their mothers
320 Tlie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
to follow the excellent counsels of Professor Calderwood,
contained in the preface to the Report of the Edinburgh
Local Examinations for 1876. He advises young students
to divide their work as much as possible, to take the
common subjects first, leaving the harder matters for the
following year. On this point reference to the Regula¬
tions Avill show how wisely merciful the University of
Edinburgh is to those hapless students who have passed
in all subjects save one, in allowing them to take up that
subject alone on the next occasion. This year it was our
fate to meet a highly intelligent girl, who had passed
briUiantly at Cambridge in all her subjects save one—need
we add, that subject was arithmetic? She was a good
arithmetician, and, trusting to her skill, had devoted her
time for special study to other things. In short, she had
not coached for this subject. She was met by unexpected
sums, lost her nerve, got puzzled, and made a mess of it.
Poor girl! she has to go through the whole series of sub¬
jects again—such is the rule,—and has to load her memory
with the dates, a string of historical and geographical
facts prescribed for next year s examination, besides keep¬
ing all her other rudimentary knowledge in sound working
order for twelve months to come. In Edinburgh, she
would have been allowed to try again in arithmetic if her
other papers were up to the mark.
Events march quickly now-a-days. Since the preced¬
ing pages were written, we have been informed that the
experiment of a system of instruction by correspondence
will be tried in connection with the Local Examinations
of the University of Edinburgh. It is intended to make
this plan as complete as possible, and it Avill, when fully
matured, be duly advertised.    We wish it all success.
Contributors are reminded that a Prize is oifered for the best Article on
any subject of Moral or Mental Philosophy appearing in the Ladies' Edin-
bargh Magazine till December 1876 inclusive.
The S'JBJIsCT of Debate for the next meeting of the Ladies' Edinburgh
Literary Society, October 7th, is—" Are the Works of Miss Ferrier superior
to those of Mrs. Gaskell ? "
The Subject of Debate for the following meeting, November 4th, is—
" Is German Literature equal to English ? "
Those interested in these Debates are rjferred to the List published in the
January number of this Magazine.
321
^&c^QlUciiQ\\5 of ttu  past.
Letter VIII.
My Dear Friend,—I hope that you are not ready to
exclaim witli Macbeth, " Lo ! an eighth appears !" At any
rate, I will promise that there shall not be " many more."
A curious instance of the effect of the association of
ideas brought about by music occurs to me in a story I
have heard of my uncle, John Kemble. In the scene
where Macbeth first makes his appearance returning from,
his victory, my uncle was in the habit of having played for
the quick march which brings him on the stage, the air of
" The Lass of Patie's Mill;" why selected specially I know
not. By some mistake the orchestra one night substituted
another Scotch air, " Lassie wi' the lint-white Locks,"
otherwise known as " The Rothiemurchus Eant," and he
felt it so impossible to proceed, that to the astonishment
of the audience no Macbeth appeared; till some one
pointing out the mistake, the right air was slaved, and
ERRATUM.
Page 310, Octoter No. of Magazine, for Artis Lixn<ja read Ars Long».
xrue ariist. i nave neara tnat my granamoiner, ivirs.
Siddons, used to keep the door of her dressing-room
open, that she might hear the king of France make that
treaty with King John, that in the next scene was to
send her on the stage with the despairing energy that
produced one of her grandest bursts, " Gone to be
married ! gone to swear a peace! " A frivolous remark or
thought at such a time would have seemed as misplaced
as it would have been destructive to the frame of mind
she felt it essential to maintain.
Although Mr. Kean (the elder) was certainly a true
genius, he was a very eccentric one, and could not be
called an artist in the highest sense of the word. He would
indulge in various strange exhibitions in the intervals of
his performances.    I have heard that after coming off the
No. 23.—November 1S76. 2 S
320 'lice Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
to follow the excellent counsels of Professor Calderwood,
contained in the preface to the Report of the Edinburgh
Local Examinations for 1876. He advises young students
to divide their work as much as possible, to take the
common subjects first, leaving the harder matters for the
following year. On this point reference to the Regula¬
tions will show how wisely merciful the University of
Edinburgh is to those hapless students who have passed
in all subjects save one, in allowing them to take up that
subject alone on the next occasion. This year it was our
fate to meet a highly intelligent girl, who had passed
brilliantly at Cambridge in all her subjects save one—need
we add, that subject was arithmetic? She was a good
arithmetician, and, trusting to her skill, had devoted her
time for special study to other things. In short, she had
not coached for this subject. She was met by unexpected
sums, lost her nerve, got puzzled, and made a mess of it.
Poor girl I she has to go through the whole series of sub¬
jects again—such is the rule,—and has to load her memory
with the dates, a string of historical and geographical
■fanfs nrpRpribed for next year's examination, besides keep-
tms plan as complete as possioie, anu it wiu, Avnen luuy
matured, be duly advertised.    We wish it all success.
Contributors are reminded that a Prize is offered for the best Article on
any subject of Moral or Mental Philosophy appearing in the Ladies' Edin-
hargh Magazine tiU December 1876 inclusive.
The Subject of Debate for the next meeting of the Ladies' Edinburgh
Literary Society, October 7th, is—" Are the Works of Miss Ferrier superior
to those of Mrs. Gaskell ?"
The Subject of Debate for the following meeting, November 4th, is—
" Is German Literature equal to English ? "
Those interested in these Debates are referred to the List published in the
January number of this Magazine.
321
^&s!,ol\ictio\\^ of tlifi  |3ast.
Letter VIII.
My Dear Friexd,—I hope that you are not ready to
exclaim with Macbeth, " Lo ! an eighth appears ! " At any
rate, I will promise that there shall not be " many more."
A curious instance of the effect of the association of
ideas brought about by music occurs to me in a story I
have heard of my uncle, John Kemble. In the scene
where Macbeth first makes his appearance returning from
his victory, my uncle Avas in the habit of having played for
the quick march which brings him on the stage, the air of
" The Lass of Patie's Mill;" why selected specially I know
not. By some mistake the orchestra one night substituted
another Scotch air, " Lassie wi' the lint-white Locks,"
otherwise known as " The Rothiemurchus Rant," and he
felt it so impossible to proceed, that to the astonishment
of the audience no Macbeth appeared; till some one
pointing out the mistake, the right air was played, and
he came on. My uncle was not musical, but this air had
associated itself so in his mind, that he could not throw
himself into the scene without it.
Some actors have made it a boast that they do not care
to keep up the illusion of the scene either before they
enter on or after they have left the stage ; that they can
go from the most tragic scene, and laugh and joke, and
return to it without an instant to composing thought or
face. This always seems to me to be inconsistent with the
true artist. I have heard that my grandmother, Mrs,
Siddons, used to keep the door of her dressing-room
open, that she might hear the king of France make that
treaty with King John, that in the next scene was to
send her on the stage with the despairing energy that
produced one of her grandest bursts, " Gone to be
married ! gone to swear a peace! " A frivolous remark or
thought at such a time would have seemed as misplaced
as it would have been destructive to the frame of mind
she felt it essential to maintain.
Although Mr. Kean (the elder) was certainly a true
genius, he was a very eccentric one, and could not be
called an artist in the highest sense of the word. He would
indulge in various strange exhibitions in the intervals of
his performances.    I have heard that after coming off the
No. 23.—November 1S7S. 2 S
^22 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
stage in the midst of his most tragic representations,
having worked up his audience, and himself apparently,
to a great state of excitement, he would suddenly
throw a somersaiilt, or perform any other tumbling feat,
in remembrance of the days when he acted harlequin in
the strolling companies to which in former days he had
belonged. I remember hearing my mother say that after
his fiery vehemence in the most exciting scenes of
Othello, Richard III., or others of his tragic parts, he
would walk calmly into the green room, place himself at
the pianoforte, and sing to his own accompaniment, Avith
sweet and graceful feeling, a little air of his oAvn composi¬
tion. He gave it to my mother, and I have often heard
her sing it. The simple words, to Avhich he gave great
pathos, were—
" Is it to try me
That you thus fly me ?
Will you deny me
Day after day ?
Have you no feeling
While thus I'm kneeling ?
My truth revealing
For ever and aye !
Or is it to try me," &c.
An original part is always desired by an actor ; one in
which he can fully bring out his own a^cavs, untrammelled
by even the remembrance or tradition of other performers.
Such a one had Fanny Kemble in Sheridan Knowles'
Hunchback, Avhich brought back the full enthusiasm
of her London audience, Avhen, as all audiences liaA^e a
tendency to do, they had almost Avorn themseh'es out
with admiration after her first season. Such a one was
Maturin's play of Bertram to Mr. Kean. It Avas a strange
Avild play, Avith bursts of stormy passion and beautiful little
gems of poetry. The story was painful, Aveird, and improb¬
able, and moreover requiring much toning doAvn before
it could be brought on the Edinburgh stage, as it then
stood. At all events it had its day, but Avas not likely to
survive AAdien the eccentric genius of Mr. Kean Avas no
longer available for it. My mother Avas the representative
of the heroine, and felt an amoiuit of interest in it, less
perhaps on account of its OAvn merits, than from her
interest in the dramatic production of the author of
" Women, or Pour et Conire;" a novel of striking interest,
Recollections of the Fast. 323
poetically written, which had fascinated her mind on its
tirst appearance, and which impressed her so much, that
when she went some time after to Dublin, she felt a great
wish so see the Eev. Mr. Maturin, whose writings had so
interested her. She did meet him at a party given by
Lady Morgan. It was somewhat of a disenchantment.
T hough a handsome man, he was what used to be called
a j^etit maitre in appearance, and more so in manner.
When introduced to my mother, he expressed a wish to
see her act, and asked what play she would recommend
him to select for that purpose. She said that she was
going to play Rosalind in As you Like it. " Ah," he said, "I
could not stand a sylvan play." This applied to ^s you
Like it was rather a startling announcement. The stories
told about him in Dublin were numerous. Among others,
that when his wife had lost a new-born baby, and he was
stopped in the street by friends enquiring after her
health, he replied, "My angel is well, but my cherub's in
heaven." Also, a friend of my mother's who was introduced
to him, said, that as he was walking about a ballroom with
her, he suddenly observed, " You'll hear odd stories of me,
but don't believe them. I have an ugly little wife at
home, but I am very kind to her;" and so I believe he
was, and I believe also that she was not ugly at all; but
such was the manner in which he preferred to speak : and
yet he was a man of genius of a kind, but could scarcely
be called a sane one.
In Dublin my mother made the acquaintance also of
Richard Lalor Shiel; and though I was very young at
the time, I have a clear remembrance of his brilliant
manner of talking, and his still more brilliant eyes—his
only remarkable feature, for his figure was insignificant,
and his face, but for those wonderful eyes, might be called
plain. He was bringing out a play at the time in which
my mother had a principal part, that of Callanthe. The
play was Damon and Pytliias. I remember hearing that
he used to get much excited when superintending the
rehearsals of his plays, and that once in giving directions
to one of the performers he perpetrated an Irish bull, ex¬
claiming, " Now, Mr. So-and-so, you draw your sword,
and you find you haven't got it." I do not think that any
of Mr. Shiel's plays are ever acted now. Damon and
Pythias was perhaps the most popular, and Mr. Macready
was thought to have made a good deal of the part of
Damon.     Ecadne,   or   The   Statue,   was another   of his
324 The Ladies' Edinhurgh Afagazine.
productions, which was occasionally, though I believe not
frequently, acted.
My mother met with a most striking instance of Irish
hospitality on this her first visit to Dublin. A gentleman
to whom a friend of hers had written to ask him to secure
lodgings for her, replied that he did not know any good
enough, and that he lioped she would come to his house,
where he would endeavour to make her comfortable. She
explained that she was travelling with her family. This, he
assured her, made no difference; and accordingly, on
arriving, we were received in this very hospitable manner.
Our kind host was a married man with twenty children
and a very pretty wife, who looked about the age of her
eldest daughter. They were all presented to my mother
the next morning, ornamented with tartan ribbons in her
honour. As one after another came into the room, down to
a little one of three years old, they made a most amusing
and interesting procession.
During my mother's engagement in Dublin, a rather
curious controversy took place in the newspapers, owing
to some of them remarking upon her pronunciation of the
word conjure in the epilogue to As you Like it. They
understood it as if Rosalind meant coujure in the sense of
entreat, and said that that they supposed it was a Scotch
manner of pronouncing the word, which they objected to,
and requested her to amend. Now, as Rosalind expressly
says, " I am not furnished like a beggar, therefore to beg
will not become me," it is not likely that she would use a
Btill stronger appeal and conjure her audience. But her
way is to co?ijure them; and what also makes for this
reading is, that Rosalind, when promising Orlando that
she will bring all things right for him, says, " I have,
since I was three years old, conversed with a magician
profound in his art, and yet not damnable." He replies,
" Speakestthou in sober meaning? " to which her answer
is, " By my life I do, which I tender dearly, though I say
1 am a magician." This certainly leads to the conclusion
that Rosalind would be more inclined to carry on her
playful assumption, and profess to co7ijure, than to conjure.
A friend made this explanation for her in the newspapers,
and although it was a good deal debated, she seemed to
have convinced the objectors ; for when, on her benefit
night, she repeated, " My way then is to conjure you," she
was stopped by an assenting round of applause.
The last time I heard of Lady Morgan, who was one of
Recollections of the Past. 325
the queens of Dublin society at the time I am speaking
of, was from my aunt Mrs. Combe, who met her at a
water cure establishment in England, full of spirit and
energy; and although past eighty, attired in a round hat
and flowers, like a little old fairy in the costume of a
shepherdess, but very conversational and entertaining.
] believe that the first of her writings which broiight
her into notice, was a novel called " The AVild Irish
Girl." It was supposed to be a sort of history of her life,
which was a curious one, and full of incident. I do not
know how her novels might be liked now, but they were
much run after when they first appeared; and that she
was a woman of original genius there can be little doubt,
and she fought her way bravely through many diffi¬
culties. She was essentially Irish, though of a different
type from Miss Edgeworth, and was reared under very
different circumstances. I remember thinking her me¬
moirs very amusing, when they appeared more than
twenty years ago. She married Sir Charles Morgan, a
physician, and travelled about a good deal with him. She
published a book on France, I think, which was much
read at the time, and also the memoirs I have mentioned
above. I sometimes think it would be interesting to. read
one other books and one of Miss Edgeworth's staid novels,
followed by one of Miss Austin's and Miss Ferrier's,—Irish
English, and Scotch, and see where one would give the
preference. I think, much as I admire Miss Ferrier, I should
decide for Miss Austin.
Ever yours sincerely,
E. H. M.
" There are, it may be, so many kinds of voices in the world, and none
of them is without signification."—1 CoR. XIV. 10.
Beechex-greex and shade of oak embracing,
Shafts of rarest sunlight stealing through.
Minster-stillness, save where restless songsters
Flit from bough to bough.
Here to right a mossy track meanders,
There to left extends a flower-strewn glade.
Where coquetting fern-fronds fleck the sunshine
With capricious shade.
326 The Ladies^ Edinhiwgh Magazine.
Comes the Squire, at amble pace slow riding,
Sees but merely timber all around,
Hears the woodman's axe which falls unceasing;
This,—the only sound.
Comes a sportsman, thoughts upon his game-bag;
Comes a schoolboy whistling through the trees ;
Comes a hunter—but the silent forest
Has no voice for these.
Comes at last a poet, simple-minded.
Strolling homeward by the woodland Avay ;—
Lo I at once a sweet and sudden clamour
Stirs the still spring-day.
Bird-throats wake to warble of the summer;
Soft in dim blue distance coos a dove ;
Bending lady-birches sighing, falter
Tender tales of love.
All the dumb woods break into a chorus,
Blend varieties of silver sound :
Aspens whisper,—golden gauze-winged insects
Murmur all around.
What sweet brooklets wander on melodious,
Full of wilful turns and sudden falls,
Where the dragon-flies flash through the rushes!—
How the cuckoo calls!
What grand monotone of bees uncounted !
What rare madrigals from hidden choirs I
While soft winds, in harmony entrancing,
Touch their sylvan lyres.
Then a sound of faint and far-off chiming
Smites the poet's ear from hidden dells;—
'Tis a lowly group of pure vale-lilies,
Pealing fairy bells.
Something of their tones he can interpret,
Something tell they of some Unseen Friend,
Planning, blessing, and for all providing.
Loving without end.
Scene: an EnglUh Forest. 327
Ring the lilies : " It is He who clothes us
In our robes of spotless loveliness; "
Chirp the sparrows: " He it is upholds us,
Feeds us in distress."
Then the poet goes his way the blither.
Sings to all men of this forest voice;
Bids them seek and prize its accents, bids them
Listen and rejoice.
Tells them how the woods are always speaking
Unto simple hearts that care to hear,—
Tells how nature will reveal her secrets
If men hold them dear.
Lord of Nature ! make us purer-hearted
To discern Thee!—Thee in Thine to seek,—
Then shall we bend loving ears to listen
When Thy A^oices speak.
Gratia.
Wki ^luutoiu of tJirtorn.
A GLORIOUS morning in May ! Grand masses of shadow
floating billow-like over green meadows; white clouds
sailing proudly over a deep blue sky; wafts of hawthorn
and wild rose in the intoxicating air; a fresh breeze
tossing the rich laburnum blooms and tender budding
branches,—all go to make a picture which is seen, and
seen only to perfection in Old England. Scenery may be
fine'r, mountains grander, rivers nobler in other countries,
but nowhere is vegetation so lovely, is nature so tenderly
arrayed, is the air so deliciously balmy, as on a May
morning at home ! There are suburbs around London—
within half-an-hour's reach of that busy, noisy, unromantic
city, where there are hidden rustic beauties of woodland,
common, and dell, which would gladden weary hearts and
freshen dusty lives, would they give themselves the time
to look for them. About the neighbourhood of Richmond
and Surbiton, where the river winds through the wooded
glade, there are s{-)ots unrivalled in valley scenery, there
are green lanes whose soft breath fans your cheek with a
scented breeze; lanes through whose tangled ftp^een you
328 77(6 Ladles Edinburgh Magazine.
catch glimpses of undulating country—hills and dales
with nestling villages and old church-towers between;
and the only thing to remind you of the vicinity of a city
is the oft-recurring whistle of the prosaic railway train.
On such a morning and through such a scene the train
came rushing into the station at Surbiton. A girl, small,
pretty, and very young looking, opened the door of a first-
class carriage and got in. There was only a middle-aged
couple seated at the further end of the compartment, and
they seemed too pre-occupied to take any notice of the
new-comer beyond a casual glance. It would have been
difficult to discover on Avhat errand she was bent there
travelling alone, but that it Avas on some very pleasurable
one was evident, for unconscious smiles dim23led the sweet
young face from time to time, and merry thoughts seemed
rippling over the parted lips.
It was a careful, thoughful little face too; at least
looking at her, an observant eye would see that at home
she was sure to be one who charged herself with the care
of others; to-day she was holiday-making, and bent on
doing it well. The little motherly way in which she
spoke to the newsboy at the window, and bought a
paper from him, which however she did not open, was
pretty to see, and betokened an oldness of thought far
her beyond years.
Her dress too was evidently chosen iu honour of the
day,—a blue ribbon tied back unruly little rings of hair,
which would curl round the fair temples and escape be¬
neath the broad shady hat; her soft grey dress was
lightened with blue knots here and there ; and the tiny
straw basket, with her luncheon evidently provided in it,
Avas likewise tied with the sn-me bright colour. A subdued
air of coquetry, or rather coquettishness, was visible inTier
whole appearance; altogether she was a sweet, and you dis¬
tinctly felt would be a fascinating thing. She seemed to
revel in the sylvan beauty of the country through which
she was swiftly passing, till, attracted by some words of
her fellow-passengers, she turned to observe them, and
Avonder as travellers do, who they were and on what
errand they were bent. " At any rate," she comfortably
concluded at the end of her sin-vey, "they cannot be
as happy as I am." Strangers as they Avere, not
having spoken, and scarcely ever glanced at each
other, their lives Avere henceforth to be intertwined
by   the  mere   fact   of little  Lucy   Normand's  stepping
TJie Shadow of llctoiy. 329
into the railway carriage that sunny morning. The
gentleman, she thought, was a most restless individual;
he rustled and unfolded his newspaper, cut up several
maga;:ines, looked out of the window, and changed his
seat from one side of the carriage to the other, seemingly
quite unconscious that he was doing so ;—for my heroine
heard him say to his wife, who sat quietly looking at the
view, " Edith, if you will just take a book and read ; it will
keep you from being excited, and shorten the time."
"My dear Henry," she replied, smiling, "I am very happy
as I am, and I am not at all excited ; at least I can keep
my feelings quite within bounds."
" Women are always so fidgety when they expect any¬
thing or anybody," her husband said blandly ; but the kuly
simply laughed.
Such a sweet, good face, thought Lucy to herself, de¬
riving some amusement from the old gentleman's eccen¬
tricities, " I wonder what they are excited about: can
they be going to meet somebody too f The elder lady
looked in her turn at Lucy, and thought she must be
a school-girl going to spend a day with some friends,
or, seeing the tiny basket—going to join a pic-nic
party. What a charming day they would have looking
for wild flowers, and how pleasant to leave a hot school¬
room in such weather. How enthusiastic over small
delightswas youth; what numberless adventures, incidents,
possibilities, an hour contained,—and how soon did the
season of such enjoyment pass !
" I hope we'll be in to time," exclaimed the old gentle¬
man, hurriedly consulting his watch ; " it would be very
provoking if the ' Euryanthe ' was in before us."
Lucy started ; they had struck a chord which vibrated
with considerable interest for her. How very strange
that these two should also be going to meet some one
from the same ship she was going to meet. Her
attention was all on the alert now, and her mind
flew off into wild conjectures who it would be. It was
quite romantic, and quite in keeping with her travelling
by herself, a most unusual occurrence. AVhat food for
after talk on happy summer days !
" I don't think it can be in so soon, Henry ; but we
are very near now, I can catch a glimpse of the sea.
The old gentleman craned his neck from the window,
as if his life depended on catching the first possible
glimpse of the ocean, and Lucy mentally trusted the door
Ko. 23.—Novr.MBER :8iC. 2 T
330 The Ladies Edlnhurgli Magazine.
was locked. " Keep calm, Edith, I entreat you, and
occupy your mind with something. How odd to see
Herbert in another hour !"
A bustle at the station. The little figure tripped out
heedless of the crowd, too interested in her own business
to feel shamefaced or afraid ; and her fellow-passengers
thought no more of her till, at the outside entrance, the
lady heard her ask a porter lounging near " if the ' Eury-
antiie ' had come in yet." " She's sighted. Miss ; I think
she'll be in in about an hour," was the reply. She turned
to look at her; her indifference suddenly quickened to
interest. " Pretty little thing," she tliought, " come
down to meet her father probably. I might have spoken
to her, and she could have gone along with us." But she
Avas out of sight before the elder lady's f;\ncy took form.
The Mansfields took a cab and drove to the wharf where
the expected vessel was to land. The busy seaport town
wore a holiday garb ; about the docks there Avas a look of
expectancy, some flags were flying, several sliips displayed
gay bunting, a band was playing " See the Conquering
Hero Comes," and a considerable crowd was collected to
give a small body of our brave soldiers a hearty welcome
back to their native shores. For we had had a short, sharp
fight abroad. Some little insult had been offered to a
government servant, or some encroachment made on our
prerogative, on an unhealthy foreign shore, and hundreds
of our soldiers must needs die of disease, and sunstroke,
and on the battle field, to avenge a petty wrong. When
will Avar cease out of the land? There had been some
brave deeds done ; and out of a decimated regiment the
" Euryanthe " was expected this morning to bring home a
handful of invalided troops, some of Avhom-Avere to receive
the Victoria Cross and to be Avelcomed as heroes. Cer¬
tainly the glorious summer morning had hung out all
her banners of Avelcome, and some hearts Ave Avot of Avere
throbbing almost painfully with hope and expectation.
The first figure Mrs. Mansfield saAv on the Avharf Avas that
of her travelling companion, modestly standing a little
apart from the crowd, and Avith her hand shading her
brown eyes, looking steadily out at the distant ship.
Her husband having gone to a bench at some distance,
]VIrs. ]\Iansfield advanced to the girl, saying pleasantly,
" I think I heard you asking about the ' P^uryanthe.' We
must both ha\'e come on the same happy errand to meet
friends.    I am so sorry I did not knoAV in the train."
The Shadow of Victory. 331
The girl laughed a merry little laugh, " I guessed it
when I heard your husband mention the ship. Aren't
they having a lovely day to come home? "
" Shall we wait here together ? It is pleasanter for two
ladies; and my husband," added ]\Irs. IMansfield laughing,
" is so fidgety about meeting our boy, that he cannot rest
one moment, and thinks it is I who want calming down.
It is your father I suppose you are expecting ? "
"No," said the girl, a red flush mounting to her fore¬
head. " It is a friend,—I am going to be married to
him, and—"
" But are you not very young to come alone so far ? "
asked the lady still gently, but her tone conveyed a
certain sense of being shocked. " Had you no friends to
accompany you ? "
" There is nobody but grandpapa, and he is very old ; I
have been accustomed all my life to go alone," she
answered with a certain simple pathos. " And," she added
after a pause, with a shade of petulance in her voice, " I
could not let Charlie come back with nobody to welcome
him, but "—now quietly, " I meant to go back by the next
train if the ship had not come in before dusk."
" Forgive me, dear, " said the elder lady gently, " for
seeming even to question your actions. One never knows
the circumstances of others, and I think I can judge faces
too Avell to think any wrong of you. Was your friend
wounded in the war? "
'• Yes," replied the girl proudly, her eyes flashing, " and
he is to have the Victoria Cross. He was specially men¬
tioned as being very brave—dear Charlie ! "
Her face was radiant when she mentioned his name,
dimpling all over with happy smiles ; her heart Avas
singing an inward song of fervent thanksgiving, and she
could hardly hold her little feet from keeping measure to
her heart's music.
" We seem to know each other, don't we ? " she said,
keeping close to ^Irs. Mansfield's side, but scarcely letting
her eyes once wander from the fast-coming ship. " Per¬
haps yo}ir boy knows Charlie ; how strange ! 0 ! " she said,
as a long wild cheer rang out over the water, faintly
echoed back from the ship, " Isn't that a glorious sound ?
God is so good, and the world is such a happy place ! "
Mrs. Mansfield looked tenderly at the pretty, eager face
upturned to hers. How would that sunny spirit brook
sorrow, if such should be in store for her ?
332 The Ladies EJinhurgh Magazine.
" Were yon not afraid to let your Charlie go to the
Avar ? " she asked, smihng.
" No," she made answer proudly; " I am a soldier's
daughter, and I would not have said one Avord to keep
him ; but ah ! I am so thankful he is safe back."
" Yes, but there must be some heavyhearts," mused Mrs.
Mansfield, half to herself, " waiting this ship,—some
women to whom it is bringing nothing, and worse than
nothing, back."
" Please don't say that," said the girl quickly, Avith a
shiver; ''at least not to-day. Look, there are evidently
A'ery few of the croAvd Avaiting friends, and only a small
company of the troops is coming by this mail. Oh, this
must be entirely a happy day ! "
Mr. Mansfield approaching, his VviTe briefly explained
the history of her new acquaintance, Avhen he immediately
besought the little girl nc^t to show any emotion, but to
occupy her mind Avith something for some minutes more.
NoAV the ship was near enough to distinguish figures and
faces, and Mrs. Mansfield exclaimed, Avith a half sob,
"That's my Herbert leaning oA'erthe bulwark. I aa^ouUI
know his figure anywhere."
" I don't see Charlie," cried little Lucy, as every moment
brought the vessel nearer. '• Where can he be ? Oh, I
daresay," she said, a sudden thought striking her, " not
knoAving anybody would be Avaiting, he has offered to let
some of the others stay on deck while he is with the
troops below."
Mrs. Mansfield smiled at this complaisant idea of mili¬
tary discipline, but said nofhing to discourage her com¬
panion.
NoAv the ship Avas licar enough to see young Mansfield's
handsome face and uncovered head as he waA'cd bis cap to
his parents; and one could see groups of ^^ale-faced, traA'el-
Avorn men, in A^arious stages of convalescence, standing
on the deck.
What a deafening cheer rang out once more as the
gallant sliip came alongside the pier. What AvaA'ing of
caps on board and on shore. Hoav little Lucy Normand's
tiny handkerchief Ava\'ered between her swimming eyes
and fluttered in the air: hoAv excited Mr. Mansfield be¬
came ! Taking his Avife's hand Avithin his OAvn, he called
to her to lose no time in j^ressing forAvard to be among
the first to step on board, crying out. " Come here, little
girl; keep close to my side, and there's no fear but that
The Shadow of Victory. 2>\?>
we   will   see  your  friend  in  two  minutes;   just   keep
calm.''
There was no need for the advice ; a sudden quiet had
overtaken the girl, succeeding the joyous thrill of expec¬
tation of the previous hour. It had not yet taken
the place of fear, but was a vague numbness which
possessed her spirit. The rosy face was a little paler
than before, and the breath came more quickly through
the parted lips.
At last they were on board, and little Lucy was for the
moment forgotten in the mother's welcome to her boy.
" Herbert, my darling ! thank God you are home! " whis¬
pered the fond mother, hiding her tearful eyes on her
handsome boy's breast; while, with a true Englishman's
greeting, Mr. Mansfield accosted his son as if he had seen
him the week before. "■ Well, my boy, got back, eh ?
How brown you are ! Pretty well frizzled in these parts,
eh?"
Meanwhile Lucy, left to herself her eyes encountering
no known face, found courage to go up to a soldier, and
vainly trying to steady the tones which had now an
accent of fear in them, said, " Please can you tell me if
Captain Wyatt is on board ? "
The man stared at her for a moment, and then said
hesitatingly, " Captain Wyatt of the—th. I—I am not
sure. Miss. You see I'm a marine; perhaps some of the
reg'lars will know. You should ask the cap'n. Miss, or
here's a soldier. Here, Wilson," calling to a man passing.
" A young lady wants to know if Captain Wyatt is on
board. Poor thing! " he muttered, as he turned away.
The soldier looked at her compassionately, and said
slowly, " No, Miss, he's not with us."
She turned away, ghastly pale now. " Will no one tell
me ? " she cried passionately, not knowing she spoke
aloud. Her voice attracted the notice of Mrs. Mansfield,
who had till now been too much occupied with her son
to remember aught of lier late companion. She turned
round at the same instant as the young girl touched her
on the arm, and indicating the young officer, said, " Per¬
haps he'll know why Charlie hasn't come home with the
rest."
" Oh," said Mrs. Mansfield, turning to her son, "my little
friend has ccme to meet a brother officer ;" then smiling,
she turned to the girl, saying, " but you have only called
him Charlie to me, and I dori't know his surname."
334 Tlie L,acUes' Edinhurgh Magazine.
The words had hardly left her lips before her son's face
assumed a serious look, as he took the girl's hands in his,
and looking tenderly into her earnest upturned eyes,
said, "Charlie Wyatt, and you are little Lucy Normand ;
poor child !"
She quickly disengaged her hand from his clasp, and
saying hoarsely, " You need not tell me any more;
— Charlie is dead," she staggered to the side of thrj boat
and clung to the bulwark for support.
" He died last Wednesday, and was buried at sea."
Poor little Lucy ! She stood looking down on the blue
and dancing waves, which had suddenly become a wild
and Aveary waste, a "wandering grave," for her. The
thanksgiving song of her heart, to which her feet had
kept music not ten minutes ago, had frozen on her lips,
and the "God who was so good," and " the world which
was so happy," what had they become? A loud, ringing
welcome burst out as the crowd slowly dispersed, bearing
the heroes along with them, and for the first time she
moved. An expression of pain, as of some sudden stab
at her heart, passed over her face ; and she put up her
trembling hands to her ears, as if she Avould shut out the
horrid sound, that same cheering which she had but now
said was the grandest music to her ear.
Mrs. Mansfield went up, and putting her arm gently
round the passive figure, slowly drew her away. '• Herbert,
darling," she whispered to her son, " 1 shall have you all
to myself by-and-bye ; we must not show our joy too much
before this poor little Avounded thing, but do what Ave
can to comfort her."
Her tender mother's heart brooded OA'-er the motherless
orphan in this sudden darkening of all her bright young
hopes; and she had the sense few comforters have, to be
still and attempt no word of sympathy or healing Avhilc
the Avound Avas so fresh.
"I Avould like to go home," Avere the only Avords Lucy
said, as they took her to the hotel; and Avhile the others
Avere partaking of some refreshment she sat by the fire
in a chair which Mrs. Mansfield had draAvn up iov her.
She tried to smile her thanks for the unspoken love and
pity of every action, the Avarm shaAA'l coA^ering her feet,
the cup of tea brought to her, the tender hand laid lovingly
on her hair, the nameless charm of silent sjmipathy ; but
it AA'as a Avan sickly smile Avhich died aAA'ay on quivering
lips.    It was the same in the train : the little lonely figure
The Shadow of Viclory. 335
huddled itself up in a corner of the carriage and gazed
into vacancy; the rest, after making her as cnmfortable
as they could, sat talking quietly, considerately mindful
of their companion. Once, about half way, she turned
abruptly round and said to Herbert, " What hour ^vas it?"
The young man pulled out his watch, naturally thinking
Bhe wished to know the time of day, but with an almost
impatient gesture she added—" that day—that Wednes-
" About six in the evening," he replied.
She gave a little convulsive cry. " And I was singing
merry songs while Charlie was dying—God forgive me!"
!She sat silent again until, seeing by the gestures of her
friends as they were nearing iSurbiton, that they were
consulting which of them would accompany her home,
she moved her seat, and earnestly rec^utsted them
not to come. " I have only a little bit to walk, and grand¬
papa will be looking out for me." Then, as if the recollec¬
tion of him who ought to have been with her and was
not, was too much for her, she stopped to steady her voice,
and continued hurriedly—" Don't think I have not felt
all you have done for me to-day. I think you must be
like what mamma would have been to me if she had lived.
You will come and see me by-and-bye;" and turning to
Herbert, she added, " You will tell me all about it, and—
him, when I am able to bear it, in a day or two." 'J'hen
as the train stopped, she put up her sweet face to Mrs.
Mansfield, and as she kissed her, she whispered, " I am glad
God let you have back your boy."
Mr. Mansfield, who never, by his own account, under
any circumstances allowed his feelings to get the better
of him, had considerable difficulty in steadying his voice
for some time after. Mrs. Mansfield was sobbing and
Herbert was saying, " Poor child, for she is nothing more,
■—what a trial for her. He was a fine fellow, Wyatt, too,
and desperately fond of her."
They strained their eyes through the twilight to watch
the tiny figure pursuing her lonely way, and Mrs. Mans¬
field lay awake half the night thinking of the heavy
heart the young orphan bore, wondering how she had
taken the news to her grandfather, and praying that
some comfort might be given to the stricken soul. Lucy
meanwhile got home through the leafy, lovely lanes of
Hurbiton to the tiny cottage looking on the Thames.
The blinds  were not drawn,  and a bright  welcoming
33() The Ladles  Edinlmrgh Magazine.
light shone clear into the shrubbery, giving a weird shine
to the lilac and laburnum trees; the dinner was laid
on the table with an additional place for the welcome
guest, the hero of this little home. So sick at heart
did the sight of this now useless preparation make her,
that she almost ran up the garden walk, pushed back the
old servant arrayed in all her finery, and rushing into
the little drawing-room, sank down at her grandfathers
feet, and throwing her arms about his knees, cried " Be
kind to me, grandpapa, for my heart is nearly broken! "
How long she sat there, trembling and hollow-eyed;
what a lonely niglit she passed in her white-curtained
room that cruel night; what bitter anguished jirayers
she prayed; what memories of days long ago, which
seemed much nearer to her now than the bright memories
of the sunny morning not yet a day old, she conjured
up, we know not. This we know, that some comforting-
angel did come and fill the burning wells with tears,
and though it was a pale weary face that showed next
morning in the sitting room, it Avas that of a softened,
chastened child, and not a rebellious wrestler against
fate. Towards evening a large packet arrived from
Herbert Mansfield, containing all that young Wyatt had
entrusted to his care to be given to his betrothed wife.
His watch and ring, etc., together with a long letter from
himself, with the minutest details of that last week at
sea, when the deadly seeds sown in a bad climate had
grown all too quickly, and the old half-healed wound
broken out afresli. There was a half-finished letter
in the dear handwriting, penned the day he knew there
was no hope of his living to see her again, beginning
with a tender message of love and patience, breaking
out into a passionate wail of regret and longing, and
left there in its incompleteness, sealed by death. Lucy
took the precious packet to her own room, and did not
come downstairs again that night. She sent a message
to her grandfather that he must spare her that one
evening only, and she sat alone with her dead. Hers
would never be the satisfaction, dreary though it be,
of sitting looking on the deai- dead face we cannot
bear to part with—
" Before decay's effacing fingers
Have swept tlie lines wliere beauty lingers."
But she could  sit   and  read over  and   over  that little
The Shadow of Motory. 337
feeble scrawl till her eyes were blind Avith weeping,
and the Avords had burned themselves into her brain ;
and thank God too for her early education of lonely
orphanhood, that she could take the lesson of patience
he whispered her from his nameless grave, as well as
share in his passionful regrets. So thoughtfnl and
considerate of others was she, that even in the midst
of her grief she remembered gratefully the kindness
of the Mansfields in thus Avriting to her all she most
wished to know, and could better bear so, than if told
under the eyes of even sympathising friends.
Three days afterwards she was sitting looking dreamily
out on the lawn, when she saAv Mrs. Mansfield and her
son approaching. She trembled a little as she rose to
meet them. It seemed so long ago, and down such a
misty, stormy vista of time she first saw their familiar
faces,—but, controlling herself, she went forward, and
taking both their hands at once, she said earnestly,
" Thank you for all your kindness to me then and since;
indeed, indeed, I have felt it."
They looked at her standing before them in her quiet,
unostentatious mourning, and thought of the tempest of
sorrow through which she had passed.
" Her eyes smiled too,
But 'twas as if remembering they had wept,
And knowing they should some day weep again."
Mrs. Mansfield and Herbert began speaking of her home,
her grandfather, the pretty lanes and walks around the
toAvn. She replied to all their questioning, and then she
said in a sudden pause, "You must not think I cannot
talk of Charlie yet. I am not fighting against God's will
noAV," she added tremblingly. " Your letter,"—turning to
the young officer, " Avas such a comfort to me. That bit
in Avhich he said he was made willing to go in spite of
leaving me behind. Dear Charlie! I am so glad you
kncAv and liked him."
" Liked him! No one could help it," said Herbert
heartily; " he Avas the soul of manliness, honour, and
good-nature combined.    I never heard more regret ex-
Eressed for any felloAV, more especially as he was coming
ome to get a rcAvard for his bravery ; it seemed so hard."
After some  further conversation, Lucy said, " Would
you like to come out and see grandpapa ?    He is in the
garden somcAvhere, and we will go down to the river, of
No   23.—NovEMBEE 1878. 2 U
838 The Ladies" Juliiihurgh Magazine.
which we are so proud hereabouts. It is at its loveliest
this month," she said with a sad smile. " We have a boat,
and Charlie and I used to row up to Hampton Court in
the summer evenings, and drift down again. Ah, me !
shall I ever have the heart to go on the Avater again?"
she muttered to herself.
They met the old officer in the garden, and in his
courtly way he thanked the strangers for their goodness
to his little girl; then, as he and young Mansfield went
out into the lane together, Lucy turned quickly, and
asked his mother to go back to the house.
'• It comes on me so sometimes after I am speaking of
other things," she said kneeling down before the low
chair on which she had placed the elder lady, " and I do
so want some woman's heart to speak to me."
Mrs. Mansfield folded the girl in her arms, and saying,
;" My poor child," she let her Aveep in silence on her
breast, only now and again kissing her forehead or fond¬
ling her hair.
" My heart seems to be so much bigger this last Aveek,"
she said presently, when she was somewhat soothed. " I
seem to bear about with me all the sorrows of the poor
soldiers' wives and daughters who liave lost their dear
ones like me. I lie and think of them all night long.
How things change Avhen they touch oneself. That
cheering nearly drove me mad that day after—after the
ship came in ; and to think of joy-bells ringing and
cannon firing, and that being glory, is an awful mockery
now, and yet—I suppose—war must be—and I would not
have kept him at home if 1 could."
Brave little heart! mayhap that other heart in heaven
heard the Avords, and kneAV the pang and the sacrifice
Avith Avhich  they Avere uttered.
The afternoon passed quickly aAvay as the girl unfolded
her past life to her new friend ; and sharing her soitoav
Avitli another helped to soothe its present bitterness.
Mrs. Mansfield's heart responded to the girl's artless guilc-
lessness and gentle nature; and she longed to have a
daughter like her, and promised herself she should never
lose sight of the friend so strangely made.
"My dear," she said, "you may think it an odd question—
and an unfeeling one, too, in me to ask, but your grand¬
father is an old man ; do you ever consider that in the
course of nature in a fcAv years you must be left alone?"
"I knoAv it," she ansAvered, Avith a heavy sigh, "Charlie
Thfi Shadow of Victory. 339
was to have taken care of me. I try not to think about
it, but when it comes to—that, 1 mnst just live on here alone,
I suppose ; I wull not be quite poor, and I have no near
relations with whom I could stay."
" Shall you be at home all summer ? You must come to
us for a time. Mr. Mansfield has quite made up his mind
to that."
"We shall like it very much," she answered, after a
little ; " but grandpapa has promised first to take me to
some quiet sea-side place ; it Avill be like going to Charlie's
grave, and I shall like to hear the moaning of the same
sea that covers him, though it be far from the place."
That is all I have to tell of Lucy Normand's story.
Whether she will live to be "an old maid," retaining
her sweetness and thoughtfulness, and shedding them
around her Avherever she goes, or whether she will,
when time has softened and hallowed sad memories
with a dim halo that can scarcely be called sorrow,
become the ha])py honoured wife of some good man,
perchance of Herbert Mansfield, I know not. All I
know is, that many such bitter ordeals have been come
through for the sake of that thing called " Glory," which
has need of some/an/are of trumpets, and shine of tinsel,
to drown the bitter groanings and cover the sackcloth
and ashes which follow like phantoms in its train.
Martyn Hay.
"giXt Pan's %i\\\\
(a border ballad.)
Whar meet Dumfries an' Lanark
Atap o' the Lowther Height,
Whar meet the lands o' the threesome Lairds,
They cam at dead o' nicht.
Slinkin' by farm steads i' the mirk,—
The wean stirred in its cot,
As it kent, by the rumble o' the wheels,
111 thing gaed by the spot.
The spokeless cart harnesed wi' rape
Drags at the horse's heels,
That snorts an' starts as ilka bump
Rattles the box o' deals.
340 Tlie Ladies' Edinburgh Afagazine.
Twa men there stride aside the cart,
Twa men o' face fu' stern.
An' never a word they speak that nicht,
Nor ance their heads they turn.
But aye they stride on through the mirk
Wi their box o' auld black deals,
Without a look an' without a word,
By the cart wi the spokeless wheels.
On by the hamestead, by the cot,
Through the uicht sae mirk an' cauld ;
Whar stops the road they tak the hill
By the side o' the lane sheep-fauld
Nae moon or stars there glint that nicht
On the hill as they gae by,
Sae mirk it is, they stoop to look
The way the rushes lie.
Then on again ower the saft bent grass
An' through the brackens high.
Till they come whar meet the twasome shires
An' the three Lairds' lands forby.
There on the lanesome Lowther Height,
On the land nae man may ain,
They cut the rape o' the spokeless cart,
An' leave it to rot its lane.
An' they drag the box o' auld black deals.
That shivers i' their ban's,
To the lanesomest bit o' the lanesome height,
Whar a stunted whin bush stan's.
An' there they delve a shallow hole,
Stap in the deal box there ;
As they set it doon, oot shines the moon,
Wi' a glint on a maiden's hair!
A maiden's hair sae link an' lang,
A maiden's dead white face,
A maiden's corpse unstreiked, unswathed.
They hae brought to this ghaistly place I
The draggled coat clings round her yet.
The short-gown wet an' torn,
The very claithes she had thrown her in
I' the black pool by the thorn.
Nae Man's Lan\ 341
They see by its glint the white dead face,
But sternly turn awa ;
Though a shiver runs frae head to heel
O' the younger o' the twa.
But the auld man's face grows but grimmer white,
An' nor word nor sign gies he,
As faither an' brither that mirky nicht
Lay the mouls by the auld whin tree.
An' gae their ways ower the saft bent grass
An' by the lane sheep-fauld.
An' leave her her lane on the Lowther Height,
I' the nicht sae mirk an' cauld.
******
A traveller ower the hill at Yule,
Fand the tears blindin' his ee.
At sicht o' a wee white outstretched hand
r the mouls by the auld whin tree.
For the han' that took its ain red life
Might rest in nae man's Ian' :
But God He kens whar the blame should fa'
0' that little ruthless han'.
An' maybe there's room in His Kingdom Come
For the wee white woman's han',
That madly strove wi' its ain red life.
Though there's room in nae man's Ian'.
Jeanie Morison.
SfhBUjghl  and  %\\\\%m%i,
(Concluded).
(1st. Language is the instrument by means of which
Thought is produced, preserved, and abridged.
2d. Language is the instrument by means of which
Tliought is communicated to, and  excited in,
others.)
1st. (continued). Not only does Language, as has been
shown, aid in the original production of Thought, but it
acts as a powerful instrument in its further production
by means of suggestion.    " Men," says Bacon, " imagine
that their reason governs wordsj whilst, in fact, words
342 Tlie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
react upon the understanding." Brown has an interest¬
ing chapter on the suggestive influence of words. " There
is," he says, " another set of resembhxnces, not in the
objects themselves, but in the mere arbitrary signs which
express them, that have a powerful though less obvious
influence ou suggestion, and often guide the trains of
our tliought without appearing to guide them." For
example, the verbal sign used to represent one notion
may also represent another possessing a totally diiferent
content; and while we use it in the first sense, the other,
with its surrounding circumstances, is naturally suggested
to us. Another illustration of the mode in which words
produce thought is aflibrded in the suggesting tendency
of rhyme; and we can trace in the works of even our
better poets the effect of this influence in producing and
directing the trains of thought. Alliteration exercises a
similar, though more limited influence. Most, if not all,
of the laws of mental association by which Thought is
directed, may be applied to words a well as to the objects
which they signify.
We have seen one form in which Language preserves
Thought, viz. that the content of the notion is riveted,
and so preserved and kept from falling to pieces, by
means of the common term applied to it.
But in a wider sense than this, Language spoken, written,
and printed, preserves Thought; and this must be appa¬
rent even to those who do not regard it from a philosophi¬
cal point of view. Trench quotes the expression " fossil
poetry" as applied to Language, but I think it may be
more aptly called fossil thought, for, as Trench goes on to
say, " In words are beautiful thoughts and images, the
imaginations and the feelings of past ages of men long since
in their graves ; of men whose very names have perished,
these, which would so easily have perished too, preserved
and made safe for ever. . . . Words quite as often and
&8 effectually embody facts as history, or convictions of
the moral common sense, as of the imagination or passion
of men ; even as, so far as that moral sense may be per¬
verted, they will bear witness and keep a record of that
perversion."
' This leads us to the wider aspect of Language: it not
only is the means of preserving our own poor thoughts
for future reference, but it preserves for us the accumu¬
lated thought of past generations. We may apply to
Language as a whole the elegant tribute which Trench
Thought and Language^ 343
bestows specially on the English language : " How great
a boon, how glorious a prerogative, for any one generation
to enter upon the inheritance of a language which other
generations by their truth and toil have made already a
receptacle of choicest treasures, a storehouse of so much
unconscious wisdom, a fit organ for expressing the
subtlest distinctions, the tenderest sentiments, the largest
thoughts, and the loftiest imaginations which the heart of
man should at any time conceive."
It is this aspect of language that impresses us with a
sense of its greatness ; and when we consider how limited
is our capacity for gaining experimental knowledge, and
how large a proportion of our knowledge is derived from
the spoken, written, and printed utterances of others, we
in some measure realise our indebtedness to the thought-
preserving capability of language.
Language abridges Thought. The finitude and imper¬
fection of our mental powers render us unable to attend
to, remember (even potentially), and name every in¬
dividual object presented to our senses. But by means
of the notion and the common term we regard external
objects not individually but grouped in classes, thereby
overtaking much otherwise unrecognisable. For example,
think what an amount of Thought is contained in an
abridged form in the one term gravitation.
We are enabled by the intelligent use of Language to
state long processes of reasoning in a few words, and to
leave on one side all that is irrelevant, this residuum
being equivalent to the attributes disregarded when those
wanted for the formation of a notion are disentangled
and classiBed. "The use of Language," says Locke, "is
by short sounds to signify with ease and despatch general
conceptions; wherein not only abundance of particulars
may be contained, but also a great variety of indepen¬
dent ideas collected into one complex one." ^
The attributes contained in notions have been reduced
to certain heads called categories, differently named by
different philosophers. This reduction, and the formation
of the notion itself, are all part of the philosophical ten¬
dency, conscious or unconscious, which exists in human
beings towards unity. Even with our limited and imper¬
fect powers, we ever seek the permanent, and are only
satisfied when we find the absolute.
' Locke, Book II., Chap. V., Sec. 7.
344 llie Ladies Edinhurcjh Magazine.
2d. When we regard Language as the medium
by which Thought is communicated to and excited
in others, we regard man in his social relations. Under
ordinary circumstances there must be some exter¬
nal influence to move him to give expression to his
Thoughts. Although some writers hold that man has an
irresistible impulse to give verbal utterance to his
Thoughts, there is a want of evidence to support this
either in theory or in fact. It is essentially in his social
relations that this audible expression of Thought is excited,
and then only to an extent regulated by the will of the
individual. " The comfort and advantage of society not
being to be had without communication of Thoughts, it
was necessary that man should And out some external
sensible signs, whereby those invisible ideas which his
Thoughts are made up of might be made known to others."^
-It seems higlily improbable that an isolated being could
originate verbal utterance; it must be evoked by some
^-xternal agency; and the original evocation, we have
reason to infer, was brought about in Adam by intercourse
with his Creator. Caspar Hauser must be regarded as
in some degree an exemplification of this social necessity,
although it must be remembered that during his long
isolation his physical and mental capacities were unduly
cramped.
We do not always desire necessarily to communicate
our own Thoughts to others. In social intercourse the
communication of our Thoughts to others, or of those of
others to us, is only part of what we aim at. We may
desire to conceal our own Thoughts while exciting certain
Thoughts and trains of Thought in others. Language is
of a further use in social in tercourse; it is frequently
employed—not necessarily intelligently—as a means of
producing the other tAvo exhibitions of consciousness, viz.
feeling, or desires and will. For example, joy, sorrow,
love, hatred, anger, determination to a certain course, may
be excited by Language, the words suggesting the causes
which produce these effects. There is yet another mode in
which Language is made a means of influence upon certain
human beings; this is by attaching an undue meaning or
connotation to a certain series of words, constituting a
charm, an incantation, &c.; or by simply attaching inten¬
sified meaning, as in passwords, proverbs, &c.
' Jiocke, pook III., Chap. II., Sec. 1.
Thought and Language. 345
Language may be likened to a living organism; it has
an origin, a principle of lite, healthy development, disease,
decay, and in some cases death, all of these produced and
regulated by ascertained external and internal causes.
Language has been considered in some of tliese aspects.
AVe now ask, how does it, as tlie manifestation of fliought,
grow ?
Midler answers, by two processes, Dialectic regenera¬
tion and Phonetic decay ; and these he treats as connected
with and exhibiting corresponding changes of Thought.
But the more philosophical division of the means of
growth is into—
1st. Generalisation,
2d.   Specialisation,
3d.  Metai^hor,
\st. Having obtained notions by the method already
described, we group these notions, riveted and represented
by verbal signs, attend to, abstract, remember, compare,
and classify their important qualities, thereby producing
new notions, with their corresponding class names, treat
these in the same manner; and by continuing this pro¬
cess, ascend from the infima species, divisible only into
individuals, to the summum genus.
There is another manner in which generalisation takes
place, viz., by the bestowal of the common or class name
on new objects possessing resemblance to the old. This,
while increasing the denotation of the term, contracts its
connotation. The latter mode of generalisation is that to
which Adam Smith attributes the growth of Language.
He says that two savages would first name the tree, cave,
fountain, &c., which occurred first in their experience.
From these they would name resembling objects ; then
add words expressing quality; next, those expressing
relation; abstract terms would next follow, and so on.
'2d. Specialisation is the reverse of generalisation. In
it the denotation of words is contracted. Miiller is of
opinion that the number of phonetic types, i.e. roots, must
have been almost infinite in the beginning, and that not
only had they as a rule a larger denotation than they
subsequently possessed, but that several articulate signs
were probably applied to individual objects. As this
theory is contested, many philologists maintaining that the
number of original roots was very small, I do not claim
so wide an application of specialisation, and only quote
No, 23.—NoVHMiiEU lS7i;. 2 X
346 The hxdiefi Edinburgh Magazine.
Miiller as an eminent supporter of specialisation as an
important element in the development of Language. The
process, like that of generalisation, still goes on. We
constantly find words originally of wide application now
limited to a narrower and special meaning. This is
eminently the case with technical words, which, as a
rule, are specialised from their popular meaning.
?>J. Metaphor is perhaps a still more important element
in the growth of Language than either of those now
mentioned. It is a " carrying over " of words from that
Avhich is known to that which is less known, the words
being applied not on the principle of resemblance, but on
that of analogy. The material of Thought being obtained
from the external world, words were first applied to
notions derived from it; and next, by analogy, applied
to more complex notions of externality, and also to
internal phenomena, in which some analogical similarity
was traced. For example, spirit, apprehension, imagina¬
tion, idea, conception, etc. This is elegantly expressed
by Victor Cousin :—
" Man is at first by the action of all his facidties carried
out of himself and towards the external world ; the phe¬
nomena of the external world strike him first, and hence
these phenomena receive the first names. The first signs
are borrowed from sensible objects, and they are tinged
to a certain extent by their colours. When a man after¬
wards turns back on himself, and lays hold more or less
distinctly of the intellectual phenomena which he had
always, though somewhat vaguely, perceived; if, then,
he wants to give expression to the new phenomena of
mind and soul, analogy leads him to connect the signs he
seeks with those he already possesses, for analogy is the
law of each growing or develo])ed language. Hence the
metaphors to which our analysis traces back most of the
signs and names of the most abstract moral ideas."
By metaphor words applied to the objects of one sense
are sometimes applied to objects of Another. For ex¬
ample, tone and loudness are now apphed by analogy to
colour as well as to sound.
There is yet another mode not exactly falling under
any of these heads, in which Language grows—viz. the
invention of words to suit our growing needs, our new
acquisitions. New discoveries and inventions are duly
labelled with a term suitable to them. The progress of
philosophy requires a corresponding increase of words to
Thought and Language. 347
indicate the new phases and combinations of thought.
Poetry claims its quota, so do theology, diplomacy, and
science in general; and in our daily life the call for
increased means of expression is also considerable, and
the frequent modification and ada[)tation of old words
and invention of new, is the result. It must not be sup¬
posed, hoAvever, that new words are admitted at the
pleasure of their originator. They must possess some
credential of suitability, and be received into the national
usage. New Avords have to run the gauntlet of public
criticism, and submit to a national plebiscite. Many
words, though brought forward under the auspices of
some ruler in the literary Avorld, are rejected by the vote,
active or passive, of the million. For example, many of
the Carlylean Avords and phrases have ncA'er found favour
beyond the pages of their author.
Great as are tlie capacities of the wonderful instrument,
Language, vicAved either in itself, or in its relation to
Thought, its imperfection is forcibly brought home Avhile
couBideriiig it. It expresses not the thing, but only
abstracted qualities ; it is at best capable of conveying
only hints of meaning—hints Avhich the hearers often fail,
from the imperfection of the medium of expression, to
interpret aright; it is impotent to express in at all an
adequate manner our feelings and desires.
Language is imperfect—
1,?^. From ambiguity.
2d. From the shifting of the meaning of words.
Is^. A very small proportion of Avords is univocal;
of these are, scientific, technical, proper, and many
common terms. The equivocal or ambiguous (those
possessing more than one meaning) occupy a large
part, and lead to much confusion and misunderstanding.
Setting aside the simpler forms proceeding from equivo¬
cal sound or from equivocal spelling alone, Ave find that
the most important class of equiv^ocal terms are those
equivocal both in sound and in spelling. The causes of
this ambiguity are, according to Jevons, chiefly—
A. From the accidental confusion of different words.
Ex. Mean, pound, &c.
B. Fi-om the transfer of meaning by the association
of ideas. The transfer is sometimes made from the
cause to the effect, and vice versa; fr(m the inonns
to end, and vice versa ; from the whole to part, and
vice versa, and so on.
348 The, Ladies Iidinhnrgh Magazine.
C. From the logical transfer of meaning to analogous
objects.
Tlie last is cliiefly caused by the use of metaphor, of
which I have already spoken, and which, while an im¬
portant element in the growth of language, is at the
same time a prolific source of ambigaiity. By the assump¬
tion of metaphorical terms and phrases, as expressing a
literal meaning, not only is occasional ambiguity caused,
but we find imbedded in all languages many errors and
erroneous theories which originated in this mistaking the
metaphorical for the real. Max JMiiller takes up this
point veiy fully in his second series of lectures, showing
especially how it leads to the rise of myths, as well as of
errors imbedded and perpetuated in language.
The errors which Bacon calls idols of the market arise
from this ambiguous use of words. " They are those," he
says, " which have entwined themselves round the under¬
standing from the association of words and names,
. . , . and consist either of the names of things
which have no existence .... or the names of
actual objects, but confused, badly defined, and hastily
and irregularly abstracted from things."
'Id. The shifting of the meaning of words is at once
a cause and an effect of the imperfe(,-tit)n of language.
Language, we must remember, is preserved mainly by
tradition, and is subject to its inherent risks of exaggera¬
tion and attenuation. In other words, the connotation of
terms is apt to shift, to increase or be Avasted, while being
handed on from one generation to another. A classical
literature and good dictionaries are powerful barriers
against this fluctuating process, but even upon these the
tide of general usage frequently infringes. It is an
observable fact, that in nations where no such literary
safeguards exist, among many African tribes for instance,
language fluctuates so much that it has been found to
change almost entirely even in one generation, this change
being d'aubtless as much (if not more) in the connotation
as in the verbal signs.
This tendency of words to lose or change their conno¬
tation gives rise to one of the great difficulties of interpret¬
ing ancient MSS. There is not only ambiguity of meaning
to contend with, but the fact that the connotation
attached to the words in their different meanings has
probably changed. Hence the necessity of seeking
knowledge from other sources than dictionaries as to the
Tliourjld and Language. 3-19
precise meaning  use and wont   ascribed to  the   terms
employed.
Looking back to the early English language even after
the Conquest, we cannot fail to be struck with the great
change it has undergone; and yet it is in its main
features the same language, though in the lapse of
centuries many and important changes have come over
it, many words being lost, ^ others adopted, and a still
larger number applied to a gradually clianging connota¬
tion. It would be difficult now, without the aid of
etymological research, to connect such words as dunce
with the learned Duns Scotus, pagans with villagers, or
passion with suffering.
Not only does this shifting process go on from one
generation to another, but we can see it even in our own
day. I met an example of it in an American book lately,
in which it was mentioned that a little girl was punished
for throwing rocks at another. This sounds absurd to us,
as we attach a different connotation to the word ; but in
the part of America referred to there was nothing that
we call rocks, only stones, to which the other term was
applied.
it should be observed that the verbal fallacicts arise
from a confusion of the connotation attached to words.
Question-begging epithets owe their indefinite nature
chiefly to the same cause.
All word warfares conducted by " Avord-warriors " ' are
traceable to this source. One person attiibutes one
connotation to a word ; another, anotlier; and then, from
not comparing the connotation, a dispute follows. The
subject of this essay is an excellent example of this.
Some philosophers say that language is necessary to the
formation of thought, others say that thought is indepen¬
dent of language. The only difference, so far as I can
see, is in the connotation attached to the words Thought
and Language, certain philosophers employing them in a
wider signification than others. No disputes on this
subject arose in Greek philosophy. Thought and its
embodiment possessing the same verbal sign. The word
Language is a pertinent example both of ambiguity of
meaning and of the shifting of connotation, and is an
exception   to    the   general    rule    of   words    employed
' See Lost Beauties of the English Lavz/uaye, by Mackay. ' Baxter,
350 The Ladies' Edinburgh Mcujaziiie.
technically having a more limited applicability than the
same words used popularly.
Among other philosophical words idea is an ever-
recurring source of perplexity and annoyance to the
student, from the endless variety of connotation attached
to it by various authors. Abstract words are much more
apt to shift their meaning and to be ambiguous than
concrete, there being no external standard with which to
compare and correct their connotation.
Philosophers and philologists have done much to show
us what we are all in part aware of, viz., that language,
great and powerful as it is, is but imperfect; it is oidy able
partially to fvdfil the functions belonging to it. Has any¬
thing, and can anything, be done to alter and improve it,
to adapt the body of Language more exactly to the spirit
of Thought? to improve the relation between the notion
and the term, and between them and the thing signified?
Most philosophers have taken up this question, and it
has been answered in two ways—
\st,   Make   a  new Language based on   our present
knowledge of things.
2d, Improve the Language we have by the help of
the  instrument provided by logic, viz. defini¬
tion.
1st, Concerning this new and philosophical language,
most writers have contented themselves with describing
its requisites, which may be briefly summed up as
adequacy, p-ecision, and completeness. Some, both in
ancient and in modern times, have boldly endeavoured to
frame a new and universal language. In the second
series of Max Mliller's lectures there is a full account of
Bishop Wilkins' scheme, the most complete yet invented.
This and other schemes for universal and perfect language
are, however, but Quixotic and impracticable, so we must
look to other means to improve the art of Language.
This means we find in
id. Definition ; the great instrument provided by logic
to preserve the connection between the notion and its
content, between the term and its connotation. " Logical
definition is the exhaustive and methodical unfolding of
the content or comprehension of the notion." ^ It is the
identification of a given connotation as being represented
by a given terra.    It implies that the notion itself should
' Professor Fraser.
Thouijht and Language. 351
be clear, distinct, and adequate, i.e. that in applying the
term we can not only recognise the thing signified, but
distinguish its parts and its important attriljutes. It is
by thus ascertaining the quality of our notions that we
rise to a more intelligent and just use of Langunge. The
same end may in some degree be gained by frequent
exemplification, bringing up a specimen of the thing con¬
taining the connoted attributes, and comparing our notion
Avith the reality. This, however, can only be fully done
with concrete objects.
There are various kinds of definition. There is the
logical definition, which gives the germs and differentiating
attribute. There is substitutive definition, whicli gives a
simpler and more generally understood term or phrase in
the place of the more complex. And there is what should
more correctly be called description, the mere enumera¬
tion of properties and accidents. The notion may also
be identified by breaking up its extent. This is done by
means of division, for which, as ■well as for definititm,
logic furnishes adequate rules. As ]\Iill says—" The
meaning of a term in use is not an arbitrary quantity to
be fixed, but an unknown quantity to be sought."
Definition is the means by which we find this un¬
known quantity, and we cannot too highly estimate
its value in the art of language.
It is by the study of language in its relation to
thought that w^e realise how much moral training we
gain from its correct exercise, fi"om the employment
of words Avith an intelligent appreciation of their
signification or connotation, and the careful ada})ta-
tion of words to the signification or connotation
which common use has annexed to them. Trench well
observes that "the power of saying exactly what Ave
mean, and neither more nor less than Avhat Ave mean, is-
not merely an elegant accomplishment; it is this, and
more than this; it is nearly allied to morality . . . inas¬
much as it is nearly connected Avith truthfulness. . . .
Ask these words Avhat they mean, and learn to distinguish
between them, for you haA'c the authority of Hooker that
the mixture of those things by speech Avhich by nature are
divided, is the mother of all error. These studies, rightly
pursued, Avill do much in leading us to stmd in aAve of
this gift of speech, and to tremble at the thought of turn¬
ing it to any other than those Avorthy ends for which God
has endowed us Avith a faculty so divine."
352 The Ladies' Edlnhuryh Magazine.
Altliongh the subject is not strictly included in the title
of this yjaper, I cannot close without at least a reference to
the inferences drawn by Berkeley from the acknowledged
arbitrariness of the connection between Thought and
Language, and our need of constantly interpreting the
signs employed by othei\s. He first demonstrates that
we do not see distance, and only become aware of it by
interpreting its visual and visible signs, arbitrary signs
Avhich Ave associate, by long habit, with the thing signified,
and have verified by a gradual and imperceptible com¬
parison of our sensations of sight with those of touch.
This Berkeley calls visual language, and rises from it to
a conception of a universal and natural language of sense
symbolism, employed by God as a means of communica¬
tion with his creatures, in order to inform, admonish, and
direct them.
" This visual language, contrived with such exquisite
skill, and so constantly addressed to our eyes, plainly
declares the nearness, wisdom, and providence of Him
with whom we have to do."^
C. E. GuTHKiE Wright.
' Alcephron, Dial. IV., Sect. 14.
Contributors are reminded that a Prize is offered for tlie best Article on
any subject of Moral or Mental Philosophy appearing in the Ladies'' Edin¬
burgh Magazine till December 1876 inclusive.
The Subject of Debate for the next meeting of the Ladies' Edinburgh
Literary Society, November 4th, is—" Is German Literature equal to
English ? "
Those interested in these Debates are referred to the List published in the
January number of this Magazine.
353
Letter IX.
My Dear Friend,—Perhaps memories, unlike flowers
and trees, grow more vivid as the bright surroundings of
nature grow dim. They have a life of their own, which,
like .Jaques' melancholy, is " compounded of many simples
extracted from many objects," and at no time, I think, do
they come thronging round us in greater numbers than
when the winter's brief day draws to a close, and the
twilight is only brightened by the fitful flashes of our
fires. Longfellow chooses his time well for the shadows
to come through the open door—
" Ere the evening lamps are lighted,
And, like phantoms grim and tall,
Shadows from the fitful firelight
Dance upon the parlour wall,
" Then the forms of the departed
Enter at the open door.
The beloved, the true hearted.
Come to visit me once more."
I never can feel these oft-repeated words hackneyed, for
they speak so beautiful a truth. Others, less often quoted,
are, I think, equally true and beautiful—
" Oh holy night! from thee I learn to bear
What man has borne before !
Thou layest thy finger on the lips of Care,
And they complain no more."
And as the season draws on to Christmas these thoughts
of the past become more intensified, and yet they are less
calculated to create general interest because connected
mostly with what is purely personal. Among some of
my Christmas recollections which do not come exactly
under this head is one of a delightful reading which
George Mac Donald gave in our drawing room in Aber-
cromby Place ; he had given the same selection just
before in London. It consisted of all the Christmas
poems, some of even an earlier date than Milton's exquisite
" Hymn to the Nativity." As our rooms were at that
time arranged for my almost daily readings, we were
asked if this very interesting lecture might take place
No. 24.—DlOEMBBB 1876. 2 Y
354 7 he Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
there. It was, in fact, more a lecture than a reading, and
I think that the great charm consisted, in this, as in all
George Mac Donald's dissertations on poetry and poets, in
his perfect knowledge of his author, and the earnestness
with which he strives to make him known to you in his
innermost thoughts and feelings. However well you
think that you have known these before, you find some¬
thing more to understand and to admire when you have
heard him speak of them. These beautiful Christmas
readings formed no exception. I told him that I wished
he had joined the name of Shakespeare to his illustrations
of the season, but he, while acknowledging fully the
Christian spirit which illuminates and shines through all
his works, did not recall anything which he could have
absolutely quoted. I mentioned the exquisitely beautiful,
though brief, description of Christmas given by Marcellus
in Hamlet—
'' Some say that ever 'gainst that season comes
Wherein our Saviour's birth is celebrated
The bird of dawning singeth all night long,
And then they say no spirit walks abroad,
The nights are wholesome ; then no planets strike.
No fairy takes, no witch hath power to charm,
So hallowed and so gracious is the time."
It has always seemed to me that it would be difficult to
go beyond this in sweetness and holy piirity, the picture
of all nature, high and low, earthly and spiritual, sym¬
pathizing with this sacred hour, so that no evil could
prevail,
" Whether in sea or fire, in earth or air."
Among the Christmas poems read and commented on by
George M     ~       ""
beautiful
George Mac Donald at the time I mention was Herbert's
" The shepherds sing, and shall I silent be.
My God, no hymn for Thee !
My soul's a shepherd too ; a flock it feeds
Of thoughts, and words, and deeds ;
The pasture is Thy word ; the stream Thy grace,
Enrichmg all the place."
Also Tennyson's—
" The time draws near the birth of Christ,
The moon is hid, the night is still,
The Christmas bells from hiU to hill
Answer each other in the mist."
Recollections of the Past. 355
George Mac Donald was at that time modestly com¬
mencing a career that has since been a very successful
one. It has always seemed to me that though there is
much that is excellent in all his books, and that they con¬
tain passages of wonderful beauty and deep thought, yet
that his real vocation lies more in understanding and
expounding the thoughts of others. He seems to throw a
flood of light on them,—they are rounded to a more per¬
fect whole by his clear, judicious, and far-seeing criticism.
Of this we had an instance here, when, some years ago, he
delivered, in the Queen Street Hall, four lectures on the
Dramatists preceding Shakespeare.
Of his own writings, I prefer his poems and a small
volume called " Unspoken Sermons." Between George
Mac Donald and my dear friend Lady Byron there existed
a true and unbroken friendship. She early discovered
how much of true genius existed under the quiet, grave
exterior of the young and then unknown poet, and lie
fully appreciated her noble nature and high aims. Mac
Donald and Frederic Robertson were two in whom she
took an earnest and affectionate interest. She frequently
visited Brighton for the purpose of hearing the latter
preach, and she felt his early death very deeply.
Before leaving the subject of George Mac Donald, I will
copy some verses, touching in their tenderness and
simplicity, which he sent me some years since. I was
thinking of doing so, and proposing to write to ask his
permission, as they never had been published, when I
suddenly met with them the other day, signed with his
initials, in the " Day of Rest."    They are called
THE SHADOWS.
" My little boy, with round fair cheeks,
And dreamy, large brown eyes ;
Not often little wisehead speaks,
But will make some replies.
" His sister, always glad to show
Her knowledge, for its praise.
Said yesterday, God's here ; you know
He's every where always.
" He's in this room.    His large brown eyes
Went wandering round for God ;
In vain he looks, in vain he tries,
His wits are all abroad.
356 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
" He is not here mamma ? No, no.
I do not see Him at all;
He's not in the Shadows, is He ?    So
His doubtful accents fall.
" Fall on my heart, like precious seed,
Grow up to fiowers of love ;
For as a child in ignorant need,
Am I to Him above.
" And ere the mom began to break,
Ere day began to be.
In my dim room I too did take
The Shadows, Lord, for Thee.
" But now I know each Shadow there.
Slow remnant of the night.
Is but an aching, longing prayer
To Thee, oh Lord, The Light "
While looking over a pamphlet published by Mrs.
Jameson about the time of my grandmother Mrs. Siddons'
death, I met "vvith a notice of an evening that indeed
forms one of my recollections connected with many of
my dear family. In alluding to reports that were at that
time going the round of the newspapers, some true, some
false, Mrs. Jameson says:—
" And since it has pleased the newspapers to lament
over the misfortune of this celebrated woman, in having
survived all her children, etc, it may be interesting to add
that a short time before her death she was seated in a
room in her own house, when about thirty of her young
relatives, children, grandchildren, nephews, and nieces,
were assembled, and looked on while they were dancing,
with great and evident pleasure, and that her surviving
daughter, Cecilia Siddons, who had been for many years
the inseparable friend and companion of her mother,
attended upon her with truly filial devotion and reverence
to the last moment of existence." It was indeed as Mrs.
Jameson said.
On that evening, merry and happy, throwing all tragic
thoughts aside, was Fanny Kemble dancing to her heart's
content; and yet it was difficult to get dancing enough to
content her, for, as she says herself, she could dance with
equal delight with a partner or with a chair. She was then
at the beginning of her career, glowing with life and joy-
fulness. There were her two brothers, John and Henry,
the former full of talent, although at that time disappoint¬
ing his friends by various changes and fluctuations, some-
Recollections of the Past. B57
times turning to law as an English barrister, then to the
church, then leaving everything to fight for liberty with
the Spaniards, and nearly ending his life among them, as
he narrowly escaped being taken prisoner by the enemy,
when he would have been shot. However, he came safely
home at last, and finally settled into a great Anglo-Saxon
scholar, and an authority on all such subjects. There was
the younger sister, Adelaide Kemble,now Mrs.Sartoris. then
a very young girl, with talent, however, both musical and
histrionic, which afterwards secured her a very high place in
the Italian Opera, which she soon resigned for married life.
There was my uncle, Charles Kemble, and his brilliant
wife, with her sparkling eyes and voice like a silver
trumpet ringing through the house. There was Horace
Twiss,^ with his then young and handsome wife. Horace,
I remember, though bearing up well, was scarcely in a
merry mood, as he had just lost a very good place
owing to the unexpected going out of the Tory Ministry ;
but he was always amusing, and I remember his saying,
when somebody alluded to an idea then prevalent, that
coals were coming to an end, " Oh, no fear; at any rate
there will be enough to call the present ministry over."
There was my own dear mother, with her calm and grace¬
ful manner, self-possessed, and yet retiring, with her own
four children to augment the group. The rest of the
party was made up of fiieuds—some old and valued,
"friends of many days," some young and recently made,
but all joining ia respect and admiration for her who had
assembled them around her.
I find copied in my aunt, Mrs. Combe's hand the
following lines, written by my grandmother, which are
interesting as shewing the state of her feelings after a life
of much excitement and turmoil:—
" Ah, what's the brightest wreath of Fame
But cankered buds that opening close ?
And what the world's most pleasing dream
But broken fragments of repose ?
" Lead me where peace, with steady hand.
The mingled cup of life shall hold,
Where time shall gently pour the sand,
And wisdom turn that sand to gold."
With these I bring my correspondence to a close.
' Horace was the son of my grandmother's beautiful sister, Mrs. Twiss, a
former Fanny Kemble.
358 The Ladiei Edinhurglb Magazine.
" And now farewell, time unrevoked has run
His wonted course, yet what you wished is done.
By contemplation's help, not sought in vain,
I seem to have lived my childhood o'er again."
Yes, and my youth, too ; and though it is indeed " chew¬
ing the cud of sweet and bitter fancy," I may truly say
the sweet has predominated, because it has been to please
a very kind friend, and also another very near and dear
to me.—Now and always, yours very sincerely,
E. H. M.
^Yom  iauitt  to   IHidnigltt.
This is an age of such all-pervading physical comfort
and luxury, that it is only by fiiirly escaping from our
ordinary ways that we can at all realize the simpler lives
of our ancestors, or come in contact with untamed
natural surroundings ; that we can, indeed, by meeting
eomething of roughness and difficulty, pleasantly exercise
our own contrivance and energy. Most of us get tired at
times of civilization and conventionality, and long for some¬
thing more amusing than our uneventful daily routine, and
regular meals; and so, for a holiday, it is pleasant to desert
our pretty Scotch playground, where travel is made easy
and commonplace to crowds of tourists, and where no
spice of adventure can be hoped for, to wander further
afield to wilder lands, where some enterprize is needed, and
some viscissitudes may still be found. In Iceland, for
instance, we seem to go back to the middle ages—the
very books which guide iis were written in the 13th cen¬
tury, and their rich, concise, and clear language is
spoken still. So we can pass through the country
of the ancient Norsemen—the most dashing, and yet the
most cultivated, of all the Teuton races—speaking their
very words, and reading those racy chronicles in which the
details of their daily lives six or seven hundred years ago
are preserved.
Gudrun and I remember with so much satisfaction our
gypsy life in innless, roadless, treeless Iceland, that per¬
haps an account of one of our many varied days of travel
may have something of interest for other people.
From Pawn to Midnight 359
One bright July morning I woke up suddenly from the
deep sleep of fatigue and good air, in a church situated
about half-way between the northern and southern coasts
of Iceland. Let no one suppose I had fallen asleep dui'iug
a sermon ; no, the little armex chapel, the only timber
building far and wide, was the other alternative from
sleeping in a tent, and had been my hospitable shelter
from so bitter a north wind that Gudrun had preferred
sleeping in the snugger though closer farm. The wind
had died away, and a bright sunshine poured through
the little square windows on either side of the humble
altar, which, however, was closely railed off from the rest
of the building. The chm-ch was about forty feet long,
by fifteen wide, built all of single overlapping planks, like
a shed, and it was very cold, as the damp of the piled-up
churchyard outside had rotted the lower boards. But it
was ecclesiastical in plan, with pews to the west, and a
pulpit in front of the chancel. The hinges and locks of
the door, of massive wrought iron, were the only hand¬
some things in it, and they, doubtless, had descended from
the richer days, when the islanders gathered wealth on
the high seas.
It is still early, but the sun is high, though we have
now, at the end of July, an hour or so of real darkness. I
spring up dressed (for here we do not undress, we merely
change clothes for the night), and with some difficulty open
the massive bolt, and step out into the dewy churchyard,
thence over the garth wall, and down a steep bank to the
broad swift salmon-river, that swirls past in a glitter of sun¬
beams. Here, in a creek, I have a bath; the pure cold
water dancing past is most invigorating, and, fortified
against all cold, I regain the chapel, wondering a little if
Gudrun has survived the night, as I know how close her
room is. By the time my habit is on, she appears, how¬
ever, in high preservation, and with her the farmer's wife,
bearing delicious hot coffee and cream. So far good, but,
alas! of farinacious food there remains but a bit of short¬
bread and some biscuit crumbs, reduced by long shaking
on horseback to the finest powder. The sugar, in another
box, is quite a geological study; it has assumed the forms
of river shingle, and has a uniform brown tint, which
Gudrun regards with some suspicion, till reminded that it
is all that remains of some chocolate cakes once packed
with it. There is no bread at the farm, and rice will take
long to cook, so we stir up pur powdered biscuit Avith
360 Tlie Ladies' Edinburgh, Magazine.
cream, and resolve to go where sea-biscuits are said to
be—to the Scotch salmon fishery on Borgar Fiord, some
eighteen miles to the south.
Follow us out to the farm buildings, and take a look
round. We are in a wide strath, through which winds
the bright salmon-river, which has worn down steep
banks for itself in most places. All round is a circle of
more or less distant mountains, for though to the north
the rocky spurs edge the plain about a couple of miles off,
to the south the serrated blue range beyond the Borgar
Fiord is more than twenty miles away, clear, as every
indention shows, through the transparent air. Eastward
a succession of icy hills glitter in the sky; and west¬
ward a rocky range culminates in the pointed peak
of Baula. The strath, where humpy mounds and stony
tracts contrast with grass lands and great sweeps of
emerald green, which means bog, is good for riding, but
nowhere can you walk with comfort, all is so rocky or
miry.
In the Tun or enclosed meadows a dozen people and
more are merrily tossing the hay in the sunshine; they
all sleep at the little farm of N , whose low out-build¬
ings face the main house. It is like a ripple of green
mole-hills magnified, with its grass roof and sides, and
rounded walls, some 6 feet high, rising to 15 feet at the
three gables. Follow us in, but stoop low in the door¬
way. Now in the dark passage, you may raise your head,
but beware, or you will soon hit it hard against a rafter
spanning the cave. For such indeed it is; the floor is
trodden earth, the walls untrimmed turf, and you grope
your way through the darkness into a higher cavern—the
kitchen, where a stick fire burns amid stones, and the
smoke wanders out through a hole in the roof. From the
smoky rafters all that needs to be dried is si;spended, on
the fire a big pot boils rice and milk; there are no chairs,
but you may sit on an inverted tub and warm yourself,
and admire the Rembrandt shadow which sets off the clear
complexions of the children who lounge there, while the
mistress of the house prepares the dried fish which is the
substitute for bread ; and a very aged party, a poor rela¬
tion, who in this hay time is her sole assistant, potters
about, in visage hardly human and -with an ancient and
fish-like smell. To the right the passage leads to the
family room, where on one of the several box beds some one
is always sleeping, for they seem to take their rest by turns
From Dawn to Midnight. 361
as on board ship. Fish bones ornament the floor ; by a
ladder you reach the loft where the bonder and his wife
live; by a door, the wood-Hned guest-room, Gudrun's,
where a good bed, some chests, a table, and four battered
chairs, which look as if they had walked here in the rain,
make up a verj' tolerable room, if the window would open,
and if the air were not the mere leavings of the family
deu. This is hardly an average farm, aud our host, with
his unkempt hair, nostrils distended with snuff, and hulk¬
ing ways, is not an average bonder ; his strong point is
his careful attention to his sonsy wife, who looks too
good for him.
Our interpreter is not here, so only Icelandic is of avail
to tell our groom which ponies to fetch from the hill, and
to settle our start. The farmer and his wife go with
us, she riding a neat chestnut pony, sitting on a saddle
like an arm-chair, with rich brass mountings; a gaily
coloured cloth was first laid over the saddle, and then
vsrrapped round her knees like a railway rug, so she gave
a brilliant bit of colour to the landscape. No wonder
ambling ponies are so esteemed here for women ; a trot
would, on such a saddle, be almost unendurable.
The air is so pure, so fresh, and light, that we feel twice
ourselves in strength and spirits; it is a joy to breathe, far
more to ride away across the trackless champaign, cantering
over the unenclosed reaches of fine turf, splashing again and
again through the river, or feeling our way carefully over
the great bogs. For the bogs are really appalling, miles long
and miles wide of alternate tussocks of strange vegetation,
pools of dark water, and shaking quagmire. My pony
too, excellent in every other difficulty, is nervous about
them ; first he stops, then smells, then tries one foot, with¬
draws it and tries the other. At last, with a despairing
neigh, he perceives that the rest are far ahead, and
further stimulated by his rider's hunting whip, plunges
on a few steps farther, when the whole begins da capo.
I feel afraid that we shall vanish altogether, and be
preserved for a few hundred years as a specimen, and a
very bad specimen too, of the costume of the 19th century.
The other riders, comparatively speaking, skim the bogs,
but I ride at an overtaking gallop when sound turf is
reached. This is Myra or Mire Sislu, and is worthy of its
name. The mire-men and mire-horses have proper local
instincts, but for the rest of the world it is pleasanter to
have land and water separate, instead of mixed in equal
No. 24—Dkcbiibik1876. Z
362 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
aarts. There is a farm house every six miles or so,—a
arge population for Iceland,—and at every farm our
jonder runs literally to earth, for they are but turf houses.
First comes a good deal of kissing, regardless of age, sex,
and appearance; nice kisses are about, as well as
the reverse, but on striking this day's average, the
untempting exceed, so we refrain. Then we are led into
the stuffy guest-room, and sit there with the men and the
bonder's wife, while the women prepare the coffee. They
marvel at my big knife and our watches, they read the
last paper aloud that we had given our guide, and at last
good coffee comes and bad schnapps, and we are off again.
We would only take coffee at one farm, not at three, as
the bonder wished, who, however, runs into every house
for his glass of brandy, while we recline on the bright
turf of the tun.
The purple mountains beyond the Fiord were now
near us, towering over the narrowing plain before
us, as wild and lonely, and as attractive to roving
spirits, as when, early in the 10th century, the first
emigrants from Norway saw and named Borgar Fiord.
Wild spirits were those, headed by Skallagrim, father of
the mighty Egil, who Avas a gentler as well as a nobler
man. But Skallagrim, with what sombre power he looms
out of that twilight of history and romance! A splendid
smith, but apt to split his anvil,—a fierce, unconquered
combatant, who, even while wrestling in sport, when his
blood was up, killed his son's companion, the young
champion of the district, and nearly killed his son,—would
hare done so, but for the intervention of Egil's foster-
mother, Braka, " a woman strong as a man, and mighty
in spells." But even on her he turned, when she inter¬
fered, and she fled to the fiord pursued by him, and took
to the water and swam for dear life, while he hurled a rock
after her that struck her between the shoulders, and she
sank to rise no more, and ever since the sea-reach has been
named Brakarsund, Skallagrim, towards evening, inherited
some of the evening fierceness of his terrible father, Kvel-
dulfr, who became at nightfall wolfish by nature, if not a
were-wolf outright. Kveldulfr is buried on yonder point,
though he died on the way out from Norway. He re¬
quested that the Mst in which his body was put might be
thrown overboard, " for I think that I shall reach Iceland
yet before you; and where I drift up, there make your
^bode."    Accordingly he was found below the point, and
From Davm to Midnight. 363
buried, as were the family after him, on the windy height.
The description of the country in the brief, clear Ice¬
landic of the 12th (and also of the present) century,
might well serve for it still. Var thar myrlendi mikit ok
skogar vidir ok langt i milli fjails ok fjoru, selveidar gndgar
ok fiskifang mikit. " There were great morasses and
growing woods, and a good space between the hills
and the foreshore, plenty of seal-catching, and good
fishing," though but remnants of the birch-wood remain
under the hills.
At last we drew rein at what Scotch ballads would call
" a wan water,"—the turbid white glacier waves of the
Hvita, or white river, rolling down in a broad torrent,
heavy with melted snow. Skallagrim and his followers
gave it that name, " as they had never before seen waters-
which from ice niountains fell, and they thought the river
marvellous." We who know Swiss glacier rivers yet
thought it marvellous to ride through this long wadu, as
fords are called ; this is the only one for many miles, as
advantage can be taken of two sandbanks in the middle.
So we crossed successively four streams of cold rushing
water about as deep as the ponies could manage a-foot,
and so rapid that it was needful to look at the bank or
leading horses to avoid giddyness.
Trotting over meadow land and splashing through
another bright river, the Grimsa, we arrive at a big
wooden house, with two large rooms, one downstairs,
the other upstairs, where a Scotch merchant spends
the summer superintending his large salmon fisheries.
The workmen, including a Scotchman, received us kindly ;
the two gentlemen were from home, but we did not
mind that; those who have read the legend of little
Silverhair and the three bears, know just what we did—
we eat their dinner, and sat in their arm-chairs, and
read their books, and as there was no third bear with
especially choice and brittle possessions, we did no
particular harni. Then we climbed up some of the
tumbled grey rocks which overhung the clear waters of
Grimsa, and gave a fine foreground to the noble view
of the mountains and sea-reach of Borgar Fiord. Far off
puffs of vapour marked the hot spring valley of Reyk-
holt; the view all round was exquisitely clear, and
glittered in sunshine. The bonder and his wife had
gone on to see some friends, and glad were we to be rid
of him.    Two chatty Icelandic girls strolled about the
364 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine,
rocks with us, and we enjoyed ourselves heartily, and
returned to the house for a good tea. Evening, though
not its shades, was now drawing on, with eighteen miles
or more between us and home, and we began to wonder
what had become of our guide; without him we could
never have ventured, for both bogs and fords were
difficult, and in him we had little trust, though more in
his wife. And as we sat at our tea above, we heard,
through the open boards of the floor, the men below
at their tea, discussing him. " Is he sober ?" said the
Scotsman, and the canny reply of the Icelander. How¬
ever, back he came, and we carried off" a good deal of
biscuit and some salmon, feeling rather like Vikings " ac¬
quiring property," as their mode of helping themselves
without paying, is delicately put in the Sagas. This was
after seven o'clock on as sweet an evening as I have ever
seen. We rode alongside of Grirasa, whose waters lay
like another sky on the dark ground, reflecting the
celestial tints. The nearer mountains were deep blue
in colour; there was a bright red gleam on the stretches.
of glacier hill and on the cone of Baula; the lower sky
of tenderest green was barred by rose and golden clouds;
and at last when the sun was gone, a glow of crimson
light and a gloom of alternate purple shadows spread
over all the heavens in ever-changing darkening beauty.
We rode hard, except where the dark morasses hampered
us. The bonder got again into every farm, but with the
help of his wife we tore him from his snuffy friends before
long, and cantered away again into the rising wind,
which was lashing itself into a northerly gale. Every
wrap went on, and was insufficient, and glad were we
to halt at 11 P.M. at our own farm, where, after a cup of
hot coffee together, Gudrun and I said good-night, and I
returned to the lonely chapel.
Now we had slept contentedly in churches before, but till
last nightwehad been together,and our guide in the gallery
or nave, and it had never struck me it was an eerie thing
to do till to-day, when the Scotchman had remarked that
nothing would induce him to sleep alone in that chapel.
And now when the heavy bolt turned with a resounding
clang, it felt lonely indeed. A round-headed white grave¬
stone seemed, by the light of the candles within, to be
peering in from the darkness at the little window, remind¬
ing one how large a company of dead folk lay round
between one and the living.    Moreover, as I Avalked up
From Dawn to Midnight. 365
the aisle, heavy footsteps seemed to follow me; it was
only the wind, but never till that night did I know what
pranks a gale of wind could play in the way of mysterious
noises, howling, stamping, shrieking in the rafters, and
shaking every creaking plank and beam of the little
wooden building. I arranged my cork mattress so as to
get my head into the comparative shelter of the pulpit
floor, and slowly shook out the plaids to postpone the
bad moment of having to extinguish the candles which
flared in the chill draught. At last I lay down to try if
my couch was firm, and, alas! flapped the end of my
plaid into the candle which thus prematurely went out,—
a nd I did not know where the matches were. But how
was this % with the darkness came an unwonted indescrib¬
able sense of utter loneliness, and yet suspicion of some
presence beyond the roaring blast and creaking timbers.
Of old the vampires—the wicked corpses with some
hideous half animation—were said here to "walk the roofs;"
was not the stamping overhead just such a noise ? The
cairn of Glum, a vampire of fearful fame, was not so many
miles away over the desert waste which surrounded us—
he of whom the proverb goes, if any one looks scared or
frightened, " he has seen Glum's eyes." Why also would
Sir Walter's really unpleasant ballads come into my head ?
What had possessed me to learn them, or at least to know
them, by heart ? "The Baron of Smaylholm" was bad
enough, but " Frederic leaves the land of France " was so
much worse that I quite dreaded thinking to the end of
it, which, however, I was irresistibly impelled to do:—
" Weary, wet, and worn with toil.
Where his head shall Frederic hide,
Where hut in yon ruined aisle"—
Here it is exactly.
" Thundering voices from within
Mixed with sounds of laughter rose "—
So they did, quite distinctly-
" High their meagre arms they wave,
Wild their notes of welcome swell—
Welcome traitor to the grave,
Perjured, bid the world farewell '
Worse and worse—and no possibility of changing the
subject. And there are surely footsteps approaching. I
can see nothing for the pulpit; It is coming round though
r66' The Ladies' Edinburgh Mayazme,
and soon Jts eyes will meet mine. I make a movement,
and there is a sudden heavy clang on the floor. Curiously
enough that culminating crash seemed to restore me to
myself. I guessed, with truth, that I had knocked over
the brass candlestick, and I ran quite cheerfully through
Claud Halcro's appropriately Norse conjuration in the
" Pirate " beginning—
" St. Magnus controul thee, that martyr to treason,
St. Bonan rebuke thee with rhyme and with reason," &o.
After all, this was a church, and whatever might howl
and knock outside, nothing bad could come in; and with
this consolatory idea I muffled my head in my plaid and
fell fast asleep. The following night I spent in the
church with no sensations of nervousness, but I composed
a new proverb—Light makes Might; and a new maxim—
Never, in an empty church at midnight, lose the lucifer
matches.
E. J. 0.
(i £ n i u s.
'Mid all the gifts given
By bountiful Heaven,
Of beauty or honour,' there never was yet
So radiant a shine
As this glory divine
Which God on the forehead of Genius hath set.
They speak with such grace.
That earth's dullest place
Is straightway invest with a beauty divine;
And words from their tongue
Fall sweet like a song.
Or kindle the soul like the red sparkling wine.
But the sin that is mixt
With the good is transfixt
By an arrow \vhose point is immortal as well;
And some God hath given
This radiance from Heaven
Have sullied their kiminous pinions in hell.
Genius. 367
So take ye your lyre,
Filled full of that fire
Which others have longed for and yearningly prayed;
With step proud yet humble
Take heed lest ye stumble
On a path where, ah! many a high heart hath strayed.
0 Genius! I wis
That the pain and the bli.ss
In souls such as thine are so nearly akin,
That God takes thee away
From the sorrowful day.
When the flesh from the frail soul the battle might win,
And the darkness of night
Should encumber the flight
Of the proud wings of fancy which skyward did soar;
And reason's eclipse
Freeze the song on thy lips.
The lips which we loved, which shall charm us no more.
So Genius dies young,
Ere the echoes have rung
With the paeans of fame which the ages shall tell.
Transplanting on high
What never can die.
The loss is to mortals—with him " it is well,"
So bursteth earth's fetter—
And Heaven is better
For one so God-gifted gone back to his God;
And earth can but take
Of the flowers which he spake,
And which sprung on the pathway wherever he trod.
Martyn Hay.
=4-==—
Potiucs (or the f tudn o)f IfTenial |lulofj0}}tiir.
Reflect that life, like every other blessing,
Derives its value from its use alone ;
Not for itself, but for a nobler end.—Dr. Johnbon.
It is perhaps necessary, before speaking of the motives
which induce to Metaphysical Study, to lay down the
premiss that study, or some kind of mental culture, is
r68 Tlie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
incumbent on all. For the highest aim of man, that which
comprehends all minor aims, is to live, well; and it follows
that the best results will be yielded by the man whose
faculties are brought to the highest degree of perfection,
as the most thoroughly tilled field produces the richest
crops,—the most highly finished instrument answers Avith
greatest success to the touch of the performer. With
those who deny the obligation to mental culture, we have
now no concern, since to them the motives we shall adduce
as prompting to the study in particular of Mental Philo¬
sophy can but appear in the same degree trivial and
uninfluential, as the nature of the end to be served is
unappreciated or denied.
But holding, on Divine authority, that the possession of
any faculty entails the responsibility of cultivating it, it
follows that the possession of mental qualities or powers
renders the study of them as incumbent on us as the
pursuit of any other branch of knowledge. It is not to
be denied, however, that many who would cordially
agree with us as to this responsibility, have a most
erroneous impression of the meaning of the phrase
" mental culture." They confuse it with another, " the
acquisition of knowledge," and are thus led into an
exclusive cultivation of the faculties of sense and of
memor3% which serve our purpose when we seek to
accumulate a store of what is commonly called know¬
ledge. " It is true," says Isaac Taylor,^ " that of late
attention has been given to the very important distinction
between a blind endeavour to impart a certain amount
of knowledge, on specific subjects, and that more en¬
lightened method which, irrespective of the measure of
attainments actually made by the learner, aims to give
to each of the powers of the mind a training and a habit
such as shall secure to the individual the highest possible
future advantage in the employment of whatever endow¬
ments nature may have conferred upon him." Sir William
Hamilton,^ too, strikingly alludes to the error of regard¬
ing the cultivation of the faculties as subordinate to the
acquisition of knowledge, instead of holding its converse
—the possession of knowledge as subordinate to the cul¬
tivation of the faculties. It is evident the one or the other
of these two plans of education is valuable only in so far
' Home Education, p. ] 97
' Lectures on Metaphysics, chap. I.
Motives for the Study of Mental Philosophy. 369
as it leads to the fulfilment of the chief aims of human life ;
and if we find the higher ends of life are gained by mental
culture, or the culture of the faculties of mind, instead of
by the mere acquisition of knowledge, their relative value
will be clearly demonstrated.
First, then, what are the motives which should impel
us to mental culture in general % and, as a preliminary, let
us inquire—What is a motive % Our simplest definition
would be, It is a desire to gain some end ; and in pro¬
portion to our estimate of the importance of the end, will
be the strength of our motive. But while differing in
degree, according to the importance of a desired end,
motives also differ in kind. We may, however, arrange
them under three heads; thus we may be guided to the
pursuit of one subject or another by reason, by inclina¬
tion, or by circumstances. Each of these three motives
has its corresponding end, and, generally, we may say:—
If our motive be regulated by circumstances, the de¬
sired end is success in some particular profession or
calling; if by inclination, the end is the gratification
and development of some natural bent, some prevailing
taste; if by reason, the end desired is to fit and prepare
ourselves for the duties and vicissitudes of life, and to
make that life as noble and useful as our faculties will
permit. As every motive to mental culture is then
correlative with some end or aim, the consideration of
the one involves that of the other. But the three ends
specified do not occupy equally elevated platforms;
the two former are contingent and accidental, and vary,
infinitely, in different individuals. Further, it is mani¬
fest that the training requisite to succeed in a profession,
or to develop some particular talent, cannot be conveyed
by metaphysical studies ; it must be of a technical nature.
But to understand and discharge the duties of life is the
universal science of human beings; in it all are con¬
cerned, and it is the aim, more or less distinctly, of every
one. If this end, then, be best furthered by the mental
culture afforded by metaphysical studies, these must
surely be most worthy our attention, and our motives
to their pursuit must be at once the highest and the
strongest which can guide us.
For, what are the duties of life which all must learn to
■ discharge and understand ?    In a broad sense, the aims
which we have  classed as  subordinate to that of which
we  are  now  speaking, may yet  be considered as  un-
No. 24.—Decbubeb 1876. 3 A
370 The Ladies^ Edinhuvgh Magazine.
doubtedly forming part of the sum of the duties of Hfe.
Every one is either iniluenced by some circumstances
which necessitate a particular study, or is endowed with
some talent, the possession of which, as we have assumed,
demands its improvement. But to train the mind to that
state of preparation for the vicissitudes of life, to that
convenient indifference to small troubles, trivial aims, and
useless labours; in short, to that mental tranquillity which
is the necessary condition of mental leisure for the greater
and nobler aims:—to open the eyes of the understanding
to those wondrous laws by which Mind and Matter—the
living conscious agent and the inanimate world—are alike
dominated; to impress man, as an intellectual as well as
moral agent, with a just view of his power, and con¬
sequent responsibility, for the improvement of his fellow-
creatures ;—such are the highest ends of life; such the
objects in accomplishing which we rise above constraints
of " our earthly prison-house;" such the pursuits which
teach us the domination of Mind over Matter. Let us
try to show that such is the special province of the
mental culture afforded by Mental Science studies.
It is evident that Mental Science, if eminently con¬
ducive to this end, viz., our preparation for life, must have
some special characteristics. We are met then by the
great division of the Sciences, the broad distinction between
the Sciences of Mind and of Matter. Mental Philosophy
embraces a study of all the facts, laws, and results of
Mind. Experimental or Material Philosophy concerns all
the facts, laws, and results of Matter. The two sets of
Sciences may be tabulated and exhibited to the eye
somewhat as follows :—
Mental Philosophy. Experimental Philosophy.
Logic. Mathematics.
Psychology. TPhysiology.
Metaphysics. -<     Pneumatology.
Ethics. {    Optics.
Theology. &c.
Sociology. Astronomy.
Politics. / Geology.
Philology. J     Meteorology.
&c.      &c. j     Geography.
\     Botany.
&c.      &c.
Motives f 07^ the Study of Mental Philosophy. 371
A word is required to explain the peculiar position we
conceive to be occupied by Logic and Mathematics. These
two Sciences are the instruments, so to speak, by which
the laws and properties of Mind and Matter respectively
are examined. Each is concerned with the subject-matter
of each one of their dependent co-ordinate Sciences;
Logic, as " the Science of the formal laws of Thought
and Reasoning;" Mathematics, as the Science of the laws
and properties of Space, Number, and Figure. Bacon
"says,^ "Many parts of nature can neither be invented
with sufficient subtilty, nor demonstrated with sufficient
perspicuity, nor accommodated into use with sufficient
dexterity, without the aid and intervening of the mathe¬
matics." And though Bacon had a different conception
of the place of this science, he gives this estimate of
mathematics with more special reference to material
Bcience; and it is evident that logic occupies the like
position in regard to the sciences of mind.
What, then, are the special advantages of metaphysical
study, regarded as an instrument of mental culture ? Let
us endeavour to draw a brief contrast between the two
departments, as, by so doing, we shall most clearly discern
their relative value. Our remarks may be placed under
three heads, showing under each a special advantage and
characteristic of Mental Science study :—
\st. Reflection  the  Instrument  of  Mental   Science
study.
2d. The Immediate Connection of Mental Science with
man, the thinker.
Zd. The scope of Mental Science in general.
1st. Reflection the Instrument of Mental Science study.
The pursuit of Mental and Physical Science Studies
gives rise to the employment of two very opposite
qualities, viz., Observation and Reflection; not that in
either land of study the one is required to the total ex¬
clusion of the other, but rather that Mental Science
requires a maximum of Reflection with a minimum of
Observation,^ and Physical Science a maximum of Obser¬
vation with a minimum of Reflection. This arises from
the nature of these two studies. Observation is that
faculty which takes note of the external objects of
Physical Science ; Reflection is that faculty which takes
' Advancement of Learning, Book II., p. 122.
'^ Observation is here referred to as the instrument for the examination of
external nature.
372 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
note of, and draws inferences from, the facts of Mental
Science ; and further, is the instrument we employ when
we seek the Final Cause of all things, material and mental.
In addition to this, we notice that our faculty of
Observation is inevitably called forth from the moment
we enter this world. For all the actions of every-day
life it is the great desideratum, and all the amount of
Reflection required is that very ordinary modicum im¬
plied in the expression, " To put two and two together."
He who is incapable of more or less skill in its exercise,
is tolerably sure of being outstripped, if not overcome, in
the path of life. But Reflection, the faculty by means of
which alone the mind arrives at the solution of the great
problems of Mental, Moral, and Social Science, the faculty
alone which fits us to cope with such questions, is left to
take its chance, to be nourished by circumstance and
" fickle fortune," or even, like a neglected child, pre¬
maturely to expire from want of nourishment. This
characteristic of Mental Science, that it inevitably calls
into exercise, and, by exercising, trains the power of
Reflection, is the first great reason for the study of Mental
Science. As Hamilton says, " It is as the best gymnastic
of the mind,—as a mean, principally and almost exclu¬
sively conducive to the highest education of our noblest
powers,—(i.e., as it calls into exercise the higher faculties),
—that I would vindicate to these speculations the neces¬
sity whicli has too frequently been denied them."
2d. The Immediate Connection of Mental Science with
man, the thinker.
The province of Physical Science is the facts and laws
of the Material Universe. Man, as an embodied being,
depends for the comfort and safety of his earthly life on a
right understanding of the mechanical laws of nature.
But is the body that which he is most intimately con¬
cerned with? Is there not something more important to
him in "that knowledge whereunto the ancient oracle
directeth us, which is the knowledge of ourselves (" the
Mind is the Man"), which deserveth the more accurate
handling, by how much it toucheth us more nearly."'^
The study of man, his mind, his own conscious states, and
the laws which govern his thoughts—this is the subject-
matter of Mental Science. And here an important fact
must be noticed.    The phenomena of two Mental Sciences
' Advancement of Learning, Book II., p. 129.
Motives for the Study of Mental Philosophy. 373
in particular, Psychology and Logic, necessarily enter into,
and are concerned with, every other science, both mental
and material. It is by means of his conscious states, and
in conformity to the laws of Thought, that man prose¬
cutes any study. How important, then, is the field with
which Mental Science is concerned I Besides its own
proper material, every science is conversant with that
extraneous matter which is investigated in the sciences
of Logic and Psychology, viz., Thoughts, and Human
Consciousness; for without these, no science could be
carried on. To the practical recognition of this truth we
know we are indebted for Locke's Essay, undertaken
to find out the scope of his own mental powers. To
understand the conscious Self, and the laws of Thought
which govern it, is ultimately necessary for the intelli¬
gent and sure pursuit of every branch of scientific research.
3d. The scope of Mental Science in general.
The last motive we shall adduce for the pursuit of
Mental Science study, is, generally stated, that it embraces
the highest and most interesting questions to which the
mind of man is competent.
Physical Science studies the facts and laws of the
material universe. It contemplates a vast mechanism of
wonderful organisation, whose phenomena are unfolded
regularly and systematically, ceaselessly following the
laws which govern their development. But it is in counter-
balanciag what is sometimes an evil effect of this contem¬
plation that we recognise one of the main advantages of a
study of Mental Philosophy; for, "byaccustomingus to the
laws of blind necessity, the wonder of nature leading to a
belief in its still greater power," we are apt to attribute
to matter all power in the universe, to under-value, and
leave out of count, according to the natural tendency of
human beings, that which does not appear on the surface
and appeal to the senses. We are, then, reminded that
the facts of the material cosmos, great and stupendous as
they are, are to us as zero without our own personal con¬
scious existence ; and it is impossible for us even to con¬
ceive the existence of matter without mind. Such study
awakens an inward monitor which we cannot contradict,
and assures us that mind is; and it is even in no way repug¬
nant to us to imagine its existence after the total annihila¬
tion of matter.
" It is universally admitted," says Hamilton, " that
Philosophy comprehends every (natural) conclusion con-
374 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
cerning God, the soul, and the present worth and future
destiny of man." To deny the utility of what is greatest
and most ennobling, wilfully to abstain from the cultiva¬
tion of our highest divine-given faculties, to hold the key
of the entrance to the highest phase of human life, that
phase which perceives the dignity of its goal, and the true
paths to follow to attain it, is surely a policy ahke culpable,
ignorant, and suicidal. May we not hope that speedily
we may only remark, from its rarity, the neglect of " the
development and purification of the moral nature, the
training and strengthening and energising of the intel¬
lectual powers; or, in other words, the formation of the
character and the culture of the mind"^ by means of these
much-neglected Philosophical studies, whose value we
have tried to inculcate.
NOLI-ME-TANGERE.
irifting on \lt i^hamus.
Upborne on the breast of the lordly Thames,
When evening's light blazed red and low,
In a fairy shallop a maiden sat
And watched the still waters flow;
And ever and ever they onward went,
And ever and ever the osiers bent
'Neath the touch of the Zephyr all laden with scent
From the meadow, o'er-blossomed like snow.
And sighing above her swept long ashen boughs,
Like waving hands weaving sleep's spell.
And drowsy the song of the gurgling flood.
As heavy with sweetness there fell
Upon it the bloom from the white linden tree,
That foam-like, and chased by the hovering bee,
Sailed onward and downward, to city and sea ■
Its sweet sylvan story to tell.
And pensive that sunny-haired maid sat, and still,
With hands in her lap idly laid.
Her sculls she had shipped, and gem-dripping they lay
As with languid lids closing, she said,
' Lord Justice Clerk Inglis.
Drifting on the Thames. 375
" Let me drift, golden river, on thy gleaming breast,
For winds breathe, and birds sing of rest, only rest.
And dreamy enchantment steals out from the west,
To hide in the deep purple shade."
And deeper and deeper that purple shade fell.
And lower and lower the trees
Swept bower-like above her, aud fainter there came.
The sigh of the flower-perfumed breeze :
But a sound of strange music grew into the air,
And a long waving motion, like mermaiden's hair.
Trailed far on the billow, swayed wondrous and fair.
With a hum as of far-distant seas.
Around and around her; and green was the light.
With dim golden glimmer inwrought.
Like   sunbeams  scarce   piercing the   dense palm-leaf
screen
In the far untrod forest, where nought
But an emerald twilight ere gleams, and o'erhead
Shone a crystalline roof in green lucidness spread,
That ever seemed moving, and still onward sped
With a burden of weird beauty fraught;
For  a  crowd  of   strange  shapes, in  wild  loveliness
there,
Rose and fell like the rhythm of song.
And with luminous eyes at the wond'ring maid gazed
As they dreamily floated along;
And fr-om moist mossy nooks dwarfish figures peeped
out,
And to and fro flitting and circling about.
With  caper   and smile,  and with   frown   and   with
pout.
Danced around her, a weird elfish throng.
Till, at sound of a voice, clear and low, ringing near,
With a sweep, swift they vanished away.
And stately the Kelpie King stood in their stead,
Clad as monarch in pearl-glist'ning array.
And low knelt he there to the wonder-rapt maid,
Who partly in gladness, and partly afraid,
Gave ear to the soft wooing words that he said,
Nor knew how to answer him nay.
376 The Ladies' Edinburgh, Magazine.
"I have  loved thee  for   long,   oh   mine   earth-born
level
And here have I lured thee with speU
Of murmuring waters, and magic-fraught song.
Streaming sweet from the Keljne's deep cell.
These my realms rich and wide, this my heart's warm
demesne,
Shalt  thou sway with love's sceptre   as   fairest   and
Queen,
So thou'lt but abandon thine earthly birth-scene.
And consent here for ever to dwell."
Reluctant, yet smiling, she held out her hand,
But as took he it went there a thrill
To her heart, for all eerie and cold was his touch,
And into the air came a chill
Sharp and sudden, and swiftly away too there fled
The strange lovely shapes that had floated o'erhead,
And gaunt osier-stems, waving dark in their stead,
Caught the moonbeams that fell white and still.
And parting those osiers with low crashing sound,
Came a boat o'er the flood silver-strewn,
And soon the brown eyes of bright boy-brother Ben
Looked down on the maid there alone.
And wond'ringly asking, " Where am I ? "    " Why,
here,
Stuck fast in the osiers and close to the weir;
And for you, fair Sis, I have searched far and near,
So now your proceedings pray own!
" In my sculHng I stopt ever}- now and again.
As I swimmingly came down the stream,
And looked o'er the boat's side, expecting to see
That hair of yours ruddily gleam
Down below, all entangled among the long weeds,
And you at the end of it fast in the reeds,
Your quietus found as regards mundane deeds,
With never a word or a scream.
" And the time too you've been I    Why, the sun was
quite high
When you left us this evening, and now
An elegant moonlight presides o'er the scene—
You've been sleeping the whole time, I vow I
Drifting on the Thames. 377
You ' wanted to drift with the current,' you say;
Well, next time you do so, allow me to pray
Some sense of the fitness of things you'll display.
And make fast your boat by the prow
" To the post by the garden-steps,—there you  may
dream.
With three feet of range ' fancy free ;'
But now, to get out of your reedy retreat,
Take your sculls, and be guided by me,
So—steady—backwater,—mind—don't run aground!
Mamma's in a fright, making sure you are drowned.
And Papa will fume on till he hears you are found,
And aboye all—we're waiting for tea!"
Melensa.
e iiaeburn 6allern.
We cannot close our year's volume, without a few words
on the exquisite enjoyment afforded to us for nearly two
months, by the Raeburn Gallery. AVe doubt whether in
any other city, British or Continental, a collection so
deeply interesting to its citizens could haye been so
quickly brought together. It may seem presumptuous to
eay so, but we belieye the facts will warrant the assertion.
Raeburn was an Edinburgh man, and seldom left his own
peculiar grooye. His pictures, almost without exception,
are of Scotch men and women, more or less connected
with Edinburgh, and moving in its contracted but brilliant
circle. There are still those living among us who can tell
their children what Edinburgh society was in its palmiest
days, before railroads and the march of improvement had
removed all old landmarks, literal and metaphorical, and
shorn our ancient and beautiful city of many of its social
charms. Those were days when a rising genius needed
no help save that of his own merits ; Edinburgh afforded
employment and delight to its own children; Scotchmen
lived in their own capital city; and the young painter had
ample choice of sitters among the burghers and senators,
the wits and beauties, who were also his familiar friends.
To the general diffusion of a higher education than was
common elsewhere, it was owing, that all classes were
much thrown together, and made dependent on each other
for interchange of social enjoyments; and where numbers
No. 24.—Decembeb 1876. 3 B
378 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
were comparatively small, no man was lost in the crowd,
the talents and gifts of each one were certain to be laid
under contribution for the benefit of the whole ; business
and pleasures were pursued hand in hand. Here was the
happiest possible vantage-ground for a young painter,
and Henry Raeburn knew it well. Born in humble life,
his rise was easy and rapid; he soon became the friend
and associate of those of higher birth; and we feel, as we
look at his works, that his sitters were more than mere
subjects for his pencil—they were those with whom he
lived and enjoyed life and exchanged ideas. Thus know¬
ing their hearts and minds, as well as their faces, he was
able practically to carry out the idea expressed by our
Laureate, in lines which are aptly quoted on the cover of
the Raeburn Catalogue, that a good painter should be
able to convey to a man's children not only the face, but
" the shape and colour of his mind and life;" and as we
walked through the rooms, we felt that in this lay Rae-
burn's great power. True, we could not share fully the
enjoyment afforded to the still surviving members of the
generation now passing away, as we were reminded by the
words of one old friend, " Ah! you young folks, what do
you know about it ? You never saw all these, but to me
it's just talking to my old friends again! " Where are you
going to-day? we asked another. "To have a crack with
my old friends in the Gallery," was the reply. Yet, on the
good principle of " thine own friend, and tliy father's friend
forget not," we were glad to see these speaking likenesses
of so many known to us by family connection or friend¬
ship with their living descendants, or by the charming
biographies whicli recall Edinburgh as it was in those
good old days. And we reflected, on leaving the Gallery
for the last time, that when the present generation passes
away, there will be none to look, as our fathers still can
do, on these portraits with the eyes of old friends and
companions ; none who can call up old times, old jests and
laughter, occasions of pleasant intercourse in days long
gone by, with those whose faces still live on Sir Henry
Raeburn's canvas. The opening of thi« Exhibition in
Edinburgh seems to us not only the right thing in the right
place, but the right thing done at the right time.
We should have been glad, of course, of a chronological
arrangement of the pictures, but their irregular arrival
prevented this. Their number is an evidence of the
painter's   industry,   especially   as   they   by  no   means
The Raehurn Gallery. 379
exhaust the Raeburns in Scotland.    As he began about
the age of twenty, i.e. in 1776, we may take this current
year as the centenary of his artist-life.    Whether he had
any special preference for old or young, male or female
subjects,  we can hardly say; yet  so many of his most
charming portraits are of young lads, that we could fancy
he took special pleasure in drawing  these.    Such   are,
" W. Blair of Avontoun," (240) ; " Alexander Mackenzie,
younger of Portmore," (169) ; his own son, Henry Raeburn,
mounted on a grey pony.     The shadow of the boy's cap,
thrown on the upper part of the face, gives great effect
to the arch roguish expression of the mouth; he looks
as if he had just achieved some boyish piece of mischief.
Another beautiful specimen of youth, is " W. Ferguson
of Kilrie, (53).    Here again the face is in shade, the light
just outlining the nose and mouth, whose perfect curves
are thus brought into strong relief. Among the female por¬
traits, " Mrs. Oswald of Auchencruive," (28); " Mrs, Vere,"
(30);   "Lady  Suttie,^' (38); "Mrs.   Wedderburn,"  (14);
" Mrs. J. Durham,"  (233), and many others, need no com¬
ment, the last-named being in our estimation one of the
most  graceful in  the  whole  collection.    Of old ladies,
"Mrs. Campbell of Park," in her large bonnet, is most char¬
ming ; also an anonymous " Old Lady with Large Cap,"
(179).    Two very pleasing pictures are Nos. 49 and 53,
the Earl of Dumfries and  Mr. Stirling of Kippendavie,
each holding the hand of a little daughter.    The child-
portraits   are  generally  less  lovely  than  those   of  Sir
Joshua Reynolds, but No. 141 called " Girl Leaning on
a Portfolio" is exquisite.    She seems about twelve, and
Bits dressed in a closely-fitted white robe, her gold brown
hair rolled into one large curl on the top of her head,
with eyes like sapphires, and flesh tints like a wild rose.
We longed to put a name on this beauteous little maiden.
From the great force of expression in all his portraits,
we should imagine that Raeburn excelled in the power of
seizing and  detaining the  best expression  habitual to a
countenance, finding, as Tennyson says, " the man behind
his face."^    We should exceed our limits were we to give
many instances, but we cannot leave one unnoticed, which
is our favourite in the whole gallery.    It is 195, Dr. Alex-
' That the converse opinion of Raeburn's powers has sometimes prevailed,
our readers may refer to the remarks on his portrait of Sir Walter Scott,
painted in 1808.—Lockhart's Life, p. 223. Scott's must have been a difficult
face to paint; we confess to not caring for this picture, though we maintain
Raeburn's general excellence.
380 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
ander Adam, for more than forty years the honoured
rector of the High Scliool. Firm, grave, and kindly, he
sits with mild, thoughtful eyes, and lips just parted in a
smile, with book in hand, as if with his class around him.
He looks like a man who, having an important life-work,
placed his happiness in a right discharge of it; such a
sitter must have pleased Raeburn well. Of Dr. Adam is
the story told, that, as on his death-bed life's brief candle
flickered out, he said gently to an imaginary group of
scholars, " Boys, it is growing dark, we will dismiss," and
so he passed away. Both the portraits of Sir Adam Fer¬
guson are exquisitely life-like, and so is Henry Viscount
Melville (148). The extended hand, its finger-tips press¬
ing the table, is wonderfully painted.
Surely a great portrait-painter and a musician must
have something in common. The best performer ex¬
presses not only the thoughts of the composer, but his
own thoughts about the composer ; so the painter will not
merely produce a likeness of his model, but give us his
own thoughts about the model. This is what our great
painters have done, but shall we ever see such portraits
again ? Can we hope to do so in days when nobody has
time to sit still longer than to be photographed ? If this
is to be our substitute for portraits, a long farewell to such
pleasure as this has been! The year 1976 will hardly
afford such another exhibition in this city of ours. We
turn from the Raeburn Gallery with still deeper regret—
its treasures Avill soon be dispersed to their various resting-
places—some to the public buildings of which they are
fitting adornments, some to dusky halls and chambers of
which they were life-tenants, and where their names are
still cherished by children's children; and as we say our
reluctant farewell, we are glad to think how many of that
past generation of Scottish worthies are now nc longer
mere " names," but, through these noble pictures, fellow
countrymen and women, on whose faces we have looked
with interest, love, and human sympathy.
" Mortal," they softly say, Hope-lifted, doubt-depressed,
" Peace to thy heart; Seeing in part ;
We too, yes, mortal Tried, troubled, tempted,
Have been, as thou art: Sustained—as thou art."
Anemone.
The competition for articles on subjects of Moral and Mental Philosophy is
now closed.
The Subject op Debate for the next Meeting of the Ladies' Edinburgh
Literary Societi/, December 2, is—" Is the Theory of Evolution neccessarily
opposed to Christianity ? "
Those interested m these Debates are referred to the List published in the
January No. of this Magazine, and to that which wUl be issued iu January 1877.
ERRATA.
Pages 244 and 270, for "E. T. Oswald," read " E. J. Oswald."
Page 306, 2d paragraph, for   "That we should   realise," read  "We should
realise that."
„    351, 2d paragraph,/Vr "germs," read "genus."
„    310,/or " Artis Lunga," read " Ars Longa."
^>,:-.-
'4«
V  -
'i"y
re
f'V    - . ■      ,  ^
