•mi-!.m
s
JI
i
n
s
n
0
n
8
fi
f
I51STS151H,
alsajtalb,
t-y^^ur,
J^y-A
/^y y
• •^».
'■^m. '%
v/ •/.
>^--;^.. _ -
""W^
THE   ATTEMPT
A   LITERARY   MAGAZINE
CONDUCTED BY  THE  MEMBEKS  OF  THE
LADIES' EDINBURGH ESSAY SOCIETY.
VOLUME   VIL
"AUSPICIUM   MELIOEIS    ^.VI."
PRINTED FOR THE LADIES' EDINBURGH ESSAY SOCIETY.
COLSTON  &   SON,   EDINBURGH.
MDCCCLXXI.
EDINBURGH :   PRINTED   BY  COLSTON &   SON.
0-^' D    ■
^ \9   HO <\
e^ 1936 ^
^iJO'\
CONTENTS.
Adelaide, by V.,        .
Alas for Her, by R., ir^ iipA*^
Attention, Of, by Rustica,   >n^   i^-''" /'-^^-^   _
Bygone Year, The, by Elfie,    . .
Christmas Tree's Reply to Lutea Reseda, The, by E. H. S.,   .
Curland Love Story, A, by Jeannie,
Darkness and Dawn, by Melensa,   ; k^-u $u-,i>:^
Deep Sea Graves, by Jeanie Morison, '^'--^. '• 'I ^  .'   '''
Demeter and Persephone, by Grace,
Easter Hymn, An, by George du Menur,
Edinburgh Ladies' Educational Association, The, by Lutea Reseda,
Elocution—Its Use and Abuse, by Sanct Rewle,     ii^'oL'-V-'-.
End of the Year, The, by Liebchen, . '^^'O^AAj^^-^i^
Epigram and Answer, by Echo,
Exhibition of the Royal Scottish Academy for 1871, The, by M. E. T.,
Friendship of Books, The, by O. M.,       .
George Eliot's New Poem, by Jeanie Morison,
George Street (Edinburgh) and Its Associations, by Eta,'^'.     .'
Gone Before, by Sanct Rewle,  . ivi-i^ bv^^^t   -
Hospital Children, by M. S. S., ...
Infant, On an, by Melita,
In Remembrance, by Sanct Rewle,
PAGE
55
180
25
1
13
206, 217
276
137
277
77
97
7
270
185
59,83
241
193
200, 224
101
265
167
33
iv                               .                                                          CONTENTS.
PAGE
I said not, " Seek ye my Face in Vain," by X. H.,
89
Jealousy, by Echo,                   .....
257
Katie Macrae, by Elsie Strivelyne, *)W SwCtA*Light in the Darkness, by Lutea Reseda,   ^^ Lu^.,.
133
151
,169
150
Limit to Religious Toleration ? Is there or is there not a, by Jeanie Morison,
78
Little Poets, by E. J. O.Vl^ Ogw-ti'^i-  .               .               .               .
281
Lord Swinfen's Guard, by R.,   .'W'-i, ''be-i*--*. t) ti-^wv"-
245
Near the Beloved, by Veronica,'iVu->'^.?.V»'^-*^   .
24
New Year's Gifts, The, by Melita,            ....
67
Off to the War, by Gretchen,                     ....
223
Our Cathedral, by A. M.,          .
127
Our Library Table,                    .                .                .48, 71, 96, 120,
144,
192,
240
,263
Our Life, by FrucaraV,, 13»«'"..S             .                .                .                .
36
Our Need, by Erucara,              .
176
Parting, by Dido,                       ...
63
Peace in France and Germany, by E. J. 0-,
246
Plea for Compulsory Education, A, by Meigeag Bheag,
121
.   Plea for Stupid People, A, by Dido,         ....
258
Poetry and the Poet, by Lutea Reseda,    ....
14
Probable Effects on English Poetry of the Introduction of Blank Verse,
On the.
by Eta,        /, ...               .                .               .               .                .
105
Reminiscences of Foreign Glimpses, by Elfie, ^l-. '.' ■■   '         .            138,
159,
185,
211
231
Roslin Castle in Spring, by E. L. E.,       .
1
126
Saviour of the Souls I Love, by X. II.,    ....
.
198
Sketch, A, by Nobody,              .....
.
34
Sketches of Curland, by Jeannie,
103,
130,
145,
177
Song of Middle Age, A, by Jeanie INIorison,
.
158
Sonnet, by E. L. E., .
•
251
Spirit's Search, The, by Melita,               ....
.
238
Style is Radically Identical with Thought, by Lutea Reseda,   .
•
36
CONTENTS.—INDEX OF CONTRIBUTOKS.
Sunset, by Jeanie Morison, . ...
Thoughts at Sunset, by Melensa,
Una Ferguson, by 0. M.,
Use of the Imagination in Painting and Music, The, by M. M. L.,
Visual Language, by Grace,   n^^ h<\i\j{ i i^ i-i^^t^ .
Viya Italia, by Nobody, ....
Wings of Icarus, The, by Lutea Reseda,
PAGE
.    •        54
230
19, 40, 65, 89, 113
181
49, 73
165
.   252, 270
INDEX OF CONTRIBUTORS' NOMS DE PLUME.
A. M.,
Dido,
Echo,
E. H. S.,
E. J. O.,
E. L. E.,
Elfie,
Elsie Strivelyne,
Eta,
Frucara,
George du Menur,
Grace,
Gretchen,
Jeanie Morison, .
Jeannie,
127
63, 258
185, 257
13
246, 281
126, 251
1, 138, 159, 185, 211, 231
133, 151, 169
105, 200, 224
36, 176
77
49, 73, 277
223
54, 78, 137, 158, 193
103, 130, 145, 177, 206, 217
VI
INDEX OF CONTEIBXJTORS.
LuTEA Reseda,
Meigeag Bheag,
Melensa,
Melita,
M. E. T.,
M. M. L.,
Nobody,
O. M.,
R.,
RUSTICA,
v.,
Veronica,
X. H.,   .
PAGE
u,
36,
97,
150,
252,
270
•
•
230,
121276
.
57,
167,
238
.
.
59,83
•
•
34,
181165
19
,40
,65
,89,
113,180,
241245
»
•
25
.
.
65
•
•
89,
24198
ERRATA.
♦ 
Page   48, line 28,/or "dispositions," read "aspirations.
Page   72, lines 9 and 12, for " Eendall," read " Kendall."
Page 143, Irae 31,/or " Averno," read " Averni."
Page 159, line 32,/or "expected," read "expectant."
Page 160,  line   2, for   "Quentin   Matsy's   blacksmith,"   read
" Quentin Matsys, a blacksmith."
Page 164, line 10, for " Lapellote," read " Papellote."
Page 164, line 10,/or "Planclieowit, read "Planchenoit."
Page 212, line 31,/or " here," read "hue."
Page 216, line 2,/or " monstrous," read "monotonous."
THE   ATTEMPT.
^&^   §2goitc   gear.
" ' Know'st thou not me,' the deep voice cried ; "
* « * *
" Before my breath, like blazing flax,
Man and his marvels pass away ;
And changing empires wane and wax,
Are founded, flourish, and decay."
The year 1870 must be considered remarkable in the history of the world, and will
doubtless be hereafter enrolled in the chronicles of nations as a grand era, which de¬
veloped, with lightning-like suddenness and rapidity, mighty events that had lain
long in embryo during preparatory ages. The wide-spread character of these historic
effects is strikingly evident, on a comparison of the auspicious opening of the year
with its stormy and darkening close, within which narrow period we can, with diffi¬
culty, point to a nation which has not developed revolutions, stirred up aggressions
or had its own integrity endangered by the attitudes of other powers.
The interest of all sections of civilized humanity has, during the last six months,
been centred on the mighty, yet humbling spectacle, of two of the greatest nations
in Europe struggling to the death for supremacy, in a manner which proclaims the
discoveries of science to be occasionally at variance with the progress of true enlight¬
enment. Verily, the scenes that have been lately enacted on the fruitful plains of France,
dimming the radiance of her summer's promise, and staining her fields with other
than harvest colours,—fields that are now enduring a moral as well as physical winter
of discontent and desolation—too strikingly illustrate the nineteenth century as the
unapproachable age of science and civilization.
The great announcement leading to the following melancholy concatenation of
2 THE ATTEMPT.
events burst on the world like a thunder-clap, though stormy signs had been loom¬
ing in the political horizon of both countries for years previous. The war, indeed,
has been called France's retribution for her arbitrary conquests under the first
Em2)ire, when Prussia bled in the iron grasp of the great Napoleon; but, although
we do assuredly see, in the history of nations, a certain law of tu quoque amendment
fulfilling itself, its application to the present instance does not in the least aifect the ori¬
ginal right and wrong of the case; and therefore, inasmuch as defensive war is alone
justifiable, there should be no hesitation in stigmatizing the present conflict as most
unjust on both sides.
The mutual feeling of national animosity, if dating back towards this century's
commencement, seems to have gathered force with years, the French resenting the
increasing arrogancy of the Piiissians, and the Piiissians longing to lower the heredi¬
tary pride of the French, till now, blows given and received have intensified these
prepossessions to a degree painful to think of. The sympathies of this country,
which, from various occult causes, were primarily in favour of Prussia, have now in
great measure embraced the cause of France, in her brave resistance against a dis¬
honourable peace of opj^ression and annexation, and horror at the consolidation of a
grand German empire over the ruins of the finest architectural capital in the world.
However, the extreme one-sidedness of the successes may be explained by the
inferior discipline, unreasonable expectations, exaggerated demeanour, and distrust
of their generals displayed by the French troops, in contradistinction to the splendid
organization, overwhelming numbers, firm resolution, and matchless steadiness of
the Prussian army, used with supeiior strategy by its leaders. The evil results of
the war should not be attributed to the lukewarm zeal of the fallen emperor, who,
notwithstanding all his faults and misfortunes, and the inferiority of his military
prowess to that of the first Napoleon, has maintained France's position in the foremost
rank of European powers. He has glorified and beautified her capital almost beyond
precedent, fostered the commercial prosperity of the country to a wide extent, im¬
proved its government by degrees, till constitutional liberties were within the grasp
of the people in the late plebiscite, and, by his constant friendship with Great Britain,
has done much, not only to annihilate the old rooted dislike between the nations, but
to render their commercial interests identical. In short, notwithstanding much in¬
jurious suspicion, he has, during his eighteen years' rule, shown himself France's best
friend and Britain's faithful ally, so that, in recognition of his past good services, as
well as for her own noble sake, we should rejoice to welcome his heroic consort to
her chosen refuge on our sheltering shores.
THE  ATTEMPT. 6
While the eyes of the world are eagerly fixed on the grand action itself in
progress, its most material accompanying consequences are apt to be overlooked;
and the awful occupant of the most dread throne in Christendom for many centuries
has been dethroned from his high temporal eminence with as little noise and cere¬
mony as might be attendant on an invalid old man exchanging one elbow-chair for
another less comfortable. To the student of dates and coincidences, it must apj^ear
noteAvorthy that the declaration of war occurred on the day which proclaimed the
Pope infallible, and thus concurred with the immediate ecclesiastical consequences of
the establishment of this most remarkable of Romish dogmas to undermine the
cause which belligerent State and Church had each alike sought to establish.
Spain, the luckless match that served to fire the train of events, has been at
last provided with a king, in the Duke d'Aosta, under whose rule it is to be hoped
that the wheels of that refractory state will move more smoothly than heretofore.
But the war brings us specially unacceptable results in the treacherous threats
of Russia to assume an undue direction of the affairs of Turkey, in violation of the
hard-won treaty of 1856. This bearish jrierfidy involves us in unenviable compli¬
cations, which are peculiarly unpalatable from the consideration that the fault is
originally our own ; as, if England had dutifully fought for Denmark in her need,
the Prussians would not now have been overrunning France, presenting opportunity
to Russia to break her chain of honour, and Britain had maintained that national
prestige which is now so sorely bedraggled in the mii-e of Continental opinion.
This is not, however, the only penalty we have to pay for the supremacy of a peace-
at-any-price party, who may presently find that we can have peace at no price what¬
ever. Britain's defences are in a state suitable to the millennial age of ploughshares
and pruning-hooks, instead of a time when, added to Continental difficulties, there
are against us the unsettled "Alabama" claims of dissatisfied America, the tur-
bulency of Ireland, the danger of Canada, uncertainty in India, and disturbances in
China. Deprived by death of the invaluable services of her great foreign diplo¬
matist, Lord Clarendon, with an army's fragment, munitioned, armed, and trained
so as to make even the unskilful laugh, " while the judicious grieve," Britain may
learn, by a severe lesson, that the most effectual measures for the preservation of peace
are to be found in the good old rule of an armed defence, till the prevalence of right
over might shall
" King out the thousand years of war,
Ring in the thousand years of peace."
While vainly listening for this noble peal of the golden future, amid the jangled
4 THE ATTEMPT.
war fanfare, our ears are pleasingly saluted with the sweet sound of the wedding
bells of our own Princess Louisa, whose recent betrothal to the Marquis of Lome
has awakened a popular satisfaction unprecedented on any similar occasion, unless
on that of the Prince of Wales' man-iage. Our own peculiar national appreciation
of the distinction conferred upon Scotland in the person of our hereditarily great
and personally honoured countryman, the heir of Macallum More, promises to find
expression in divers forms, of the most appropriate of which would surely be an
offering to the royal bride from the daughters of the land of her adoption, and
the proposed national gift of a royal residence in our noble capital, such as would
afford opportunity for the i-estoration, in some measure, of its by-gone glories as the
ancient seat of Scottish royalty.
The foundation stone of a most valuable addition to the architectural institu¬
tions of Edinburgh was laid, in October, by the Prince of Wales, with full masonic
honours. The claims of the Royal Infirmary are so undisputed, and its efiiciency so
worthy a medical school unsurpassed in the world, that regi-et must be felt at the
acrimonious disputes that preceded the settlement of the new site; but, unfor¬
tunately, such difierences seem necessary preliminaries to the adoption of anything
new in our city, whatever it may be. Even now, the inhabitants are doomed to
suffer all the painful inconveniences attendant upon a scarcity of water, while the
Town Council indulge their controversial proclivities in determining the rival
merits of the Heriot, Talla, and St Mary's Loch schemes ; and, notwithstanding the
increased water rates levied from suburbs growing in every direction, no new sup¬
plies are forthcoming to replenish exhausted reservoirs, and fill empty cisterns, a
state of things that indeed woos diseases to poor homes, and is sufficient to intro¬
duce into the town such fever epidemics as have lately prevailed in Glasgow and
Liverpool. Happily, the Association for improving the Condition of the Poor con-
tinues its praiseworthy efibrts with the success due to wise philanthropy and
excellent organization.
In addition to the continuance of soup kitchens as an agency for the prevention
of starvation among the very poor in sevei'e weather, dinners are again provided,
this winter, for the physical nourishment of those juvenile starvelings of society,
whose moral and intellectual training is the real educational question of the day.
Under the new Provisional Order, Edinburgh has lately received from its
Merchant Company the endowment of a new group of schools, where first-rate
education is provided in all branches, at a rate which previous experience teaches us
to consider a very low one, with the additional inducement and impetus to   study
THE ATTEMPT. 5
of bursaries offered for the superior scholarship of both sexes. Against this new era
of things the old school proprietors protest, as an infringement of the rights of the
old system, so serious, that Government has been memorialized by more than three
hundred teachers on the subject; but, whatever the undue advantage taken of this
undoubted educational boon by many who need it not financially, and the injury
thereby sustained by old established professional talent, it is an undoubted fact
that the ordinary high rate of school fees has sufficiently burdened large families to
render a reduction only proper and reasonable, especially in the department of girls'
education, which has been as superlatively expensive as proverbially superficial. It
may be that this new system will work a reformation in the one point, as the other
evil is now combated by the education in the sciences provided by the Ladies'
Educational Association under four University professors, whose courses of lectures
in literature, experimental physics, logic and metaphysics, and mathematics, are
again this session in progress, with very successful results.
Less happy have been late efibrts towards the attainment of female medical in¬
struction at our University, such as would qualify those women desirous of the qualifi¬
cation, for ministering intelligently, as well as benevolently, on behalf of the sufferings
of their sex, and rendering them competent to deal with the ailments of children.
Small as is the pi'oportion of women who feel themselves qualified to undertake this
arduous profession, the welcome already awarded from many quarters to the intrepid
little band of pioneers points to the prospective establishment of our female colleges
in the kingdom, such as will render unnecessary tlie undoubtedly odious incongruity
of indiscriminate University teaching.
During the past year, medical science has lost several of her brightest
ornaments and most useful practitioners, such as Sir James Clark, physician
to Her Majesty, and Professor Syme, the most successful surgeon of his day, of
whom it has been said that " he never wasted a word, a drop of ink, nor a drop
of blood." But these are as drops in the bucket compared with the ocean of
good that flowed around the life of Sir James Simpson, and ebbed for ever at his
death. He was the benefactor of his kind, so that it was fitting his loss should be
mourned, not merely as a national, but as a human calamity. To the unrivalled
power which his genius developed for the relief of human suffering, to live as tlie
undying death of pain, he added in himself the will and the skill to do good in the
highest possible degree; so that the same breath which admires his talent and power
of mind, hastens to dwell on his kindness, his gentleness, and compassion of heart.
AHence much of the impressiveness of feeling that reigned in the touched hearts and
6 THE ATTEMPT.
saddened countenances of those mourning thousands, whose stricken demeanour on
that still day in May, which witnessed the obsequies of pomp and circumstance due
to the object of a world's grateful regard, proved yet more nobly than the procession
of the learned, honourable, and illustrious of our land, moving in long black pha¬
lanxes " with solemn tread and slow," the power of one mind over many for good,
and lent the deepest significance to the mightier lesson of the universal dirge—
" The sceptre, learning, physic, must
All follow this, and come to dust."
It is remai-kable that death should have deprived us of our greatest mental and
physical mediciners at the same age, and within a few weeks of each other, for we
think we may safely assume the position of comparison between the eiforts of Charles
Dickens on behalf of the amenity of the human mind, and those of Professor Simp¬
son for the body.
The pen of Charles Dickens is that of a great writer used in a noble service, so
that its creations, though sometimes faulty, generally grotesque, and often overdrawn
and extravagant, have nearly always in them something of nature's kind, to refresh
the weary and fill the vacant mind. With all their caricaturisms there is a grand
moral tone permeating his wi-itings, in the consciousness with which they irresistibly
inspire us of the vast amount of latent good there is in the world. He intro¬
duces us to it in the most ridiculous, commonplace, and uninviting forms; but
while we laugh, grow tired, or feel repulsed, our minds are encouraged, and rejoice
that the genius of such a man has been dedicated to the noble purpose of evolving
the " good " which a yet gi-eater than he found in " everything."
Of the few distinguished male novelists now left us, our great statesman Disraeli,
is one of the chief, and few books have been more read, more criticised, and more
abused than his late publication—" Lothair," BlachivoocVs flagitious attack upon
which was as undeserved and ungraceful as Professor Blackie's defence was spirited
and generous. Mr Disraeli's writiag defects arise chiefly from an extraordinary
style of exaggerated phraseology, notwithstanding the unnatural effects of which,
" Lothair" is not only a clever expose of the shifts and devices of the Pomish
system for entrapping alike individuals by perversion, and religious bodies by blind
coadjutorship, into the furtherance of its designs; but a high-minded exposition of
the true heroism of an enlightened devotion to the cause of any country or religion,
and the noble consistency of character moulded in accordance with these high
aims.
THE ATTEMPT. 7
It is worthy of note that in Mr Hill Burton's lately concluded work, the
literary world welcomes the best history of Scotland yet written.
" The Attempt" once more greets its readers on beginniag the seventh year
of its existence. Started for the creation and cultivation of literary tastes within
a small circle; success has encouraged the promoters of this little magazine to
extend the range of their aims so far as to admit the contributions of ladies without
the barriers of their immediate Society, in the hope that these pages will thereby
afford greater benefit and pleasure to an enlarged circle of readers.
Elfie.
Readers of " Good Words " cannot have forgotten George Macdonald's graceful and
thoughtful essay on " Polish," which appeared in the course of the year 1865. Mr
Macdonald's object is to correct the erroneous impressions that prevail regarding
polish of style, and polish of manner. He shows how true polish is a taking off,
rather than a laying on, and how the nearest approach to it is to be found in the
removal of all that has been concealing and thwarting nature.
" The definition of it," he observes, " appears to me to be that condition of surface
which allows the inner structure of the material to manifest itself. . . . From
the heart of the agate, the mossy landscape comes dreaming out; from the depth of
the green chrysolite looks up the eye of its gold."
The relevancy of this quotation will, we hope, be presently clear to all. For what
is Elocution, if it be not a branch, and an important branch, of polish of style t
What is so truly remarked of the latter cannot but be applicable to the former:
that " It will be the removal of everything that can interfere between the thought
of the speaker and the mind of the hearer." To this view of the study of Elocution,
our matter-of-fact railroad age seems inclined to demur. That the true aim of the
Elocutionist is simplicity and not ornament, and that the investigation of the princi¬
ples of speech is a practical, as well as a scientific, gain to the student, these are
truths not so widely acknowledged as we could wish. As a technical training for
some special profession, be that profession the bar, the pulpit, the stage, or the plat¬
form, all willingly grant the utility of the art of oratory.    But if we take a higher
o THE ATTEMPT.
stand, and ask why a tone, an inflexion, a gesture that pleases in the pulpit, should
jar in the drawing-room, what is the reply 1 We know what has been too often said
to ourselves, " Oh, that is all very well in public, but in private, I like natural
speaking." So long as this idea prevails, and Elocution is excluded by popular con¬
sent from a liberal, general education, so long will Elocution, in its special technical
application, fail of perfection. The false distinction, and the unjust exclusion indicate
a mistake in the popular understanding of the science of speech. Where is the cause
of this error to be sought 1 How may we account for the deliberate neglect of so
important a branch of education ? Professor Melville Bell, whose fame needs not to
be here extolled, offers, in the introduction to his Elocutionary Manual, a very
obvious reply to these questions. After referring to the lazy acquiescence we are
all too apt to accord to " things as they are," he proceeds as follows :—
" But, besides this natural conservatism, this unreason, which is the principal
cause of the maintenance of all error, there is another cause, which is indeed a reason
for the anomaly referred to, although the reason itself will be admitted to be un¬
reasonable. A prejudice exists against the cultivation of manner in delivery. . . .
' Manner' and ' matter' are spoken of as antagonists in oratory. But what is
matter without manner ? Matter is the native, unquarried lock; manner is the
chiseled statue or the sculptured palace. . . . Manner is the manifestation of
all matter; and no matter can be known but by the manner of its presentment.
This is equally true of intellectual as of physical material. The matter of the finest
oratory may be hidden within the brain, worthless and unappreciated, as the marble
of that sweetest creation of the sculptor, the ' Greek slave,' lay buried in its native
hill, till a power arose that covild iinveil its symmetry and grace."
It is only fair, however, to remark that this prejudice against oratorical
display may have some excuse in the prevalence, particularly among the pulpit
orators of our day, of that false notion of polish against which George Macdonald
enters so eloquent a protest. A case in point occurs to us. A stranger, who had
gone to hear a sermon by one of our most eloquent and popular preachers, observed
as he quitted the church, " What an orator that man would be, if he ivere only
sincere ! "
Here, then, are two wide-spread evils—the cultivation of a false oratory, on the
one hand, and the dislike of all oratory whatever, on the other. Which is cause
and which is consequence 1 We have seen that they grow side by side ; possibly, in
the course of our inquiries, we may find one common root for both.
We  have spoken  of principles ; not of rules, and this for a sufficiently good
THE ATTEMPT. 9
reason. Rules are of use to us so far, and only so far, as they are based upon
sound principles; and tlie more general and deep-rooted the principle, the more
simple and intelligible is its application. Nor can we avoid tracing much of the
superficiality and dogmatism of many ordinarily well-educated people to this error—
viz., the substitution of rules, which are only the application of general principles to
special cases, for those general principles themselves. In nothing is this more
marked than in gi-ammar. It has often struck us as singular that the cry of scorn
against advanced logical and philological study should be raised by those whose
early grammatical training has been most complete. But the explanation,
after all, is not far to seek. We knew a lady of the old school, who, on the
story of Newton and the apple being discussed in her presence, exclaimed " But
why did he wonder at that 1 The apple fell because it was heavy, what more
could he want to know about it ? " Similarly, when those who have completed a course
of grammatical education are invited to pursue further and deeper their enquiries
into tlie meaning and use of the language they speak daily, they reply in wonder,
" But we have learned all that, the grammar rules give us all we need."
One of the best known of these rules commands that the verb to be shall have
the same case after it that it has before it. This is laid down with dogmatic brevity,
as if it were the ultimate reach of the mind on that question, as if the expression of
man's thought had nothing to do with the thought itself, or with the relations be¬
tween the objects of man's conception. Yet at the root of this rule lies a principle
accepted by logicians as fundamental, the explanation of it is found in the law of
identity. This law has been thus stated, " An affirmative proposition is not secured
against inconsistency, unless its predicate may be thought of as identical with the
subject. The primary formula of affirmation is this—A is A." Translate this
formula into the concrete. In place of " A is A," let us affirm that " Dore
is a great artist." The terms "Dore" and "artist" must be in the same case.
Why 1 AnsM'er, according to rule, " the verb to be requires the same case after
it that it has before it." Correctly answered. But is it much harder to state
the principle at once, and to say, " the copula here performs the duty of affirming
the actual identity of Dorc with a certain portion of the class ' great artists 1' "
Thus it is that we work from the surface downwards, condensing and simplify¬
ing our knowledge more, the more we gain, evolving at each step of our progress
some principle of existence, some law of thought. To show how the neglect of prin¬
ciples injures the cause of oratory, we cannot do better than refer to Mr Melville
Bell.
B
10 THE ATTEMPT.
" A certain movement of voice implies incompleteness of statement, and its
mechanical opposite imjDlies completeness. A knowledge of this simple principle
involves at once a knowledge of more than half the rules for inflexion founded on the
construction of sentences, with which Elocutionists have bewildered theii- students.
The mind can grasp this principle and carry it along without effort through all the
complexities and involutions of composition ; but if, instead of this, the student is
made to learn all the possible arrangements of words in sentences, and to apply
a separate ' rule ' for each new form, he can never bring his rules into sjjontaneous
application."
To count one for the comma, two for the semi-colon, three for the colon, and
four for the full-stop, and to make a longer pause at the close of each paragraph ;
such, if we are right, is a summary of the ordinary rules for Elocutionary pausing.
The pupil is desired to observe the marks of punctuation, and to take breath at each.
He is assured, at least if his authority belongs to Lennie's school, that " punctuation
is the art of pointing written composition in such a manner as to lead to its proper
meaning, construction, and delivery." And, having impressed this upon the pupil's
mind, the teacher thinks he has done his duty. But, what is the result 1 Dutifully
endeavouring to follow out the directions given him, the embryo Elocutionist labours
pantingly from point to point, till the voice, exhausted, sinks down between some
unhappy preposition and a still more unhapi:)y noun which it is sujiposed to govern.
To keep the voice strong and the chest filled, more frequent halts are required than
the marks of punctuation afford, and with no principle by which to regulate these
halts, the reader inevitably makes mistakes, separating words that should be joined,
and joining words that have no necessary connection with one another.
What the chapter is to the book, and the paragraph to the chapter, such is the
sentence to the paragraph, and the clause to the sentence. This, further, is to be
remarked, that, as the chapter comprises within its space various topics, dissimilar, yet
with some connecting link binding each to each—so with the paragraph, and the
sentence, and the clause. The ruling principle in these divisions is simply the
arrangement in groups of the ideas expressed, with a view to lightening the labour
of the reader, and thus, indirectly, of the hearer also. This principle once grasped
by the student, the application of it to details will be easy enough ; keep each idea
by itself, let each be rounded olT into its own completeness, that the hearer may be
relieved of the laborious pai't of his task.
Punctuation and jiausiiig are alike niled by the priuciples of grammar, by the
relation   of words to  each  other.     The  first gathers  cognate  ideas  into   groups,
THE  ATTExMPT. 11
preparing the ground for the work of the second ; what that work is, we have seen.
So far from undervaluing grammatical construction and parsing, we hold that
the rudiments of grammar should always precede the study of expressive reading
and speaking. We hold that no one unable to parse at sight any given sentence or
clause can be a thorough Elocutionist.
The principle of emphasis is also extremely simple. In order to render the
subject-matter of his discourse moi-e easily followed, the reader or speaker must make
an almost imperceptible pause between the individual thoughts he expresses. For
the same reason, he must, by additional force in the utterance, distinguish new and
unfamiliar ideas from old and familiar. The rule is this ; emphasize strongly every
new idea, and suppress all that have already been expressed or implied.
But what, amid this sweeping reformation of Elocutionary abuses, is to become
of the ancient and honourable art of scanning 1 Is it to have any place at all among
these natural and universal princijiles of oratory ? Or are our Elocutionary manuals
to be swept and garnished of such unnecessary encumbrances as Spondees and
Dactyls 1 Are we to retain them merely as curiosities of ancient literature, as
relics of less enlightened times, dear as they are to the scholar for the sake of
many classic memories, precious in his eyes as is the " MJjwv anbi " of the old blind
bard?
"We have hitherto followed scrupulously the scheme of Mr Melville Bell, as the
clearest and most rational it is possible to find ; but we must at this point express
our respectful dissent from the opinion he so strongly holds. He condemns unsj)ar-
ingly the entire system of scanning as a nuisance, and enquires—" What have chil¬
dren, or men either, to do, in reading, with trochees, iambi, dactyls, amphibrachs,
or anapaests?" Directly, nothiiig whatever; indirectly, a great deal. Headers of
Moli6re wiU recollect how wittily he touches off the unfortunate Lej)ine, the valet of
the Femmes Savantes, whom no instruction in the laws of Equilibrium would enable
to keep his balance ; and, certainly, no amount of familiarity with the nomenclature
and rules of scanning, will, of itself, train a child into an easy and graceful reader
and speaker. Still, unconsciously, the child, in reading aloud extracts from the
British poets, reaps the benefit of this science of rhythm.
Try the following experiment.^—Reckon up the total number of unscannable
lines in any one poem, by any of our gi-eatest poets, say Keats, or (dare we utter
such treason ?) Kobert Browning, the idol of the refined, the artistic and the philo¬
sophical—and compare with this list the number of lines at which a careless or
inexpert  reader  might stumble, what will be the   result ?    As far as experience
12 THE ATTEMIT.
can be any guide, we should imagine the numbers will correspond.     The scientific
labour, and the unscientific reap the fruits of their labour.
We would then, while expunging the rules of scanning from the Elocutionary
manuals in common use, retain them as a test of the accuracy of rhythm, as a stan¬
dard by which the advanced student of poetry, be he a reader or a writer, may try
the versification of it.
Rhythmical cadence, which, in the reading of poetry, is the firet consideration,
demands a slight stress upon all rhyming words, and a slight pause to follow such
words. In all poetry whose aim is not directly comic, the endeavour of the author
should be to reconcile sound to sense. He should throw the weight of the accent on a
word of suflicient importance to bear it gracefully ; and he should avoid the awk¬
wardness of breaking off a line in the middle of a clause, thereby separating words
which, taken apart from each other, have no meaning or power. Does not
Browning often mar the beauty of his poetry by neglecting these two laws of
taste 1
We have often regretted the amount of time that is wasted in a girl's education
on pianoforte practice. For, though all of us, in the course of our lives, must occasion¬
ally read and speak, many of us have neither the capacity to enjoy, nor the power to
make, musical sounds. Which therefore should be ranked as the accomplishment,
the universal or the occasional. Elocution or Music 1 Yet Music is regarded as a
necessary branch of every woman's education, while Elocution is smiled at as a
fancy, indulged as a whim, or lamented as the first step on th« road to the stage.
The chief fault of untrained readers and speakers is rajjidity of uttei-ance.
Any one who has had experience in the early education of children, must know
how diflicult it is to check the breathless galloping that follows the labour of first
learning to read. This tendency is by no means universally combated in higher
class schools, while, as is well known, " fast and loud" is the rule in our parish school
teaching. Thus begins the ruin of a child's naturally easy and graceful elocution.
We have said that Elocution is founded on natural principles, and that the highest
art is that which approaches neai'est to nature. If confirmation of this assertion
were required, we might seek it here, for the period of a man's life when his
elocution is most nearly perfect, is precisely that at which it is unstudied and
involuntary.
The shibboleth of correct English speaking, as of correct German and Scotch,
is the pronunciation of the letter R. The resemblance between the last two
languages is in nothing more striking than in this,—that in both alike the soft
THE ATTEMPT.
13
vowelized consonant R of English is, or should be, unknown. We like to recal the
sentiment of one who was a thorough master of the science of speech, and a man of
refined taste. " I respect Scotch as highly as I do English ; but if you speak Scotch,
speak it in the Scotch manner, if English, in the English manner. Do not mix the
two languages."
We regret sincerely the decay of the Scottish tongue in the Scottish land, but
since it is to be thus, and not otherwise, let every true born Scot resign himself
with a good   grace to his fate, and study from the foundation what is to him a
foreign and acquired language.
Sanct Rewle.
C^c Cfjnstmas tree's §epla to ^utea |leseba.
Lady, you surely do us wrong.
To gi"eet us with a plaintive song.
To say our bright and genial race.
Have parted from our proper place.
Then, when in sadder scenes we shed
Our light upon the drooping head,
Greeted by many a wan sweet smile,
And striving sorrow to beguile,
True, we have left our forest home.
The earth's green sward, the heaven's
blue dome,
Within your lighted hall to be,
That holy thing,—a Christmas Tree.
Do we not think on one whose voice.
Did with the weeping weep, the glad
I'ejoice 1
And humbly feel that even we
May joy to be a Christmas tree.
And as around us where we stand,
They throng, the happy children band.
We think we hear the accents mild.
That blessed and loved the little child.
And when no more our lights are seen.
Some hearts will keep our memory green.
And blent with thoughts of love and grace,
The Christmas tree will have its place.
E. H. S.
14 THE ATTEMPT.
We should not be astonished that the philosopher should be considered by
many to have been, and to be, of more use to mankind than the poet, for the
services he has done are as self-announciag as they are immense. Apart from the
more common benefits that we often, through too great familiarity, are unconscious
we owe him, there are many dazzling gifts for which we must wonderingly thank
him. He yokes a weariless steed unto our cars, more wondrous and more
powerful than the Tai'tar's horse of brass : he weighs the stars, and sets them in
our horologe; he tames the lightning for a page, a herald more swift than
Puck; he fights even-handed with death, and ofttimes conquers that fiercest
eoemy of our race. It is almost impossible to overrate his work, unless we set it
above that of the poet, whose gift of poetry is really a greater gift than philosophy.
Does it seem too sweeping to assert that poetry is more powerful, more necessaiy,
more perfect, more universal, more elevating to the best parts of our mixed nature—
that it is the immortal, the other the transient 1 We must always live, love, laugh,
weep, fight, and die, and it is to the oneness of human nature that the jjoet owes
his power. Jean Paul says, " The learned man is useful only to the learned, it is
the wise man with the poet-soul who is equally useful to wise aad simple," for
poetry, being perfect, has its relations in the soul and heart of man.
Mathematics and music are the only sciences universally known as perfect. The
relations of angles and lines being discovered, no further discovery can alter or coirect
Euclid ; the notes of the chord being found, the ear knows no possible improvement.
Poetry is proved as perfect—not after the years of patient study and brain work needed
before one can understand and assent to mathematical truths,—but immediately on be¬
ing uttered to the simplest mind. No after discovery alters its truth and beauty :
no man dreams of altering Homer or improving Shakespeare. But we must have
remarked how scientific men emj^hasise the word " new " when they seek books and
knowledge. It must be " new," else their reading does them neither good nor
credit.
Science may attain its own perfection, but when it does so, it must die ; it
cannot exist separate from this present state of things. It will fade and fall from
us with the cast-ofi" vestments of frail mortality. We shall mount to our new life
as the butterfly does, utterly unmintlful of the now useless and shrivelled chrysalis.
THE ATTEMPT. 15
But our poetry is a part of the eternal and infinite, and in the new heavens and
the new earth, our dreams shall become our reality, our prophecy, our present, our
poetry, our prose. I can imagine no great poem written by any of the doctrine of
the Sadduccees, which say there is no resurrection. Their philosophy can only seek
present comfort and pleasure as their greatest good, for to them tliere is no beyond.
To a deep sense of poetiy, either in the writing or the feeling of the written, is
necessary a full belief and permeating consciousness of the surrounding future.
Feeling our poetry to be immortal, we know we cannot produce a thing greater than
ourselves ; striving to produce a thing worthy of ourselves, we first learn how to
become more worthy of our end. We see not fully yet what we are or may be,
save by the gleams of light that our straining eyes perceive through the crevices of
the gate that shuts us from the land of light beyond. But glimmering lights they
seem, half memory, half prophecy ; yet our poetry desires them as the best we have,
and refracts them into meaning by its power. For the atmosphere is dull and cold
and uncertain where we stand without and wait. We can only keep ourselves
awake, while, as philosophers of the porch, we go through our exoteric training, till
the gate be opened which shall admit us to the inner circle of the kingdom, where
is kept for us the satisfaction of all our yearnings and desires, the end of all our
faith.
As religion makes men like what they worship, so poetry tends to make them
like what they admire. Then how careful ought the poet to be in the responsibility
of production. If the external world triumph over his internal, he sinks into a
philosopher ; he must reach ever unto the permanent, and avoid all things fleeting
and false. He must never hope to work himself into a suitable frame of mind ; to
become earnest for a time, in order to write a poem ; his feeling must be innate and
habitual. Spenser, Milton, Wordsworth, Coleridge, Shelley, and many other.s, have
written and embodied their belief that no great poem ever was written, or could be
written, but by one whose life itself was one grand poem ; that nothing great can
spring from a mean source, that the everlasting cannot rise from the earthly. The
downward attraction of gravity will alTect even spirit, if spirit will permit itself to
be so affected, by a union too close with clay.
" Poetry stands between nature and convention, keeping alive in us the
consciousness of the spiritual world." The poet is the giant who fights
against conventionalism of language and thought; against the habit of
speaking what others have spoken, against seeing only in the mirror of other
men's  opinion,  against sleeping on the  enchanted ground of forgetfulness.     He
16 THE ATTEMPT.
rouses us, quiA-ering and throbbing under his electric shock. He points us to th ■■
way that leads to truth ; he inspires all nature with his nature, and presents it to
us. He gives in one page the power to reproduce within our soul, in one minute, what
painting would have required miles of canvas and centuries of toil to illustrate ; for
he makes us work with him, and for him, and forces us for awhile to partake in his
nature. And yet we willingly yield, and own our relationship. He is the son of
his age, and yet its teacher. By his life, and by his work, he gives the tone and
example to his generation that he received from it. He is the incarnate spirit of
his times. Hence came the cry, " Let me make the songs of a people, and whosoever
will can make their laws." Early poetry was all song. Homer sang of his swift-
footed heroes, and produced hundreds like them through many after generations;
and many other poems that we know not now, of Celt, of Saxon, or of Indian tribes,
will have thus reacted on the heart of the people. We know that it must have been
so, because even in modern times, when all influences are weakened by their com¬
plexity, it has been so. The chivalric glory of the Elizabethan age bloomed out in
Spenser, Sydney, Shakespeare ; the solemn grandeur of the Puritanic spirit in
Milton ; the witty artificial philosophy of the 18th century in Pope ; the revival of
the worship of nature in AVordsworth ; the tendency of our own age in Tennyson,
The sense of poetry with nations, as with individuals, is often most pure in youth
—" Heaven lies about us in our infancy." There is often the most true appreciation,
where there is the least criticism. But never is poetry more needed than when a
mind becomes clogged with undigested learning, narrowed with mercantile arrange¬
ments. Then it is as a fresh breeze of li-\T.ng air from the hills to the feverish brow
in the choking atmosphere, exhausted by too much breathing. The oldest poetry
we have is fresh and true still as it was when it flowed forth from the souls of its
" Makers ;" it is even more poetical to us than it was to those that heard it. For
though it has lost the charms of personal, ancestral, or national glory, it has gained
more. Neither early poets nor their listeners fully appreciate the true excellence of
their poetry, which thus seems almost divinely unconscious and simple. But to one
and all, every true poem presents excellence of some kind ; and though our mind,
our people, our age should have drunk strength and refreshment from it, other
minds will rise with the after ages to find the stream as satisfying, and more full.
Without poetry, philosophy would not have existed; it is more than a pre¬
cursor, it is a father. Here is a diflerence not only in kind, but in degree, as a
whole is greater than its part. Plato supports this, for he says—" It is a general
name signifying every cause, whereby everything proceeds from that which is not
THE ATTEMPT. 17
h to that which is, so that the exercise of every inventive art is poetry, and all such
artists poets. But poets, or those who imagine and express this indestructible order,
are not only the authors of language, of music, of the dance, of architecture, and
statuary, and painting, they are the institutors of laws, the founders of civil society,
and the inventors of the arts of life."
Philosophy, then, is poetry made tangible, for, as we have said, it lias sprung
from a union with earth. "We have shown how poetry awakens and enlarges the
mind, displays and strengthens its powers; it lifts the veil that common use has
thrown over creation, and shows us what is, and makes us ask the why. Hence
arises philosophy in its various forms. As a father also, poetry, after it has produced,
sustains, nourishes, and guides its child. Its first gift is language, which of itself is
but chaotic poetry. Every author of early ages must be, and is a poet; he fixes and
inspires the arbitrary signs of his thought that we call words. New sets of feelings call
for new sets of words; metaphoi-s multiply the means of expressing ideas too rich
for poor language ; and in process of time, these all become fossilized into the speech
that paves the high road of the philosopher. For, however easy it may seem to
men who have learned to speak to think without the aid of words, it would be a
difficult thing to set a man thinking or wishing to think, without the kindling from
those signs that interpret to him his neighbour's thought and fix his own.
The father next guides his child by suggestion. History records facts, the result
of the memory of man ; but poetry, the immortal, is likewise a prophet and a seer.
Imagination " gives a local habitation and a name " to many things that philosophers
call " airy nothings " for many ages, till they discover through experience at once
their reality and their value. For the poet not only sees and comprehends the
present more than all other men ; he sees the future in the present, and the spirit
of the future in the ashes of the now. We are continually finding that our new dis¬
coveries have been preconceived by the poet long before.    The same voice that cries
" For I dipt into the future far as human eye could see,
Saw the vision of the world and all the wonders that would be,"
has been proved prophetic by an illustration this year,
"Heard the heavens fill with shouting, and there rained a ghastly dew,
From the nations' airy navies grappling in the central blue."
Our whole geology was sketched for us in Genesis, but the world was growing
old before philosophy   could read it.       Job tells us of the internal   fires of the
18 THE ATTEMPT.
eai-th, of the weight of the winds, but science heeded not until it saw. When the
Psalmist uttered his hymn of gratitude to the God who made the heavens, the moon,
and the stars, and yet forgets not the sons of men, he was far in advance of the
astronomy of his time. The heavenly bodies were deemed but twinkling lights to
guide and influence man, the lord of this fixed and solid earth, and therefore a
meditation on them would have but magnified his importance, and made him almost
worthy of the thoughts of the Lord of heaven. Did the full truth dawn on David as
he wrote ? Doubtless he was inspired, but the spirit does not inform man of what he
could ever discover for himself. Was it not the poet's soul of the Psalmist that
prophesied ? And are not all poets in some such sense inspired ? Does
not the direct inspiration of the Almighty give them understanding^ One
of the gi-eatest and most poetic of great philosophers has said—" The authors of
these gi'eat poems that we admire do not attain excellence through the rules of any
art, but utter their beautiful melodies of verse in a state of inspiration, and, as it
were, possessed by a spirit not their own. ... A j^oet is indeed a thing
ethereally light-winged, and sacred, nor can he compose anything worth calling
poetry until he becomes insj^ired ; for whilst a man retains any portion of that thing
called reason, he is utterly incompetent to produce 23oetry or to vaticinate.
Poets, then, are the interpreters of the divinities, though they themselves may be
ignorant of many things. . . . But the very ai't of uttering weakens the
power; so the most glorious expressions of poetry are poor compared with the
conception, for it springs from the inter-penetration of the divinity, redeemed from
decay, and rendered immortal."
The father preserves the child. Is it not the poetical imagination and fervid
language in such books as " the Testimony of the Rocks," " More Worlds than
One," Chalmers' " Astronomical Discourses " that have given them their power over
thousands that would never have been attracted by the same tnith drily stated ?
Many a physical and metaphysical tome would have long since gone to dust, but for
the embalming power of the stream of poetry that runs through its heart.
Lastly, it is by our poetry and not by our philosophy that the image of
God is revealed in us. God knows all, for He has created all. I have read
one distinction to prove that j^hilosophy seeks for the difference of things, and in
order to do so tears down existences as they are, tends to analysis of the matter
it has made dead. But poetry, seeking more the similitudes of things, tends to
produce the one from the many, by putting life in thought. But it does more.
Tasso cries—" None merits the name of Creator, save God and the poet!"    When
THE  ATTEMPT. 19
thought is brought forth in word, we also take of the dust of the ground and breathe
into it the breath of life ; we also say let there be light, and there is light;
becoming fellow-workers with God. Imperfect as we are, we dare not say that all
things that we have made " are very good." But we have shown that poetry makes
us strive to be the best possible to our fallen nature, and to produce what we are
ourselves—to reach forward after the good, for the good alone is beautiful, the good
is God. His creation was one poem. He thought out our world, its motions, its day
and night, its summer and winter, its verdure and its inhabitants; and His
language we read carelessly every day. His language is all creation. The stains are
ours, not His. Yet, wonder of wonders—our blot suggests to Him a still grander
thought. The noblest poem we have is our redemption, which God writes for us in
His own blood. Its themes are beauty inexpressible, truth unchangeable, purity
unto perfection, love unto death, when we study it and catch its spirit. He acts on
us by making us one with Him in His nature, growing as we love, and loving as
we read, till we reach the perfect stature of a man, and reflect, (though but as
moonlight unto sunlight) the likeness of the divine hero of God's last great poem.
LuTEA Eeseda.
Chapter  XII.
" I to cry out on pride,
Who have won her favour !
Oh, Maud were sure of heaven,
If lowliness could save her."—Tennyson.
As Una stood looking far off, her brow against the glass, Elsie went up to her and
put her arm round her waist. Miss Hilary had made an excuse for leaving us.
Unless she attended to it herself, Mrs Sandyside never put enough green in the tea
for her peculiar drinking. Elsie, Una, and I were alone together for the first time
that day, and the two girls turned round and came towards me when they heard
the door shut.
20 THE ATTEMPT.
" You know all about it, don't you, Molly," said Una. " She's in a high state
of self-congratulation, and must have other people's good wishes as well."
" Dear Elsie," I said, " I wish you both joy, with all my heart. I couldn't
wish anyone a better or a kinder husband than my dear Frank will make."
Elsie returned my kiss eagerly. She was the sort of girl whom happiness agi-ees
with, that was evident; and T thouglit Frank's future, as far as it depended on her,
would be a bright one. Miss Hilary re-entered, and the young men soon followed,
Frank manceuvering himself quite naturally into tlie sofa-corner near Elsie, by the
window, where I suppose the usual allowance of nonsense was talked. Sweet
nonsense, sweet moonlight, sweet old story telling itself anew.
Brand came and sat down beside me, while Miss Hilary began to talk to Una,
who had seen fit to put on a turquoise cross, which harmonized well enough with her
shimmering blue dress and ivory neck, but which acted upon our orthodox friend as
the traditional red rag upon the bull.
" Yesterday evening I was passing your church here, my dear, and I thought,
having heard so much of the Kitualistic tendencies of Mr Brookes, I would just look
in at the service, and really, I never was so shocked. I trust none of you encourage
such goings-on by your presence, and I am grieved to see you, my dear Miss Una,
giving countenance to them in any way."
Una had forgotten what was under her chin, and was confused by this attack.
" How do I countenance them. Miss Hilary % "
" Well, my dear, I trust you will excuse my remarking it, but that cross ! It
is a pretty ornament enough, but if you would only consider that, in a place like this,
it is an absolute lending of yourself to folly, and worse than folly. I shall never
forget that scene of yesterday evening,—a mere theatrical representation. I am very
sorry, deeply grieved, that anything about you should have recalled it to me. I am
informed that some young ladies here, not that I suppose you to be one of them, are
actually so far led astray as to wear a peculiar garb, and fast on Fridays. Were I a
proprietor in this neighbourhood, like my cousin John, I should feel it my duty to
represent such a state of things properly to the bishop ; I should indeed. But of
course my influence is restricted to a narrow circle, like that of every female. Still,
my dear, there is no one without influence. That ornament you carelessly wear,
what harm it might do !"
" Well, I won't wear it before you again. Miss Hilary," said Una. " I assure
you I had no thought that my neck was lending itself to the doctrines of St Ursula,
or her eleven thousand virgins."
THE ATTEMPT. 21
" My dear, do not talk nonsense on such a subject."
" I would not, if it were possible to talk sense upon it, as I look at it," said
Una ; and then the door opened, and enter the butler with tea, likewise my father
and the General. The latter sat down by Una, and speedily asked for a song, which
she at once consented to, partly, no doubt, with intent to end the discussion of her
luckless pendant; though indeed Una was never fond of enhancing the value of her
songs by having a sore throat, and never singing away from home, and being
unwilling to perform before judges ; and the usual prices young ladies exact for their
melodious pipings, which are generally pretty high for the value of the article, in the
way of entreaties and persuasions, were never needed by her. She sat and sang all
General Hilary asked for, sang with a rich, true, full voice. Border ballads and
Burns' love-songs, German folk-songs and old English ditties. Brand stole away,
after a little, from his place, and stood with his arms on the piano, listening.
" Thank you, fair Una," said General Hilary ; " that's what I call singing—
anything one likes, and no tedious apologies to begin with. And how well that little
fellow from Wemborough is bringing out your voice.    You really are improved."
" You have no last new songs either," chimed in Frank. " No ' Sick at Heart'
by the author of ' Dead Beat,' or ' Dewdrops ' by the author of ' Tears and Smiles.'
I like Una's songs ; her repertoire is so extensive, we can ask and have."
" And, Miss Hai-per, do you mean to belie your name and give us no music ? "
said my father.
" Sing a duet, Elsie," said Una ; and when ' I would that my love ' had been
agreed on, she made Elsie play, and stood up to sing the first, and the two sweet
voices joined in several two-part songs. Then Frank was persuaded to try ' Blow
breezes, blow,' in which he broke down signally. Brand was still standing by the
instrument; he had not asked for any song, but when Frank and Elsie withdrew,
Una paused a moment, turning over the leaves of a book of Scotch songs, and began
a great favourite of his—
" Here's a health to ane I lo'e dear."
Brand started and looked at her, and thanked her when the song was done, and she
rose and left the piano ; and soon after the carriage was announced and we took our
leave.
Brand gave Una his arm to escort her down the staircase, and I followed
with the General. " Thank you," I heard Brand say ; " did you know how fond
I am of that last song ?"
22 THE ATTEMPT.
" I thought you hated singing," she replied, departing slightly from the rules of
veracity.
" Of course you know I hate it, and I hate talking at dinner time, and I hate "
" Making morning calls," broke in Una, " and impromptu picnics, and so forth.
I'm glad I know your tastes.    Good-night, Mr Hilary."
Brand had spoken lightly, but I saw his face for a moment in the light of the
hall lamp, and he looked pale and angry. He pressed my hand as kindly as ever for
good-night, and I felt vexed with Una. For the first time it stmck me that our
white sea-witch had been spoiled. Not that her temper had suffered from the process,
it was sweet and sound ; nor yet that her head had been turned ; but, on thinking
over the matter, I felt that from the time when she had been brought to Hampstead,
hardly any one had opposed her in any way, and her own sweet will had been her
rule of action.
She was so gay and graceful, so winning and dear, that to thwart her in any¬
thing she had set her heart on would have been to me impossible. I remembered
her immunities in old times at Mrs Clayton's, how, when she had taken part in
some fault or frolic, her share therein was sui-e to be overlooked and the blame laid on
some one else if possible ; how old Herr Hartmann would smile grimly when he found
his German books defaced by stealthy caricatures on the title-page, and guessed whose
work they were ; how one and all had petted and praised and made much of her.
And since she came home with iis, it had been much the same- I remember opening
my eyes in wonder when old Lizzie remarked one day, apropos of something Una
had persisted in against advice, " Eh, but Miss Una's real wilfu'." It had never
struck me that she was, because I had never attempted to cross her ; my path did not
interfere with hers, they lay lovingly side by side. I had my housekeeping, my work,
my books, my poor people ; Una had her " fun," her rides and walks, studies and
amusements, always associated with me as much as might be, biit had there been a
deviation on one side or the other, I knew it would have been on mine. It would
have been so much easier for me to give up a wish that had no positive duty attached
to its fulfilment, than to bring a cloud over the dear bright eyes I loved to watch.
But had all this been good for the future Una, as well as the present 1 Had we
not made her our queen, and would she not wish to extend her sway wherever she
might go. Had she come to love ruling and reigning for its own sake, would she
ever be content to rule by serving, as a woman should, in the heart, and not in the
house ?
She was my Una to me, my child, my pet, beloved and cherished ever since I
THE ATTEMPT. 23
had first felt the little warm arms i-ound my neck, and I could not easily bring my¬
self to regard her in any other light, or think how it would be when our sea-maid
went out from the house to a home of her own. I looked at her, as she sat op¬
posite me in the moonlight, her white cloak drawn round her shoulders, the
objectionable cross just peeping from its folds, humming the air of one of the duets
she had been singing with Elsie, with her head turned aside towards the window,
looking into the trees that bordered one side of the park.    The red underlip, full
and ripe,
"Some bee had stung it newly,"
was bitten and compressed, the smooth brow was knitted in little white furrows,
like the ruffles in a snow-drift. What was the matter with Una ? I looked and
wondered. We were alone in the carriage, we three. Frank had walked with my
father, and till we got to Lawrence Lodge we were silent as the three Fates,
Elsie, because I suppose she had enough to think about, I, because I was watching
Una, and Una was unaccountably quiet. But none of us said much that night.
Elsie had to write to her mother, and Frank, in a short interview we had in the
bookroom, told me he also would write to Colonel Harper.
" Or shall I go and see him, Molly. You're the wise woman ; which is the more
advisable V
I counselled a personal interview with the Colonel, who could not have many
objections to the marriage, save the great one of losing Elsie, and Frank had a
thousand softeners of the fact, and shortcomings of the separation in his mind.
Whether he would be as eloquent to Elsie's father as to me, I was rather doubtful.
I wished him all good luck as I said good night.    We declared he would be off by
the early  train  from  Kingswood  to   London, and thence to L , where Elsie's
large family of brothers and sisters lived, there to confront the " grey tyrant father."
I could not help thinking a very telling argument on his part might have been a
reference to that page of the family Bible where were recorded the names and ages
of the successive claimants to the name and honours of the house of Harper, to the
number of twelve, of whom Elsie, aged eighteen, was the second.
" I say, Molly," he said, as I turned to leave the room " you couldn't ask Elsie
to come here a minute, I suppose, just to say a word to a fellow ; I shan't see her
to-morrow, and I have not said good night to her."
" Dreadful thought," I rejoined, " I heard you say ' Good night, Miss Harper,'
half an hour ago, and so did Papa and Una, I suppose. And now you wish to
disturb her again."
24 THE ATTEMPT.
But there was not much disturbance wanted. Elsie was standing at her half-open
door as I went up-stairs, still in the rose-coloured " gaze de Chambery " she had worn
at dinner, and I had hardly time to give Frank's message when she glided down the
stairs, swift and silent as Margaret of Branksome. One would almost think they
had made some mutual agreement! Alas for the depths of strategic cunning sud¬
denly revealed in " seeming simple " creatures by certain circumstances.
Musing on these things, I went to bed, and next day, Frank was nowhere; but
the day after, he and a grey-haired veteran, who proved to be the veritable tyrant
father, appeared upon the scene, and walked up together in all amity. Elsie, en¬
couraged by the sight of them side by side, ran down-stairs and threw herself into
her father's arms ; and what followed may be left, oh, wise reader, to your own
brilliant imagination.
Colonel Harper took Elsie home with him, and soon after we had to say good¬
bye to Frank, who was off to Redmains, now free of the Lindsay party, to tell his
own tale, and who thanked Una and me with unbounded gratitude for our very un¬
conscious aiding of the blind goddess who had turned him up such a prize in the
lottery, as I do verily believe he found in Elsie. For when he sailed to India again,
she was with him; and at this moment a long letter on thin paper lies before me,
bearing the signature " E. Laurie," and telling of " moving accidents by flood and
field " in the far East, ending with an assurance that Frank and she will never forget
the falls at Kingswood, and how we sat under the beeches. O. M.
pear  tfjc   §eIoij{tr.
(Fkom   the   German   of   Goethe).
I think of thee, when o'er the ocean I hear thy voice, when waves are rising
The sunbeams stream; With hollow moan ;
I think of thee, when in the moon-light In forest shades I love to linger
The fountains gleam. And hear its tone.
I see thy face, when by the wayside lam with thee, tho'distance lie between us
I wander slow; Still art thou near ;
When o'er the narrow bridge at midnight The sunlight dies, soon will the stars be
I trembling go. Oh, wert thou here ! [shining—
Veronica.
THE   ATTEMPT. ^-^
# f   attention.
[Ail Essay written for the Class of Logic and Metaphysics in connection with the
Edinburgh Ladies' Educational Association.]
" Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy might."
§ 1. General definition and distinction of Attention from Abstraction.
Psychological method has become more subtle and more searching since the
days when Dugald Stewart reckoned Attention among the intellectual faculties in a
scheme, possessing at least the merit of being simple, if it is not absolutely profound
in its analj'sis of our intellectual modifications.
Confining his observations to the ordinary results of mental action, as we find
them in Ai-t and in Science, in Commerce, in Life, and in Literature, he named and
classed his intellectual powers, rather according to the manifest difference between
mental products, than according to the essential nature of the faculties themselves.
On such a system, it was natural that he should erect " that act or exertion of
the mind, necessary to fix in the memory the thoughts of which we are con¬
scious," into a special faculty, without pausing to ask if Attention were itself suscep¬
tible of that fui-ther analysis, which his own words suggest to readers familiar with
Sir William Hamilton's definition of the " exertive states," as the genus comprehend¬
ing Will.
If we try to realize a state of Attention, and if we compare it with our usual
mental condition, we shall find it to be Consciousness intensified by Volition.
Attention is to Consciousness in general, as the focus of a burning glass is to diffused
solar light. It is but the term used to express the result of that constant and unre¬
mitting action of the Emotions and the Will upon the Intellect, by which our faculties
are drawn together and concentrated on certain objects, rather than diffused over
the whole sphere of Consciousness. Far from being a special intellectual faculty,
co-ordinate with the rest, it is a condition of their operation ; far from being a mere
species under Consciousness, it is Consciousness itself in its highest potence. The
term Concentrated Consciousness is a peculiarly appropriate and exhaustive definition,
since Attention is ruled by that law of the limitation of our faculties, which decrees
that finite intelligence can only vivify its energy at one point by more or less with¬
drawing it from every other. In the formula adopted by Sir William Hamilton;
" The Intension of thought must ever be in the inverse ratio of its Extension."
D
February.
26 THE ATTEMPT.
We may conveniently study Attention under two aspects,—a positive and a
negative (i.e., Attention proper, or the converging of our faculties on certain things,
and Abstraction, or the withdrawal of Consciousness from all other matters), pro¬
vided that we bear well in mind that every conscious state must include both of
these, and that neither is possible alone, since either is a consequence of the other.
§ 2. Erroneous use of these terms.
Common speech is at issue with philosophical precision in the use of the term
Attention. We overlook the fact that Consciousness is never in such a state
of perfect equilibrium as could be correctly called a state of inattention; and,
applying the term loosely to express cases of considerable and painful effort
alone, we speak as if it were possible to be aware of mental states without
attending to them. That Consciousness is ever unequally distributed over all
its objects, so that we are always more or less in a state of attention, whenever con¬
scious, may be thus argued.
Attention has been shown to be the result of a fusion of the Emotions and the
Will with the Intellect, by which the latter is made to energize more vigorously in
a certain direction. Now, since a state of pure, passionless intellection is an impossi¬
bility, and since the influence of these two mental states on Thought is always to
vivify and to concentrate, we must be, therefore, constantly in the twofold state of
Attention and of Abstraction.
Again, the term is not unfrequently, but incorrectly, applied to objects of Sense-
Perception only, as if inattention to mere sensations was not often the sign of intense
absorption in abstract thought. Ifeander, forgetting his very meals, until fed by his
servant, as he lay on the floor immersed in study, was surely as little to be called an
inattentive man, as was the great English sculptor of our own time, who could never
be induced to connect his arrival at the railway station where he was to alight, with
the need of any exertion on his own part.
Abstraction, in this respect, shares the fate of its companion tenn. An idle
day-dream, a state of half-waking consciousness, in which all the faculties energize
languidly, and perhaps never more equally because so torpidly, is not unfrequently
called a state of Abstraction.
We forbear, however, to enter on the wide subject of the misuse of the term
Abstraction, dreading lest it might lead us into irrelevant matter. But an energetic
protest against the grave error of using this unfortunate word to designate objects
of Attention, instead of their exact opposite, and a rigid limitation of it to those
THE ATTEMPT. 11
things which we abstract from, in order to attend the more closely to those which
remain, may well come within the scope of this essay.
§ 3. Two motives of Attention.   Will and Desire.
Some motive must be present, to make us attend to one thing rather than the
other. Either the act of concentrated Consciousness must be a means by which we
hope to attain some final end, or it must be an end in itself, i.e. it must, by its
energizing, satisfy some desire, and help us to get rid of some uneasiness. When we
add up a long column of figures, the necessary concentration of our faculties can
only be a mediate end, whether we attend in order to ascertain the sum total, or in
order to acquire the art of adding up deftly and well. But, when we attend to the
fair forms and colours of a garden, such act is a final end in itself, since, by such
pleasurable energy, the natural longing for beauty is appeased.
It is necessary to discriminate carefully between these two,—between the atten¬
tion which comes from a resolute excercise of Volition, and that purely involuntary
stimulation of Intellect, which is due to the presence of Emotion. True, it may be as¬
serted that both Will and Desire co-operate in every act of Attention ; but it is none
the less the part of the metaphysician, in this, as in all other kinds of mental
analysis, to determine which state predominates.
Careful study of the influence of Will on Attention is of much moment to those
who seek to discipline and to develope their own intellect or that of others.
With the operation of Emotion in facilitating Attention, the Artist, the Poet,
the Actor, and the Preacher,—all, in short, who seek to interest and to per¬
suade their fellow-men, are in an especial manner concerned. Let us take
each in order:—
1. Of Voluntary Attention.
Few faculties are more important than this of voluntary concentration. By
its aid, the man of lesser ability may aspire to do the work of the man of greater,
while without it, genius is frittered away upon unworthy results.
When we think of the Will as exercising this ofiice of assembling the faculties,
and of marshalling them for united action, we are irresistibly reminded of the maxim
of the first aSTapoleon, that the chief problem of war was by no means how to muster
a great army, but how to collect the largest force at a given place and on a
given day.
The power of deliberately concentrating the faculties on a certain special sul)ject,
of energizing vehemently and continuously in one direction, is a natural gift, varying
28 THE ATTElir-T.
indefinitely with the capacities of different men. But the important habit of attend¬
ing exclusively to any matter in hand, however wearisome or distasteful, is attain¬
able by all, and may be greatly augmented by determined practice.
True, you cannot train a dolt into a genius, but this faculty of concentration,
which has formed one-half of the genius of great discoverers, is perhaps of all our
powers, the most susceptible of development. Were we, indeed, unreservedly to
accept the definition which genius gives of itself, we should seem to claim for
sustained attention, too large a part in the achievements of great men. Hear Sir
William Hamilton boldly assert that the difference between an ordinary mind and
the mind of a Newton, consists chiefly in this, that the one is capable of the ap¬
plication of a more continuous attention than the other. Strangely miscellaneous is
the list of authorities he quotes in sujiport of this assertion. Bacon, Descartes,
Malebranche, Newton, and Helvetius, are summoned along with Mrs Siddons,
Cuvier, and Lord Chesterfield, to endorse the verdict of Buffon, that genius is but a
prolonged patience. Nor do living authorities reverse this sentence. Carlyle declares
that genius is but the power of taking trouble, a saying ammended by Mr Helps
into : Genius is the power of being intensely interested in a great many things.
Ordinary minds, however, are inclined to dissent from an opinion which tends to
lower genius from its pedestal, and they turn to psychology, in the hope of discovering
by a searching analysis, that such utterances are prompted by the humility inseparable
from ti"ue greatness.
Let us revert, for this purpose, to our former analysis of Attention, that we may
decide the question.
Its constituents we ascertained to be Intellect and Will. Observers attribute
the discoveries of Sir Isaac Newton, like the impassioned action of Mrs Siddons, or the
unerring judgment of Cuvier, to a rich store of supreme mental gifts,—to Intellect,
in short, while men of genius themselves attribute their success to a force of Will
exercised in producing sustained attention. Are these conflicting views to be
reconciled or explained ?
Evidently, of the two elements of an attentive state of mind, the man of genius
is most distinctly conscious of the exertion of Will. Now, if Will be indeed the
personal Self in a higher and in a completer sense than are the Intellect or Emotions,
might we not reasonably expect that the enei'getic thinking out and resolute detention
in Consciousness of certain ideas, should make a more profound impression on the
memory, than the mere involuntary suggestion of new thoughts 1 Is it not natural
to assign the principal part to what is realized as a personal activity, rather than to
THE ATTEMPT. 29
a ready association of ideas, during which the mind often seems to assume almost the
attitude of a passive listener ?
§ Of A ttention due to Emotion and Desire.
On the fact that Emotions of pleasure or of pain can, by the Desires they
occasion, arrest the Attention without the deliberate concourse of Volition, depend
the great principles of composition, not less in plastic than in literary art. For the
artist cannot appeal to our sense of duty to intensify Attention. He must, by
exciting emotions of delight in beauty of form or colour, make it easy and pleasant
for us to fix our minds on his picttire :—
" For, we're made so that we love,
First when we see them painted, things we have passed
Perhaps a hundred times, nor cared to see ;
 Art was given for that ;
God uses us to help each other so,
Lending our nainds out."
The task of the artist is to assist us to abstract from the insignificant details of
his subject, that we may better attend to the perfections of the chief figures or
objects. Does a painter wish to make one part of a great picture pre-eminently
interesting 1 He will study, by monotony of line and lowness of tone, to make us
abstract from its immediate surroundings, just as a skilful story feller is careful not
to sufier his subordinate men and women to become too heroic, lest they should
withdraw the reader's interest from the principal characters.
§ 4. Of the sphere of Attention.
But the demands of art on our Attention do not stop here. Not only, at the
painter's bidding, must we concentrate our Attention, we must likewise extend its
sphere so as to comprehend a greater number of ideas.
This brings us face to face with the question of why some men can attend to
more things at once than others seem able to do, a question which may be as
conveniently studied in connection with art as in relation to abstract thought. The
field of Consciousness in a gi-eat artist is wider than it is in ordinary minds, just
because the quality which above all others distinguishes him, is a grasp of intellect
that takes in the whole of a subject as a whole, that binds up scattei'ed objects into
that appearance of unity, which is as essential to perfection of beauty in lines, in
forms, and in colour, as a well woven plot is to a good story.    Such capacity is akin
30 THE ATTEMPT.
to that power of generalization, by which an abstract thinker arranges and combines
the disconnected results of ^psychological or of physical analysis. In either case, we
trace its working by a power of dealing with many thiags at once without confusiag
them, and in either case, its operation is the truly philosophical one of reducing the
many to the one.
Now, the great artist seeks not only to intensify our Attention by exciting
stronger emotions than those felt by dull ordinary minds in the contemplation of
scenes or of events, he seeks further to extend our sphere of Consciousness, so that
we may attend to the whole of his subject at once, through feeling its unity of
conception. To this end, in the words of the poet, he " lends his mind out;" he
endeavours to communicate to others his own insight into those actual, though
unperceived, relations of things, whether of harmony or of contrast, whether of
mutual dependence or of mutual support, which make it an impossible thing either
to add one line or subtract from a perfect picture, without more or less of injury to
the whole. Hooker lived in days when the jargon of art-criticism was unknown,
yet Hooker knew that " all things receive externally some perfection from others,"
because the harmonies of nature could not be unfelt by a mind ever intent on
discovering instances of the sovereignty of Law. Take a familiar example of the
manner in which it becomes possible to attend to many objects at once, by appre¬
hension of those relations which knit them up into one harmonious whole. Few
objects seem to have less connection with each other than the separate dry and
shrivelled leaves of a heap laid ready for burning. It would be difficult to attend to
more than one or two of such leaves, perhaps impossible to remember any. Yet who
could look at the marvellous decaying heap in the foreground of Millais' " Autumn
Leaves," and not feel that a subtle sense of unity pervades the seemingly confused
mass, assisting us to attend to individual leaves, because we apprehend the mutual
connection and dependence of their contrasted and gradated colours, and the helpful
beauty of their continuous lines.
But in its deepest analysis, the question—Can we attend to more things than
one at a time 1 is a very subtle one, and various and conflicting are the replies of
philosophers. Restrict it to Visual Perception, and it resolves itself into perhaps its
most easily argued form : Can we attend to more objects of sight than the minimum,
visihile i Granted that we only see a minim,um visihile at one instant of time, and
that to apprehend the rest of an object the eye must successively traverse its surface
and follow its outline by a series of muscular movements, it does not follow that
each minimum passes out of Consciousness to make room for the next.    We may
THE ATTEMPT. 31
retain a copy of each in Consciousness, by that very effort of concentration which
we call Attention, so that the whole sum of the 7)iinima visibilia which are contained
in an object, may be at once present in Consciousness, and attended to, although only
the last seen may be actually in vision. We may be said to attend to a certain not
inconsiderable portion of a landscape, though an extremely distant steeple may be
our ininimum visibile. Again, Attention may well be a more com2:>lex state of Con¬
sciousness than mere sensible Perception, since it is by voluntarily concentrating
Consciousness on the similar qualities of a number of objects, that we are able to
gather these together^ and so form the bundle of attributes we call a Concept. "We
do this by simultaneously abstracting from all the other qualities which mark
individual character, and do not form part of the connotation of a general name.
Though, as Berkeley would argue, we can by no means tear separate qualities away
from the objects in which they inhere, and consider them as abstract ideas, we may
yet fix our attention on the qualities common to a class, and so utterly neglect all
dissimilar attributes and individual peculiarities, as to become quite unconscious of
their existence for the time being, and aware only of the Concept, i.e., of its attri¬
butes. A notable instance is this of that principle of compensation which is ever at
work, ceaselessly redressing the balance of earthly good and ill, that to the very
limitation of our faculties which hinders thought from being in full force over the
whole sphere of Consciousness at the same time, should be due that great power of
forming Concepts which alone enables us to reason.
5.  Of Unconscious Mental States in relation to Attention.
Closely connected with the foregoing subject is that of unconscious mental
modifications, because the observation that " v^hen a number of ideas suggest one
another by association, with such certainty and rapidity as to coalesce together in a
group, all those members of the group which remain long without being specially
attended to, have a tendency to drop out of Consciousness," leads us to ask : Why
a re somemembers of a group of ideas less attended to than others ? We have seen
that the vigorous energizing of Will and of Desire have the power of concentrating
Attention, a power which can only operate by withdrawal of energy from other and
contemporaneous ideas. Those operations therefore which from habit have become
so easy as to require a very slight exercise of Will, and those ideas which excite
only languid Emotion, will be the first and readiest to yield up their share of our
available mental energy. The newer and the more interesting states, will, like
Aaron's rod, swallow up the rest.    For instance, in reading, we do not attend to the
32
THE ATTEMPT.
separate acts of turning the page or of combining letters into syllables and words ;
we pay no attention to each step in walking, nor to the successive acts by which we
raise food to the mouth. We habitually abstract from the larger proportion of the
jostling crowd of our associated thoughts; they never rise above a certain low
degree of feeble Consciousness ; they are not remembered, and, but for their
effects in determining our organs to muscular action, and in introducing other
and more attractive ideas, we should be unaware that they had ever existed.
May not Sir W. Hamilton's theory of the inverse ratio which Perception and
Sensation bear to each other, be connected with the proportion in which they
alternately take possession of our available mental energy? When the eye is
dazzled by a bright light, the sensation of pain attracts all our attention to the
subjective sensation, so that we abstract from its objective caiise. Every artist is
familiar with the fact that he who attends with all his might to grace and accuracy
of form, will assuredly colour feebly if not untruthfully. Witness the Eclectic
School of Bologna; and in modern times certain German schools of art, who, in
their turn, retort on ourselves that we attend exclusively to colour, and neglect
designs—i.e. in the language of the psychologists a vivid sensation di-ags our attention
away from the more refined and subtle enjoyment of form.
The further enquiry. Why an idea ceases to attract attention when often
repeated? must be referred to that principle of Association, whereby contiguous
sensations or ideas tend to grow together, so that if one of them be suggested,
the others are as immediately presented to the mind, as if they were part of the
first idea, and consequently are called up without fresh expenditure of Volition.
We associate the arrival of eye and thought at the foot of a page, so closely
with the exertion necessary to turn over the leaf, that if an act of Will be required
at all to determine the successive movements of hand and eye, which ti'ansfer
our sense-perceptions to the toj^ of the succeeding page, it is so slight as to be
instantly forgotten. Recent physiologists suggest that the fusion by repetition ot
such successive acts and ideas, is due to a process of gi-owth or of development in
the nerves, whose energizing is the physical accompaniment of mental operations.
§. 6. Concliision.
A treatise on Attention would be incomplete without some mention of the fre¬
quent, though indirect references to it^ scattered through Holy Writ, though full
discussion of this subject would here be misplaced.
Among many texts, we select three :—
THE  ATTEMPT. 33
Kecent commentators tell us that in the Mosaic formula of the law of love, the
clause rendered in the authorised version, " with all thy mind," is better tran¬
slated, "with all thine intensity;" that is, with full concentration of mind and
purpose. Again, the preacher admonishes, " whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do
it with thy might." And the oft repeated Evangelical precept, " What I say unto
you, I say unto all, Watch," is a pointed assertion of the weight and worth of con¬
centrated attention, in the rule of the Christian conscience, and in the discipline of
the Christian life. RusTiCA.
fii ^tmtmhxnnci.
Evening falls ; a tearful band
Round the couch of mourning stand j
Silently and sadly all
List the words that slowly fall,
While the eye, now dimming fast,
Seems to view the fading past.
And the feeble hand extends
Dying gifts to watching friends—
" In memory of me, keep this."
III.
" In memory," suggestive phrase !
What thoughts that simple word may raise
Of days of happiness gone by,
Of breaking heart and tearful eye;
Of grief that cannot be repressed,
Of nights of anguish unexpressed;
Of Calvary's cross and Jesu's word.
As spoken at the sacred board—
" In memory of me do this."
II.
Shadowed o'er by ancient pUes,
Where the summer sunshine smiles
On ruined arches, old and gray.
The relics of some vanished day ;
While old ocean's sullen roar
Echoes from the rock-bound shore,
Witnessing to grief untold.
Stands the new amid the old—
" In memory of those we miss."
IV.
A picture hanging on the wall;
A wish half spoke, half sighed by all;
A letter from a foreign shore.
Conned by the readers o'er and o'er;
A theme to which the talk will roam;
A blank within a Scottish home;
The name of one no longer there.
Remembered in the daily prayer—•
" In memory of her we miss."
Sanct Rewle.
E
Febnuiry.
34
THE ATTEMPT.
|i Skcttlj.
It was after the fearful struggle between the North and the South, and peace reigned
once more upon God's earth. The North was satisfied; there had been bloodshed,
and famine, and pestilence all through the beautiful South, and the slaves were
free. But though peace had been jiroclaimed, there was a lurking of revenge in the
heart of the South. The spring came, a beautiful, soft spring-tide, and the flowers
looked up as pure and white as if there had never been any war or bloodshed in all
the world. And the sj^ring had ripened into summer, and found me still in my
Florida home, where all tilings were so changed.
One afternoon I watched and Avaited in the twilight for the sound of footsteps
that would never sound again, and saw where the sunlight shed a halo on a mound of
ground—the grave that held a brother.
There were very hard thoughts in my heart against the hand that had slain
the brother that I worshipped ; there were hard thoughts against the land that
shouted out its song of victory while the heart and life were broken in the South.
And if my thoughts were hard against these, think how bitter they must have been
for the fallen race whom this bloody turmoil had made free, the race that rung
their chains exultingiy, nor thought how dearly their freedom had been bought.
These bitter thoughts were passing through my mind when some one touched my
arm. It was lame Jacksey (who had formerly been one of our slaves). " Missus,"
he said, "please come to Clothilde—she's worse." Clotliilde was a mulatto, and had
done plain sewing for me often ; I had felt a great deal for her, having heard her
sad story. The world is full of " sad stories," but I think Clothilde's was saddest of
all. I found her where she had stopped to rest, under an old maple tree, that spread
its arms protectingly over her, while the low murmur of its leaves sounded like the
rippling of water on a glinting shore—a robin up in the branches sang " Sorrow,
sorrow, sorrow comes to all ! " I sat down by her, and took the hand she held out to me
—and felt one or two of the bitter thoughts stealing away with their heads held down.
The hand had grown very thin, and the face was looking oh ! so weary, that I think
God pitied it. The red light of the sunset rested on her cheeks, and threw a
radiance round the jet black hair—the same sunset-light that rested on my brother's
grave—and looking at the clear black eyes and weary face, Clothilde's story came to
my mind. She and her brother had been born in slavery, but her brother, having
earned his freedom, had gone to the far north,  hoping to gain  money there to huy
THE ATTEMPT. 35
his sis(e7-'s.    They wrote to each other, and Clothilde heard that when the war broke
out, her brother had enlisted in the Federal army.
Years had passed, and Clothilde had never seen him, but she waited patiently, say¬
ing God would not let her die until he came. The sunlight glinted on the weary face,
and glimmered far away ujDon the brother's gi'ave. I thought again of the stranger
that had passed that afternoon, and asked to see my school (for I had subdued my
pride, and was teaching the freedmen) ; how eagerly his dark eyes had scanned each
face; how he had paused upon the threshold to look back, and say, " she is
not here!"
The shadows slanted longer on the grass, and crossed the grave—the robin saug
very softly now. Clothilde put her hand on my bowed head, and said—" God bless
you." Ah ! I wonder if when the pearly gates open, and her angel stands before
God the Father, if that prayer will be heard ]
" Poor Clothilde, is it very dark ?" I asked.
" There is a light a-head," she answered me—"it shines brighter and brighter—
if he would only come !" The brother that she loved so dearly, if, I wondered—she
could love.     God only knows, in Heaven they may be changed.
The eyes were closed now, the look on the face was that of weariness, but as if
the toil and trouble were well nigh over now, as if the light from His throne were
falling softly  on  the upturned face, and saying—" Best."
The robin in the maple gave a last sorrowful twitter, and the sun in the west
had left only a mound in the sky like a grave, from which a golden arrow fell, like a
ray of hope, across the face of Clothilde.
There was a sound of footsteps on the narrow walk, a word or two of surjjrise,
and the stranger who had searched eveiy face in the schoolroom, and said " she is not
here," stood before us. Ah ! he had found her at last. Could no one waken her,
but for a moment, to tell her that her brother stood before her ? The robin in the
tree was silent now, and the brother sat with the sister that never would know
him again on earth, clasped in his arms. Every bitter thought in my heart vanished
and hid itself in the twilight.
I left the brother with the lifeless burden in his arms, with no one near to hear
his calls and entreaties but the One who listens always. "Whatever my thoughts
have been they are changed now. Does any one sneer at the thought of " Ee-
tribution ?"
Nobody.
36
THE ATTEMPT.
®nx f tf^
There is a truth (on novel's page*
'Twas first revealed to me) ;
The truth that every life on earth,
Blessing or curse must be.
And as I name the first, I hear
Humility's soft sigh;
And at the mention of the last,
Pride's haughty tones reply.
" A little poison in my streams
A city might destroy,
A little sunshine on my hills.
Fills many hearts with joy."
Then, said she, pointing to the dead.
Who in her bosom slumber,
" Take heed, and make this lesson thine.
Ere thou be of their number."
" But is it ti-uth ? " was my soul's cry, I asked the Book, and there I found
That cry Earth often hears; That which the Word hath said,
And smiling through her thousand charms, "Against Me, is the hand of him
She whispered in my ears, Who lendeth not his aid."
* Felix Holt. FeuCARA.
I. We say that a man of wealth is worth so many thousand pounds. Many of us
protest against this manner of measuring his value by his external possession. But,
while we do well to notice this, we must not err on the other side, and wilfully
blind ourselves to its share of truth. We must not depreciate money ; it is the
result of work or energy of some kind, mental or bodily, as it is the promise of some
future pleasure or good in store. Thus in the past it is noble, in the future it may
be glorious ; it is only in the bare present, when it is rolling over the country, or
lying useless in the till, that it is coin and nothing more.
But it is not always he who has done the work who receives the wealth, nor
the possessor of the coin who will purchase the pleasure.
II. Words I may call the coin of thought; they pass current amongst us, each
with its known value, so that we can reckon up their sum by an almost arithmetical
process. Many of them have become defaced, clipped, and otherwise debased ; the new
THE ATTEMPT. 37
have been changed for the old, as the Mint has re-called and re-moulded the metal,
just as the " angel" and the " mark " have vanished, and the " guinea " and the
" groat" are melting away in our present coinage. But each age understands its
own dealings.
If words then be coined thought, can we judge the mental riches of a man by his
words 1 It is the only foundation for such a judgment we possess. Not by the
multitude of his words,—for a sack filled with farthings, or a ton of base coin,
would never equal the value of a few gold pieces.
For in language there are gold and silver and copper coin, and more false money
than is ever found current in the realm. It is here more easy to be issued, more
difficult to be detected, and here, greatest marvel of all, the purest coin, like faery-
gold, becomes base at the touch of the individual who cannot stamp his own imago
on its reverse—who does not comprehend what he issues, and give it forth as true.
Our language, though also like money, the result of past work and the promise of
futxire blessing, is not so to every one. We inherit much; and the inheritor too
often misses the blessing that falls on the winner of his own fortune. These words
are ours by right, we have yet to make them so by might; they are ours potentially,
we have yet to make them ours actually. They are as ciphers, valueless till we
put ourselves as a unit at their head, aud then each one multiplies the whole by ten.
III. Words are more than coin. One great philosopher has called them the
fortresses of thought, as they mark o\it and protect the ground we have already
conquered and cleared, preventing it from again becoming Terra Incognita. These
fortresses belong to each of us, private soldiers, only insomuch as we have followed
the generals who constructed them, as we have mounted their walls, and scaled their
turrets, and planted oiir ensigns there ; and from their height have surveyed the
surrounding country above the mists of the lower ground.
IV. Words are still more—they are identical with Thought. The Greek
language knew no distinction. God's " let there be," that called the universe into
existence, was but His Thought. Christ was the expression of His Thought of
Salvation, when the " Word became flesh, and dwelt among us," and these two
were one. We who are made in His image, ought to put our thought's value in
our speech, or our mental wealth ought to be equivalent to our expression of it.
That it is not so is a result of our imperfection.
v. When any subject is presented to the mind, it produces certain impressions
38
THE ATTEMPT.
on it. These impressions may vanish to make room for others, or be fixed there by
interest and attention, and retained in the memory. The more acquisitive the
disposition of the mind, the more interest, and consequently the more attention, it
brings to bear upon these impressions, and the more it retains in the memory, or
the more mental wealth it acquires. These riches are coined for the pui-poses of
mental commerce, but the coin or language is also a result of thought; the comparison
that fixes and uses these arbitrary signs is a mental operation of higher intellectual
powers.
VI. Style is more than words. It is a fusion of many products of thought.
What a suggestive word is " style !" From the steel point and wax of the ancients,
to the ideas of modern times—the manner of doing anything. Whence comes our
" manner" %
A rich man does not carry about a sack of gold upon his back, that men at the
corners of the streets may count his riches. He spends it, he has spent it, he will
spend it to profit. Enter his dwelling-place, though he be absent you will know his
wealth. If he joins you, his garments, his mien, his voice, his manner, show you his
riches. Doubtless, till you have seen much and imagined more, you cannot
calculate the proportion his intrinsic wealth bears to his extrinsic or visible
possessions. But these things seen are not merely the signs of wealth ; they are wealth !
What one shows is a part of what one has.
VII. Suppose that all men in the world were to be required to write an essay upon
any given subject, the variety would be as great as the number of individuals. After
folding up the blank sheets returned, we should find one who would commence and end
with " The subject is = the subject—■" reaching at the highest a synonym, not a defini¬
tion. From another the subject becomes a description—he sits down and writes all
he has read or heard about it. He may use good words—but he neither made them
nor re-inspired them. They are coin tliat have been given to him, not earned by
him, and he exchanges them for others of like value. A third man practically may
have mastered all these difficulties ; he knows both what to say, and how to say it.
He writes his essay in terse, true words, in clear-cut quick-stejiping sentences. A
man more oratorically inclined may throw into the style some of the music he knows
to be so winning to the ear of his hearer, and of the illustration he feels to be so
kindling to the imagination. Disposition influences everything, but whatever be the
natural disposition, education, experience, thought has a power so mighty, that we
recognise it beyond and al)ove all disposition.     And where should we recognise it ?
THE ATTEMPT. 39
In the style ; because, in all essays that do not require simply a definition of
some one word, the primary thought is given when the subject is named.
Let us look at a rich man's style. For him each word has a distinct meaning ;
a whole chapter of definition, a whole volume of j^oetry is crystallized in one keen
expression, that flashes light around it. His own understanding convinces him
that it will be intelligible to all who will to understand ; his words are equivalent to
thought—they are thought. They are suggestive even to himself, they are links to
his past, and a whole chain of associations awake at the ring of their true metal.
Yes ! he has often thought this thought and spoke these words before. Memory
makes present the time when he last talked with a friend on this subject, and the
conversation, with all its connections and references, returns to his mind ; but he has
interest and attention enough to produce abstraction and keep hold of the thread
that will lead him out of the maze. The book from which his friend then quoted he
had read before ; he remembers still the occasion when he studied the clearly stated
opinion of that great author, the kindling of his heart into a deep red glow, from
this fresh fuel added to the little spark he had produced for himself by friction,
through turning and turning and turning this idea, when it had first entered his
mind. He was pleased to find the spark could assimilate with the fire of that
maturer thought which lie now possesses by right of mastery; and from which he
can now, as then, warm himself to the subject. For such burnings are of the nature
of the true everlasting fire, that the ancients have not alone discovered nor we
altogether lost. By it he sets up his forge and strikes out his words while the iron
is all red-hot. From it he is permeated with energy, intensity, emphasis, ay, with
love ! For he welcomes this thought as an old and intimate friend, and treats it as
such. He is not afraid, he is familiar and affectionate. In introducing it, he is
pleased to show that its pedigree and relationship are noble. He places it in the
best points of view, and sets lights to suit it. He loves to adorn it and hang jewels
on it. These are his figures of speech and thought—his mental wealth. Not only
the structure of his writing, in which his spirit for awhile makes its abode as an
inhabitant: but his dress, his voice, his manner, prove his gracious education. In
uttering his words they become musical, his accent pure, and proves the society he
has been wont to frequent; his syntax, or his gait, shows liberal training,—
" True ease in writing comes from art, not chance,
As those move easiest who have learned to dance."
Through all he does or says, his reader (not himself) is awai-e of another result
40 THE ATTEMPT.
of his gentle birth and noble breeding. He offends neither in word, nor deed, nor
thought, the feelings of his companion ; unconsciously he has grown like the
chivalrous knights, " without fear and without reproach." His true taste is a
combination of nature and art j his rich imagination the highest intellectual power.
All he says seems fresh and new. When Solomon said " there is nothing new under
the sun," he forgot to add, except new combinations, for it is in the new combinations
of old things we find the highest creative power possible to mortal mind—the Maker
the True Poet. His reader may exclaim, " his thought is original; but his style
is interesting apart from his thought." It is not so, it is with, and from, and by this
highest mental action that he is able to make real to the imagination of other minds
his monarch-thought, crowned by its kindred gems, and enthroned awhile amid a
court of fellow-thoughts, that erelong may be elected to take their seat of honour in
the midst. Lutea Reseda.
Chapter XII.—Continued.
When Frank was gone, things fell back into their old train. Una bathed and
rowed me about in a charming little cockle-shell of a boat. We read and walked
together, and the pleasant summer days wore through, and the end of July came.
Soon after Frank left. Brand Hilary told us he had to be off to London.
He had been coming in from time to time in his old way, and each time Una
seemed to avoid him more. She managed to be out at any time he was likely to
call; and when he baffled her ingenuity by coming at an " orra time," as Lizzie
called it, she was deeply occupied in some new stitch in embroidery, or obliged to
rush away to call on some special person joere Haslam had recommended to her at¬
tention. And so I guessed a sense of discomfiture and discomfort was taking him
to London, though his friends there were no doubt anxious to see him again. But
away he went; and on one blazing day, when the pines seemed crackling in the heat
like flames, and the sand glared like sparks of fire, and the sea, as Una said after
her morning plunge, was seething like a cauldron, there was a great to-do at Glynne
Park, and we heard the family were coming home forthwith. And almost simultane¬
ously the news came to us via General Hilary that the 11th Hussars were coming
J
THE  ATTEMPT. 49
to Wemborougli, about ten miles from St Michael's, there to take up their
quarters. Una moralized on this, as we sat with the Venetians down to exclude heat
and light as much as might be.
" Put two and two together, and they make four,—four Glynnes coming back
from town ; add the four Glynnes to the 11th Hussars, the product will show the
desired result."
I was sleei)y with the heat, and merely told her to be quiet, whereupon she sat
like Heine's picture of the little daughter at home, deep in the armchair, blinking
in the light, with the golden hair wandering back from the sweet face. For that
day she declared no one would venture out for fear of being fricasseed, and her hair,
simply from her walking up from the beach in the sun, had become wholly un¬
manageable, " neither to hand nor to bind," to quote Lizzie once more.
" I can do nought wi' it. Miss Una," she said, " what wi' the saut and the heat
it's like a tap o' tow. Gude forgie me, it's as bonnie hair as ever I saw, my lamb,
but it'll neither brush nor kaim this blessed day."
" Well, Lizzie,
" Wherefore should I busk my head ?
Or wherefore should I kaim my hair ? "
when nobody will see it," said Una. " I'll just leave it as it is for the
present." So now she was sitting far back in an Indian chair near the bow-
window, her sweet face framed in gold, like the aureole of a saint,—pardon the
hackneyed simile,—and Una was no saint, but a veiy woman, bonnie and
bewitching. The white lids half-shaded the great sleepy eyes, and hardly let
out a ray of fun; the little slippered feet just touched the ground, balanc¬
ing the chair backwards and forwards. Suddenly, through the silent house,
when even Lizzie was dozing, I fancy, over her knitting, and Sarah's flii'tation with
the baker's young man at the back-door had become a thing of nought, and a lotus-
eating lingering leave-taking,—rang sharp and clear the door-bell. Una started from
the peaceful lounge.
" Where shall I flee 1" she said, and then answering her own question, she
darted into the greenhouse, and I fear attained her own bedroom window, by means
of a furtive ladder, while the drawing-room door was wide opened, and Mrs Glynne
announced. That worthy lady was a full-blown specimen of the British matron.
I have no doubt that when Mr Glynne led her to the altar, some thirty years
before,   she  was  a  very  fine  girl;   and  now, in her handsome widow's weeds,
 ^^ F
Pebrvari/.
50 THE ATTEMPT.
she is comely and comfortable to look iipon, save  for an unusually disturbed ex¬
pression on her forehead and a trouble in her eye.
'• My dear Mrs Glynne, I am very glad—we did not know joxi had already
returned.    I hope the girls "—Here I was stopped by Mrs Glynne's expression.
She sat down beside me on the sofa, looking first at me, then round the room,
and then asked hurriedly for Una. I apologised for her absence. " Oh well, my
dear Miss F—Mary, I mean, I rather wished to see you alone. It is no use my
pretending, you see, that I've come on a very pleasant errand. You have more
influence with Violet than anyone else, and I do so want yoii to speak to her.
Indeed there is no time to lose. Since she has taken this resolution, I have had no
peace.    What is to be done 1"
I gathered by degrees that Violet felt a vocation to join a sisterhood at
Wemborough, indeed, she insisted on doing so as soon as arrangements could be
made about it,
" If it was Rose, I should have thought nothing of it," said poor Mrs Glynne,
" she wovild have taken another whim as soon as she found the life wasn't all roses,
and confectionery and gold crucifixes; but Vi is so set on it, and you know she
never cared for amusements like other girls, and now nothing will serve her but
what she calls a "religious" life, as if one couldn't be religious except among those
old nuns. I saw through the convent once, and such a set, such faces and figures,
their vocation was to keep out of sight as much as possible, certainly. But Violet "
Here Mrs Glynne stopped, and fairly put her lace-edged handkerchief to her
honest grey eyes. I was very much distressed, for I liked Violet Glynne, and had
never thought her High Church propensities would have led her so far.
"I am much grieved," I said, "but, dear Mrs Glynne, there are others who
would be more likely to influence Violet,—Mr Haslam, Mr Brookes, Mr Cyril."
Mrs Glynne shook her head vehemently. " Mr Haslam is a good man, if ever
there was one," she said (I am picking up the H's she dropped in her excitement,
and putting them in where they ought to have been), " but you know, dear Mary, he
is not a High Churchman, he is Evangelical rather, and Vi has never gone to his
church ; nothing he could say would make any difference. And Mr Brookes, I'm
sure, will just say, ' let her follow her vocation.' And Mr Cyril—mark my words,
Mr Cyril has put all this nonsense into her head, I'm convinced of it. I knew
how it would be—that is, I didn't know how far it would go, of course, but I never
trusted that man, casting down his eyes and gliding about like a cat."
I could not join in her suspicion, for though the Rev. Ambrose Cyril, as far as
THE ATTEMPT. 51
ill him lay, copied what I suppose was his ideal of a Jesuit, I believed him to be in the
main a good little fellow, and by no means cajiable of counselling Violet to such a step.
" Well, Mrs Glynne," 1 said, " I will go and talk to Violet at once, if you think
I can do any good."
" If you would, my dear, I should be so thankful. She doesn't know, of course,
that I was coming to see you. I came in the pony carriage, but I'll set you down
at the house and then go on to the village.    I have some things to order."
So I got ready, and was deposited at the gate of Glynne Park, walked to the house,
and was shown into the drawing-room. Soon after, a light step came to the door,
and in walked Violet; such a changed Violet, that I should hardly have recognised
her. She had on a grey dress, coarse in material, and utterly plain in make, though
it was late in the afternoon, with no ornament of any kind, except a heavy chain of
jet beads, and a cross that hung to her waist-belt. Her face had lost all its bright
colour, and was white and pinched, with black shadows under the dark eyes ; her
hair, no longer frizzled and 2:)ufFed, was drawn plainly to the back of her head and
twisted there ; her hand, when she gave it me, no longer glittered with rubies and
diamonds, and was so thin, that I saw the bones at the once round wrist quite
plainly. What had changed her so entirely 1 I kissed her, and sat down with the
thin little fingers in mine.
" My dear Violet," I began, " how ill you are looking !"
She intermpted me with a hasty impatient motion of her hand.
" No, Mary," she said, "I am well,better than ever I was before. Wouldn't
you feel well if you had been in the dark for a long time, and suddenly you saw a
light shining in the distance, that seemed to promise peace and happiness 1 That
is what I feel now. Everything has been dark for so long, and now that I see rest
and peace close at hand, ought I to shut my eyes and say it is dark still 1"
" My poor child," I said, " I have heard of wandering lights that only betray;
are you sure, Violet, it is not one of these you are following, that will lure you into
worse darkness, and leave you there 1 You are so changed since you went to London,
I should hardly have known you. You are tired with excitement, and so think you
are weary of the world."
" I don't think it, I know it," said Violet; and then suddenly, like the quench¬
ing of a lamp, the light died out of her eyes, and she sat down on a low stool beside
me, and laid her head upon my knee.
" Oh, Mary," she sobbed, " the world is so bitter, so hollow and poor. I am
weary of it, heart and soul; you don't know how weaiy."
52 THE ATTEMPT.
" Don't I ?" I said; " haven't I felt the same; but wait, and the years will
bring you comfort, as they have brought it to me. Don't mistake a disappointment
for a vocation, Violet."
" A disappointment," she said, sharply, " who said anything of disappointment?"
She tried to look up, and dry her tears—but they came again, the clouds after the
rain, heavy and bitter, as from some " comfortless and hidden well."
" Tlie whole world is empty and cold, Mary," she said, " and the more I see of
it all, the better I see a woman can't be happy in it. We are made so that all the
best of us is turned into pain, sooner or later. Nobody can help it, or mend it; the
only way to avoid great sorrow is to go where it is out of the question you can ever
be very happy, to give your life to God, and be at rest. That is what I want to do ;
to buiy the girl 1 was thi'ee months ago, and forget that she ever lived, and begin a
life that has nothing of self in it. Don't hinder me, Mary, or try to hinder me. I
have been mad, I do believe, and now it all lies behind me like a dream. Do you
remember when we read Faust together 1 there is a line of your translation that runs
in my head day and night,—
" Dumb lies the world like the grave."
—Oh, Mary, I know what that means now."
She had spoken brokenly, and now she hid her face. Her sorrow touched me
nearly, and seemed to diuw us together.
" What is it, Violet," I said soon after, apparently a very inappropriate question,
but one that I could not help asking, and the answer came most unexpectedly. I
was sitting by a small table, with my elbow on its edge, and, in moving, I knocked
down a small album that was lying there, and it fell on the floor open, at a place
where I saw a dark handsome face I knew well, Louis Maryon's.
I stooped to pick up the book, and I saw Violet's eyes rest on the face for a
moment with the same hungry eagerness that its eyes had worn when they looked
at Una. Poor Violet, I knew how it was, as I put back the book with a sigh,
though she thought her look Lad been unobserved. It was cruel to ask her any
more ; her secret, I felt sure, was in my keeping, and it was safe. However, she sat
motionless and silent, and it was getting late, and the afternoon of sunshine had
suddenly darkened over.    It was time for me to go home.
As I rose, and said I must go now, but would see her next day, and begged
her not to do anything without consideration, she looked earnestly at me and said,—
" You guess something, Mary 1"
THE ATTEMPT. 53
Before I could reply, there was a ring and a rustle. Mrs Glynne had come back,
and insisted on ordering tea for me, so my return was delayed for some little time.
Clouds were gatheriag fast as I passed along the piney paths, heavy drops
began to fall as I neared the gate of Lawrence Lodge, and the wind had risen, and
was moaning of rain. Una, I thought, would be wondering what had become of
me. Was she in the drawing-room, T wondered. The Venetians were only half
down, and I looked into the I'oom with the strange unfamiliar feeling with which
one looks into one's accustomed sitting-room from the outside.
Ay, there was Una, sure enough, and not Una alone. My heart throbbed as I
saw a tall dark figure beside her in the twilight. Una sat in her low chair, her hair
still loose streaming over her shouldei's, and Bi'and Hilary was kneeling beside her.
His back was to the window, but Una's face, all softened and tender, was turned
towards me; there was just light enough to see it by, and also to see one white hand
resting on Brand's shoiilder, as gently and confidingly as a white bird nestles to its
mate. There was one moment's touch of jealousy, only a moment's, and then I let
myself in and went up-stairs. Faster, faster the rain fell, it was beating on the
windows, streaming on the panes, but how little those two would care !
" B-ain or hail, or fire or snow," could not change the world to tliem.
My room was over the drawiug-room, and it was long before I heard a soiind ;
then I heard Brand's step, the door closed, and all was silent. Silent, till Una came
slowly upstairs, and then I could not wait any longer, but went out and drew her
into my room, where Lizzie had lighted the small swinging lamp. Ah, what a
change, as great as the change in Violet Glynne. Una's eyes had grown so strange
and sweet with new light, her cheeks were wet and rosy, her whole dear face was a
very mystery of happiness.
Even her voice was changed when she spoke.
" Oh, darling Molly, Brand has been here."
" Not Mr Hilary any longer, Una."
" No, Brand,—my own Brand, my love, my darling. Oh Molly, what have I
done that I should be so blest 1"
I felt her full heart beating agaiast mine, her eyes raining delicious tears : love
had made our white sea-maiden more tender, more womanly, more beautiful than
ever she had been before; and by degrees, totally forgetting such a trifle as the dinner-
hour, I drew from her all the particulars not strictly private.
" You know I got up to my window with old Tom's ladder, which was lying
on the ground, more by token, having nobody to hold it, I nearly broke my neck,
54 THE ATTEMPT.
but I managed to get into my room. And I heard Mrs Glynne go away, and I
didn't think you were with her, so that I could go down again in that state ; and I
was reading as easily as could be when in walked Brand. How he got in without
ringing, or anything I don't know."
" It's not the first time," said I, nor was it.
" Well, that was your fault, Molly; I never taught him to do that. And I
felt so caught, like a bacchante or something of that sort."
" Like a mermaid," I said. " I should think Brand would insist on your
always having it down, it is very becoming."
" And I apologised, and said you were out, and I did not expect any visitors,
and thought he was still in town. And then, oh, then, I can't tell you what he
said. I never thought he cared for me before, Molly; and now I don't wish for
anything else.    If he was going to America again I would go with him."
"Let us be thankful he is not," said I. And then came the gong for dinner,
finding Una wildly dishevelled, and me still in my hat of darkness and shoes of
swiftness. Love had shaken the glass of Time, and no mistake, and my father the
soul of punctuality. I expected a message to hurry us, but none came ; and then
Una remembered Papa was going to dine with Mr Haslam, and had told her so in
the distant ages " before Brand came in." The front door opened while we were
sitting after dinner, Una coiled up on a low ottoman, and I in my old place beside
the work table, and a quick step came through the hall. And ere a man had power
to say " behold," there was Brand again.
" The bad shilling, Mary," he said, " nous revenous toujours to Lawrence
Lodge."
I rose up gladly to welcome him, more warmly than ever before : such perfect
content and satisfaction were stamped on his face. While I shook hands with him,
Una seized the opportunity, the room being rather dark, to glide out of it, and was
gone before Brand could turn round where she had been sitting in the shadow.
" Dear Brand," I said, " I am so glad of this news. You have been like a
brother to me for a good while, and I could not have wished a better one."
Brand lifted my hand to his lips, very much as his father might have done, and
asked in the same breath for Papa and Una.
" Papa will not be home till late, I think. Una, where are you 1" No answer.
I went up-stairs and into Una's room ; all was dark and silent, but for the rushing of
the rain which had not yet ceased ; but I presently heard a little rustle, and there
was my child on her old perch at the window-sill.
THE ATTEMPT. 55
" Una, Brand wants you," I said. " He will wait till Papa comes in. Now,
go down to him like a sensible woman, and I'll go and see about tea."
" You mean you'll go and sit with Lizzie, and you shan't," said Una. " If I go
down, you shall come too." Saying which, she took possession of me, and we both
descended. Brand was still standing near my little lamp, and I could not help
thinking of the night when we had seen him first—the white face, the helpless limbs,
that had moved all the compassion of my heart. The life given back to him on that
wild night had grown doubly dear, surely was a life worth saving, worth cherish¬
ing. And Una, looking at him for a moment, with that proud fond glance, before
her eyes fell and she gave him her hand,—Una, winsome and wayward, had his life's
peace and happiness in her hands, to make or to mar.
"Well, those two young people would not hear of my leaving them to them¬
selves, and declared, if I did, they would go and walk in the rain. So I took my
work and sat still, while they occupied the window seat, and tried to steady my
mind and think about Violet Glyniie, and what could be done to turn her from
her resolution. In vain,—the happiness of those two who were so dear, filled my
thoughts, till the clatter of approaching tea-things was heard, and Brand jumped up
and buried himself in a book picked up at random, and Una came to her old seat
on the rug, and declared the wet evening justified a fire, July though it was, to dry
Papa when he came in, before he could be expected to attend to affairs of
importance. So a small blaze was soon irradiating the room, and a very happy-
looking trio we were, I fancy,—Una making tea, and forgetting that Brand never
took sugar, and then apologising by declaring she was thinking of Mr Glynue,
after which, and after Brand's pretending to be in a rage, and saying he would
drink no more of such a witch's brewing, she became very silent indeed, and the
evening passed on. Part of it, I must own, I absented myself in the book-room ;
and then Papa made his appearance, was unsuspiciously glad to see Brand, was
enlightened as to the cause of his presence on that special night, and what passed
farther, I cannot say, but the result seemed satisfactory.
Brand came to say good-night to us, and soon after quiet settled down on all
the house. Not, however, till Una had found her way to Lizzie's room, and told
her all about it, exhorting her to be particularly fond of Brand, as indeed I think
our faithful nurse had been ever since the night of the wreck, though the idea ' that
her bairn' was going to be married, completely filled her mind for the time being, to
the exclusion of all other thoughts.
O. M.
56 THE ATTEMPT.
OUR   LIBRARY   TABLE.
Chips from a German WorJc-Shop.    By Peofessor Max Mulleb.    Vol. III.
Longmans, Green, & Co., 1870.
It is with great pleasure that we hail another work from the fertile pen of Professor
Max Miiller, in the shape of a continuation of his interesting and instructive " Chips
from a German Work-Shop." To some readers this volume may prove of greater
interest than its predecessors, for leaving the Mythology and "Folk-lore" of the
ancient world, the author has come down to comparatively modem times, and has
given us some well written ai'ticles on the Literature both of Germany and our own
country. Among these we would specially notice his article on " Schiller," that on
" Bacon in Germany," and his general survey of German Literatiire, which originally
formed the preface to his " Ancient and Modem German Classics," published in
1858. The biographical notice of the late Baron Bunsen, with which this volume
ends, will be perused with interest by all English readers, though by some it may be
considered as too indiscriminate in the praise it bestows on that Minister. We
conclude these brief I'emarks by affirming our belief that those who have already
perused the first two volumes of the " Chips," will find the volume just published
no unworthy successor to them.
First Principles of Ecclesiastical Truth.    By J. Baldwin Bbowx, B.A.
Hodder & Stoughton, 1871.
This veiy interesting book is divided into four parts, each part full of thought and
suggestion. 1st, "The Doctrine of the Infallible;" 2d, "The Natural History of
Antichrist;" 3d, " The Christian Commonwealth ;" and 4th, " The Eevolution of
the last quarter of a Century." Mr Brown belongs neither to Low Church, High
Church, or Broad Church, biit is in views and principles, as well as denomination,
Independent. Many people may not entirely agree with every proposition laid down
in this work, nor with the views drawn from them, but what book was ever written
that met all our wants, wishes, or dispositions ? To some, however, it will speak
with much force and power, and suggest thoughts of a Spiritual Church, containing
the great truths in all; a Church that, whether recognized or not, surely has existed,
does exist, and will exist, and if acknowledged, would produce more of brotherhood
and charity among the difierent earthly establishments.
THE  ATTEMPT. 49
Visual i^anguage.
[An Essay written for the Class of Logic and Metaphysics in connection with the
Edinburgh Ladies' Educational Association.]
In the following passage from Berkeley's " Alciphron," the Theory of Vision,
which he was the first to propound, is expressed perhaps as clearly and fully as any¬
where else in his writings.
" The proper objects of sight are light and colours, which combine to form a
language wonderfully adapted to suggest and exhibit to us the distances, figures,
situation, dimensions, and various qualities of tangible objects, not by similitude, nor
yet by inference of necessary connection, but by the arbitrary imposition of Providence,
just as words suggest the things signified by them."
The analogy suggested in the last clause explains the expression " Visual
Language," applied to the objects of sight. The relation between the objects of
sight and the objects of touch is, Berkeley says, the same as the relation between
words and what they stand for; a relation, that is, of sign and thing signified.
In order to understand this properly, let us first consider the relation of
language to thought, at least to thoughts. It is neither possible nor useful here to go
very deeply into the subject. One might say that in language which expresses
thought jiroper—not merely describes material objects and facts—there are several
successive sets of signs. First, we almost always speak in metaphors of some sort;
we think by pictures, and then put them into words (and this has a close connection
with visual language on another side) ; then, every word which expresses a mental
idea is a metaphor taken from some physical phenomenon; and lastly, the words
which name physical objects are now known to have been originally in a sense
figurative, either personifying the object, or naming it by some distinguishing
property. We might go much further into the vexed question of what the
real connection is between the first root sounds and the ideas they represent, but
for the purposes of the present illustration, let us confine ourselves to words naming
physical objects, and sentences expressing physical facts.
There are particular sounds, more or less complex, which we have learned to
associate with particular objects, and which, on that account, and not because there
is any likeness or necessary connection between them, at once bring up the object
before our minds.
By long experience we have so thoroughly learned the meaning of those signs,
G
March.
50 THE ATTEMPT.
that we are quite unconscious of the act of interpreting them,—it is done so quickly
and easily. We can see, however, when we come to think about it, that we do
interpret them, and that we have gradually acquired the power of doing so.
As it is always a difficult and doubtful matter to enter into the consciousness
of those unfortunate infants who form such a fruitful subject of speculation to
philosophers, let us rather think of the way in which we should learn the language
of a foreign country, if we were suddenly turned adrift there without any previous
knowledge of it. We hear a variety of strange incomprehensible sounds uttered by
our companions, and we see them preceded, accompanied, or followed by various
actions. We observe that a particular sound uttered by a neighbour at a tahle-d'hote
is always followed by the appearance of a particular dish ; we try the experiment of
making the same sound ourselves, and find that the same dish appears, and so we
think ourselves justified in concluding that the sound is the name, i.e., the audible
sign, of the dish. Of course, our conclusions will sometimes be hasty and unsound,
but these mistakes are always such as experience will correct. In the same way we
become acquainted with various short sentences ; and having got so far by experience
and association, we begin (even supposing, for the sake of illustration, no knowledge
of grammar) to make laws of some sort with regard to the various combinations,
which we first take in as wholes, and then pick to pieces; which laws enable us
to interpret new combinations we have never found associated with our actual
experiences. The failure or success of such interpretations corrects or confirms our
belief in our laws, so that in time we come to interpret the language without doubt
or hesitation, quickly, easily, and almost unconsciously.
To apply this to sight. We have seen that there are two parts in spoken lan¬
guage—the sound, and the meaning; that it is only the first which we perceive
immediately, the second, we infer ; that the power of making this inference has to
be gradually acquired; and that there is no resemblance whatever between the sound
and the meaning, the one standing to the other in the relation of sign to thing signi¬
fied. Now, what do we perceive immediately in sight ? Berkeley shows, I think
very clearly, that all that we immediately perceive in sight is " light, and its seve¬
ral modes and colours." He says himself that this will be admitted by every one
after a little reflection, and it has been universally admitted since he wrote. The
few objections that have been raised to this part of his theory seem to me rather mis¬
understandings, arising from what Berkeley himself so often deprecates, " sticking "
at some particular expressions, instead of looking at the whole in the light of the
general principle.
THE ATTEMPT. 51
But many other ideas, besides those of light and colour, come to us from our
sight as we now use it. We say that a thing "looks" hot or cold, soft or hard,
heavy or light. Here it is quite easy to understand that we are speaking ellipti-
cally—that we do not mean that we actually see heat, weight, etc., but that we see
various appearances from which we infer, that if we were to touch, press, or lift
the object we see, we should experience certain tactual sensations, with which we are
well acquainted;—one special kind of sensation with more or less of pleasure or
pain in it, which we call heat or cold; another, of more or less resistance to the
motion of the hand, which we call hardness or softness ; another, of more or less
muscular exertion in lifting the object, which we call heaviness or lightness. Our
" seeing " the hotness, softness, etc.^ is evidently an acquired perception.
But when we " see " a thing to be round or square, flat or solid, near or far
oS", are these acquired perceptions, or are they given immediately in sight ? Unlike
the first-mentioned set of facts, which are immediately perceived in touch, though
not in sight, these last seem to be altogether acquired perceptions, acquired originally
by the sense of touch, though with sight also helping in a manner.
Let us try to begin at the beginning and find out how we get our ideas of
extension, figure, and distance. "We must take for granted space and time as universal
conditions of perception—space not meaning anything vast or mysterious, but just
where, and time meaning just when. Then I think it can be shown that our idea
of extension in one direction—length—is originally that of continuous motion of the
hand along a surface; our idea of extension in two directions—length and
breadth—is that of motion combined with change of direction ; our idea of ex¬
tension in three directions—solidity—is that of the addition to these two of the idea
of motion in one particular direction, away from ourselves. The amount of each
dimension is measured by the space passed over in a given time. While we are
acquiring these ideas through touch, sight helps very much all the time, giving us
for each tactual inference, after we have made it often enough, its proper visual sign,
by which sign it is ever after expressed to us, all at once, not in succession of parts,
as we first got it by touch ; and as soon as we have learnt the visual signs for all our
tactual inferences, they are so much shorter, and easier to use, that we think by
them ever after, and so we come to say that we " see " figure, distance, etc., when
these are really only ideas that have been acquired by touch, which the sight-per¬
ception calls up.
The objections of those who maintain that the sense of sight by itself gives us the
Idea of distance, have been answered by several writers since Berkeley's time, who
52 THE ATTEMPT.
have confirmed, and in some cases more fully worked out Berkeley's analysis of the
perceptions given by sight and by touch. The diiiiculties of these objectors seem
principally to arise from not distinguishing between original and acquired perception ;
as Mr Mill says, perception seems to be a word invented to confuse the difference
between what is seen, felt, etc., and what is only inferred. Because sight noio gives
us the idea of distance much more quickly and easily than touch, some have even
maintained that we perceive distance by sight only, and not by touch at all. This
difficulty may be explained by the analogy of language. When we have once known,
for instance, the name " cat," we do not take the trouble of describing it every
time, even mentally, as a soft-furred quadruped that can purr and scratch ; but that
is what " cat" means, all the same ; so, when we have once learned the visual signs
which mean that a thing is a long way off, we do not take the trouble to think of
ourselves walking towards it for a considerable time before we can touch it, but that
is what being a long way off means, all the same.
As to the angles of the optic axes, about which a good deal has been writtenj
one might say that they do not belong to sight at all; for, to take an extreme case,
no one would say that a man's sensations in turning round to see something behind
his back, belong to the sense of sight, and all the other motions are of the same
kind, though different in degree. However, this does not matter much, as whatever
sense these sensations belong to, they are only sigris of distance; they would have
told us nothing about it if we had had no notion of it before.
Having made the analysis of what we perceive in sight into what we perceive
immediately, and what is suggested and inferred, we come to ask why certain things
seen,—certain modifications of light and colours,—always suggest certain tactual
ideas.
The ordinary popular answer to this question is—Because what we see and
what we touch is the same thing.
The ordinary philosophical answer is,—Because what we see and what we touch
are the common qualities of the same unknown substance.
Then Berkeley's answer.    First—Negative.
1. In opposition to the popular answer, he maintains, that what we see and
what we touch are not the same thing, for there is not only no likeness whatever
between them, but there is no possibility of ever comparing them.—(The " Theory
of Vision " is mainly devoted to proving this.)
2. In opposition to the ordinary philosophical answer, he maintains that there
is no such thing as abstract extension, abstract solidity, abstract space, or abstract
THE ATTEMPT.
53
matter, in which the sense-qualities reside.—(This is chiefly worked ont in the
" Principles of Human Knowledge," and in " Hylas and Philonous.") Some difficult
questions are suggested here as to what Berkeley means by saying there is no
such thing as abstract space or abstract extension. It all depends, as he says
himself somewhere, on what we mean by saying a thing exists. The main point
here, however, in order to understanding the Theory of Vision is to get rid of the
notion of an unknown and unknowable material substance, supposed to be the cause
of our sense perceptions.
Second—Positive.
Berkeley holds that the connection between the thing we see, and the thing we
touch, is simply one of inseparable association. When we have several times per¬
ceived two things together, the one, when perceived alone, calls up the idea of the
other; and when we have very often perceived them conjoined, and never found them
separate, we cannot conceive them apart from each other, and cannot help feeling as
if there was a necessary connection between them.
Now, all our lives we have been experiencing this constant association between
the objects of sight and the objects of touch, all our lives wo have been learning the
language of vision. And as in learning a language by ear, we almost always hear
sentences, which we afterwards analJ^se into words, so in sight, our sensations are
almost always complex, and we unconsciously analyse them, and recognise them
when they appear again in new combinations, and make some sort of guess as to
what we ought to expect them to mean, which is confirmed or corrected by
experience.
For instance, I am acquainted, let us suppose, only with the appearance of a
house when quite near. I have some day a visual sensation in most respects
exactly resembling the sensation which I usually associate with a house, but it is
much smaller, and fainter in colour. I find, however, that after walking forward
for some time, I have the visual perception of a hoiise to which I am accustomed.
I go through several other experiences of the same kind, and my conclusion from
the whole is, that when a house looks small (i.e. occupies a small portion of the field
of vision) and faint, I shall, after walking forward for some time, have a perception
in other respects like the first one, but large and distinct; and then I can
immediately, if I wish, go up to the house, ring the bell, go in, and experience all
the various tactual and other sensations which I have already learned to connect
with its visual image. Then I make the same experiment with other objects, and
find in all cases the same result; and so I make the general rule, that to see a thing
54 THE ATTEMPT.
faint and small, means that I must walk some way before I get to it, in short, that
faintness and smallness are signs of distance.
Of course no one ever really goes through a process of this sort, because long
before we could walk at all, we learned, to a certain extent, to measure distance by
tlie eye; and also, because we always get the benefit of so much of other people's
experience, that there are very few mistakes left for us to make, or puzzles to
work out in these matters. But we can observe the eye in a higher stage
of its education in measuring distance. A sportsman will tell you that a covey that
rises is forty, sixty, or eiglity yards off, and a good rifle shot can judge within a yard
or two at a much gi-eater distance. They see exactly the same things as we do, but
theyhave learned by experience to interpret much more accurately than we can the
meaning of what we see.
By the same law of association, our tactual perceptions suggest the visual ones :
when we touch a thing in the dark, we think of it as we know we should see it
in the light.    But in general, it is the objects of sight which act as signs, and call
up, or at least are capable of calling up, not only the tactual sensations belonging
to them, but often an immense number of other ideas acqiiired at different times
and by different means.    Vision  is  thus  the   language  which expx'esses all  our
ideas of the world; we think of external things, not by the words by which we
name them to other people, but by the pictures by which we name them ourselves ;
pictures which sometimes express in a moment what it would take hours to describe
fully in words. Gkace.
{To be continued.)
Stinsf t.
Upon the heathery knoll we stood.
Her hand was clasped in mine.
And glistening through the autumn wood,
Darted the clear sunshine.
My Flower, my Flower, her golden hair
Gleamed in that radiance bright.
Fit crown it seemed for saint to wear.
Where angels walk in light.
THE ATTEMPT. 55
We stood and watched the crimson ray
From the quiet heavens depart,
And leave the old woods dim and gray ;
But light was in my heart.
I deemed that glory ne'er could pass
From my Flower's radiant brow ;
But 'twas the sunset's light, alas,
The night has followed now.
Untrue—0 child ! had'st thou but died,
That light had not been gone.
Thy bright head brighter glorified,
In realms that need no sun.
For faith that shone like sunlight here.
There had but purer grown,
And love but tendererand more dear ;
But faith and love are gone.
And thou hast left my heart, my Flower,
Lonely amidst the night,
As old dim woods when day is o'er.
There is no light, no light.
Jeanie Morison.
Travelling does give its votaries very great enjoyment, not only at the time but
afterwards. When you have returned home with a few photographs, a soiled Brad-
sliaw, some utterly unreadable hotel bills, an empty purse, and a slightly worn-out
body, your friends look at you sorrowfully ; you do not care. You hug yourself and
feel happy, thinking how much you have seen, how much you have learned, and
how much you have to think upon. The photographs recall a few scenes, but they
are mostly of well-known places with no colouring.    Thoughts, as they come and go.
56 THE ATTEMPT.
brighten and illumitiate little bits of your foreign life, and time burnishes instead of
rubbing them out.
One great pleasure in life is derived from theatres. Abroad we went to them
very frequently; and one entertainment we witnessed I can never forget. We
arrived one day about four o'clock at a small German town, where Murray told us
there was nothing to see,—fortunately, I thought, as the rain was descending in tor¬
rents. No table d'hote, no books, no newspapers, nothing ! Looking round our little
sitting room, I shivered—how wrong to shiver in July in Germany, when my friends
in Scotland picture me enjoying a good band under lovely trees and radiant skies !
Going to the window I perceive opposite a wooden erection streaked with paint.
Imagine the fag-ends of all the paint-pots in Germany collected together, put on side
by side, one by one.    What can it be ? and what are we to do to-night 1
Is there a theatre 1 we ask the waiter;—he points frantically at the wooden house;
the mystery is solved. At seven o'clock we rush across, for the rain is as bad as ever.
We gave a very little money in at a window, got back what looked more than double
what we had given, followed a heavy-headed, heavy-footed woman up two or three
steps into a kind of large box, an old tea-box, I think; at any rate it was papered
with those yellow hieroglyphics on a black ground which we associate with tea-boxes.
The little theatre filled very rapidly, not with young people, but more the class you
see in a lecture room.
For about ten minutes we had some very good music, then the curtain rose,
and we saw and heard a most frantic-looking landlady abusing her unseen boarder
to her daughter, who was a nice-looking, very plainly-dressed girl. A door opened
on the stage, and Beethoven walked in ; there was no doubt about it, it was the very
man whose portrait I saw day after day, for I am ashamed to say how many weeks,
on that dreadful march of some departed hero. The landlady continues her abuse, and
although her daughter defends Beethoven, who is no doubt the aggressor, he takes
no notice. (Oh, I remember in Mangnall's Questions, that much-abiised book, they
did say something about Beethoven being deat). The landlady departs. The girl
sings a song very sweetly, and Beethoven looks as if he still heard some sounds.
A music-master, evidently the girl's lover, comes in, bringing with him a song
that Beethoven has given him, by the sale of which he may gain enough money
to please the ireful mother. The song is "Adelaide,'' which he sings. The girl tells
her lover and us the sad story of the song,—that Adelaide is the name of Beethoven's
love, who left him years before to wed one richer than the poor, and at that time
unknown musician.
\
THE  ATTEMPT. 57
As she tells the sorrowful tale, a lady enters fi-om behind, draped in all the gar¬
ments of the deepest woe; she listens to the last verse of the song, which is repeated for
her, snatches the song from the young man's hand, and falls weeping at Beethoven's
feet. The young couple politely retire, and we had then as well acted a scene as I ever
saw. Adelaide tells Beethoven what she has suffered;—woman-like, she thinks she alone
has suffered. He tries to stop her, wishing to let her know he cannot hear; of course
she will only be silent when she has nothing more to say. She always loved him; in
fact, she believed herself, and wished him to believe, that it was for his sake she
married the rich man. Now the rich man is dead, and she wishes to marry Beet¬
hoven ; he tells her he is deaf, and therefore he will not marry her. I think I
cannot have quite understood, and turn to a little German friend who is sitting
beside me—she has been weeping ever since Adelaide fell at Beethoven's feet; my
poor friend only shakes her head, she cannot speak for sobbing. " Why cannot she
write ] " I whisper. What a look of contempt I get! I try to feel ashamed of myself,
and listen eagerly for the next word from Adelaide,—it never comes. What a silence,
only broken by sobs from all parts of the house. Looking at the stage, I find that
neither hero nor heroine can go on for weeping real tears ; after they have tried vainly
to articulate, the curtain descends—silence still—no music; I do feel veiy uncomfort¬
able ; I cannot laugh, and I cannot cry. Fortunately for me the curtain soon rises
again, and I am delighted to see the raging landlady, who tells her daughter and her
lover that Adelaide has given her daughter, I should be afraid to say, how many
florins. The happy couple kneel. She blesses them. The curtain descends. The
band plays, and all begin to leave. It is only half-past nine o'clock, but all look quite
worn out with their sorrow, for the waiter says we have seen the finest piece ever
put on the German stage, and tells us that Fraulein E is always ill for two days
after performing Adelaide.    I quite believe him. V.
Ct£   iHu   §uxx'b   (Sifts.
To that young child at innocent play.
Bright as the morning's earliest ray,
Loved of his parents, fair as the day,—
New Year, what bringest thou ?
_____^  H
March.
58 THE ATTEMPT.
" Oh, I bring an angel to bear him hence
To a land of love and delight,
To take him in his young innocence.
Ere sorrow or sin can blight."
^o^
And unto that maiden sweet and fair.
With the radiant eyes and the auburn hair,
And the pure bright brow untouched by care,-
New Year, what bringest thou 1
" Oh, I bring sorrow to that fair maid,
And death to the one she loves best;
And the roses upon her cheek will fade,
As the sun-light dies in the west."
To that pale woman with secret pain,
Her youth departing to come not again,
Weary of waiting and hoping in vain,—
New Year, what bringest thou 1
" Oh, I bring her a bridal-wreath and veil.
And her lover from over the sea,
I bring new bloom to her cheeks so pale.
And her youth will come back with me."
To that old man with the locks of snow.
The wrinkles of time, the marks of woe,
The eyes grown dim, and the footsteps slow,—
New Year, what bringest thou 1
" Oh, I bring him rest from his wandei'ing
And release from his misery.
And of all to whom my gifts I bring,
He will the most thankful be."
Melita.
THE ATTEMPT. 59
Clje ^fljibitiflit of % S^nal Swltts^' ^.tabcmn for 1871.
Again have the months rolled round, and the doors of the Royal Scottish Academy
are, as usual, thrown open to the public, who, with eager expectancy, throng the
old familiar rooms, and hasten to gaze upon the results of the summer wanderings
and autumn toil of the ai'tist; whose happy vocation it is to minister to our sense
of beauty, to bring to our hearths and to our homes those scenes of nature over
which his willing feet have wandei'ed, and on which his loving eyes have lingered.
And to what lands, to what far distant regions have our academicians, our associates,
and our artists bent their steps; what streams, what rivers, what northern fiords or
inland seas, what precipices, what mountains, what cataracts or deep ravines have
they brought home to us ?
Many and many an old accustomed scene of loveliness have they been shut out
from. Alas, for us, for them, and for the dwellers in these countries ! It has not been
the eager foot, the loving eye, the tender heart of the artist and the poet that have
been free to wander there, and to gaze upon the silent scenes of nature. Far other
have the intruders been,—the feet that herald destruction and death, the hearts that
know no mercy, and the eye that looks upon a fellow-man but to slay, have alone
had entrance where, but a few short months ago, all was peace and beauty.
It is well for our artists and our poets that Scotland, narrow as is her horizon,
presents such a diversity of beauty, such rugged precipices, towering mountains,
brimming rivers, and lovely lochs and bays, that we are, in a manner, independent of
other countries ; and can find, within the narrow compass of our native land, all that
is necessaiy for the purposes of art. The many beautiful and charming landscapes
that hang upon these walls, with one or two excejitions, from Scottish soil, attest
sufficiently the varied aspects of beauty in which nature displays herself in our
favoured land.
Before touching, however, upon the landscapes,—of which we have this year
an unusually large number of chai'ming examples,—^we will remark briefly upon
those pictures whose subjects are of historical, domestic, and dramatic interest.
We now come to advert to the fact which we must point out to our readers,
that this Exhibition of 1871 does not boast of a single picture which may strictly
be said to enter the domain of high art; for we cannot justly accord this
distinction to Maclise's celebrated picture of the " Sleeping Beauty," No, 262,
Great    Room.    No   doubt,   this   charming   nursery   tale,   translated   from   the
GO THE ATTEMPT.
German of Grimm, is known to our readers. If not, there is a short extract
from it in the catalogue. Suffice it to say, that sleep for a hundred years falls,
like a flash of lightning, upon the princess, her court, her attendants, ladies,
knights, pages, servants, and domestic pets; no living thing within the enchanted
walls of this palace escapes the fairy spell. The moment seized upon by the painter is
when the appointed deliverer comes, in the shape of a gallant and handsome young
prince, whose mission is to free the " Sleeping Beauty" and her court from the
thraldom of the enchantress. The awakening is not yet, and the spectator, like the
Prince, the only truly living creature in this scene of fairy enchantment, looks on
with awe and amazement. Now, what is wanting in this wonderful picture is
not the manipulative skill of the painter, but the imagination of the artist, which
cannot rise so as to behold the invisible, or even so high as the conception of
the poet to whose happy fancy we owe this beautiful legend. Is this expansive
dame in white satin a fit ideal of the enchanted maiden of fifteen, asleep in all her
girlish purity ? Are those glaring eyeballs and pert features, that hover round her
canopied couch, things of beauty and messengers of love ? We think we have one
amongst us who can deal in better fashion with the flying, creeping, winged denizens
of fairyland,—beings that sleep in acorns, and sup from dew-drops. But, admitting
these defects, this picture is still a wonder of manipulative skill, in its delicacy and
high finish of touch, in its grouping and splendid colouring. "We should suppose
there are few pictures, that, within the confines of a single canvas, contain so much
exquisite drawing and such wonderful diversity of character and occupation. The
figures that occupy the foreground are sufficient of themselves to make the reputation
of half-a-dozen artists, and are done with such wonderful accuracy of detail, that they
are quite a marvel of labour and fidelity.
We will now turn to No. 467, South Octagon, " After the Battle ; A Scene in
Covenanting Times, painted for the Association for the Promotion of the Fine Arts
in Scotland," by R. Herdman. This is the picture of the Exhibition. This fine work
is full of human interest, and is handled with rare skill. It may perhaps, however,
be objected that there is too much sameness in the tone of the picture,—too much
uniformity of colour. In the foreground, stretched upon a rude couch, lies a
dying man, so near his dissolution, that one almost anticipates the moment in which
the fluttering, gasping spirit shall wing its flight to that unknown bourne whence
no traveller returns ; the grey, ashen face, and stiffening limbs are depicted with
great force and truth. Death, that great mystery of our earthly being, is here;
and as  we look upon   the  faces  of   those  who are   around   the  dying  man,—
THE ATTEMPT. Cl
upon the aged father, his Bible upon his knee ; upon the old mother, softly laving the
brow and neck of her dying son; upon the sister, gazing out upon the beyond,—we
feel, with a certain sense of incompleteness, that there is an absence in their ex¬
pression and in their demeanour, of that awful, soul-subduing sense of the presence
of the mighty king of terrors, soon to pass out from that stricken household with
the spirit of the dying man. Perhaps we ask too much from the painter, when we
look for this subtle something, this consciousness of an unseen power; the ex¬
pression of the sorrowing relatives is simply that of decent gravity and subdued
feeling, but were a higher, deeper feeling evoked by the hand of the painter, we
should hail it as the highest triumph of art. This is, nevertheless, a most pathetic
picture. Tlie young wife extended on the couch, her face hidden from view;
the faithful collie, his rough, loving head laid between the rigid feet of his dying
master ; the poor wounded captive tightly bound, and sitting on the ground with
drooping head ; the silent gravity with which the soldiers look on the paiaful scene
before them ;—all this makes up a whole, calculated to call out the best sympathies
of the spectator; and is manipulated with such skill and unity of design and
colouring, as to make a noble picture every way worthy of Mr Herdman's reputation.
No. 557, South Octagon, is Mr Douglas's principal picture, " Wishart preaching
against Mariolatry." Mr Douglas's taste and knowledge lie in the delineation of
mediaeval times. This work is the most ambitious picture we remember having seen
from his easel; there is an immense deal of life and spirit in it. The colouring
is, however, harsh and unpleasing ; and there is no background to relieve the effect
of the throng of listeners crowding and filling up the foreground. The preacher,
Wishart, stands upon a raised platform, and with hot intolerance is preaching to the
crowd before him ; a Franciscan friar is listening, with hardly suppressed indignation.
There is gi'eat diversity of expression and feeling in the listeners, some are amazed
and scandalised, others are merely amused. Few among them seem to take to heart
the searching words of the preacher ; whose truths, however, wUl not be allowed to fall
to the ground unheeded and unfruitful.
In the Sculpture Eoom are two pictures of great merit, by foreign artists.
No. 699, "A Hunting Scene in Spitzbergen," by Luder Beckmann. The dying
bear and its cubs are truthfully rendered and the accessories are carefully and well
filled in.
No. 719, "Queen Mary before her Execution," by Gonzalo Salva, is a suffi¬
ciently hackneyed theme. The principal figure, the queen, is that of an aged and grief-
worn woman ; her attendants are weeping round her in the usual stereotyped atti-
62 THE ATTEMPT.
tudes. There is nothing striking in this picture, or indicative of much vigour of
thought or execution; it is, however, well painted; and there is some life and
interest in the group on the right of the queen,—a group of lordly prelates, who,
their heads being safe upon their shoulders, can afford, in all the pride of Prelacy
and Protestantism, to look upon the sad fate of poor Mary with a mingled feeling of
arrogance and cold brutality, which the painter has delineated with great skill.
Returning to the Great Room, we have only left ourselves time to notice three
small paintings; all, however, showing talent of the highest order.
No. 333, " Touchstone and Audrey," by J. Pettie. This is the most com¬
plete picture in the Exhibition. It leaves nothing to be desired in its delineation;
the artist and the poet are at one, and Shakespeare's famous creation is before
us, by the aid of the painter's genius, exactly as the poet expressed it in words.
The two figures are standing in a sylvan scene, with the forest of Ardennes in the
background. Audrey, in the midst of her sheep, is a perfect rendering of Shake¬
speare's Audrey. As for Touchstone,—all the world knows Touchstone, and here he
is. "We almost hear them speak. " Doth my simple features content you, Audrey ?"
says Touchstone, stroking his chin. Audrey,—" Your features ! Lord warrant us !
what features 1"
No. 361, " The Signal," by the late John Phillip. A Spanish girl drawing
back a curtain, and throwing down a rose to her lover. This is a gem; but
we need not expatiate on its beauties ; our readers are well acquainted with the
works of this great artist, and there is not here much story to tell.
No. 297, "They couldn't say their Canitch," by Erskine Nicol. This is
the only picture we have from this artist, who grows more chary year by
year of sending specimens to his native town. The scene of this picture is placed
in the far north. Three boys, admirably painted, are before an old desk, half-chipped
away by the penknives of the scholars, in the agonised attempts to get the better of
their lessons. These three boys are stiU in the throes of committing their task to
memory. The shock-headed boy in the middle begins to see daylight; but as for the
other two, the one is struggling with vmconquered difficulties, and the other has
passively resigned himself to all the hopelessness of utter despair. This is not a
picture of much pretension, but it is worked out with the artist's usual care and
characteristic humour.
We should like, before concluding our notice for the present, to call our readers'
attention to a small picture of great simplicity and beauty, No. 531, in the South
Octagon, " Mother and Child," by A. Jourdan.    The softness and delicacy of the
1
THE ATTEMPT. 63
contours of both mother and child ; the natural, simple attitude and sweet face; the
fine artistic feeling throughout the whole picture, are perfectly charming, and a most
useful study for our young artists.
We hope to resiime this notice next month, when we shall have an opportunity
of reviewing the landscapes and water-colours, of which we have a more than usually
large number of great merit and beauty. M. E. T.
1 a r 1 i n g.
From the German of Spitta.
What mean ye to iceep, and to break mine heart ?"
What mean ye with your weeping.
To break mine heart in twain.
When still in God's good keeping
United we remain.
Kor time nor place can sever
The bond that binds us two ;
God shields the love for ever
That 'neath His favour grew.
II.
Clasp hands once more, though never
Again on earth we meet,
Yet soul in soul for ever,
Our union is complete.
We gaze in silence, knowing
We ne'er may gaze again;
Though friend from friend is going,
With God we botli remain.
64 THE ATTEMPT.
III.
We say, " I here, thou yonder,"
" Thou goest, I must stay !"
Yet we, where'er we wander,
Are one in Him alway.
We call our lives divided
And say a last adieu !
But both will still be guided
By One whose word is true.
IV.
Then why this bitter weeping 1
Why all this weight of woe 1
We know in whose good keeping
We both may onward go.
Still 'neath His watchful guiding.
Supported by His hand.
To keep our feet from sliding,
We reach our Fatherland.
Then let this parting season,
With heavy sorrow stored,
Be but another reason
To bind us to the Lord.
If Christ, our Elder Brother,
Be first within the heart.
We ne'er can lose each other
Though here in pain we part.
Dido.
THE   ATTEMPT. 65
Chapter XIII.
" I would be a mermaid fair ;
I would sing to myself the whole of the day ;
With a comb of pearl I would comb my hair;
And still as I combed I would sing and say,—
Who is it loves me, who loves not me ?"—Tennyson.
Need   I   say  how our old  friend,   the General,   welcomed Una as a daughter
indeed 1  and old Grace Sandyside declared they were made for each other, Mr
Brand and Miss Undine ? and how for a time all Una's wilfulness seemed lost in
the wish to please Brand 1    He had told her all his story, I found, and far from
feeling the jealousy that a smaller heart might have experienced, she studied how to
make her love heal all the old wound in his heart, so that it should never ache again
with the long-past pain. I wondered sometimes how she had contrived to blind herself
so long to his affection for her; but her own love had shut her eyes to his, and a revised
edition of the story of poor Mary Evans had been imparted to her by that " little
bird,"—-bird of prey and plunder, which flutters around most places where human
beings do congregate.    Una never told me who had told her, or what had been told
her; but from an expression that escaped her one day I came to this conclusion.
Brand was now, of course, a daily guest; none of the total absorption in each
other's society, to the exclusion of all other considerations, which marks the conduct
of some  affianced   pairs,   was manifest in him and Una;  their love  seemed  to
make them more considerate and kind of others, and though Brand, like Lorenzo
of old—
" Knew whose gentle hand was on the latch,
Before the door had given her to his eyes ;"
and though Una seemed to live in his looks, through those long sweet August days,
I never felt myself in the way, and can hardly say I felt jealous of the place Brand
had in my darling's heart.    I knew he was well worthy to fill it.
In all the numerous small cares and pleasures and thoughts connected with Una's
engagement, I had almost forgotten the approaching advent of the 11th Hussars.   Not
so St Michael's in general.    Not so the six Miss Screwburys, who bloomed out in all
sorts of lovely novelties in the way of costumes and ex ibited a sudden passionate
I
March.
66 THE ATTEMPT,
devotion for an elderly cousin who lived at Wemborough, and had a nephew in the
above-mentioned gallant corps. The distance was certainly a draw-back; but it is
wonderful what can be done by energy and perseverance, and twice a week, at least,
some of the sisters found their way to Wemborough. So Rose Glynne said, at least,
one day when she came to call, alighting from her horse, and rushing in in her
habit to embrace and congratulate Una.
" Vi's as bad as ever !" were nearly her first words, and then I thought, self-
reproachfully, that some time had passed since the eventful day when Brand asked
CTna, and that I had never repeated my visit to Violet.
" What's the matter with her, Rose ?" said Una.
" Oh she's stai-k, staring mad; wants to bury herself alive in a convent, and cut
off her hair, and wear a rope round her waist. It is only the natural end to what
she has been going on with for a year or two ; but she has worn herself to a shadow !"
and a real shadow of sisterly sorrow came over Rose's own careless face as she spoke,
improving it greatly.
Una was astonished, as I had said nothing to her about Violet's purpose. But I
asked Rose if her sister still persisted in her intention.
" Of course she does. Mamma is distracted, and has cried her eyes out nearly.
I can hardly believe Vi really means to go in for that gloomy old grave at Wem¬
borough, and those old witches of sisters. By-the-bye, Mary, T wish you would
come over and speak to her, I can do nothing with her, I'm sure, and no more can
Mamma."
Here followed a step in the hall, and Brand came in, whereupon Rose started
up to take leave, but I would not let her go so soon, and took her to the book-room,
leaving the lovers in possession of the drawing-room. In the book-room we sat
down, and I asked Rose what had put a convent life into Violet's head.
" ' I cannot tell, so mot I thrive,'" quoted Rose, pretending to laugh, but not
very successfully. " I thought it was the Reverend Ambrose, but I met him a week
ago, when I was walking, and he asked me if the report about my sister was true.
This set me up, of course, as I thought he was the source of all her absurd ideas, and
I answered, rather hotly, I'm afraid, that I supposed he know better than any one
how true it was, and who had taught her to think that such sacrifices were required
of her. He looked quite astonished, and said he should be grieved indeed, if any
one could think he had suggested such a step to Miss Glynne, or approved of it in
any way. He seemed so much in earnest, that I could'nt help believing him. No,
Vi has evolved it out of her own consciousness; there's no mistake about that, but
THE ATTEMPT. 67
where will it end ? Oh, you may think I haven't mvich feeling, Mary, because I
used to chaflf Vi about her way of going on ; but I'm as wretched about her now as
I can be."
And indeed Rose looked so; but then she began to discourse about
Wemborough and the gallant 11th, and told me they had seen a good deal of
Captain Maryon in the season, and soon was laughing heartly over the precautions
of Miss Wylde, our old governess, who had set up an establishment of her own at
St Michael's, and having a holy horror of men in general, and men of war in
particular, avoided, with her maiden troop, the road that led to Wemborough, and
caused all the blinds on tliat side of the house to be strictly kept down.
At length she rose to take leave for the second time, saying she was sure Una
and Mr Hilary were wearying for me in the drawing-room ; and having promised to
come and see Violet next day, I said good-bye to her. The drawing-room was
naturally empty when I returned to it. Brand having taken Una out. That evening
was to be spent at the hall; and knowing my two young people would not turn up
till five o'clock approached, I went out to take a turn among the pines. I thought
as I went of Una, how quickly her sweet young life was drifting into a safe bright
haven of home happiness, and, absorbed in such thoughts, I did not observe a tall
figure advancing to meet me, till I heard Captain Maryon's voice, and saw him
close beside me. I held out my hand with'some hurried words of greeting, and he
walked on beside me, talking easily of one thing and another, till at length he said—
" Will you convey my congratulations to your sister 1 I have heard of her en¬
gagement ; such news, you know, travels fast. Hilaiy is certainly the luckiest fellow
in the world."
He did not speak hastily, bitterly, as Brand had spoken that day under the
beeches. His tone was perfectly quiet and friendly, and yet I distrusted it, as I had
distrusted him from the beginning.
Could I forget what he had said to Una the last time we saw him ? Bold^
resolute, unscrupulous,—I had read those three words in his face long ago, and I
could not help wishing in my secret heart that the corps, whose presence at
Wemborough made itself felt in St Michael's, had been sent, to put it mildly, some¬
where else.    Why not to India, or some other distant clime ?
But I gave an appropriate answer to his speech ; and just then, tiirning a cor¬
ner, we saw two unmistakeable figures before us—Brand and Una, My companion
saw them as soon as I did, so there was nothing for it but to go on and overtake
them.    I noticed they were not walking close together, as was their wont; every
68 THE ATTEMPT.
line of Una's figure, and every motion was so familiar to me, that her very step, be¬
fore I saw her face, told me something was wrong. And when we came up to them,
and I saw Brand's disturbed face, and Una's little set of the mouth and turn of the
neck, my suspicions were confirmed. Brand was startled when he saw his friend,
apparently, but shook hands fi-ankly and kindly; and Una, I was rather surprised to
see, did the same. There was a momentary withdrawal on her part, as if she would
merely have bowed, and then, seeming to think better of it, she gave him her hand,
hardly raising her eyes to his face while she did so. Then, with a sudden motion,
she put her arm through mine.
" I was just getting tired, Molly," she said ; " we will go home together."
And she led me off, hardly pausing for a parting word with Brand,—not hers,
but mine, for I said I hoped we should see him at five as usual; and he also said, " I
hope so," glancing at Una, without speaking to her. I felt obliged to extend my
invitation to Captain Maryon, but he excused himself; and then I yielded to Una's
pressing arm, and we went off.
" What a hurry you are in, child," I said, " and what is the matter ?" For
now I saw how flushed her cheeks were, though it was a cool afternoon, and how
her eyes were shining, with a sort of defiant light I had not seen for a long time.
" Surely Brand and you have not quaiTelled 1"
Una did not answer for a few minutes, her feet passed swiftly along, treading
down the pine-twigs as if with a sense of pleasure.    At length she spoke—
" Brand and I are getting to understand each other a little better, Molly, that's
all."
" It doesn't look like it," I responded.
" Oh yes, we understand each other now to perfection. Why, I thought Brand
was in love with me, found his pleasure in making me happy, and seeing me so ;
and as for Brand, he seems to have thought I was only created for the purpose of
doing his pleasure, and having no wish but his.    Now we are both undeceived."
" What do you mean, Una 1" I said, wondering what cause of trouble could
have come between them.    " If ever a man was in love. Brand is."
" I tell you I thought so myself till to-day."
" This is some absurd misunderstanding."
" Is it t It is an understanding between us," said Una. " I am quite glad you
came up when you did, and yet it might have been better if you had not; our under¬
standing would have been clearer."
" Tell me what it is all about 1"
THE ATTEMPT. 69
" I will, darling," said Una, speaking more like herself. " In the first place,
the General is going to give a ball. In the second place, Brand won't let me enjoy
it.    In the thii-d place, I am determined that I will."
Here she stopped, but by degrees I drev/ from her that Brand had either begged
as a favour, or demanded as a right, that any so-called " round dances " in which Una
took part should be reserved for him, as he did not wish her to dance them with
any one else. Una was almost ashamed, I think, of naming the cause of war ; but
now it was out, and we had gained the gate of Lawrence Lodge, and gone into the
drawing-room together.
" Una," I said, " you won't let a trifle like this make a quarrel between Bi-and
and you.    Think, darling, how foolish it would be."
Una had seated herself in one of her favourite low chairs, and thrown off her
hat j her bright hair was ruffled over her brow, which wore a look of trouble and
pain I had hardly ever seen there before.
" You call it a trifle, Molly, and so did Brand. My pleasure may be a trifle
to him, but it is no trifle to me to see how indifierent he is to it, as long as he can get
his own way.    It is sheer jealousy, and a wish to tie me up from enjoying myself."
" Una !" I said, in a tone full of reproach, and which she felt keenly, I saw, for
suddenly a sense of wrong-doing in speaking so of Brand seemed to come over her,
her face clouded over still more, and for the first time since that rainy July evening,
she burst into tears—tears half of pain and a tender remorse, but half of something
else, anger or vexation. They were hardly di-ied when we heard Brand's step
coming up the walk, and Una bit her lips and went to sit in the window seat with
her face turned from the door. Her first impulse had been to run upstairs, but in
so doing she must have encountered Brand in the hall. In he came, and out I went
to demand tea, hoping that by the time I came back peace would be made.
" Sweet hope, but vain."
Una was still in the window looking out, her face close to the glass, and the
sunset streaming over her yellow masses of hair, and lighting up Brand's chestnut
curls as he sat, putting on, somewhat ineffectually, an air of total indifference, in her
forsaken chair by the writing table. He looked as if he could have whistled, had
he known the air, the scornful old song, soothing to injured lovers—
" If she be not kind to me,
What care I how fair she be."
Not very cheerily or sincerely, though, he was too true a lover for that.    As
70 THE ATTEMPT.
for Una, she was singing, a little defiant habit of old standing with her, humming
snatches of songs with half-murmured words, as she looked oat into the garden and
the vistas of pine beyond; now came a fragment of the Marseillaise, now a few bars
of a waltz, set to some nonsensical words, and last, the air of a little Spanish song
that she had copied from Violet Glynne's music-book three months before. I knew
from whom Yiolet had picked it up, and saw that Brand's quick ear recognised
it; he made a hasty motion as if to turn towards Una, but checked it, and she sang
the whole in a low voice, and then sat silent. The sunset was waning, the red pine
stems were darkening in the twilight, a thrush in the garden was pouring out a
passionate song that we all heard distinctly; not a song of mockery or defiance, the
notes were full and tender, like the " heart's outbreak " of the mellow-voiced mavis ;
—harmony there, discord with us. Una came presently and sat beside me, bending
over some work, as if she wished to make the most of the daylight.
" Industrious child !" I said ; anything to break the silence.
" One must do something," replied Una, bending still closer to her handiwork,
and snapping her thread with a little impatient jerk.
" Well, go and make tea for us," said I, for the cups and saucers had appeared
upon the scene. Una went to make it, handed Brand his cup without looking in
his face, and then returned to her seat beside me. I felt vexed with them both, and
was thinking of leaving them once more alone, when Brand suddenly started up and
came to me to say good evening.
" Nonsense, Brand," I said, " what is taking you away so soon ]" Una neither
moved nor spoke ; her conduct was so childish that many men would have laughingly
ignored it, and thereby have got the better of her; but Brand was inexperienced in the
ways of women, and did not know what to make of her treatment of him. He went
to her and held out his hand, and Una leaned back and looked at him for the first
time, saucily and yet half-angi-ily.
" We are not friends, why should we shake hands?" she said.
" No, we are not "friends," said Brand, " more or less than friends we two must
be for the futuce."
" Then we may dispense with tokens of friendship, till we can make out
whether it is to be more or less,"
" Come with me into the garden. Undine, I want to speak to you," said he.
" It will do no good," said Una; " and your calling me Uncline won't do any
good either.     But if you care for my company, I'll go."
She rose and put on her hat, and marched out of the door, which Brand held
THE ATTEMPT. 71
open for her, and I was left to meditate on her wilfulness and the harm it might do.
She stayed long, and just as I was going upstairs, I heard her come in. Not singing
now, but with a sweet look of mingled triumph and tenderness on her face.
" Well Una," I said, as she came up to me, " I hope Brand lectured you well,
and that you are back on your old footing."
" We have made it up," said Una ; but how they had made it up was left to
conjecture. Next morning when Brand came in, with the old smile in his eyes, Una
ran out to the door to meet him, and spent most of the morning in singing to him,
regardless of the fact that she should have been practising hard at a difficult notturno,
which little Mr Swithley from Wemborough expected to hear next day. The 20th
of Sej)tember was fixed for the ball, and nothing more was said about any difficulty
by Una, nor did Brand mention anything of the kind. Una shone upon him,
morning and even-star both in one ; the little rupture seemed to have ended in more
perfectly cementing and confirming their love.    And I was happy in their happiness.
Mindful of my promise to Rose, I went to Glynne Park again and saw Violet.
I prevailed upon her at last, without saying or asking anything of what had caused
her sudden resolution, to put off any such step as entering a convent, at least for a
few months. She was already leading a life of entire seclusion, refusing all invitations
to go out, so that, as Rose said, half in real vexation, half in pretended anger,
" except for the honour of the thing, she might as well have no sister at all." And
so the time went on, and the 20th of September drew near. O. M.
=-f=
OUR   LIBRARY   TABLE.
The Celtic Origin of Greeh and Latin.     By Thomas Stratton, M.D.
The Gaelic student will hail with pleasure the second edition of The Celtic
Origin of Greek and Latin. The first essay in this volume is on the Celtic Origin
of Latin ; the second on the Celtic Origin of Greek; and the third, on the Celtic
Origin of classical proper names. In these essays the author confines himself to the
Celtic language as represented by the Gaelic of the Highlands and Western Isles of
Scotland. Dr Stratton inclines to the opinion that three-fourths of the Latin
language may be traced to the Celtic, and that nearly one-half of the Greek has the
same origin.    The following are a few words representative of each essay,—Latin
72 THE ATTEMPT.
Cithara, Gaelic Ceathar, a harp ; Latin Mills, Gaelic Mileadli, a soldier ; Latin Opus
Operis, Gaelic Obair, work ; Greek kuon, Gaelic Cu, conn, a dog; Greek pais, Gaelic
paisd, a child. As examples of classical names, we may give Mars, which is the same
word as the Gaelic Ar, battle, and Nymphse, the same as the Gaelic Naomh, holy.
We regret that we cannot give more examples from this curious and interest¬
ing work, but if our readers will provide themselves with the volume, we can safely
promise that the pleasure of their rambles, next autumn in the Highlands, will be
greatly increased.
Leaves from Australian Forests.    By Henry ^^^endall.
Melbourne : George Robertson.
Australia is to most people the type of all that is rough, money-making, and
unromantic. But Mr Jlendall, with a poet's true insight, has penetrated beyond
this hard upper crust, and behold the result. What was harsh before, is softened;
what was uninteresting, becomes picturesque ; what was dry and meaningless, is now
instinct with life and beauty. Neither can the author of these poems be a mere
fanciful dreamer ; for there is in them full evidence of outgiving energy, sympathy
with nature and human nature, and earnest, manly thoiightfulness. We may also
perceive throughout tlie whole volume tokens of refined scholarship, and pure
cultivated taste ; the torch has been kindled at the altars of the highest and
worthiest of the priesthood of poetry.
The Hotel du Petit St Jean.    London : Smith, Elder, & Co.
The scene of this charming story is laid in a country town of Gascony. The
writer evidently knows the south of France well, paints with a delicate and truthful
touch its scenery and its inhabitants, and enters with intelligence and sympathy into the
social, political, and religious feelings of the Gascons. These descriptions of scenery
and manners form an admirable background to the figure of the heroine of the book,
Marie Nadard. Her story, how she loved, and suffered, and at last overcame, is
beautifully and touchingly told. The account at the beginning of the book of the
election, and of a criminal trial turned to political purposes, throw^uch light on
the working of the internal government of France under the Second Empire.
Towards the end, there is a very interesting description of the consecration of a church,
and a sermon preached on the occasion by " one of the greatest oi-ators of the French
Church," which is evidently drawn from life.
THE ATTEMPT. 73
{Concluded from page 54.)
This theory of inseparable association which we have been considering, is only half
of Berkeley's answer to the question of how our visual signs and their actual mean¬
ing are connected. For he goes on to enquire into the cause of this association, and
says, that its cause is the will of God, " the arbitrary imposition of Providence."
I suppose that by " arbitrary" here, he means not only that there is no likeness,
or no connection of cause and effect, but no necessary connection whatever between
the two things. But this hardly agrees with his analogy between sight and language;
for though words are certainly not like the things they stand for, nor caused in any way
by them, yet, on the other hand, no nation ever held a meeting to settle what names
they should call things by, and so invent an entirely arbitrary language. Given the
men and the circumstances, we can see that the language grew, according to
laws which are now, to a certain extent, known.
So, when Berkeley says that faintness and smallness might quite as well mean
nearness, brightness or confusion and straining of the eyes, distance, it is quite true
there is no possible likeness between faintness and distance, etc.; but as to necessary
connection,—from what we know of the laws according to which our sight-pictures are
produced, i.e., the laws of optics and of light, all depending ultimately on the laws of
motion, we are forced to conclude that the whole universe would have to be made
over again on entirely different principles, before faintness could suggest nearness,
brightness distance, etc.
The connection, for us, between the two sets of ideas is that of association;
the connection that underlies the association is that which exists between the
different effects of the same cause, which cause is the Divine Idea. Or, to put it in
another way: the bond that holds together the heap of ideas that make up what we
call a thing, is subjectively, for each man, the association between them which he has
learned in experience; but what holds them together objectively, so as to make them
the same thing for every man, is the one creative thought of which all the sense-
ideas are different outward expressions. It is a connection, therefore, in the nature
of things ; and perhaps this is, after all, the same as Berkeley means, when he says
that the connection is "by the will of God." For if the will of God and the nature
of things do not mean the same, what is the nature of things 1
To Berkeley, indeed, we know they did mean the same.    "We cannot properly
K
April 1871.
74 THE ATTEMPT.
understand this second half of his synthesis, without looking at it in the light of the
general princii)le which lies at the foundation of his philosophy,—a principle of
which this Theory of Vision is only an illustration which he worked out much
more fully than any other part of the subject. He maintains, that instead
of our sense-perceptions being means of communication between us and an
unknown external world, they rare the external world—all the external world
that we can ever have, or know anything about. But it is a necessity for the
human mind to think a cause for everything. The cause that has usually been
thought for our sense-perceptions is some unknown material substance, in which the
sense-qualities are supposed to reside. This supposed noumenal matter Berkeley
shows to be an unnecessary abstraction, and also to be conti-ary to the analogy
of the only kind of cause and effect of which we have any experience,—the
relation between ourselves, and our thoughts and actions. According to this
analogy, spirit is the only cause we know; and as there is no proof of any kind
that matter is the cause of our sense-perceptions, why should we not suppose that
spirit is the cause of them too 1 Matter, then, is only what is known, perceived by
mind ; " its esse is percipV " The whole choir of heaven and furniture of earth
have no existence out of a mind." This does not mean, of course, the mind of any
one individual, but the universal mind, the mind of God; and this is the same as the
Scriptural account of the creation, " Through faith we understand that the worlds
were framed by the word of God, so that things which are seen were not made of
things which do appear."
The analogy of language comes in again very usefully here, as applied to the
whole of our sense-perceptions—the material world, that is;—for if it is at first
difficult to conceive that that material world, which we see changing, and working,
as if independently, according to laws which we can discover, can yet be dependent
for its very existence on a perceiving mind, it may help us to reflect that language
has what might be called an independent existence, in so far as it grows and
changes according to laws which are discoverable by the same process of observation
and induction as that by which we discover physical laws, and which, so far as they
have yet been ascertained, are quite as certain in their operation. And yet language,
we can see at once, has not only no meaning, but no existence apart from its func¬
tion of expressing thought; it is impossible to conceive it existing as language at all,
apart from a mind to understand it. And so, when the race which used a language
has disappeared, we say the language is dead ; as long as there are any men who can
read the records of the dead nation, the language is not dead, for it still speaks, it
THE  ATTEMPT. 75
stUl expresses thought to some mind ; but if there are no records left, if there is no
communication of thought going on by means of the language, it has gone utterly
out of existence.
It is interesting to notice by the way, the confirmation, of a negative kind at
least, which some of Berkeley's ideas receive from modern physical science. Physi¬
cal science now tells us that all we can ever know of material things is their pheno¬
mena ; we may amuse ourselves, if we like, with ingenious theories as to what
matter in itself is, but we must discard all such preconceived metaphysical notions
if we are to make physical discoveries. Again, physical science is gradually showing
that all the supposed occult material causes of physical phenomena are only different
forms of motion, a thing which must have a cause ; but the cause has never been
found in the material universe as yet, and does not seem likely to be. Even gravita¬
tion, which was almost the only one of the old-fashioned occult causes which we had
left, seems to bid fair to resolve itself, by way of electricity, into just another modi¬
fication of the universal motion.
To put Berkeley's main principle in more modern language : There is only one
substance, and that is Spirit, Thought, God, and the sense-given universe is the out¬
ward expression for us of certain of God's thoughts ; or, from the other side, our sense-
perceptions are collections of symbols through which these thoughts are made known
to us. So that the study of the material world is, as Bacon calls it, " the interpreting of
nature;" it is trying to read those thoughts of God rightly. Mankind have always
been attempting this interpretation of nature, with more or less success ; the history
of these attempts is the history of all human science and philosojihy.
Comte held that there were three stages in human philosophy. First, the
"theological," in which all phenomena were explained by a supposed supernatural power
working in them, as in the old Greek mythology. Then the " metaphysical," in which
phenomena are explained by laws, and an abstraction called " Nature." Then, very
strangely, the third stage of human progress, according to him, is to consist in going
back to what was before even the first attempt at an explanation, the mere observation
of phenomena. May we not rather believe in and hope for a third stage of
human thought, in which the empty abstractions of the second shall be filled
up and explained, so that men shall see the divine thought as clearly in the
laws, as they now see the laws in the phenomena ? One can trace the same
progi-ess in individuals. Children often think that the thunder is literally God's
voice, that the sunset clouds are really the golden gates of the heavenly Jerasalem,
the   stars,   angels'   eyes  watching   us   as  we   sleep.      Then,   perhaps,   the  glory
76 THE ATTEMPT.
gradually " fades into the light of common day," " the heavens go fui-ther off and
become astronomical." But when that dreary but necessary stage has been
fought through, the faith which has been gradually won—rather, gradually given—
can see the " gold chains by which the whole round earth is bound about the
feet of God." And the childish fancies come back again, fancies no longer, but the
truest and most real of all facts.
But there is another side to this question—
" The sun, the moon, the stars, the seas, the hills, and the plains,- -
Are not these, oh soul, the vision of Him who reigns ? "
—that is the one side; but on the other—
" Earth and these solid stars, this weight of body and limb,—
Are they not sign and symbol of thy division from Him ?"
The " time-vesture" of God often conceals more than it reveals, sometimes
conceals without revealing at all. All the material things which form this veil
are held together and expressed for iis, as we have seen, by the eloquent and dazzling
sense of sight (so that it is sometimes used to mean them all, as in the contrast
between faith and sight). And this sight has so much power over us, that,
not content with expressing the material world for us, it invades the pro¬
vince of thought, and insists on our thinking by pictures, and speaking in words
which describe pictures. We feel that, because we have bodies ourselves, our
thoughts must have bodies too ; and so they must; but to begin with, we generally
make these picture bodies very badly, so that they do not half express the thoughts
they belong to, and then we often go on to forget altogether that they are living
bodies, with a soul of thought inside them, and never try to think any further
than the pictures, the symbols which were meant to express thoughts, and which are
of no use unless they do.
So it is often with the sense given symbols of the universe. Instead of looking
through the symbols to the realities, we stop short at the symbols, empty and mean¬
ingless as they are in themselves, and live in a world of shadows, which we take
for substance,—live, as has often been said, in a long night of dreams, " till the scent
of the morning air summons us to our still home, and dreamy night becomes awake,
and day."
We cannot enter into the why of this fatal tendency to take signs for realities;
to ask this leads us to that insoluble problem to which one always comes at the
bottom of every question,—the existence of evil in man and nature. But the fact
is very plain, and we can understand, so far, the moral use of these sense-symbols—
THE ATTEMPT. 77
that their tendency to hold us down is a trial, and, if resisted, a training for us
while in this life. What we have to do hei-e, is to learn to see through their
mingled "splendour and gloom."
Not that we shall ever be perfectly successful in this life ; it will always be
" through a glass darkly,"—
" Life, like a dome of many coloured glass,
Stains the white radiance of eternity,
TiU death tramples it to fragments."
It is just a long struggle to walk by faith and not by sight, " till the day of eternal
brightness shall break, and the shadows of symbols shall flee away."
Grace.
The church bells are ringing,
And nature is singing.
All things rejoice on this bright Easter-Day;
Clu'ist hath arisen.
Burst the bonds of His prison :
O sing to the Lord with rejoicing this day !
Dark was the night.
But Christ sent us light.
Light to awaken us this Easter-Day ;
Thanks be to Thee,
For Thy goodness to me,
In raising a Saviour on this holy day.
Sound psaltery and lute,
With cymbal and flute,
A psalm of thanksgiving let us raise on this day ;
Shout, shout, O fair sky !
Earth answer the cry,
Christ, Christ hath arisen this bright Easter-Day !
George du Menur.
78 THE ATTEMPT.
|s i^txt or is i^tu not r ^imit I0 gfligicrus ^oUxntxon?
" Who art thou that judgest another man's servant ? to his own master he standeth
or falleth."    This seems to me the key-note of all religious toleration.    In other
words, I am responsible to none but to God, and to my own conscience, for my
religious opinions.    To God and to my own conscience I am responsible ; but I
must face both the grandeur and the dread of that responsibility alone.    No man
can come to me and take my burden of responsibility on his shoulders; and there¬
fore no man has a right to dictate to me in what manner I am to discharge myself
of that responsibility.    True, my way of looking at that responsibility, my way of
discharging my duty to God and my conscience, may seem to you utterly false and
absurd, at variance with everything that you believe to be truth, and with every
conception which you have formed of God's nature and laws ; nevertheless, while it
holds good, that you cannot be mediator between God and me, that I, with my
responsibility, must stand at the last day, face to face with God, as much alone with
Him as if the universe held none but Him and me, so long this is a matter in which
no stranger may intermeddle.    I do not suppose that any Protestant will seriously
dispute this; it is the basis of all Protestantism, and I do not see, having granted
it, how any Protestant can stoj) short of its legitimate conclusion and outcome, a
universal religious toleration.     A clear recognition of this principle, that in all my
relations to God I stand apart from all the rest of the universe, face to face with
Him, as much alone before Him as if I were the only being He had ever created,
seems to me to be the foundation of all the religious liberty for which the reformers
fought and suffered.    All persecuting principles are therefore antagonistic to the
very essence of Protestantism.     They are, on the other hand, the legitimate result
and outcome of the principles of the Eoman Catholic Church.     Its fundamental
principle is, that the church is mediator between God and me, that it takes my
responsibility upon its shoulders, and stands between me and God.    If this be so,
then the church's claim to dictate to me in all matters of religion is a reasonable
and a valid one, and the Roman Catholic Church is only carrying out her principles
when she uses all means in her power, even to the scaiFold and the stake, to enforce
obedience  to  her  commands.     If she, and not I, is responsible to  God for the
salvation of my soul, then she is doing her very best for me, when,  if I prove
refractory under gentler treatment, she tortures my body, if by any means she may
save my soul; slie is only doing what any kind and wise parent  would do,  whose
THE ATTEMPT. 79
child's limb was so shattered that without amputation death must follow, and who
sacrifices the limb to save the life. It was no old world barbarism that led to the
massacre of St Bartholomew and the stakes at Smithfield ; it was only the legitimate
outcome of the church's principles, and while she holds these principles, it must be
their consistent application still. As a Protestant, however, and believing that I
hold my responsibility direct from God, and declining to render it up to any hands
but His, I put in my claim for myself, for the freedom of my individual C07iscie7ice,
for the world, for a universal religious toleration.
Who am I, trying with my poor faculties to spell out the letters of God's
alphabet, that I should say to my brother, " See, I have spelt it right, this is God's
thought, this is the tiiith, and all else is falsehood 1" May not he, too, be spelling out
in a different way from mine the answer to Pilate's question ? Both of us, perhaps,
groping in the dark as Pilate was, with the answer as close to us as it was to him,
though he saw it not.
But here I must draw a broad distinction. While I maintain that no man has
a right to interfere, if, " after the way which some call heresy, so worship I the God
of my fathers," that for my personal belief, and my personal worship, I am re¬
sponsible to God and to my own conscience alone ; that in theology, my relations
as man to my Maker, I am absolutely free, the case is altogether changed, when
theology is merged in ethics—when religion ceases to be a matter between me and
God, and comes to be a matter between me and my fellowmen—when I change
from the first to the second table of the law. The very principle of a universal
religious toleration implies, that I am not at liberty to use this freedom of mine to
the detriment of another's freedom. Thus, while no man has a right to say to the
Roman Catholic Church, "You shall not hold the principle that the chui'ch stands
as mediator between God and its members," the State has a perfect right to say,
" You shall not so carry out that principle as to interfere with the liberty of my
subjects, for that is a matter not between your own conscience and God, but between
you and your fellowmen." It may be an article of my creed that we should have
all things in common, and while it remains simply an article of my creed, no man
has a right to interfere; but if I proceed to carry out my principles by laying
violent hands on my neighbour's property, the State has a perfect right to say, " Thou
shalt not steal," and I have no right to complain of persecution, if a too practical
application of my principle lands me in the Calton Jail. I think that a clear
recognition, that the very fundamental principle of a universal religious toleration
necessarily implies  that I  am not at liberty to use this freedom of mine to the
80
THE ATTEMPT.
detriment of a brother's freedom, tends greatly to simplify many of the practical
difficulties with which the cai'rying out of the principle of universal religious
toleration is confessedly surrounded. The accurate adjustment of the two principles,
the exact poise of the scales, in particular cases, becomes often a matter of extreme
intricacy and delicacy. It was on the adjustment of these two principles that the
great controversy, which ended in the disruption of the Free from the Established
Church, turned in 1843 ; and it is on these two principles that such questions as a
national establishment of religion, and the teaching of religion in our national
schools, hangs in the present day.
It is often objected to the principle of unlimited religious toleration, first,
that it condemns a State as a State to have no religion; and, second, that it condemns
a church as a church to have no creed. I do not think that, rightly interpreted, it
does either.
Let us take first the case of the state. Has a state a right to establish and
endow one particular form of worship as a national church, and to levy the funds for
the support of that church from the community at large; a community many of
whom are opposed in principle to the church so established 1 Is this, or is it not
consistent with universal religious toleration? I believe that there is nothing
inconsistent with religious toleration in svich an establishment, and that a state has
a right so to establish and endow a church. As the subject of a state, I pay my
proportion to the national funds, in return for the protection given to me by the
state, and quite irrespective of the objects to which these funds may be applied. I
may be a peace-man, and altogether disapprove of a standing army; but while I
remain the subject of a state, protected by a standing army, I must pay my share
towards its support, whether in my individual capacity I desire that protection or
not. As a subject of a state, I must merge my individuality, my personal likes and
dislikes in a mighty whole. I personally may utterly disappi'ove of many of the
ways in which the national funds are expended, but that is not the question. The
state says, " I will protect your rights, in return you must support my institu¬
tions." If I agree to the bargain, I have no right to grumble, though some of those
institutions do not fall in with my individual predilections. No state has a right
to say to me, " This is the national church, and it must be your church;" but I
think a state has a right to say, " If you accept of my protection, you must pay
your share to the support of my institutions," and I do no not think that it altei-s the
case that a national church should be one of them. I think our Lord embodied
this princijile in His reply to the question, " Is it lawful to give tribute  to Caesar
THE ATTEMPT. 81
or no ]"—for He could by no means have approved of many of the institutions of the
Roman empire, and yet His answer was, "Render unto Caesar the things which are
Caesar's, and unto God the things which are God's."
I think that to say that a state as a state has not a right to a religion, is to
turn the tables and say, " I claim universal religious toleration from you for myself
as an individual, but I deny your right to claim the same toleration from me as a state.
I, as an individual, may select my own religion, but you as a state must have none."
Would this not be in fact the worst form of tyranny, the tyranny of a democracy 1
The questions, which are such fruitful subjects of controversy in these days,
whether it is most expedient for the state to establish one church, or to assist all,
or whether the best service it can now render religion is to leave it alone, do not, I
think, touch the principle of the state's right to establish a church, but only bear on
the expediency of a particular application of that principle at the present time. I
shall therefore not enter on them, further than to say, that my personal feeling is,
that it is not only the right, but the duty, and the privilege of a Christian state to
acknowledge, by the support of religion, in some form or other, from the national
funds, her national fealty, to the great Head of church and state, her national subjec¬
tion to the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords.
The question of the right of a state to teach religion in our national schools,
comes, of course, under the same princijjle ; and here, I think, the matter of expedi¬
ency is much simplified by the fact that here (as far as Protestants are concerned at
least) there is no question of sect. We want no creeds, or catechisms, or human
explanations. It is for the teaching of the Bible, and the Bible alone that I would
plead in our national schools. Of course, the principles of religious toleration re¬
quire here also a " conscience clause," that such instruction should not be compul¬
sory on any; but surely it is the duty of a Christian state to put in the power of
its children to learn in its schools, not the wisdom of this world only, but that wis¬
dom which is able to make them wise unto salvation ; not such knowledge only as
will give them a successful life, but the knowledge which will crown a successful
life with a triumphant death. There is a noble sentence in Trench's book on words,
in which he asks, " Cannot we instruct a child, cannot we teach it geography, or
arithmetic, or grammar quite independently of the Scriptures ]" and answers, " No
doubt you may, but can you * educate' without bringing moral and spiritual forces
to bear upon the mind and affections of the child 1 The putting in is indeed most
needful, that is, the child must be instructed as well as educated, but not instructed
instead of educated."
L
April 1871.
oj THE ATTEMPT.
I have spoken now of the first objection made to the principle of unlimited re¬
ligious toleration, viz., that it condemns a state as a state to have no religion.
I should like now to say a few words in answer to the second objection, viz., that it
condemns a church as a chui'ch to have no creed. Here, I think, a great mistake
is often made by those who profess extreme liberalism within the walls of the
chui'ch. They seem to forget that it is essential to the very existence of a church,
or any other society, as a corporate body, that there should be certain principles,
make them as broad as you v/ill, on which its members are agreed, otherwise the
very existence of a church, or of any other kind of corporate body, is an impos¬
sibility. The members of a professedly Christian church must at least believe in
Christ, and those who do not so believe have no right to complain of exclusion
from a society of which such belief is the very essence, We do not judge you, your
belief or non-belief lies between your own conscience and your God ; to your own
master you must stand or fall, but our society, our church is founded on this be¬
lief, and only those who so believe can form part of it.
Many men in these days, make in this way, a screen, of the principles of religious
toleration, under which to teach within the walls of a church opinions subversive to the
fundamental principles of the church to which they profess to belong, and in direct con¬
tradiction of the creeds they have signed. Should the church find them out, and refuse
to retain them within her pale, immediately they raise a cry of persecution, and of
danger to the " freedom of the individual conscience ;" but they raise this cry on
altogether false grounds, thei'e is no more persecution in a church excluding from
her pale those who, having voluntarily signed her creeds, would still subvert her
fundamental principles, than there is in a general expelling a mutinous soldier from
his camp. We would say to such men, " Yes, you have every right to the unfettered
freedom of your individual conscience; we neither judge nor condemn you, but do
not make your freedom an excuse for falsehood. Christ needs no forced recruits in
His army ; but what shall be said of the man who has voluntarily taken the soldier's
sacrament, and then, in the thick of the fray, has iirged his personal freedom as a
reason for striking with the enemy ?"
But while condemning those who would thus abuse the principle of religious
toleration, and falsely seek to deduce from it, that, because, in their opinion, a church
must be a shoreless ocean, and has no right to a fixed creed, therefore they are at
liberty to sign formulas which they do not believe, and to remain in the communion
of a church whose principles they do their utmost to subvert; may we not, on the
other hand, turn to the Church of Christ, and say, " Do not give these men any
THE   ATTEMPT. 83
excuse ; do not let them say " it is only a matter of degree, no one believes all the
creed they sign, we only disbelieve a little more than the others." Surely the
Christian church should drop out of her creeds all non-essentials, all matters of mere
opinion and speculation, that no honest, Christian man agreeing with her in all
essentials should still have, either to stretch his conscience by signing formulas he
only half believes, to fossilize opinions only half-worked out, or else to remain alto¬
gether outside her pale.
Surely the Christian Church should go on ever more and more " lengthening
her cords and strengthening her stakes," drawing more and more into her wide
bosom those that are without, paying her allegiance to her Divine Head more and
moi'e unfettered from within as from without, more and more approaching to the
grand consummation, one broad, united Fne Church of our Lord and Saviour Jesus
Christ.
But, alas, we are far from that consummation yet; by and bye it will come and
will not tarry, but we may have long to wait; in the meanwhile, let us " possess
our souls in patience," and as in this world, evil is but the dark background
of the picture throwing out good in stronger relief, nay, the necessary condition,
without which good itself could never rise to the highest good, as the redemption
itself had never been but for the sin from which we are redeemed, so let us make
the present confusions and differences the background for a gi'and, universal,
Christian toleration; the occasion and opportunity for the exercise of that
divine charity which " beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all things,
endureth all things," even a charity which " never faileth," remembering always
that for us as for others it is still true, tliat " now we see through a glass darkly,
but thtn face to face, that now we know in part, but then shall we know, even as
also we are known." Jeanie Morison.
pojial Scollislj l^tabcmn ^djtbitmix for 1871.
SECOND   NOTICE.
In resuming, in this month's number, our notice of the Exhibition of 1871, we shall
first direct our attention to the landscapes ; and we may remark, that whatever
deficiency may be observable in the historical paintings, in number or quality, no
disappointment will be felt in this respect with the landscapes, which are both
numerous and excellent.    And this is the more encouraging to those who hold dear
84
THE ATTEMPT.
the advancement of Scottish Art, for death has been of late busy among our
ai'tists, and it is gratifying to observe that they who, a few years ago, were second in
the rank, are now stepping foremost, and are able to hold their own with any school
of painting, whether at home or abroad. In every finer excellence of this art, we
can fairly assert that the Scottish school of landscape painters is not surj^assed by
any. We need hardly remark, that the love of nature for herself is a taste of
modem growth. To the ancient mind, nature was but the background, a place to
hold a certain man, his interests, his passions, his enjoyments,—man was everything,
nature nothing. The sea, the mountains, the plains, were nothing to Homer,
except as the wrath of Achilles filled them and vivified them. But now we are
taught by a purer, a higher, a more ennobling taste that natui-e clothes herself with
beauty for her own regalement, and that man is merely the spectator, the humble,
wondering admirer of all this loveliness and grandeur. In the works of none of our
artists is this quiet reverence for nature's self more evident than in those of Waller
Paton. Nature at peace, nature crowned with the regal magnificence of an autumnal
sunset, or the glory of a summer's eve, brilliantly illuminated with golden purples and
crimsoned greys,—these are the glorious tints he delights in. We are at a loss to fijc
upon the scene that best illustrates his genius. Whether we should take " By the
Burnside, Glencloy Arran," with all its soft, rich summer radiance,—the wimpling
burn, so clear and sparkling, that the pebbles lie visible ever so far beneath the
surface, graduallylosing itself in the far distance; or the "Outlet of Loch Achray," with
the light breaking over the distant mountains ; or " Brodick Bay, Arran," with the
beautifvd, animated foreground, and out in the far beyond the broad Atlantic,
suggesting the immensity of the trackless deep, while here, in the beautiful bay,
the sea lies sleeping peacefully beside mother Earth, as the child at rest on its
mother's bosom. These three pictures are all full of sweet poetiy and sentiment,
and it would be hard for us to tell to which we would give the preference.
Mr Bough has this year contributed no less than nine landscapes: we shall call
attention only to the two principal ones; although No 362, Great Room, "The Broomie-
law, Glasgow," might have been painted by Turner; and No. 233, " The Beach at
Sunset," a small thing, throws a light upon all around ; and No. G93, Sculpture
Room, " The Field of Bannockburn," is a most perfect little landscape. Nevertheless,
we must turn from these and ask our readers to examine with us No. 62, North
Octagon, " Saint John's Vale, Cumberland," a most lovely picture, where, upon the
Cumberland hills, we have the most beautiful rays of sunlight, piercing through the
passing clouds, and disjiersing the gathering mists—a fair background to the peaceful,
THE ATTEMPT. 85
broad spreading yale, with the lightly-tipped feathery trees and charming soft green
herbage. At the opposite side of the room is No. 152, "A Sunny Day in lona.'
Such a sky as we have here is to bo seen in this variable clime, perhaps not a dozen
times in the course of the year, for it is only when our northern sun shines out in
all his brightness that such an effect as we have before us can be produced; it is not
the deep eflfulgence of a sunny day in France or Italy, where the sky is of one bright,
uniform, hard, metallic blue ; the sky here is of a blue, softly clear, with slight, tender,
almost invisible, clouds here and there, tempering the azure to an etherial softness.
Beneath this beautiful sky, all is clear, distinct, bright, and restful, a young woman
sits with her infant beneath the ancient cross, and a shepherd lazily leads home the
peaceful sheep. We can count the flowerets ; we can number the blades of grass;
we were going to say the scene is jjerfect, but the works of this artist, however
rich in genius, are never quite perfect; a poor dislocated cow, with its head on its
knees, mars the perfect beauty of this picture.
Mr Cassie has, near to this bright scene, a picture which is able to live in
its close proximity, No. 158, "Thunder-clouds on the coast of Fife." This sea-piece
is perfection, nothing could be finer, truer, or more satisfying ; the clearness, the
distance, the realistic effect of the calm, smooth water, makes one breathe softly to
one's self, canaletti redivivus. Mr Cassie has no less than seven paintings, each of
which would well merit a long descrijjtion. We have only space sufficient to call
attention to one more, 284, Great Room, " Big Guns on the Tay." The big guns
are not the attraction here ; it is again the clear, lovely blue of the sky, the infinite
distance, the soft, warm, still atmosphere, the delicious tone of the picture.
Mr Peri gal is well known to the lovers of Scottish scenery as one of its most
truthful exponents. He is a careful artist; and although it has been objected to
him, that in his productions there is generally observable a certain hardness, and
absence of the softening effects of atmosphere, he has a picture on the walls this
year which is remarkable for its merits in regard to power, dash, atmospheric
beauty, and perfect truth to nature,— we allude to No. 33, North Octagon, "Holy
Loch," in which all the proper effects of a breezy day, of ruffled water, of gathering
clouds threatening in the distance, are admirably rendei-ed. He has been in
Norway this summer, and has brought home with him some fine reminiscences of
his wanderings, we advert to them, but have not time to particularise them. No. 720,
Sculpture Ptoom, "Romsdal, Norway," is a large and striking picture,with a background
of rugged rocks and fantastic precipices, sheer and stupendous, reminding one strongly of
the Alpine rocks so dear to tourists.    We have much to be pleased with in the four
86 THE ATTEMPT.
artists whose works we have succinctly reviewed. It appears to us that never
have they devoted themselves with such an amount of zeal, industry, care, and
attention to the technicalities of their art, as they have shown in their pictures in
this year's exhibition ; without these qualities, genius itself can never rise to gi-eat-
ness, or hope to please beyond the present moment.
We must not forget two beautiful pictures by the President of the Academy,
Sir George Harvey, No. 355, Great Room, " Inverarnan, Head of Loch Lomond."
Sir George Harvey is the painter par excellence of the cool summer loch, and of the
green velvet of the mountain. He delights in pastoral scenes—a beautiful soft
summer sky, the deep blue shaded by fleecy clouds, deep ti-ansparent water, large,
green, inviting hills, a distant vale, nature looking lazily on in the summer heat.
This is a picture quite in his own style—the deep repose, the quiet sylvan recess,
the cautious angler approaching in his small skifl", so quietly as scarcely to rufile the
transparent loch, the trout rising to the fly, the whole scene suggestive of the very
poetry of cool verdant shade and soft repose. The second picture by Sir George
Harvey, is No. 441, South Octagon, "Far from Home." It represents aweary way¬
farer looking out at the distant prospect; although a woman, there is something in
the hardness of the features that reminds one of Columbus looking out
upon the far-distant shore. Landscape and figure are, however, beautiful and in
perfect keeping, the autumnal tints giving a richness of colour that brings out the
solitary figure with good eflTect.
Mr J. M'Whirter has two pictures in this Exhibition, both characterised by the
peculiar aspect of nature that he inclines to delineate No. 2, North Octagon, " Stand¬
ing Stones on Mauchrie Moor," displays vast expanse of moor unrelieved, except
by these mysterious laudmai'ks of bye-gone ages, dividing clouds herald in the closing
night, and a few shivering sheep in the foreground, add to, rather than take away
from the cold dreariness of the darkening twilight. No. 495, " The Monastery—
Moonlight," is more suggestive of human interest. It is life, although life given up
to silence and to solitude ; one melancholy monk is slowly retracing his pensive foot¬
steps from the well in the middle of the picture to the lighted room of the monastery.
The moon's i-ays fall, perhaps with exaggerated brightness, upon the flagged pavement
of the spacious court, and upon the walls of the monastery.
Mr Smart has a large and elaborate picture. No. 510, "The Pass of Leny."
There is much work in this picture, and it will bear close inspection. The rocks,
foliage of trees, and foreground are admirably painted, but there is a certain want of
light and shade, a certain monotony of treatment and sombre closing in of background,
THE ATTEMPT. 87
with Benledi towering in close proximity, that detract from the beauty and the
interest of the scene. The Pass lies to the right, a solitary fisher has diverged there¬
from, and is making his way to the swollen and turgid current, to the left a sea gull
is slowly rising and winging his flight beyond the wall of mountain, which encloses
the scene before us.
We now, with great pleasure, turn to the North Room, where are the water-
colours, among which stands pre-eminent, Mr Keeley Halswelle's, No. 1029, " Sketch
of Pilgrims at the Scala Santa, Rome." This is a charming picture, excellently
grouped. There are three female faces of great loveliness, and one of them fraught
with an expression of rapt devotion exquisitely conveyed. This is the finest and
most perfect picture we have ever seen from Mr Keeley Halswelle's studio. It is a pity
that the perspective is somewhat destroyed by the closing in of the wall behind,
which is uncomfortably close to the admirably grouped pilgrims. The pilgrims are
alike overcome with the sacred solemnity of the shrine before which they worship,
but the distinction is admirably kept between the earnest and innocent devotion of
these lovely girls, and the expression of an over-laden and guilty conscience in the
bronzed and hardened faces of the brigand chiefs. No. 820, is a remarkably spirited
water-colour in tempera, by Mr Gourlay Steell, painted with great vigour and life.
Highlander and bull are alike powerful and determined; both in breadth of treatment
and power of delineation, Mr Steell stands confessedly at the head of our animal
painters. In No. 828, " The Battle of the Standard," we have a spirited picture
of the battle of Northallerton. The coloiiring is splendid, and the action full of
energy. No. 900, " The Duck Hunter," by R. M. Ballantyne, is a charming scene,
clear, and harmonious. "We must not forget to look at No. 864, in which, under the
pretty title of " Wild Flowers," Mr Birket Foster gives us a sweet little group of
charming children, most carefully painted.
Nos. 1009 and 1018, by Mr Houston, are two figures, "The Esquire," and
" The Standard Bearer," splendidly painted, of great depth of colour, and elaborately
worked. They remind us of two similar subjects of Mr Houston, in the Exhibition of
1869, " A Kingsman," and " On the Walls," which, by their brilliancy and richness
of finish, attracted great attention.
Mr J. 0. Brown has several excellent water-colours. No. 1052, "Christ be¬
fore Pilate," is a genuine example of good drawing and vigorous conception. He has
also two spirited little pictures, Nos. 884 and 936, " The Twelfth Night," and " The
Cartel," full of life and expression.
We have to remark that the lady artists are well represented in this Exhibition ;
OO THE ATTEMPT.
they appear, however, to confine themselves principally to the delicate branch of
art that we are at present reviewing. Miss S. S. Warren, in No. 1040, " On the
Thames, near Majjledurham," gives us a rich, soft, genial, lovely landscape, in the
same style as the "Woodcutters" of last year.
Mrs Stewart Smith, whose pencil preserves so faithfully the reminiscences of
olden architecture, has, in No. 849, " The Ancient Residence of the Earls of Shrews¬
bury, Chester," a fine bit of ancient building; and in No. 982, " Aberdeen,
from the Harbour," she has thrown over the cold granite city an evening glow of
sunset quite Turneresque in its effects.
Lady Dunbar, in No. 858, 948, 978, and 10-57, with her light and lively
pencil, gives us some bright and characteristic sketches of Gibraltar and Corsica.
Miss C. F. Gordon Gumming, in Nos. 826, 861, 874, has some clever delinea¬
tions of Eastern scenery, with its bright skies and tropical foliage, evidently
studied upon the spot. From Mrs Charretie, we have some sparkling specimens of
coquettish beauty. Miss W. Dunlop, in No. 1088, " Watching for the Pigeon
Post," has a charming incident of late events, carefully and tastefully painted.
Nor are our own native female artists unrepresented. Miss M'Whirter, Miss
Frier, Miss Ross, Miss Scott Lauder, and a host of others whose works we have
not space to particularise, prove how assiduously this branch of art is cultivated in
Scotland. Before concluding, we must, however, beg our readers to glance at one or
two exquisite landscapes in this room. Nos. 856, " Loch Achray, Trossachs," by
Mr Smart, and 863, " The Halt of the Herd," by the same artist. This last picture
has a fine warm glow, and the cattle are delightfully painted. Mr Frier has some
capital landscapes. He is excellent in work, and has some good studies of the
foliage of trees and foreground. Mr James Paterson, we are glad to observe,
has two or three specimens of his genuine clear artistic work in some sweet
little landscapes, a great contrast to the work of some of our artists, which,
though very efiective in results, is somewhat rough and sketchy in manipulation.
No. 952 is a warm rich sunset by Miss Kinloch, whose name we do not remember
to have seen before. Miss Hewitt, in No. 932 has a pretty fern gatherer; and in
No. 1038, Miss Naughton, has a charming little simple face and figure. From
Mr W. E. Lockhart, we have some capital studies of Spanish life and architecture.
In conclusion, we beg to call our readers' attention to Nos. 1073, 1074, 1075, by
Mr John Nimmo, which are finely painted miniatures of an admirable delicacy
and finish, and which, at the same time, are full of life, spirit, and expression.
M. E. T.
THE ATTEMPT.
89
"I   saib  no!,   Sich  g«   mji   Jface  in   Briu."
For ever, ever round me swell.
The heaving waves of music's spell;
Now faint and low the sighing sound,
Now deep and loud it pours around :
Around and round my soiil for ever.
But grasp its strains I still can never.
Like dream forgot, which leaves behind
Aroma sweet to soothe the mind,
To tell it breathed of love and light.
Though form evades corporeal sight;
Those visioned sounds elude me ever.
And rest within my striving never.
Where man's majestic mysteries claim,
A reverence due midst grief and shame.
Like " many waters" round me swell.
The murmurs of that heavenly spell,—
And must it then remain for ever,
That helpless, I can answer never 1
Ah, no ! for mockery's here unknown,
Nor weakness stains that heavenly tone,
Those waves of sound so lovely true.
To wake response are potent too,—
Upon their swell upborne for ever,
I listening wait, despairing never.
Where streamlets run and mosses hide.      For oh, the waves that round me swell,
Or where from hills is prospect wide, Of One who loves me ever tell.
Where moors their heaps of heather spread, Throxxgh them His will triumphant sings,
And startled plovers wheel o'erhead,—      The Word its own fulfilment brings ;
Those heavenly tones are whispering ever, And me He seeks, He woos for ever.
But grasp the strain, my soul can never.    I Kstening wait, despairiug never.
X. H.
 — ^=^^^««=-s 
Mnn   Jf £ r 0 u s 0 n.
Chapter XIV.
" When you do dance, I wish you
A wave o' the sea, that you might ever do
Nothing but that; move still, stiU so,
And own no other function, each your doing,
So singular in each particular.
Crowns what you are doing in the present deeds,
That all your acts are queeas."—Winter's Tale.
The days went on, and Captain Maryon, by General Hilary's invitation, came to
stay at the Hall, and we saw him now and then.    He was perfect in his manner
M
April 1871.
90 THE ATTEMPT.
towards Una and me; and Brand did not seem to feel a twinge of jealousy, in spite
of what he had told me under the beeches. Indeed, it was needless; Una might
have shown him her heart's inmost depth, and his own image would have looked
back at him from out of it.    I felt sure of that.    For her, when he was gone,
" All men else went with him."
And yet I could not forget the sudden disagreement so suddenly made up, and
wondered if all would pass off smoothly in the end. The marriage had at length
been fixed for the end of October, and, in the meantime, the day of the ball was
drawing nigh. Mrs Sandyside was in full tide of preparations, so that Brand made
excuses to come continually, and without ceasing, to Laurence Lodge, because we
were not going to have a ball.
" It's no use, Mary," he said, " a fellow must sit down somewhere. And old
Grace has bagged all the chairs at home, what she has done with them she best
knows. We bivouac among the ruins of our home. My father was once used to a
military life, but I never was. A swamp 's a swamp, and in the backwoods one can
sit anywhere, and sleep anyhoAv, but in a Christian country, one expects something
like a chair, not to say a bed. But we shall soon be like David Copperfield's waiter,
who lived on broken victuals and slept on the coals. ' Here the waiter burst into
tears.' My guest! Oh, most sweet hostess, my guest is gone, his leave is up, his
pipe is out, the partridges at Wemley Gorse are safe from his unerring breechloader,
and they ar'nt in very great danger from mine. I can't be bothered blazing away
at them." . And he sat down beside Una and pulled away her work, thereby elicit¬
ing the remark that if she had known what would ensue when Captain Maryon's
leave was up, she would have written to the Colonel to ask for an extension of it.
" He is'nt gone so very far after all," said Brand, "not quite beyond recall.
Tliey are all awfully bored at Wemborough, it seems. Some of them have taken to
morning service in the Minster, and there is a convent of old nuns in the High Street,
so, for a lark, Maryon told the junior cornet, Tresham, that there was a lovely girl among
them who had been got in by some trick, and was pining for a deliverer; she was to
take the black veil in a few weeks, and meantime, was allowed to walk, closely
veiled, just at dusk, in one part of the convent garden. So ever since he (Tresham,
I mean) has been hanging on by his eyelids about that time in the eve, to the
wall of the garden, where it is just above the river, on the look-out for his
charming novice. Unluckily, he has never seen her yet; but one evening Maryon
says, he came in dripping wet, and told one of his friends, in strict confidence, that
he had seen a nun's figure coming along, ' no end of a good figure,' as far as he could
THE   ATTEMPT. 91
see in that light, and all smothered up in those hideous duds they wear, and he
thought he would try a whistle. My lady proved like the Yelled Prophet, though,
she lifted the thing, whatever they call it, from her face, and Tresham declared when
he saw her he fainted, anyway, he fell off the wall and rolled into the river before he
could stop himself."
" With delight ? " said Una.
" No, with horror; he had not believed any creature calling herself a woman
could be so hideous, and he was seriously ill for a few days, what with the ducking
and the disappointment."
" They must be hard up for amusement," said I, "male Lady Cla.re Vere de Vere's."
" They know so ill to deal with time,
They needs must play such pranks as these."
" Well, they're all coming to this affair of ours," said Brand, " much good may
it do them. Tresham's novice will, by that time, have become ' the bride of heaven,' so
he can amuse himself with any one that turns up. He dined with us a fortnight
ago, when you were there. Una, don't you remember a fair-haii-ed fellow. One
of the others handed him the peaches and said, ' like to like,' and he got as red
as fire."
" I remember him," said Una, " I shall get introduced on the 20th, and talk
to him all night.    We are both fair, young, and beautiful, like to like indeed."
" Come out for a walk," said Brand ; and I watched them pass along the road,
Una's hand on Brand's arm, after the good old custom of by-gone days, permissible
in those long quiet alleys of pine about St Michael's. I haj)pen to know where
they went, and what they said on that September afternoon. They took the road
leading to the shore, and sat down on some rocks near the edge of a little bay. At
first both were silent. Una clasped her hands on her lap, and sat looking far out to
sea, with the old wistful look in her eyes. Brand was close to her, stretched
on sand, and pebbles at her feet following her glance.
" What are you watching for, white witch? " he said at last. "Ariadne, I think
I should call you, here is your humble and devoted Theseus, no need of looking out
to sea."
" I am so glad we are to live near it," said Una. " I was thinking of that,
and of mamma. She is there. Brand, with the cold waves over her, it is so hard.
Do you remember Christabel, and how her mother said she should hear the chapel
bell " ' strike twelve upon her wedding day 1' Mamma will not hear mine under
the sea.      Ah, yes, I know," as she followed Brand's honest hazel  eyes in their
&2
THE ATTEMPT.
upward look to the calm autumn sky ; " it was only what was once my mother that
the sea holds, but she was as young and happy as I am, looking forward as I do,
loving as I do."
Brand half shuddered. " Don't talk in that way, sweet. I could not live
without you.    The sea has been good to vis too.    Do you remember ]"
Una only smiled, a smile that vanished quickly as the more perfect memory of
that night returned, then came archly back to the ever-changing lips.
"Yes, I remember, you poor flotsom and jetsom, how little I thought whom I
was receiving beneath our humble roof! Haven't those amiable wreckers, who
used to knock shipwrecked mariners on the head, a proverb about the man whom
you have saved from drowning 1"
" Being sure to do you an injury," said Brand.    " Yes, sooner or later."
" So to prevent mistakes they did him an injury at once," said Una. " But I
needn't be afraid of you, I didn't save you."
" You did your best, but it was Maryon. He is a plucky fellow, never stuck
at anything when we were boys. Una, I have something to tell you. Do you
know I once thought you were engaged to Maryon 1"
" Who told you so 1" said Una, quickly.
" Nobody."
" Then what put it into your head 1"
" Well, it would have taken a bat not to see we were both after the same
thing."
" Thing, indeed !" from pouting Una.
" The same queen, the same darling, the same water-witch ; but when Maryon
went to Laurence Lodge to say good-bye, I guessed what he was up to, and thinking.
as I did, that we were much the same to you, how was I to know what your answer
would be ? So I waited at home till he came back, and I would have defied twenty
detectives to find out from his face whether it had been yes or no. I went with
him to see him off, without saying a word about it; but just as we were shaking
hands I couldn't stand it any longer, and I said, trying to speak as if I didn't care
for the answer, " No chance for a civilian at Laurence Lodge now, I suppose 1" and
I laughed like a hyena ; it was a hideously unsuccessful piece of humbug. Maryon
said nothing, but just lifted his left hand lazily to his breast pocket,—we were alone
in the railway carriage,—and pulled out an end of blue ribbon, and then I thought it
was all lip with me.    I had seen you with that on the day before."
" It was a lie," said Una, "as much a falsehood as if he had spoken it.    I must
THE ATTEMPT. 93
have dropped the knot on the floor, I never missed it till he was gone.    Perhaps,
though, he thought I let it fall on purpose."
"I know what he wished me to think, at anyrate," said Brand. "It shows
the sort of fellow he is, darling. All's fair in love, they say, but I don't think that was.
Of course, I have never said a word about it to him.    Mary undeceived me."
" Let us go home," said Una, rising and taking one more look over the wan
water; " I want to get back to Molly."
So the two re-appeared; and in a week the 20th came, and about nine in the
evening Una and I were ready, and the carriage took us up to the Hall: the entrance
was lighted up, and here and there among the trees lamps glistened. I had never
seen Una look lovelier than she did that night; her white ball-dress and the pearl
ornaments papa had given her, made her look like a fairy queen, and when we
came into the drawing-room, I heard a little murmur of questions. Alost of the
guests were already assembled, and the dancing had begun. A dismal introductory
quadrille was in progress, in the midst of which I beheld Brand, leading a measure
with the eldest Miss Screwbury. I thought also I noticed a slight stamp of his foot,
which had nothing to say to the music, when he caught sight of Una. That he was
doing his duty was obvious, and yet when Una saw him, her cheeks flushed and
then grew a little paler than before. The General greeted us as we came in, and just
after we had taken our seats, there was a mighty tramping in tlie hall, up the stairs,
and the officers of the 11th came in, blazing in full uniform, and were shaken hands
with, and bowed to, and then grouped themselves aftej- the manner of men, looking
with watchful eyes towards the blue, pink, cerise, and white masses of drapery that
adorned the walls of the room. Among them I saw one whom I fixed upon as
the much-deluded Tresham, with bright curly hair glittering in the gleam of the
wax-lights, honest grey English eyes, and a bloom on the fair boyish cheeks that
many a girl in the room might have envied. Near him stood Maryon, and I
wished, with a nervous eagerness, that the quadrille would finish before he had
remarked our presence. But it had only just begun, apparently ; couples advanced
and retreated, shy young men mistook the figure, and were left alone, prancing ner¬
vously in the midst, till shoved into their places by well-meaning but impatient
friends; one or two of the pairs ignored the music and the figure altogether, and re¬
mained quietly chatting in the background. Rose Glynne, a mass of floating white
frills, over-canopied by a pink silk tunic, came swimming like "a western cloud"
towards us from the corner where she had been sitting, and laid a plump little kid-
gloved hand in mine.
94 THE ATTEMPT.
" You here, Molly ! Why, Vi might have come if she had known. Are you
only acting as chaperone to the bride 1 How charming the rooms look and the Hall!''
She insinuated herself between Una and me, and the quadrille music went thumpino-
and banging on.    I began to ask Rose about Violet.
" We have to thank you, Molly, that she isn't in her cell at Wemborough now ;
but she has taken another turn, and is going to be an hospital nurse, and I'm afraid
she won't be put off that by anything you can say."
I was very much startled, but it was a better thought than her former one,
and  I  felt  I   dare  hardly try   to reason  her  out  of it.      " She wouldn't come
here  to-night, of course,"   I said;   and the words were  hardly  spoken  when   I
heard Captain Maryon's voice bidding us good evening.     He  had  brought   Mr
Tresham with  him, and introduced  him  to Rose, and  stood speaking to  me for
a little, while  the quadrille was drawing to  a  close.      I saw  Brand leading his
partner  to  her seat, and I knew where he would turn next, of course; but just
then some one I knew came up to speak to me, a group of people surged past us, and
in a moment more I saw Captain Maryon and Una engaged in conversation.    The
usual comparison of programmes, showing a list of dances with blanks opposite them,
the usual chat about the look of the rooms and the people, and then Brand came up.
He shook hands with us, and took j^ossession of Una's card, writing down his name
for the next dance; and Una rose and took his arm, not without a slight blush, and
the two went off among the other dancers.     Captain Maryon looked slightly discom¬
fited, and I thought I heard the word " Vasliti" muttered as he went to look for a
partner.    Then the valse began, sweet sad notes to set people swinging and twirling,
like dragon flies on a summer pool, and Tresham and Rose whirled past me to the
time, and then Brand and Una.    How beautiful she looked when they paused for a
little, her cheek a shade rosier han usual, her eyes shining with  excitement, for a
ball was by no means an every-day matter with  Una, and the lights, the flowers,
the   music,   and   the   people   had   all   their   effect   upon   her.      Every   now   and
then,   when  Brand's   eyes   were   somewhere else for a moment,   hers   would   be
lifted  and  fixed  on   his   face   with   a   fond,   faithful   look  of honest   love   and
admiration, foi-, without depreciating anybody else. Brand might fairly be called the
handsomest man in the room.   Captain Maryon's figure was equally good; but I have
already told you, O i-eader, why I preferred Brand's face to his, in spite of its well-
cut features and haunting eyes.    They were  doing their  best  now to  captivate  a
pretty little girl of seventeen, the niece of Mr Brookes, who was on a visit to St
jMichael's.     Round and round went tarletaue, muslin, silk, tulle, and gaze de Cham_
THE ATTEMPT. 95
bery, each revolving pile of millinery with its accompanying cavalier, many seeming
to enjoy it intensely, many seeming heartily bored, " like fine young English gentle¬
men, all of the modern time." To such youths, even the fan of their partner, of
which in a rash moment tliey have relieved her, seems a burden too heavy to be
borne.
Brand brought Una back to me, having to dance the next quadrille with an
elderly dowager who had come from afar, and who did, by no means, consider her¬
self, like old Montague, to have past her dancing days. And soon after Captain
Maryon came up again, this time asking if Una would like some refreshment;
and I watched them depart together with tlie old uneasy feeling in my mind.
And though my ears could no moi-e hear through two walls than Sam Weller's
eyes could see through a deal door, I know what passed between them; Una
told me afterwards. They sat together in the room where ices, Moselle cup,
and other dainties were arranged for the guests. It was on the same floor as the
drawing-room, an old-fashioned room full of little recesses and corners, now turned
into little bowers for the nonce, with greenery and hothouse plants. In one of these
was a tempting looking sofa, and here Captain Maryon deposited Una j and having
cast anchor beside her, began by congratulating her on her engagement. " I
really hadn't a chance to do it before, Miss Undine ; but of course you know how
sincerely I wish your happiness, even though ," and here he stopped.
" Thank you," said Una, not exactly knowing what next to say, but going on
with " I am sure you do."
" Hilary deserves you, and I can say no more for him," Louis Maryon continued.
" He is the luckiest fellow under the sun, and I don't grudge him his good fortune.
And yet, to-night, this evening will be so short, and who knows when we may meet
again 1    Is it strictly forbidden that you should dance with anyone but Mr Hilary 1"
Una hesitated, ashamed in her foolish pride to acknowledge that Brand had
expressed any wish in the matter ; and Captain Maryon interpreted her silence.
" Ah well, I see it is. Then will you talk to me a little, give me one night,
one hour to remember out of the years 1"
" You are mistaken, Captain Maryon," said Una. " I do not wish to dance
much to-night, otherwise, of course, I could do so as much as I liked. And I can talk
to you, of course, but it is better not to go back upon anything that can only give
pain to us both.    There are plenty of other subjects."
Maryon laughed, not a very pleasant laugh to hear. " Oh yes, lots of other
subjects,   and  lots  of   other   opportunities   to   talk  them  over  in.      If   a   man
96
THE ATTEMPT.
was going to be hanged, and you went to see him (forgive the association
of ideas) you would talk to him about the weather, about the last new novel,
but politeness would keep you from saying anything about the cultivation of
hemp. And of course you will talk to me on any indifferent subject, it is quite
natural. "We will forget that you are to be married next month, and that I ever
took it upon myself to aspire to you. I will forget it, I mean ; it is not to be
exjjected that you will forget the one or remember the other. Still I seem to have
something to say to you."
He spoke bitterly and hardly, and Una felt troubled and frightened; she could
hardly make an excuse to leave him, and she dreaded what he might be hurried on
to say.    What he said and did, I must keep for my next chapter.
O. M.
OVR LIBRARY TABLE.
The Cultivation of the Speaking Voice.    By John Hullah, Professor of Vocal
Music in King's College, etc., etc.    London : Macmillan & Co.    1870.
This little book, one of the Clarendon Press series, is, we hope, the pioneer of the
study of a much neglected art. Of late years, in the ordinary teaching of singing,
a greater degree of attention than formerly has been paid to the manner of the
jyroduction of the voice. We would fain predict, that as now the necessity of a
careful training in this respect is recognised in the exceptional art of singing, the
aim of this treatise will ere long be attained, and the art of speaking, receiving an
enlightened consideration commensurate with the universality of its practice, will
be recognised as an indisfiensable branch of a liberal education. If the author's
practical directions fail somewhat in perspicuity, it may perhaps be attributed
chiefly to the nature of the subject, as one requiring oral instruction. His remarks
on the principles of the art are highly interesting, and calculated to awaken further
thought on both the theoretical and practical sides of the subject. We strongly
recommend a perusal of the work to all who have not as yet considered the subject;
and specially to those interested in the education of the young.
THE ATTEMPT. 97
How restless and aimless one feels for a while, after the withdrawal of some all-
engrossing occupation ; at least till the aching void comes to be somewhat filled
with other duties, other pleasures. Almost unconsciously I sit down to write, and
I find my title the old school-girl routine essay " On the closing session." Those
were sad days to me, in which I bade my old friends farewell, as the school years
finished one by one ; saddest of all days the last day of the last year, when after I
had mounted step by step through each school class, a door was opened and then shut
behind me, and I was ushered into the world beyond school. The old associates, one
never knows quite how dear they are until we leave them ; the old teachers, who
have given so much instruction and interest, and inspired so much reverence and
aflFection ; the old books, so much bescribbled by memorial notes ; the old walls, that
numberless associations have becharmed for life ; the old habits, that have become a
second nature ;—we scarcely know how hard it is to give them all up till we are tried.
My school life was closed in darker hues, because I had no hope that any similar
pleasures could be mine in future. But a larger school has opened before my larger
growth, with nobler studies, and a wider field; and its fourth session has just
ended, the work is done, the classes are closed ; the farewells are all said—how
many may be for ever; for, tossed upon the waves of life, who knows how or when
we shall meet again. Fancy goes back to the silent room and empty benches ; and
my heart for awhile, feels silent and empty as they. Tlwuyhts * rush into my soul,
and find their relations in language; tender associations are entwined around the
hall in George Street, that will never be forgotten ; but the probable effects of
dwelling too long upon them might be the introduction of hlanh verse into a prose
essay. So we will stop dreams, and go on to some of the inductions we have made
from our observations.
All mortals require society, and the more similar in taste the society, the more
satisfying it is. Where can we meet associates so similar as among those who have
the same end and aim, the same thoughts and hopes as we have 1 The word class
suggests this similarity. Not like the school life, where all girls must be put
through the drill of instruction, whether it prove education or no ; and where many,
where even all, may be quite unlike ourselves. Not even like college life, where
young men are sent, as they were sent to school, by the force of authority,  or
* Keferring to the titles of the essays given out through the session.
N
i^ May 1871. '
98 THE ATTEMPT.
necessity, or fashion, whether they like it or not; our class life ensures a certain
resemblance. It is a test to all its members. Not fashion leads women there, for
it is not fashionable ; not professional prospects, for to none (as yet) is a way opened
through its gates: not parental authority, for this is beyond the prescribed
routine of the world's ways ; not duty, in the narrow meaning of the word. What
else can lead them there ? Nothing less than love. This may have degrees; it
may be only love of occupation ; a recognition of the grand truth, that " God, in
cursing, gives us better gifts than man in benediction ; " but all love is not at first
sight, and the deepest afiection grows slowly upon acquaintance; yet, with many
at the outset, it is a love of knowledge for its own sake; a search after truth, a
straining after wisdom. No wonder that so much earnest woik has been done, so
many diflUculties of past education and of present circumstances overcome, for love
gives power. No wonder that so much concord has reigned, for we do not jostle
each other roughly when we all walk in one way, a way that is broad enough for all,
and whose very roughnesses and steepnesses draw us neai-er each other; for, even
here, union is strength, and the giving and taking of help is twice blessed;
and wo leain to love each other more in seeking the truth we both love.
Love is an infectious passion. Let us hope that we may all scatter the seeds of such
infection in unseen waves around us wherever we may go; for the same pleasure
and profit as we liave desired and have received may still be received by all who
learn to desire it. It is safe to say of knowledge now, even to a woman, " Blessed
are they that hunger and thirst, for they shall be satisfied ;" but the time is not long
past in which we should have sighed, " Unhappy are they who hunger and thirst,
for they must go unsatisfied to their grave ;" for however we may recognise bright
exceptions in character or in circumstances, we must confess that ordinary people do
not gain knowledge clearly for themselves without the help of some education, the
encouragement of some companion, the concentration of some particular present aim.
All these we can have in a class,—and such classes we owe to the Ladies' Educational
Association. We must never forget our debt of gratitude to the little group of
ladies who oiiginated it, who laboured for it, who planted it, and cherished and
nourished the little seed into a hopeful plant. Its roots are rapidly spreading, it
is gaining nourishment from the soil around it, it has already borne flowers and fruit,
as nature does in vegetating buds:—
" And ere one flowery season fades and dies,
Designs the blooming wonders of the next."
The ladies have done nothing rashly ; they have carefully felt their way, for the
THE ATTEMPT.
99
morning was  dark  and   the  path  untried when   they first went forth on their
mission.
The first session had only one class, Professor Masson on English Literature ; and
though the Association was not yet quite in working order, the lectures were enjoyed
by a large number, and Professor Masson's whole-hearted aid was duly appreciated.
The second session opened regularly with three classes, English Literature, con¬
ducted by Professor Masson ; Logic and Mental Philosophy, by Professor Eraser ;
Experimental Physics, by Professor Tait; and they were all satisfied, both with the
numbers and the quality of their students. The third session, grown bolder, the
Association added a fourth class, that of Mathematics, conducted by Professor Kelland,
which has continued also through this present foui-th session. During the summer
of 1870, they started Professor Balfour's class of Botany, which was most successful;
this will be continued during the summer months of this year, commencing in
the beginning of May. It is to be hoped that the attendance will be as numerous,
and the work as satisfactory as last summer.
Now, while we owe great gratitude to all our Professors, no wonder that we feel
a special tenderness towards Professor Kelland. Eor, in spite of (perhaps on account
of) the small number of his class, which was only sixteen, he laboured on, laboured
with an earnestness unheard of, giving extra time and trouble with most generous pro¬
fusion. In sending out the sixteen ladies from his class this year, he gave them his
paternal benediction, and thanked them for the pleasure they had given him. He said,
that small as the class was, it had been quite large enough to satisfy him. But we must
not only hope he will have a larger class next year, but must earnestly do our best
to make it so, if only in recognition of the Professor's kindness. We need not fear
that he will frown and say the class is too large. Not at all, for with him, " what¬
ever is, is right." The same amiability that made him say that sixteen was quite
large enough, would force him to acknowledge that 160 was quite small enough.
What he requires, what he must have, is a thorough understanding between his
class and himself, an earnest desire to improve the spirit of application, and the
mere numerical body may take any form or size it pleases. Nay, rather, we may say,
with such a spirit as a unit at the left hand, each added cipher increases the value of
the whole tenfold. But while wishing to think of the Professor, we must not think
only of him. The education of women has always seemed to me to have proceeded
upon a false principle; theii- natural tastes are fostered, theii' very defects are
increased by theii- ordinary showy and superficial education ; that value of instruc¬
tion by which it becomes the complement of our tastes is forgotten ; what we most
100
THE ATTEMPT.
need, we are left utterly without. If we require anything more than another to make
up to us our natvxral deficiencies, it is a thorough study of the exact sciences. Exacti¬
tude, brevity, close and uncoloured reasoning we do not find so natural to us as
language, music, drawing; then, by all means, let us get ourselves indoctrinated
with them. If women could only thoroughly recognise their own deficiencies, or
the deficiencies of their past education, we should have no more fear that Professor
Kelland's classroom would ever be left half filled.
Not less necessary to completing feminine education, not less novel to it, has
been Professor Eraser's class of Logic. More abstract and perfect even than mathe¬
matics, the study of the lav;s of thought, and the forms of reasoning, have much the
same efiect; but it has an advantage beyond and above the first. Pure and abstract
as logic may be in its unmixed elementary forms, it is found in combination with
every known variety of knowledge, of language, of experience, of life.
Professor Fraser's class has been satisfactoiy this year in every relation, but we
cannot speak of the next session as of the past one.    Those ladies who were not wise
enough to avail themselves of the golden opportunity this year, or who were not
fortunate enough to be able to do so, will not have another opportunity until the
session after next.    But they need not therefore give up their intention of pursuing
there some mental study.    Whether next year's course be quite as profitable, in the
sense of mental drill, or not, certain it is, that it will be ten times more interesting.
Professor Fraser is kindly making arrangements to give a course of lectures, viewing
Idsiorlcally the progress and variations of human thought in its search after truth.
Many-sided as it is, men often think that  they have gained all truth, when they see
the glory radiated from the little facet that lies before their eyes, and most intensely
interesting must it be to us to be enabled to put ourselves, as it were, within the
mind of each thinker; to look with him at truth as he looked at it, to follow the
reasonings that to him were cogent enough to support belief.    Most jirecious there¬
fore should be to us the lessons we may learn of tolerance, and of respect for the
opinions of others, and of avoiding precipitancy in forming our own j most rich the
examples of careful reasoning, and of patient research ; most comforting, while most
humbling, the recognition that, made as we all are, in God's likeness. He is in all, but
He is not all in all; His particulars are our universals. His fragments our wholes,
that often have lost, in being broken, their patent resemblance to Him.    Blue and
red and yellow do not suggest the f)ure ray whence they were refracted, and will
never do so, till they are once more combined in one in that metaphysical world
that lies above the physical.
THE  ATTEMPT.
101
Not less worthy of attendance are the classes of Professors Masson and Tait;
but it has been recognised before this, even by Utilitarians, that some knowledge of
Experimental Physics and English Literature makes women more capable and more
respectable heads of houses. Materialists find no fault with such studies; are they
not real, tangible, common-sense-like 1 They help a woman to arrange her house
and write her invitations ; and, even better, to understand the sacred Sybillic leaves
of the daily newspapers. So they have been somewhat more widely protected and
encouraged. Long may they be so ! Long may they be the means of leading women
into a course of thought that cannot die in itself, but will impel onward ever to
new and higher thoughts. Lutea Reseda.
ont   %i ii0 Xt.
A traveller on a weary way,
A sailor pining for the shore,
I seek the friends who were my stay,—
But the best have gone before.
The journey's end is not in view.
The road is rough, my feet are sore;
I miss my comrades staunch and true.
For the best have gone before.
I miss the voice that oft impressed
My youthful mind with fitting lore;
A father's love my childhood blessed;
Ah, not lost, but gone before !
Another I would fain recall,
My playmate in the days of yore,
I loved her better than them all,—
Must the dearest go before ?
Another, gentle, bright and kind,
With joyous mirth in happy store.
My covisin, almost bx'other, friend,—
Oh, so young, to go before !
I strayed upon a thorny track.
The more I strove I suffered more;
One gently, firmly led me back,—
He, alas, is gone before :
" Ungrateful!" do I hear you say 1
And "absence makes you love them more,"
And "it is morbid fancy ! " nay,—
But the best have gone before.
Is it because I held them fast.
And hugged them to my bosom's core.
With God-forgetting love at last.
That the best have gone before 1
Is it because on them I leant, [bore t
And deemed their strength my weakness
A reed too slender, quickly bent.
For the best have gone before.
Is it that they were ripe for heaven.
Plucked for the Master's garnered store.
To me more time in mercy given.
While the best have gone before 1
102
THE ATTEMPT.
Oh, pause then, rash, repining heart.
In humble thought repose once more;
Are murmurs fitting on thy part.
If the best have gone before 1
And would I have them share my toil.
That I may rest upon my oar,
A coward from the strife recoil ?
They have fought and gone before.
Oh, selfish, to parade my woe;
I ought to think of all they bore;
'Tis happiest for themselves, I know,
That the best should go before.
Sanct Eewle.
[Shortly after writing the above lines, the writer was herself called to join those who have " gone
before."    We print as a conclusion a few verses written by a friend, " In Memory of Her we Miss."—
Ed.]
Yes, she who wrote these mournful lines.
All pain and sorrow quickly o'er,
In heaven a blessed spirit shines,—
For the best do go before.
Much she was loved, and wise was deemed,
With deep, and rich, and varied lore :
Alas! how little any dreamed
That she so soon would go before.
So full of energy and life,
And adding to her knowledge more;
Prepared for earthly work and sti-ife ;
O why should she have gone before 1
Her Father called her early home.
To serve Him there for evermore;
Free in the fields of light to roam ;
'Twas well for her to go before.
And we, who stay to mourn her loss,
Are looking to that radiant shore
"Where, Jordan's billows safe across,
Abide the loved ones gone before.
THE ATTEMPT. 103
Sk^iflj^s  of Curlan^.
No.  I.
In endeavouring to give some description of Curland, with its inhabitants, manners,
and customs, I must remark, by way of preface, that I shall merely relate what has
come within the range of my own personal experience during a residence of nearly
two years in those regions; and to state that, for any information respecting the
political affairs of the province, I am indebted to private sources alone, and there¬
fore do not hold myself responsible for what may appear to some to be partial and
one-sided statements.
The" province of Curland, or Kurland, lies on the shores of the Baltic, and is
one of a groujj of annexed principalities which are said to form the brightest jewel
in the Imperial Russian diadem.
When we hear the name of Russia, we are apt to associate it with all that is
sterile, desolate, and dreary, and visions at once arise of perpetual snows and track¬
less wastes, inhabited by savage beasts of prey, and peasants scarcely less savage
than their fierce and grizzly companions. Such ideas may, indeed, be more or less
accurate with regard to many portions of this vast empire during the eight months
of the rigorous northern winter.
But it was my fortune to dwell in a more favoured spot, and to enjoy my first
view of a Curish landscape under the sunny auspices of one of the most beautiful
days in the brief but lovely Russian summer. During the earlier part of the day
several light showers of rain had fallen, rendering the bright and varied tints more
vivid, and diffusing a fresh fragrance of flowers and moist mossy earth through
the atmosphere. I drove for many miles along a broad, but I must, in the interests
of truth, confess an extremely unlevel road,—a road which would reduce the mind
of any well-educated, well-regulated English horse to despair,—through an undulat¬
ing country, an endless alternation of corn, pasture, and moorland, the monotony
broken now and then by one of those glorious forests which are the pride and beauty
of Curland. Who shall describe the splendours of a Curish forest? The noble fir
ti-ees, with their graceful drooping boughs and feathery branches, interspersed with
silver-barked birches, swaying in their slender elegance to every breath of wind that
stirs among them, while here and there a sturdy oak rears its majestic head above
its compeers. Then the dark, mysterious glades and tangled pathways, penetrating
far into the dim forest depths]; and the short turf, which, in the first delicious days of
104 THE ATTEMPT.
early summer, is dotted over with cowslips, anemones, sweet-scented violets, and
other spring flowers.    Those gi-and pine forests, what pen can depict their glories 1
But while lingering thus by the way to observe and admire, my Jehu grows
impatient; and, reminding me that T sJiall have abundant future opportunities of
studying the scenery, gently hints that the day is bearing on, and he will still have
the return journey to perform after conveying me to my destination. I see the
justice of his remarks, while deploring his want of appreciation for the picturesque,
and, with a reluctant sigh, resign myself to be whirled and jolted onwards.
As we proceed, I am struck with the total absence of boundary-walls, fences,
or hedges; the line of road is marked out by a deep trench on either side, and the
same species of landmark serves to divide field from field, and moor from plantation;
thus the whole country has somewhat the appearance of a vast private domain.
This impression is strengthened by the utter want of anything that would answer to
our idea of a village.    Here and there is to be seen a group of wretched dwellings
huddled together, constructed with a few uprights and cross beams, the interstices
patched up with mud and turf, and the roof thatched with smoke-blackened straw.
Those are the habitations of the peasants who labour upon the estate of some wealthy
count or baron, whose substantial red-tiled mansion,  approached by an avenue of
birches or chestnuts, can be descried in the distance, with its jaloiisied windows and
shady verandah, its well-stocked orchard and severely utilitarian garden, wherein
cabbages and potatoes occupy the place of honour, and drive the few rose bushes and
flowering shrubs to take refuge underneath the windows of the Frau Griifin's boudoir,
or the Herr Grafs smoking apartment.    In the immediate vicinity of the great house,
or schloss, are to be seen stables, barns, a forge, a carpenter's shop, and a large brick
building, called the Herberge, in which reside the bailifi", the store-keeper, and the
chief functionaries of Monseigneur's household.    ]N"ot far ofi" are sure to be a wind¬
mill, a hostelry, and a German-looking church, with slated roof and severely white¬
washed  walls.    Very near  to  the latter edifice stands the  Pastoral, or pastor's
residence, snugly ensconced amid well-tilled and productive fields; for the clergy in
Curland combine agricultural pursuits with their sacred calling, and, as a rule, are
remarkable for their skill in cultivating their glebe-lands.    A school house is not an
unfrequent appendage to a wealthy nobleman's estate.    A well-built,  comfortable
looking dwelling of red brick is sometimes to be seen, but such houses are rare, and
are only inhabited by the wealthier peasants, or, as we should call them, the well-
to-do farmers of the country.
As we pass groups of labourers at work in the fields, no jocund laugh nor merry
THE ATTEMPT. 105
whistle salutes the ear ; I never heard a Russian peasant sing ; and when we meet a
country clown toiling along on foot, or rattling over the road in his telega, drawn
by a small ill-shapeii horse, he merely dolfs his sheep-skin cap, and scarcely removes
the huge pipe, his inseparable companion, from his lips, as he mutters a " Good
day," or " God help you," with a sullen, down-cast air. If a Jew pedlar happen to
pass, we receive a more cordial greeting, and his dark eyes light up, and his heavily-
moustached, sallow countenance breaks into a roguish insinuating smile, as he offers
to display his heterogeneous wares there and then by the roadside for my inspection.
But as the day draws to a close, the song of birds is heard in every grove and
thicket, and the air is soon filled with rich melody. Mingling with the sound of
their warbling is the shrill cry of the herd maidens, as they raise their voices to a
kind of monotonous chant, calling "hame the kye;" and long after I have reached
my destination, through the long twilight of that midsummer evening I hear the
twittering of the swallows under the eaves, and the measured chirp of the corn-crake
echoing far away over the peaceful fields and pasture lands. As I draw the curtain
of my window to take one last look into the calm and lovely night, I see lights
moving upon the lake which forms the northern boundary of Count K.'s estate;
some of the Count's people are fishing by torchlight, spearing the fish as they rise
to the surface, attracted by the glare. Poor silly fish ! they are easily caught in
this manner. The lurid flame almost extinguishes the faiut twinkling of a few
stars in the deep blue canopy overhead. I could remain long gazing upon the
tranquil scene, but after a week's unintei'rupted journeying tired nature asserts its
claims, and I am soon oblivious alike of the land I have left, and of that which
presents so fair and shining a face to the weary and travel-woru sti'anger. Such are
my first impressions of Curland and its scenery. Jeannie.
An Essay written for the Class of English Literature in connection with, the
Edinburgh Ladies' Educational Association.
Three kinds of verse have existed in European literature—rhyme, alliteration, and
blank verse.    These may, with much appearance of probability, be considered to be
the forms peculiar  respectively to the Celtic, the Gothic,  and  the   Classical or
Greco-Latin branches of the great Aryan family.
  o
May 1871.
106 THE ATTEMPT.
We know that in our own islands, the literary remains of the early Cymri and
Gaels are in rhyme; and tradition asserts that the Druidical bards preserved and
transmitted their religious doctrines in rhyming verse. This form of verse is peculi¬
arly suitable to, and expressive of, the Celtic character. We should expect, from this
nervous, fiery, passionate race, poems of a lyrical and incidental nature, poems incit¬
ing to deeds of heroism, poems in praise of their gods. For such subjects we usually
consider rhyming verse to be the most appropriate form.
The Gothic contribution to verse was undoubtedly alliteration. It is fully ascer¬
tained that this was the form of verse peculiar to the three Gothic divisions of High
Germany, Low Germany, and Scandinavia. When the Saxons invaded and con¬
quered South Britain, they introduced alliteration, such as exists in " Beowulf,"
"The Gleemau's Song," and Ccedmon's works. Ebyme, limited to Ireland, and the
mountain retreats in Britain of the Cymri and Gaels, was there fostered and
cherished. In alliteration we trace the Saxon or Gothic character. It expresses
strength and solidity, and is fitted for the inculcating and iteration of the Saxon
ethical element.
The wave of learning which had swept over Southern Europe from Arabia, in
the 8th, 9th, and 10th centuries, brought with it rhyme, which belonged to Asiatic
nations as well as to European Celts. Bhyme then assumed rule over Romance verse,
supported, no doubt, by the Celtic influence of Armorica; and when the Roman
invasion of England took place, it followed the warrior bands, grappled with and
eventually subjugated its Saxon rival, and assumed supreme and solitary rule in the
kingdom of British verse. The struggle was sturdily maintained by alliteration;
and we may observe, that in our earliest Saxon remains there is no form of versifica¬
tion save that of alliteration. Then occasional and often faulty rlijone is introduced;
next, rhyme predominates, accompanied by frequent alliteration ; and finally, allitera¬
tion is completely subdued, only to be used incidentally to add to the music and to
strengthen or intensify the expression of poetry in rhyme, and subsequently in blank
verse.    Norman rhyme brought with it romance and allegorical poetry.
Britain was thus in possession of lyric poetry and romance poetry when
blank verse was introduced. We have now to consider what were its efiects on
English poetry.
In entering upon this subject, it is necessary to bear in mind one fact, viz., that
our language, from certain characteristics, is less fitted for rhyming verse than many
other European languages.    Among these characteristics are :—
1st. The preponderance of hard consonantal terminations.
THE ATTEMPT. 107
2nd. The rarity of terminal inflections.
Zrd. Certain inflectional peculiarities, such as, that while the plural of most
nouns ends in s, the verb belonging to them in the present indicative has no s, and
the reverse in the singular.
ith. Terminal e being mute.
Hence the selection of a form of verse for certain styles of poetry, depends not
only ou its actual fitness, but in a great measure on the nature of the language in
which it is to be employed. The limited natural capacity of our language for rhyme
would be less felt by our early than by our later poets ; for the former could mould
the language to their thoughts, the latter must adapt their thoughts to the
language.
Blank verse was introduced into England under circumstances differing materi¬
ally from those of alliteration and rhyme. It was not the form of versification estab¬
lished by a conquering nation, but was voluntarily adopted for its own intrinsic
merit. Hence we should not expect it to drive out and replace the forms of verse
already existing in England, provided always that these forms were suitable for the
style of poetry to be expressed. "We should rather expect its introduction to pave
the way for new departments of poetry, for which it is natiirally adapted.
The blank verse we have to consider is composed of five Iambic feet,—
"As yet this world was not, and chaos wild."
Most of the metres chosen by the classic poets were longer, in accordance with the
character of their language. But as our words are less sonorous and less long, the
shorter heroic line seems more suitable to the language of our country. We find,
on turning over the pages of our poets, that the pentameter is almost universally
adopted in blank verse. The longer lines have a tendency to cause the multiplying
of words, or an undue drawing out of the meaning.
The Iambus is the measure most frequently employed in ordinary conversation,
the measure most natural to speech; for example :—
The snow is lying on the ground to day.
Blank verse thus possesses the ease and naturalness of prose, united to the dignity
and practical capabilities of verse, and should be, in consequence, peculiarly suited
to the drama, of which the conversational element partakes of prose, while its poetic
element tends to verse. Further, from the dignity of movement in blank verse,
that form should be especially suited for the tragic drama.     That this was the case
108 THE ATTEMPT.
is demonstrated by the fact that our national drama, with Shakspeare at its head, rose
immediately after in that form. We cannot believe but that, even without so
suitable a vehicle of expression as blank verse, Shakspeare's sublime thoughts must
have found utterance in some way. But to picture his plays written either in prose
or in rhyme, were to see his noble flights of creative genias in the one case limited to
prison walls; or, in the other, permitted indeed, but hampered by chains and
fetters.
We find that Diyden founded a school of rhyming tragedy, but his style,
though possessed of many beauties, is unable to give a natural and easy flow to
dialogue. Becoming sensible of this after a time, he ceased to write rhyming
tragedy, and adopted the Shakspearian model of blank verse.
The next capability which we should expect oiir verse to derive from the new
importation, is the power of giving fit exj^ression to epic poetry, that species of poetry
being simply dramatic narrative, and requii-ing the same dignity and freedom from
restraint as dramatic dialogue. Some such epics in rhyme did exist in our language
(such as Barbour's " Bruce," and Blind Harry's " Wallace "), but these, though treated
poetically, are more correctly rhyming chronicles. But the epic of the classical type
did not exist, and rhyme was unfit to sustain the gravity and majesty required in
its movement. Blank verse was peculiarly suited to do this ; and we find, accord¬
ingly, that after its introduction, epic poets did arise in our country, and that they
availed themselves of the advantages of this species of verse. Chief among these
stand Milton and Tennyson. Milton, indeed, considered that " rhyme was no neces¬
sary adjunct or true ornament of poem or good verse, but the invention of a bar¬
barous age to set off wretched matter and lame metre, .... a thing in itself
trivial and of no true musical delight, .... a jingling sound of like endings,
. . . . the troublesome and modern bondage of rhyme." Milton must either not
have formed this opinion till his maturer years, or else only have held it with regard to
rhyme as employed in dramatic and epic poetry, for we find that he actually used it
in several of his minor jueces. Few will concur with Johnson in his assertion, that
Milton chose blank verse because it was easier than rhyme, and then tried to j^er-
suade himself that it was better. Blank verse, as the vehicle of expressing Milton's
massive thoughts, is essentially (to use the expression of the day) the right thing in
the right place.
It is interesting to compare the same thoughts expressed by Milton in blank
verse, and by Dryden in rhyme. In " Paradise Lost," Satan is made to say, ad¬
dressing the Sim—
THE  ATTEMPT. 109
" How I hate thy beams,
That bring to my remembrance from what state
I fell; how glorious once, above thy sphere ;
Till pride, and worse, ambition, threw me down.
Warring in heaven, against heaven's matchless King.
Ah, wherefore ? he deserved no such return
From me, whom he created what I was.
In that bright eminence, and with his good
Upbraided none ; nor was his service hard.
What could be less than to afford him praise,
The easiest recompense, and pay him thanks ?
How due ! yet all his good proved ill in me.
And wrought but malice ; lifted up so high
I 'sdain'd subjection, and thought oue step higher
Would set me highest 
.... Ah me, they little know
How^dearly I abide that boast so vain.
So farewell hope, and with hope, farewell fear,
Farewell remorse ; all good to me is lost:
Evil, be thou my good ; by thee, at least,
Divided empire with heaven's King I hold ;
By thee, and more than half perhaps will reign ;
As man ere long, and this new world, shall know."
Paradise Lost.    Book iv.
The following is one of the finest passages from Dryden's " State of Innocence
and Fall of Man."    Lucifer says, on entering Paradise :—
" Fair place ! yet what is this to heaven, where I
Sat next, so almost equall'd the Most High ?
I doubted, measuring both, who was most strong ;
Then, willing to forget time since so long,
Scarce thought I was created.    Vain desira
Of empire in my thoughts still shot me higher
To mount above his sacred head :    Ah, why,
When he so kind, was so ungrateful I ?
He bounteously bestow'd unenvied good
On me :    In arbitrary grace I stood :
To acknowledge this, was all he did exact:
Small tribute, where the will to pay was act.
I mourn it now, unable to repent,
As he, who knows my hatred to relent.
Jealous of power once question'd :    Hope, farewell ;
110 THE ATTEMPT.
And with hope, fear ; no depth below my hell
Can be prepared.    Then, 111, be thou my good ;
And, vast destruction, be my envy's food.
Thus I, with heaven, divided empire gain j
Seducing man, I make his project vain,
And in one hour destroy his six days' pain."
Act m., Scene 1.
Blank verse is also adapted for sustained poetry, whether didactic, ethical, de¬
scriptive, or argumentative. For, as an old writer says, in " A Defence of
Khyme " :—'' I confesse that to mine owne eare those continuall cadences of couplets,
used in long and continued poems, are very tyresome and unpleasing, by reason
that stil methinks they runne on with a sound of one nature and a kind of cer-
taintie which stuffs the delight rather than entertains it." This fairly expresses the
reason why blank verse is preferable to rhyme in prolonged metrical works, and
why we should be led to expect that after its introduction writers of sustained
poems should choose this form. The names of Thomson, Wordsworth, Young,
Cowper, with a host of others, sufficiently prove the truth of this hypothesis.
Pope is a marked exception to this general principle. His reasons for choosing
rhyme, he says, are :—" That principles, maxims, or precepts so written, both strike
the reader more strongly at first, and are more easily retained by him afterwards.
I could express them more shortly this way than in prose itself." While acknow¬
ledging and admiring the perfection of his terse epigrammatical style, his thorough
control over rhyme, and his high ethical strains of thought, most readers feel that a
moderate amount of his poetry is sufficient at a time,—that, in short, it "stuffs the
delight."
In treating of any adjunct of poetry, it is essential to bear in mind that verse
is by no means necessarily poetry, nor is prose necessarily not poetry. Coleridge
says that the correct antitheses are poetry and science, prose and metre. We may
find much poetry in prose, many prose works being rich with poetic thought; and
also much science (this word is used in a very comprehensive sense) in metre. Metre
or verse is, however, the generally accepted and most suitable mode of giving utter¬
ance to poetic thought, and this for reasons fully entered into in many interesting
works on the subject. There are writers who fail to make this distinction, and who
think that, by assuming for their ideas the garb usually worn by poetry, they gain a
place among the ranks of poets. Blank verse affords even greater facilities for this
than rhyme, iaasmuch as the mere form of it is more easily acquired than that of
rhyme.   We should therefore expect that on the introduction of blank verse, English
THE ATTEMPT. Ill
poetry would be inundated by weak effusions of this kind. Such productions are
generally ephemeral, but we find that contemporary writers speak of innumerable
compositions of this nature.
Among such of the true poets, however, as write in blank verse, we look for a
more dignified style of expression, a more elevated poetic diction, to compensate for
the dismissal of the form which use and wont ascribed to poetry. Arguing from
analogy, we might fairly suppose that this dignity and elevation of diction would
extend itself to writers in rhyme, for we generally find that when an improvement
is effected in one department of art, science, or philosophy, it extends itself in some
degree to the others. Now, we do observe, in general English poetry, after the
introduction of blank verse, a greater dignity of sentiment and diction than existed
before. If we compare any of the early English poets with their later brethren, this
fact will be sufiiciently illustrated.
It is natural to suppose that blank verse, as being the metrical representative
in our country of the classical nations, should be the means of directing attention to,
and introducing the influence of, the poets of the nations from which it was derived.
We should expect to find translations of classical poems, imitations of classical
models, choice of classical subjects, allusions to classical events and persons, and als6
a tendency to the classical objective mode of treatment. This has been eminently
the case. In our poetical stores are to be found translations of the -iEneid, Iliad,
Odyssey, and other works by many of our most eminent writers ; Pindaric odes.
Anacreontics, and pastorals in imitation of classical poets; the dramatic rules of
Jonson and Diyden borrowed from them ; Shakspeare, Milton, and others selecting
classical subjects; Milton teeming with classical allusions; and most of our great
poets affected by the influence of classical objective, as opposed to the Saxon sub¬
jective element. In considering these results, it is necessary to remember that they
were not produced by one but by several causes, the classical influence being mainly
produced by the general revival of learning all over Europe. But had the revival not
taken place, there seems sufficient ground to believe that the introduction of blank
verse would of itself, in a great degree, have led to these results.
Aristotle laid down certain rules by which sublimity and elevation of language
might be achieved ; these were :—to avoid idioms and common forms of speech, to
use metaphors, to introduce the idioms of other tongues, to lengthen phrases, by
adding words which are not absolutely necessary, and by extending or contracting
words, by inserting or omitting syllables. These rules were practised to good pur¬
pose by the ancients, and it seems eminently probable that our poets would act upon
112 THE ATTEMPT.
them. Milton is a forcible example of this ; he adopted all these classical modes of
imparting sublimity and elevation of language to his verse. Nowhere do we find
common or homely expressions in his works.    We find abundant metaphors :—
" Night's hemispliere had veil'd the horizon round."
" The setting sun
Against the eastern gate of Paradise
Levelled his rays."
" Now came still evening on, and twUight grey
Had in her sober livery all things clad."
Classical idioms:—
" Orion, armed, hath vex'd (referring to a storm) the Red Sea coast."
" Of man's first disobedience and the fruits, etc." (inversion).
" How long, with ardent look, his eye pursu'd,
Delighted."
" Event perverse.
Sight hateful, sight tormenting."
Words extended or contracted at pleasure :—
" I 'sdain'd subjection."
" Hurl'd headlong flaming from th' ethereal sky."
One peculiarity belonged to the poems of the old classical writers; their lines
were divided by quantity, not by accent, as in the English measures. Now, the
rules regulating the latter were becoming more stringent in Henry VIII. and
Elizabeth's reigns. It would be extremely natural for English writers in blank
verse occasionally to avail themselves of this quantitative division, to introduce the
*
mixed measures so much used in classical poetry, and to vary the position of the
csesural pause as permitted by the nature of the verse. Milton and Tennyson fully
exemplify all these. They frequently introduce quantitative divisions; they make
free use of almost every measure ; and they place the csesural pause on any syllable
from the first to the last, and, occasionally, upon several, thereby giving endless
variety and pliability of expression to their phrases.
From all that has been said, it will be seen that blank verse afibrds great scope,
not only for dignified, but for easy, flowing, and natural expression.
To sum up : We have found that the introduction of blank verse provided fit
means of giving expression to dramatic and epic poetry,—led to classical influences and
the elevation of poetic diction,—and finally, has given increased facilities to the poet
who is endowed with rich and abundant conceptions, to pour forth those streams of
thought which refresh and gladden all who approach them. Eta.
THE ATTEMPT. 113
En a   Jf^rgitson,
Chapter XV.
" Now half to the setting moon are gone,
And half to the rising day ;
Low on the sand, and loud on the stone,
The last wheel echoes away.''—Tennyson^
Una sat looking into the white radiance of the hot-house flowers in the bouquet
Brand had given her, as if she could read her fate, G-retchen-like, in their snowy
petals, and Captain Maryon went on—
" I have something to say to yoii, and I hai'dly know how to say it. You will
think I have forgotten myself, among other trifles, if I go on, Miss Undine.
You are Mr Hilary's promised wife, and I am his friend. And I have no right to
speak of what might have been, any more than you have inclination to listen. Yet I
saved Brand Hilary's life.    I saved your lover for you.    Do you owe me nothing?"
It was the first time he had ever referred to the brave venture on that stormy
night, and Una felt almost alarmed, startled, and shaken by the meaning in his voice
and the passion in his face.
" I owe you a great deal, Captain Maryon," she said. " I shall never forget
how you put your life in danger for his, even though you did not know whom you
were saving.    I owe you thanks and gratitude, and I give them with all my heart.''
" And a generous fellow would ask for nothing more. Brand would have done
as much for me if he had had the chance. But I 'm not generous, Miss Undine—
neither generous nor plucky, I 'm beginning to think. My heart is as selfish and
as hungry and as wild as the sea that night, when I look at you and think that I
never can win you, the only woman I ever loved. Forgive me, and have pity on
me. Think for one minute of that poor wretch I was speaking of, condemned to
death ; do you think you would grudge him any token he asked for before he died,
something for his hand to hold underground when he was dead ? It would do you no
harm to think he had that last comfort."
" I don't know what you mean. Captain Maryon," said Una.    " If I could do
you a service I would, as you know, but it is not right to talk to me in this way."
" Are you afraid it would make Mr Hilary angiy if he knew 1" said Louis
Maryon, mockingly.    " Don't be alarmed.    He is supplying the necessities of that
vast mass of British matronhood whom he was dancing with a little ago.    No, all I
p
May 1871.
114 THE ATTEMPT.
want is a very slight favour—just one. I shall never ask it again. Mrs Hilary
would not grant it, I am sure, but you may. Somehow, I can't feel that you are so
comjjletely the property of the future owner of this desirable family mansion, as
much his as the plate, and the wine, and the other concomitants of greatness, so much
his, that you are no longer at your own disposal, and can't grant a favour."
" What is the fiivour. Captain Maryon 1" said Una, her cheeks flushing at the
careless sarcasm of his tone, which was not surprising, as it was assumed for the
express purpose of provoking her.
" Only a dance," he said. " Just once to have danced with you would be some¬
thing to remember, and you said just now you could dance if you liked. Let me see
if that was a boast or not.    There 's another waltz beginning."
Una hesitated. His taunt had stirred up all her spirit of opposition to Brand's
wishes, and had Brand himself been there to repeat them by look or word, it would
at once have broken out; but his absence was in his favour.
" I have a condition to make, Captain Maryon," she said. " You have something
of mine which you never should have had, and never were intended to take. I
cannot comprehend why you took it; but if you joromise to give it me back imme¬
diately, I may dance one dance with you."
" Not otherwise % You are tyrannical, Miss Undine. Trust a woman for
using all the power she can get into her hands, to say nothing of abusing it."
" It is nothing to me," said Una, hastily, " and I think I had better not dance
much to-night. Mary is by herself, too; would you mind taking me back into the
other room, Captain Maryon ?"
" I should mind it veiy much just at present, till this little question is settled,"
he replied.    " It is nothing to you, I daresay, but it is a gi-eat deal to me."
Una hesitated, he might think she attached great importance to the concession
if she refused it, and yet if she granted his request, might it not do harm % The
waltz music went tinkling on, most of the resting coiiples in the room of refresh¬
ments, had gone off to renew their exertions; the veiy spirit of the music seemed to
pass into Una's feet, and they quivered to its spell; it seemed as though her little
high-heeled satin slippers would dance away with her, like the red shoes in Hans
Andersen's weird story. And forgetting everything else in the sudden and strong
desire she felt to join the dancers, she said, " Very well, I will dance this dance
with you, only one, remember," and Maryon sprang up and offered her his arm,
with some soft Spanish exclamation of half-suppressed delight and triumph, such as
broke from him now and then, trembling on his lips.
THE ATTEMPT. 115
In a few minutes more they had caught the time, and were moving swiftly and
gracefully among the throng of dancers.
Now, while the above conversation was going on, a headache, which had been
lying in wait for me all day, had suddenly seized me, and the noise and the lights
increased it to an almost unbearable pitch. I looked round for Una, but she was
beyond my ken, and seeing my father standing near the door, I made my way to
him and committed her to his care, asking him to bring her home in reasonable time,
and apologizing to the General, who was talking to my father, for my hasty and
enforced retreat. For when I walked across the room, a sort of dizziness, caused by
excessive pain, forewarned me of the impossibility of staying any longer, if T wished
to avoid fainting. The General made offers of Mrs Sandyside's aid, the quietness of
her room, etc., but well I knew that worthy soul would have little peace in room or
mind that night, and I sat in the comparative coolness of the entrance-hall till the
carriage appeared, wishing I had left Una with Brand, instead of our military friend,
and feeling troubled and uneasy, though the pain T was enduring was such as almost
to prevent me from thinking. It abated in the quiet darkness of the carriage, and
I was better when I reached Lawrence Lodge, and found the ever-ready Lizzie to
sympathize and make much of me. I was installed on the sofa in the drawing-room
at last, determined to sit up till Una came home; and while I am there, my story
must go back to the Hall.
While Una was passing into the dancing-room on Captain Maryon's arm, she
could not help looking round for Brand, half wistfully, half mischievously, but
whether luckily or unluckily, she saw nothing of him till after she had circled round
the room several times and stopped to rest. Maryon was bending over her, talking
in the low tone he was fond of using, and fanning her assiduously, when, by a sudden
instinct she lifted her eyes and met Brand's, with an expression in them she had
never seen before. He was standing against the wall opposite the place where they
had paused, his whole face intent upon Una, so much so that he hardly seemed to
notice her partner, and Una was frightened, finally provoked, by his look. Had
her own conscience been clear, it would have brought her to his side at once,
to find out its cause, but she was conscious of having provoked the fit of jealous
anger which was locking Brand's lips together, and making his hazel eyes blaze like
an angry lion's, and she resolved to go her ov/n way, in spite of such glances.
"Are you ready?" said Maryon, and without more delay Una set off with him
again, nov did they stop till the last notes of the waltz were sobbing themselves out
on the warm perfumed air of the crowded room.
116 THE ATTEMPT.
" How sad those tunes are," she said, as they crossed the floor to find a seat;
" that last one was like a dii-ge."
" It was like a dirge to you, and it was a dirge to me," said Louis Maryon,
" 'the last, the last, the last,' was in every note of it, and now it is done."
He found a place for Una next Mrs Glynne, then bowed and was lost among a
group of brother-ofiicers, while she was left to meditate on what she had done. Not
a word had he said of fulfilling her condition, she had gained nothing by granting his
request, except a pleasant dance with a good partner, and what might she not have
lost 1 Surely not Brand's love, or the confidence that is the " roof and crown " of
love ? Where could Brand be ?—nothing was to be seen of him. Some one came up
to be introduced by the General. Una was tired, could not dance. Would she come
and get some refreshment? Oh yes; and hastily rising, she passed on into the cooler
atmosphere, outside the dancing-room. Still Brand was nowhere. Mrs Glynne had
told her of my disappearance, when she had sought me after that unlucky valse, and
she replied almost at random to Mr Leslie's speeches; so that the said young barris¬
ter, who was staying for a few days at the Hall, knew not what to make of her, and
set her " distraction " down to the efiect of approaching matrimony.
Meanwhile, where was Brand 1 No one can be more competent to give informa¬
tion on that point than myself, for Brand was sitting on one of the ai'm-chairs at
Lawrence Lodge, his usual chair, which I had some diificulty in persuading him to
t;ike, looking hurt, and angry, and inconsolable.
Not very long after I was settled on the sofa, I had heard quick impatient steps
on the gravel, and Brand marched in.     I was thunder-struck.
" My dear Brand, is anything the matter 1 What is wrong 1" I cried, starting up.
" I )jeg your pardon, Mary," he said, " I'm civil, disturbing you, when you had
come home for quiet, but the fact is, I'm otf on a journey, and come to say goodbj^e."
" What are you thinking of?—a journey, at this time of night.    Brand, tell me
what has happened."
" Nothing has happened, but what I might have foreseen," he said, standing
against the mantelpiece, and biting his lips. " Una has been trifling with me, and
with Maryon too, I fancy, and I was fool enough to think her incapable of it. I
might have known,—all women are alike, they say, and I've made experiments enough
for one. Did I tell you Markham had bought a yacht, and is going across the
Atlantic?   Last week lie asked me to join him, and I'll do it now, I lauglied at him
then, you know.    So dear Mary, I'm ofl'; Markham is getting all ready at  ,
and is going to start directly."
THE  ATTEMPT. 117
" Brand, are jou going to break Una's heart for a mere fancy?" I said. " Sit
down and listen to reason."
" I'd rather stand ; I'm in a hurry, Mary."
" Yes, you're in a hvirry ; of coui-se, when a man is going to be foolish, and
heartless, and cruel, the quicker he goes on the better. Wait, sit down. Brand. I
wont say goodbye to you, as you seem to wish, while you stand there."
" Anything to please you," and he flung himself into a chair. There was one
l^oint gained. I now observed for the first time that he had dressed himself in
rather a rough-looking coat, suggestive of salt water, instead of the accurate sables
in which he had graced the ball, which gave an air of vraisemblance to his project of
yachting. Markham was a young American he had known in New York, who had
only recently come to England, and now wished to make a trip back again.
" Now let us talk like reasonable beings.    What has Una done ?"
" Well, I could see nothing of her for a good while, and when 1 did see her at last,
she was waltzing with Maryon. She knew I was looking at her, though she pretended
to take no notice. You need tell me she was not flirting, Mary, and with the very
man I wished her to avoid."
Need I say how I combated his arguments, and tried to bring him round,
all the time knowing that one look from Una would be more powerful than
all I could say, but little hoping for the auxiliary I obtained very shortly. I
glanced towards the window in a pause, while Brand was staring at the floor,
sotting himself down for the most injured lover that had ever been since lovers
were, and I gave a start, and suppressed a scream, for there was Una's face, looking
white and frightened, yet with a half-penitent, half-comical twinkle in the soft eyes;
it was as quickl}'- withdrawn, and I heard, with love's sharp ears, the quick light foot¬
steps at the door. I did not stop to wonder why, how, or when she left the Hall >
but I rose and went out, leaving Brand to wonder, and just took hold of Una, for
Una it was, and not her wraith, brought her into the drawing-room, in spite of a
sort of faint struggle on her part, said, " Here is Una, come to beg your pardon, and
be good for the future," and went upstairs. How they settled it between them,
those two foolish young people, history says not, but when I came down to tell
Brand he might just return to his guests, and leave us in peace, I found them both
on the most amicable, not to say aflectionate terms,—Una having enjoyed a good cry,
positively her last, ] think, till the day when she changed her name to Una Hilary,
and Brand having quite got over his fit of indignation. I turned him out with some
difiiculty, absolutely refusing to allow  Una to go back with him, as ho coolly pro-
11B THE ATTEMPT.
posed, and dance a " pas de triomphe;" and then I had to listen to Una's story, to
her penitence, her trouble, and her good resolutions, to hear how, when she couldn't
tiud Brand, and I was gone, she felt as if he had gone after me, and got unobserved
into the cloak-room, muffled herself up, and ran the whole way home.
"I've done for my slippers, Molly, they may do to throw after us, but I shall
never dance in them again. How stupid, how absurd I have been, and oh, darling
Molly, forgive me. No, I was'nt a bit frightened running in the dark, though it is
a good way, no one noticed me, though when I saw Brand really was here, I felt
inclined to run back, or go upstairs without speaking to him, and then everything
might have gone wrong. I felt like Cinderella, when her carriage turned into a
jiumpkin. Will Brand get back again in time for no one to notice he has been away ?
What will the General say, and Papa ? "
So she ran on, till I persuaded her to go to bed; and Lizzie, who had divined
something of the state of matters, brought her some decoction to prevent danger of
cold. And so ended the evening of the ball. I saw an account of it afterwards in the
St. Michael's Mercury, of the decorations, the principal guests, and so forth, and
am given to understand that the company broke up between three and four a.m.
well satisfied with their entertainment.
And now I can only express a hope that my story has afforded some entertain¬
ment to my readers, for it is coming to an end. Only a chime of wedding bells, only
another sound, sad and solemn, floating from a distant battle field, like the knell of a
parting soul, and I have done. Such sounds mingle together in our Kves, as the
rivers mingle in the ocean.
October brought the day when Una plighted her troth to Brand, and became
his wife. Rose Glynne was a bridesmaid, but Violet was no longer at St Michael's.
She had resisted entreaty and advice, and gone to London, to stifling fever wards,
and grimy streets, to lose herself, and to win, I verily believed, something better.
I could not fight against her resolution, when I saw how firm and faithful it had
become.    I bade God speed her, with all my heart.
The last autumn berries were hanging in the hedges, the last sweet autumn
gleams were on the sea, when we kissed the dear bride, and let our white witch go,
trusting her gladly, yet sadly, to the sunshine of tenderness and truth in Brand's
happy face. And things flowed back into their old course once more, and the young
couple were settled at the Hall.
And one day last year I was sitting with Una, in her little morning.room at
the  Hall, when the  letters  were brought  in.     Brand and she had been married
THE ATTEMPT. 119
several months. There was one little packet with a foreign post-mark, addressed in
a hand more familiar to me than to Una. "Violet Glynne," I said, "what is she
doing abroad. Ah yes, she is one of the Red Cross sisterhood, and has gone to nurse
the wounded." Something about the look of the letter made me cany it off to read
it in the library. First came out something wrapped in paper, with " for Mrs
Hilary," wTitten outside; then Violet's letter, strangly interesting, coming as it did
from the black battle-cloud on the Rhine.
" Dearest Mary," it ran, " I came here to help, with the other nurses. I feel
as if I had had a presentiment, or I should not have insisted so on coming. I had
never shirked the work at the hospital, and they said they could trust me. It is
not many days, I cannot coimt them, since we came to Sedan, and one night I was
sent for to nurse a wounded man. He was lying in a sort of shed, and there was
hardly any light, but I saw that death was on him, and I knew he was Louis Maryon.
I never thought how he came there, though I have heard since he volunteered
into a Prassian I'egiment,—I only saw him and knew he was dying. You can feel
for me, Molly. I had no time to feel then. I bound ujj his wound, and did all
I could for him, and suddenly he seemed to recognize me.
" ' Violet, Violet Glynne,' he said, ' what are you doing here 1'
" ' I am at my work,' I said, ' nursing those who want me.'
" ' You are good to me,' he said, ' I am glad to have an English face near me,
for I have a message, and you need not tell me it's all over with me, I knew it when
I fell. Send this to Mary Ferguson; she knows who it belonged to ;' and he drew
what I send you out of his breast. ' She will see then I have never forgotten her,'
he said, but so low that I could hardly hear it. Mary, I was beside him there
alone, you know what he is to me, and he was dying, and thinking of no one but
Una. I took the ribbon from him, and promised to send it to you, and then I
read to him, bvit he did not seem able to listen. ' It's all very dark,' he said,
' Una, Una,' and then I saw he had no more need of me, Mary. I have been
working hard day and night, but now there is a rest, and I have found time to write.
Give this to Una, or keep it, whichever you think best,—I have fulfilled my
trust. He died as a brave man should die. I need not be ashamed of loving him ;
even Una need not be ashamed that he loved her. And now he is dead. Good-bye,
Mary.     Pray for me, dear, tender heart.—Always yours, Violet Glynne."
I opened the little packet, and there was the knot of blue ribbon I had last seen
in the hand that was now cold and stiff under the turf at Sedan. Yes, there was a
stain to testify to Violet's tnith—a dark blur on the gay blue silk, where blood had
120
THE ATTEMPT.
touched it. I could not give it to Una then; there came a day when I did, and
when her tears fell fast over it, and Brand mourned with her for the brave life so
willingly cast away.
And here my story must have end. My father and I still live at St Michael's;
the General and papa still enjoy their long Indian conferences ; and Una is as fond
as ever of "■ Mary mother." Even my nephew and godson. Brand Hilary the less,
has not ousted me from my old place in my child's heart. The pines are still
whispering their old tones over us, the waves are still wandering to our feet, the
fishing boats still sailing away into the dim world of waters.
And even so oiir lives are sailing on, in sunshine and shadow, to the unknown,
unguessed land of the future.    May we rest peacefully in the haven at eventide.
O. M.
OUR   L IBR A R Y   TA B L E.
The Works of George Berkeley, D.D., formerly Bishop of Cloyne: Including many
of his "Writings hitherto unjjublished. With Prefaces, Annotations, his
Life and Letters, and an Account of his Philosophy. By Alexander Campbell
Fraser, M.A., Professor of Logic and Metaphysics in the University of
Edinburgh.    In 4 volumes.    Oxford, at the Clarendon Press.
The thanks, not only of the philosophical world, but of all for whom true
nobility has charms, are due to the painstaking research and appreciative enthusiasm
which have laid before the public, in a form far surpassing in completeness and
interest any previous attempt of the kind, the record of the life and work of
Bishop Berkeley of Cloyne.
Neither the character of such a man, marked as it was no less by warm
affections, pure faith, unbounded charity, and the most splendid philanthrophy, than
by mental gifts of the highest rank, nor his pious and beautiful system of
philosojihy—the natural outcome of such a mind,—should be allowed to pass lightly
out of memory. All must, therefore, welcome the appearance, in these four
volumes, of a guarantee for the perpetuation of both the one and the other.
No formal criticism of the merits of this new edition of Berkeley's Works is
attempted here. We only at present call attention to the gi-eat care which has been
taken to elucidate and supplement the text by notes, dissertations, and prefaces, and
the fact that several miscellaneous treatises, now published for the first time, form
part of the contents of these interesting volumes.
THE ATTEMPT. 121
%  IpUa   for ©omp^uIsiD r J2   ^bu ration.
Compulsion is an ugly and repulsive word, and to none more so than to British
ears. The calm flow of the Anglo-Saxon's blood is not very easily disturbed ; but
there is one thing which never fails to make it boil in his veins, and that is—any
infringement, real or imaginary, of his dearly loved and jealously guarded liberty.
This being so, we should hardly be sui-prised if such a word as compulsuTiy
savouiing, as it does, of that restriction of his rights which is the abhorrence of the
Briton's soul, were to rouse the whole English people to indignation. When,
therefore, we see that far from this being the case, so ajiparent an infringement
of the liberty of the subject as is suggested by the system of Compulsory Education,
is not only looked at calmly, but actually desired by tlie larger proportion of this
freedom-loving nation—when we find it advocated on the platform, petitioned for
by the very class whom it will most nearly affect, and legislated for (liowever
imperfectly) in the parliament of the nations—when we see all this, we are sui'ely
justified in drawing one of two inferences. We may conclude either that this
system is, in reality, no infringement of liberty, or else that there is something
in education that commends itself to the British mind as superior even to
unlimited free<lora. Now, which of these two conclusions is the correct one ? Or
may it not be that there is some truth in both?
To look, first, at the question, How far, and in what way, is personal liberty
affected by Compulsory Education 1
Liberty, we must all agree, is in itself a perfectly good thing. Where it seems
to be productive of evil effects, this result is due to the exchange of liberty proper
for its base counterfeit license. Now, where shall we draw the line between these
two 1 Surely this may very reasonably be selected as one boundary line—the pro¬
viso that the exercise of our own liberty shall not entrench on the liberty or rights of
our neighbour.    But who is my neighbour, and what are his rights 1
The first of these questions has received, on the highest authority, an answer
which forbids any more limited application of the term, than one embracing within
its sphere the whole circle of mankind. The neighbour of the good Samaritan was
the afflicted Jew, his hereditary enemy. Shall not the Christian, then, count as
his neighbour his fellow-Christian, his fellow-countryman, and, above all, his own
child ?
With regard to the second question. What are the rights of my n( ighbour ?
 Q 
June 1871.
122 THE ATTEMPT.
These things may surely be conceded. The community has a right to demand of each
of its members that he shall place no obstacle in the way of his fellow-members
leading a secure and peaceful life. The child has no less the right to demand from its
parent provision for the sustenance and welfare, not only of its bodily frame, but
of its mental and moral nature as well; and what the child has a right to demand
from the parent, the State has a right to enforce on the parent. For child and
parent are alike members of the State, and the rights of the one must be no less
jealously guarded than those of the other.
These are no new principles that are here laid down. They are to a certain
extent acknowledged and acted upon, and all that we would ask is a more exten¬
sive application of them, by which they may be brought to bear on the subject of
education.
The State does recognise its duty to protect the lives and property of its
members, and its authority to restrict the liberty of those who seek to endanger
either or both, so far as to compel the latter, by punitive measures, to refrain from
direct interference with the personal freedom and security of others. But why stop
here ? If it can be shown that a certain course of action, not in itself directly
subversive of the welfare of the community, yet tends indirectly, but none the less
certainly, to the same result, is it too much to demand that such a line of conduct
should be made by compulsory means to cease? I think not; and I think, too,
that the neglect of a parent to educate his child can easily be shown to issue in this
evil result. Let us but look at any criminal report, and we shall find that, as a rule,
ignorance and crime are in the direct ratio of each other. Xor need we wonder at
this, if we consider that, as has been well remarked, " there is no such thing as the
negative of education." The child to whom are denied the advantages of education
proper, is virtually sent to a school, but to what a school! A school of vice and
infamy, where its young mind not dulled, but rather sharpened by contact with the
surrounding pollution, drinks in a poison more deadly in its results than any which
can assail the mortal frame only. What wonder if, from such a training school,
there issue forth pupils who become in time the pests of society, and the endangerers
of its welfare!
What we ask, therefore, is not that education should take the place of non-
education, but that a good and useful education should replace a bad and pernicious
one. And surely in making this request, we stand upon strong ground when we
urge our plea upon the State in the name of its own interests !
If we turn from the rights of a community to those of a child, we find these too
THE ATTEMPT. 123
respected by the law of the country up to a certain point. We find the parent who
starves or neglects his child's body, dealt with as a criminal. Why should not legal
measures restrain him also, who would starve the incomparably superior part of his
child—the intellectual and moral nature 1
Perha})s it may be objected that interference with this portion of parental duty
is beyond the province of the law. But ought it to be so 1 Granted the right of
the State to secure to any of its members the protection of his interests, does it not
follow that the higher these interests, the more urgently do they call for its inter¬
position on their behalf?
One limitation must, however, be put upon this inference. Every man is a
member of two states—that in which his lot is cast by birth, and with which his
period of connection is bounded by the term of his mortal life, and the everlasting
kingdom, of which, as an immortal soul, he is a subject. The power of the mere
human state over a man extends to him, of course, only in the former capacity. The
regulation of no course of conduct, therefore, which is without fruit in this life, falls
within the province of the law.
Now, if this test be applied to education, shall we still find ourselves able to
maintain our position of claiming its compulsory enforcement? I do not fear to say
that we shall; for surely proofs are not wanting to testify to the vast influence
exerted on the whole worldly career of a man by his early education. We
know, from the biographies we possess of men who have risen to eminence
from the humblest grades of society, that the first step in their upward path was, in
almost all cases, if not, indeed, in all, the procurement of a sufficient amount of
education to serve as a foundation for higher things. We know, too, the obstacles
that had sometimes to be overcome, for the attainment of even this small quantity
of instruction; obstacles which, although inadequate to daunt these bi-ave spirits, may
have been strong enough to deter thousands of less resolute mould from attempting
to enter on pursuits for which, by mental capacity, they were well fitted. It is a
great honour to our Arkwrights and our Stevensons, that they should have risen
superior to so many difficulties; but it is no honour to the State that such obstacles
should have been permitted to remain in their path.
But objections on the ground of principle are not the only, nor, perhaps, even the
most common ones that have to be met in a plea for Compulsory Education. It
may also be urged that, however right and desirable, it is inexpedient, and, indeed,
unworkable in this country. But to such objections, I think, two answers at least
may be given.
124 THE ATTEMPT.
First, if the princijjle is a right one, it should not, and cannot be unw^orkable.
We have the high authority of one of the most zealous friends of education in the
present day, Dr Lyon Playfair, for asserting that " true principles, infused into legis¬
lation, rapidly develop themselves into efficient action."
Secondly, we know that the system of Compulsory Education is actually in oper¬
ation in various countries, and with results which need not discourage us from the
attempt to introduce it in our oM'n.
Let us look at some of tlie European states in which this system is enforced.
Prussia, we all know, is one of these,—whether it has there proved a success or
a failure, let the events of the past year testify. In the late Franco-Prussian war, we
had a nation educated in accordance with the compulsory system engaged in conflict
with another, whose mental training had not been so secured. There is no need to
tell which of these two came forth victorious from the strife; nor is there, I believe,
need to point out how far the unparalleled successes of the Germans and the
disastrous defeats of the French were due to the special knowledge and general
intelligence of the former, as contrasted with the lamentable deficiency in both tliese
respects of the latter, showing itself in ignorance even of so simple and necessary a
matter as the geography of their own countiy.
In Switzerland, education is compulsory for children of from five to eight years
of age; in Denmark, for those between the ages of seven and foui-teen. In Den¬
mark's insular dependency, Iceland, the compulsoiy system is also carried out with
great rigour. Indeed, an old law of the island decreed, that no couple should be
permitted to marry unless the bride at least was able to read; and thus the education
of the future generation was provided for. This law, we are told, is now virtually
in abeyance, and that for the best of reasons—the necessity for it has ceased, as all can
read. The fact that a police force of three members is found sufficient to preserve
order in this island of 70,000 inhabitants, may not unjustifiably be taken as a j^roof
of the benefits accruing to the community from this system of education.
But it may be urged, that the rigorous measures resorted to for the enforcement
of education in the above-mentioned states ai'e only possible under a much more
despotic form of government than, haftpily, we are subjected to.
Well, it is probably true that such a system of compulsion as that of Prussia,
where the parent is compelled, not only to prove that his child is obtaining some
education, but to send it to the particular school for which it is registered ; or that of
Iceland, where the pastor or overseer of the parish has power to I'emove a child from
its parents, if they refuse to educate it, and board it at their expense with those who
THE ATTEMPT. 125
will teach it, is too much opposed to the sjiirit of the British people to be workable
in England. But there are two kinds of compulsion—direct and indirect; and
where the former is impossible, the latter may still be attainable. With regard to
the respective merits of these two methods, I take the liberty of again referi-ing to an
authority already quoted.
" Direct compulsion" says Dr Lyon Playfair, " is most easily applied when
there is no necessity for it, that is, when the state of public opinion in favour of
universal education is so advanced, that there is a general acquiescence in the desire of
the state, and no need to inflict penalties     Indirect compulsion, which makes
education the only tool with which labour can be begun, enlists all motives, whether
they be good or bad, on the side of the State. The sordid, selfish parent, who wishes
to live on the wages of his children, would find the need of educating them ; while
the prudent, loving parent would be greatly an ally of the State." In the same
speech from which these sentences are taken it is added, that the adoption of this
principle "is a logical consequence of the imposition of education rates ; for, if it be
right to compel a community to educate its children, it must be equally right to
compel these children to receive the education thus provided."
But I must hasten to a conclusion, merely pausing to notice, and, if possible,
meet a special difficulty which seems to lie in the way of the introduction of
Compulsory Education. I refer to the fear that the burden of this system, whilst
preventing, with only just rigour, the wanton carelessness or sordidness of some
parents, will fall with equal harshness, and therefore with injustice, on some who are
actually unable to pi-ocure schooling for their little ones, and whose miserable
pittances require to be eked out by the scanty earnings of these children from their
tenderest years. It is, indeed, but too apparent that this must sometimes be so, as in
the case of poor and feeble widows, whose utmost efforts are scarcely sufficient to keep
absolute starvation from the door. But, unfortunately, in this imperfect world, it
is a rule knowing hardly any exceptions, that every good has also its attendant evil.
In measures which thus affect the whole nation, we must be content if the evil is
over-balanced by the good, and m;ist not rashly condemn the whole principle on
account of some objections to which it may be open. We do, in fact, apply tins
rule in other things. Thus, we all admit and extol the great benefits accruing from
the introduction of machinery in spinning and other industrial arts; and yet v/e
know that individuals have suffered from these social benefits.
But, again, it is not impossible to lighten in a measure the weight of this
burden.    This may be done in England, as it is done in the cotton manufacturing
126 THE ATTEMPT.
districts of Saxony, by what has been termed " an equitable compromise between the
claims of industry and school learning"—the adoption of half-time schools for
children employed in the factories. That this plan has been found to work well, is
best shown by the fact, that " the children under this system appear to be ultimately
as well instructed as those under a whole-time system."
Finally, I would return to the argument, that if the principle is a true one, it
ought to be and must be carried out, although all society should require to be
revolutionized for its accomplishment. Public opinion may not be ripe yet for its
carrying out (although a strong argument used in its support is that, in Scotland at
least, the sense of the country is in its favour); but if this is so, the first study of all
who are interested in this subject, and who have any influence on the mind of the
nation, is to do what lies in their power to bring that mind to a mature judgment
on this point.
To all objections on the score of impossibility, we may reply with Mr Ruskin,
" You say that it is impossible.    I have nothing to do with its impossibility ; but
only with its necessity."
Meigeag Bheag.
'QoBlin   dTaslU   iit   Spring.
A VALE more lovely eye hath never seen;
The stream flows low within its rocky bed ;
The curtaining foliage of most tender green.
By soft and dewy spray is ever fed.
The heart, oft sad, is here by nature led
To lose its sadness, midst the emerald sheen
Of life, which mirrors forth a purer Being.
Even soul life, in a higher region bred.
Is deepened by the harmony of lays
Which echo Nature's voice, in these her days
Of growing gladness at the coming Spring,
And in such mood our inner spirit prays
That God would mercifully guide our ways,
And make our life all harmony within.
E. L. E.
THE  ATTEMPT. 127
Our cathedral is undoubtedly one of the finest, as well as one of the oldest, build¬
ings in our town; and as we see it year after year raising its massive tower above
the smoke and the chimney-stalks surrounding it, it is little wonder that wo learn
to regard it with feelings of [jeculiar pride and admiration. "We feel a sort of per¬
sonal property in it; it belongs to us, does this grey old edifice, by right of inherit¬
ance, for our fathers laid those heavy stones one on the top of the other, and carved
those grotesque faces that peer out from different corners, making us almost afraid
with the malicious wickedness of their faces, and set up those strong pillars, which
seem to send forth a dumb defiance to the universal law of destruction. Still more,
it is ours by reason of our love. We have grown up beneath its shadow ; we
have hidden behind its buttresses; we have moralised in childish fashion over its
grave-stones; outside, in the twilight, long before we knew aught of music, we have
stood and listened, with a strange mixture of awe and delight, to the organ within,
as it rolled out in tliunder-tones, and anon came low and tremulous, as scarcely
daring to break the stillness. There we first learned something of the great
mysteries of our being ; there our minds first dimly attempted to grasp the idea of
the infinite; there, when the turmoil of the city had deafened us, when our heart
was filled with the cares and worries of life, when our faith in the unseen was dim,
have we turned, and in its grey stillness the old cathedral has preached unto us
patience ; has spoken of the submission that is greater than victory, has reminded
us, as in an undertone, of the rest that remaineth. What the hills are to the moun¬
taineer, what the sea is to the sailor, that has the cathedral been to us,—separate
from us, infinitely above us, yet bound to us in a close companionship.
It stands in a not very clean street, this venerable building, but in a street that
used to be a principal one centuries gone by. There at least one notable action took
place between the Scotch and English; and the many lesser skirmishes that have
arisen before and since, the many brawls and private quarrels, it would be difficult
indeed to enumerate. But where once swords leaped only too readily from their
scabbards, and where blood oftentimes ran like water, bare-footed children now play,
in happy ignorance of the past; from the windows where noble ladies looked down
on the street, clothes are hanging out to dry; while below second-hand book-stalls
and pawnbrokers' shops drive a brisk trade. At tlie top of this street, but a very
little removed from the noise and turmoil of it, stands the cathedral.    We get, per-
128 THE ATTEMPT.
haps, the finest view of it from the Bridge of Sighs, so called because it leads to the
burying-gronnd, a rocky eminence, which, with its shrubberies and monuments, forms
a noble background to the building. From thence we see it stretching before us in
a long and almost unbroken line, for the transepts project so little beyond the aisles,
that it does not present the usual form of a cross. At the end nearest us stand tlie
Chapter-house and the Lady-chapel, which are not so high as the rest of the edifice;
and from the centre of the nave, supported on either side by the transepts, rises the
tower, square and massive at its base, but taking an octagonal form, and tapering
away as it ascends. Round the building runs a line of massive gurgoyles, those
hideously grotesque faces in which architects of the Aliddle Ages seem to have de¬
lighted, grinning as if in mockery of the saints inside. It is difiicult to imagine with
what ideas they could have been made so prominent a decoration, but in former
times all the strange and horrible fancies, as well as the pure and noble ideas of a
people, found their expression in the architecture, instead of as now, in the literature
of their country.
The interior of the cathedral is, however, even more remarkable for its beauty
than is the outside.    On entering, we look up the long nave, pillars on each side of
ixs, each a cluster of seven columns, up past the groined arcli in the centre, where
the tower rises on its four columnar piers, past the pillars of the choir, with their
foliated capitals throwing shadows on the tesselated floor, straight up to the great
eastern window, where, in a golden flood, the light streams in.    Above the pillars of
the nave is the triforium, which is closed, and rising still above that is a row of
clerestory windows.    Just beyond the central arch stands the choir, separated from
the nave by a beautifully carved screen, and under the low-browed arches adjoining
that are the steps leading down to the crypt.    If we pass up the aisle, we come to
the Lady-clia2:)el, which is, as usual, placed at the extreme end of the cathedral.
The pillars here are more slender, the capitals more richly carved, the whole archi¬
tecture lighter, and at the same time more ornamental, than in any other part of the
edifice.    Here is one solitary monument raised to the memory of an archbishop.
Hard by is the Chapter-house, in form of a square, the roof supported by a strong
pillar, on which are engraved the arms of the bishop who erected it.    Singularly out
of keeping are those armorial bearings in a building raised for the worship of Him
who  so despised all worldly honoui'S.    Going down into the crypt, we pass from
light into comparative darkness.    This part of the building forms quite a lower
church, and was in fact, after the Reformation, used for some time as a place of
public worship.    It is a series of low-browed vaults, supported by short and im-
THE ATTEMPT. 129
mensely strong pillars, while under foot are the graves of the dead. Near the centre,
on a raised platform, is a tomb, said by tradition to be that of our patron saint.
The windows hei'e are smaller than in the nave overhead, but the coloiiring is
exquisitely rich ; there is here a subdued twilight, a calm stillness, that is more than
refreshing ; with no brightness, no idea of gladness, at least there is peace.
Looking on a scene like this, with the beauty of the nave and choir still fresh
in our memory, we begin to understand how the whole Gothic character, with its
vague yearnings and aspirations, its memories of mist, and clouds, and forests, is
expressed in its architecture. How different is this from the Grecian, which pre¬
ceded it. Of those temples, completeness was the most striking characteristic ; they
were finished, they were perfect, yet with a perfection not very high, not very diffi¬
cultly attainable. The beauty-loving nature of the Greek was satisfied by the natural
world around him ; humanity was his highest ideal, and humanity rather in its
physical than in its moral aspect. The Doric pillar represents the strength and vigour
of manhood ; the more slender Corinthian column, the graceful beauty of the maiden ;
and within the temple ai'e the gods—but the gods are men. With the Teuton, the
case is different. He too has a beauty-loving nature, but he dwells in a country of
mists and rains ; a grey countiy, where the hills rise and the trees grow, but where
there is no warm colouring, no glorious sunshine nor soft zephyr; whei-e the great
waves of the Atlantic, rolling in green at his feet, set a mighty barrier to his pro¬
gress westward. He lives in the presence of powers infinitely above him, before
which he is as a straw in a whirlwind. Nature, in her strength, mysterious, in¬
scrutable, is ever around him ; to him God is infinite. His architecture is the dim
expression of what he sees and what he feels. Within, the cathedral reminds us of
the meeting branches of an avenue of trees; and, as in the forest the rays of the
setting sun flicker through the green leaves on the gnarled trunks of the old oaks,
so through the red and purple window they fall with rich colours on the majestic
pillar and the grey tombstone.
The form of the building is a cross; symbol of death and degradation, symbol
of the greatest victory the world has seen, of conquest through sufi'ering, of
triumph over sin. The high tower points eternally to the heavens, telling of a
world brighter than this; and all around are the quiet sleepers, whose rest is not
easily broken. Here, as we sit in the shadow of the pillars, and listen to the tremu¬
lously earnest tones of the Miserere, as they roll down the aisles, and rise and die
away in the vaulted roof, it echoes through our very soul, the cry of a suflering
humanity going up to God. A. M.
June 1871.
130 THE ATTEMPT.
^htit^t^   of  Curlantr.
No. II.
In no other part of Europe, I should think, are distinctions in the social scale so
rigidly observed as in Curland. The four grand classes into which the population is
divided are the Noblesse, the Literaten (comprising pastors, medical men, and
lawyers), the Bourgeoisie, and the Peasants. Each of these classes is surrounded by
a barrier of exclusiveness which is rarely overstept; and, like so many distinct
atoms or grains of sand, though they may sometimes mingle, they can never merge
into each other and become united. The three first divisions I have mentioned
preserve strong and visible traces of their German, and some few of their Swedish,
origin. Pre-eminent among these evidences, is their language; German being the
prevailing tongue though in formal society French is frequently spoken. Then
their family names, among which occur such time-honoured German appella¬
tions as Drachenfels, Kleist, Belir, and the Swedish Keyserling; while, among the
Bourgeoisie, we meet with numberless Schmidts, Miillers, Meyers, and so forth. The
religion of Curland is Lutheran, and the prevailing habits and customs essentially
German. Perhaps the only sentiment shared in common by noble and bourgeois, is
love and sympathy for the traditional Vaterland; and added to this feeling on the
part of the nobles, is generally to be found a deep hatred of the Russian yoke.
Let us first give a glance at the Curland nobleman chez lui. As his revenues
are generally derived from his family estates, he usually resides in the country,
tilling his lands, hunting his game, and administering justice, or what he esteems to
be justice, to his dependents, but a short while ago his serfs. In this latter function
he is assisted by a petty court, chosen from among the chief peasants or farmers.
He lives among his peojile as a kind of patriarch, or little king, though his once
almost despotic power has of late years been considerably, and for the most part wisely,
curtailed by the supreme Bussian authority. Nevertheless, he still has enormous
power over the welfare of his peasantry, and if well disposed, can by his personal
influence, do much to maintain among them good feeling, order, and comparative
sobriety; to say nothing of the good he has it in his power to do by establishing
schools in his domains, and exercising a general supervision over the moral and
temporal interests of _his people. Of course these remarks are applicable to every
gi'eat land-owner in any quarter of the globe ; but they have special significance
when referring to a country where the lord of the soil is approached by the peasant,
THE ATTEMPT, 131
with almost Eastern marks of homage and reverence; and where he is divided from
his dependents, not only by the wide gulf of rank and wealth, but even by a
different language and separate worship of their common Creator ; for, owing chiefly
let us hope, to this difference in speech, the Lettish peasant is accommodated with re¬
ligious services in his own dialect, which are seldom, if ever, attended by his German-
speaking superiors; while, on the great Festivals, such as Christmas, Easter, and
Ascension day, the Lettish service is followed by one in the German language, for
the behoof of the family of the grand seigneur, and such of his household and chief
functionaries as may see fit to be present at it. Unfortunately, this influence for
good is by no means exerted in its fullest extent. Accustomed from his cradle to
the exaggerated lip-service of slavish menials, and educated in all the pride of feudal
prejudices, the Curland count or baron is but too prone to look upon the peasant as
merely a speaking animal, created for his convenience, and existing solely to do his
pleasure. The natural result of this overbearing and contemptuous conduct on the
part of the master is servile flattery, concealing deep and bitter animosity on that
of the servant. Indeed, as a rule, the nobles are regarded by the peasants as their
natural and hereditary enemies, unjust task-masters, whom it is their bounden duty
to outwit and overreach on all possible occasions.
Pride of birth and insolent assumption of superiority are so generally the
characteristics of these haughty proprietors (in Scotland many of them would rank
as small lairds), as to give rise to the biting sarcasm, contained in a proverb popular
among the bourgeoisie :—" Der Mensch fanght mit Baron an," i.e., Mankind begins
with baron ; or, the lowest in the human scale is baron; lower than that is merely
a miscellaneous collection of beings, with or without souls. And yet, they are
scarcely aggressive in theii' arrogance; acknowledge their claims, and they will be
civil, sometimes even courteous; and nothing can exceed the affability with which
the Frau Grafin or Fran Baronin will quit her ancestral schloss for a whole afternoon,
and domesticated under the humbler roof of the Frau Pastorin, beguile the hours
with knitting, coffee, and gossip. They are a kindly disjjositioned people on the
whole, loving much to patronise their inferiors, and too indolent to do much
positive harm ; avaricious, it is true, but not particularly uncharitable, not particu.
larly given to intemperance, not great gamblers, not given to great excess in any
respect. They live a monotonous domesticated life, hunt the fox and the deer, (they
do not hunt the former on horseback as we do ; they form a cordon round a given
space of forest land, and have the covers beaten by little boys, whom they reward by
donations of schnaps, a species  of very strong bi'andy),   superintend their fields,
132
THE ATTEMPT.
smoke, and play cards. In the winter they generally emigi-ate for a short time to
their capital, Mitau; and in the summer, visit some one of the watering-places in
German}^, or on their own coasts. These expeditions supjily them with stock for
conversation for the rest of the year, when they meet enfamille, and pay each other
those ponderous visits, which often begin at ten in the morning, and end at mid¬
night, or are sometimes extended over the space of several days ; for the Curlanders
are hospitable to each other in their way, and exchange spontaneous visits on a vast
scale ; carrying with them children, governesses, tutors, valets, and waiting-maids.
British children, if they could know the rigid course of tutors and governesses
to which their little Curland brethren are subjected almost from their infancy,
would assuredly be more contented with their own mitigated fate. No sooner has
the tiny comte or comtesse learned from the nurse to lisp a few words in the Lettish
tongue, than a German governess is engaged to teach it to speak what is in reality
the child's mother-tongue. Arrived at the mature age of four, the little victim
is usually placed in the hands of a French honne,, to acquire betimes an easy accent
and fluency of expression in this most polished of European languages. At about the
age of seven, education begins in earnest—German, French, English, Russ; and
for the boys, Latin and Greek,—all must be studied by these unfortunate little poly¬
glots ; then at sixteen or seventeen begins the university course at Dorpat, Berlin,
or Heidelberg. And yet, notwithstanding this comprehensive curriculum, a highly
educated, scholarly man of family is a rara avis in Curland. To be sure, when they
go to the university they need not study ; their way of life is already marked out
for them; if they have but few paternal acres, they must obtain a seat in some
government bureau, which exacts but little scholastic attainment for the performance
of its duties. The question was ouce mooted in my hearing, why the needy sons of
noblemen could not embrace some profession, " why," replied a cynical old doctor,
" to be even a pastor, it is necessary to know something."
When I used the word indolence, I should have mentioned that I applied it
only to the nobler sex. The ladies of Curland are most energetic and exemplary
in the jierformance of their domestic duties; ruling their households, and generally
their husbands too, with judgment and discretion; not disdaining the smallest detail
of kitchen economy, making clothes with their own ftiir hands for the 7narniiton, who
assists the cook, and gives his services in consideration of receiving instruction in the
culinary art, and being supplied with food, sleeping-room, and raiment.
I could have added many details regarding domestic life in a Curland mansion,
and given a sketch of the Curish baron of the old school;—a very rough, unkempt,
THE ATTEMPT.
133
illiterate specimen of the human race, indeed,—but I must trespass no more at
present on the patience of my readers. In continuing these imperfect sketches in
the next number, I shall take for my subject a few particulars concerning the most
really influential and respectable class of society in Cuiiand, namely, the Literaten.
Jeannie.
Chapter I.
A VEKY bright face had Katie Macrae, not precisely pretty, but pleasing, with
what is better than prettiness to those who understand it, a frank, intelligent ex¬
pression. She had sweet brown eyes too, that looked you straight in the face, and
hail- that lay in soft bands round her small head; her figure was graceful, and her
movements full of the elasticity of youth and energy; altogether, though not a
beauty, she was one on whom her lover's eyes might gaze with pride and pleasure.
So thought Charlie Jocelyn, as he came quickly towards her up the gravel walk by
the river. She was waiting for him at the seat where they had their daily chat
before going into the house to dress for dinner; and as she turned with an expectant
smile to greet him, she would have made a good picture in her fresh summer dress,—
a bunch of roses in her hand, and the light from the rippling water, and the shadows
from the overhanging willows crossing and chasing each other where she stood.
Wliile these two are enjoying their privileged half-hour, let us glance at their sur¬
roundings.
Mr Macrae was a well-to-do merchant in London, not one of the merchant
princes, for he lacked the daring of a successful speculator; his imagination was in
some respects over-acute, and he realized the results of possible failure too keenly to
risk taking a step from the safest of beaten tracks. He was devoted to his
house, and many years ago had purchased the little house—half cottage, half villa—
where he now resided. It was prettily situated on a quiet reach of the river, and
everything had been done that a refined taste could suggest to make it an ideal
resting-place for the tired man of business, Mrs Macrae was a gentle woman, well
suited to preside over so tranquil a spot, and like her husband, was wrapped up in
their children, of whom Katie was the eldest.   Katie's school-life was just over, and she
134 THE ATTEMPT.
returned to excite the envy of her younger sister Nelly, for whom that period had
not arrived, and who consequently remained as yet under the parental roof, where
she bade fair to become the tyrant as well as the beauty of the family; youngest of
all was Harry, a quiet studious boy, who was destined to follow in his father's foot¬
steps.
Shortly after she came home, Katie had met again the companion of her child¬
hood, the aforesaid Charlie Jocelyn, and after a brief renewal of their acquaintance,
he had proposed to her and been accepted, with the proviso, that the marriage was
not to take place till his prospects were more secured. Mr Jocelyn had been an old
friend of Mr Macrae's, and had recommended his son to adopt the mercantile profes¬
sion, in order that he might not know the struggles that had clouded his own life of
comparative poverty; Charlie had obeyed his father's dying injunction, but not with
the best grace; and there were those who averred that he was not half good enough
for his promised bride. She, however, maintained, with the persistence of affection,
that he only needed to be put to the proof to win from others the esteem she
accorded him.
After thus much of preface, we may return to the lovers, who lingered by the
river till Mr Macrae paused at the gate before joining them. He watched them for
a few moments, and his face contracted as if with sudden pain, " What a peaceful
picture it is," he half murmured to himself; "it seems impossible that it can be so
easily destroyed, and yet " Just then Kate beckoned to him, and opening the gate
with the air of a man who makes an effort to go through with something distasteful,
he advanced towards her.
" How late you are, papa ! and you don't look well; is anything the matter ?"
" Nothing that need distress you, my child; let us be happy while we can."
" That is a gloomy sentiment, though ; it sounds as if, ' while we can' would
not be long," said his daughter, still looking at him anxiously. Her father caught
her glance, and at the same time saw that Jocelyn was watching him, as though he
had some clue to the change in his appearance ; so, shaking off his constrained looks,
he answered more gaily.
" Ah, you didn't know that I had any leaning to the epicurean doctrine, but
Charlie here can tell you that the city puts queer ideas into one's head at times.
However, I've left them in the smoke, and now we'll enjoy ourselves. I repeat
that, Kate, and expect you to obey."
" Cei-tainly, papa, it is what I generally do, I think," she answered, and asked
no more questions.    Often, however, in the course of the evening she remarked that
THE   ATTEMPT. 135
her father's manner was unlike itself, that his laugh was loud and forced, and his
eye restless ; and feeling sure that Jocelyn shared her opinion, she followed him into
the hall as he was leaving, and abruptly inquired what was wrong.
" I cannot tell jow, darling; indeed I do not know, I only suspect, but you
must try and cheer him. I think he is much troubled about business matters, and
you know how over-anxious he is."
" Yes, poor papa, he is positively haunted, I believe, by the dread of anything
going wrong. Well, we must hope it will mend soon," and Kate went back to the
drawing-room with an undefined fear pressing upon her, which she recollected two
days afterwards as if it had been a jn-esentiment.
Two days, it did not seem as if much would occur in that space of time, and
yet that was all that was left to her of her joyous girlhood; after those two days
she would be a woman with a woman's cares ; she would have turned one of those
corners in the path which we do not notice as we approach them, but which once
passed, are dark memories in our lives for evermore.
On the second evening after Kate's conversation with Charlie, Mr Macrae, who
had become increasingly restless in his behaviour, bade his children good-night with
unusual tenderness, and told his wife he was going to sit up for some hours to finish
some accounts he was overlooking. He retired therefore to his study, and there the
terrified servant found him next morning seated at the table, his arms folded on
his desk, and his head resting on them as if asleep. Something in his attitude
alarmed her, and finding he did not move thougb she made some noise, she rushed
to Kate's room and awoke her. She, poor girl, the moment she saw the white face,
divined what calamity had befallen, though she tried, as she hurried down stairs, to
believe the suggestion of a fit; a minute examination, however, showed her that
her father was dead, and the little empty bottle beside him too traly explained the
terrible cause. More to give occupation to the servants than for any other reason ;
she despatched one for the doctor and one with a message to Charlie, and then,
appalled at the task before her, she went slowly to her mother's room, carrying with
her a letter she had found vmder the dead man's hand. How she got through that
next fearful half-hour she never knew, but it passed, as even such agony does pass, and
then she had time to collect her thoughts, and strive to excuse the deed while indulging
her own grief. Jocelyn was soon beside her, but even he dared not say that he had
dreaded some such end from the moment that rumours had arisen of the failure of a
great house, involving almost total ruin for many who had been hangers on to it like
her father ; nor could he express his conviction, that while a braver man would have
136 THE ATTEMPT.
weathered the storm, the weak mind lost its balance, and sank into the contempla¬
tion of that irretrievable moral cowardice, as the sole mode of escape from trouble.
After the funeral was over, and the first hurried arrangements had been made,
it became necessary to settle more distinctly the future course in life of the widow
and her family, and for this purpose Kate and Charlie met again by the river-side,
for Mrs Macrae, never an energetic woman, depended now entirely on her daughter's
strength and courage. Neither she nor her husband had boasted of wealthy rela¬
tions, and all that could be done for her by her friends was to continue to her the
possession of the old house, though much of the most valuable contents had to be
sold; for the children they could do nothing, beyond assisting to defray the expenses
of Harry's education. Charlie therefore came to his rendezvous, convinced that to take
Kate away to a home of her own as soon as possible, was the best thing that he and she
could do, and he proceeded to press this conviction upon her with eager words. But
she, meanwhile, had taken counsel with herself, and the result had been far different,
though her heart sank as she tried to tell him so as gently as she could. " Dear, it
is impossible, and you must see it is so if you reflect a little."
" Impossible, Kate ! and why?"
" First, because I cannot leave my mother; I sometimes think the shock will
affect her miud, and I must take care of her; my father's letter trusted her to me ;
and then who is to teach Nelly unless I do so? we cannot afford to send her to school."
" You might still do all that though you were my wife. Why should we not all
live together?"
" No, Charlie, I could not do it; I could not undertake new ties in addition to
those, and it is not fair that you should be the bread-winner for us all; besides, even
what I have said I must do is not enough; I mean to give lessons as a daily gover¬
ness."
" Kate !"—The young man's brow darkened, for he had not forseen any opposi¬
tion. He knew the girl loved him, and he had almost rejoiced that there was now no
authority to keep her from him. " Kate, you are talking nonsense ; do you mean
to throw me over ?"
" No, Charlie, not that; only we must wait, very long I am afraid, and we
must both work hard."
" And you expect that for this fancy of yours, I am to spend the best years of
my life without you 1 and, moreover, to know that you are going out among strangers
to work !"
" There is nothing to be ashamed of in that, and I cannot give up my duty even
I
i
THE ATTEMPT. 137
for you.    Oh, Charlie," and she turned to him with tears in her eyes, "don't make
life harder for me now, you know 1 would not vex you if I could help it."
" Then why be so Quixotic, Kate 1 why not risk something for me ? what have
I done that I should be made to suffer 1" and again, more eagerly than ever, he tried
to shake her determination. In vain she wept, and, even though she knew that such
argument must be useless, spoke of the disgrace that must attach to her as a suicide's
daughter; he grew angry and excited, and at last hinted that she wished to make
some better match. Then her pride came to her aid, and very quietly and firmly she
spoke, " Charlie, this must end ; you know in your heart you are unjust to me, and
you will regret it by-and-bye. I will not be a drag on you, and therefore I would
rather consider our engagement over; I must live as I best can, and wish you better
fortune in the future."
For a minute there was silence, and he stood looking at her with anger and
love mingling strangely on his face, before he answered her. " Very well, I take
that as my dismissal, and I vow I'll iling up everything I've tried for here, and emi¬
grate ; better lose all at once and make a fresh beginning. Goodbye, Kate. You
don't know what you're doing, I believe, but we must each go our own way for at
least many a day to come."
He turned away, but in a moment was at her side again, and with one farewell
kiss, had murmured, as if in spite of himself, a fervent " God bless joxi" and then
was gone. So these lovers parted; and if Kate, in her bitter solitude, almost con¬
fessed to herself that Charlie had not fulfilled her expectations, she did not allow
herself to dwell on that additional pang, but tried bravely to close this volume of her
life and lay it aside, so that she might give herself heartily to her new labours.
Elsie Steivelyne.
A LITTLE splash in the ocean, A little hope-flower withered,
A child's bier sunk in the wave. Cast in the heart's deep sea,
And the ship with stately motion, And the life goes on unaltered.
Steers onward proud and brave ; Bravely and steadfastly ;
But a mother's heart all broken, But ne'er is such bloom regathered,
Went down to her baby's grave. This side eternity.
Jean IE Morison.
s
June 1871.
138 THE ATTEMPT.
'§>tminincitnttB   ot    Jfnr^ign    ^limps^s.
VOYAGE ROTTERDAM THE  HAGUE.
" A traveller! By my faith, you have great reason to be sad. . . . Look you lisp and wear
strange suits ; disable all the benefits of your own country ; be out of love with your nativity, and
almost chide Heaven for making you that countenance you are, or I will scarce think you have swam
in a gondola."—As You Like It.
Trite is the ancient truism, " Travellers see strange things," in these restless times,
when listening is put out of fashion, and passive conjugations eschewed by a world that
affects to master the difficulties of the verb to see for itself. With second-hand expe¬
riences at such a discount, the wistful narrator nivist needs " teach his tale," after the
manner of the Ancient Mariner, by means of some extraneous magnet of superior
potency and interest, enchaining attention to his subject. The weird spell thrown
by the late strange and stirring events on the Continent over the scenes of their
action, has accordingly drawn from the wells of memory the following pereonal im¬
pressions produced by a short tour in the spring of 1867, through simny landscapes,
even then darkened with the forecasting shadov/s of what are now dread realities.
Not the most graphic pen that was ever dipped in staudish, mighty in describing
the overturn of empires, and the grief of worlds, is competent to deal with that
momentous epoch in personal history, -which reveals to each new voyager the
inimical terms on which he and Neptune begin their acquaintance. For an adequate
conception of the hori-ors of a Jirst night at sea, we can only refer the uninitiated to
the hard teaching of that experience which rendered the first thirty-six hours of our
" life on the ocean wave," of the most miserable in my existence. The weather was
of that cheering character peculiar to our coast in spring,—the atmosphere dampish,
the wind easterly, the sky uncertain, and the sea's calm above, covering a " swell
below," which became disagreeably important to our tried consciousness ere many
hours were over. Our berths looked nice, snug, little asylums to get into; but
alas ! how long had we nestled in those treacherous holes, ere we wished ourselves
anywhere in the wide world rather than where we were, possessed by that desperate
indifference to any worse stroke of fate than the present, which is notably characteristic
of the most trying of mundane maladies, sea-sickness.
Life in a berth, under these circumstances, is a strange, dreamy thing, equally
cognizant and careless of its surroundings. The unearthly noises on deck at dead
of night, the murmurs of talk in the saloon, the jumble of the elemental warfare
THE  ATTEMPT. 139
without, the groans and quiverings of the screw, the scream of the whistle, mingling
with the hoarse tones of the seamen, and the pitch, toss, and roll of the vessel, with
attendant vagaries of such moveables as swinging lamps, slamming doors, and
dancing glasses, steal ungently over the passive senses without waking them, unless
when the hearing of clever conversation at table rouses a certain languid interest,
or the beneficent mention of ham and egg for breakfast, stirs one up to a stroug
feeling of being at last fairly extinguished !
On deck, after a painfully gyratory progress thither, Sunday's usual peaceful
calm degenerated into a long day of dull inertness, unstirred by the lazy consciousness
of passing Holy Isle of Marmion interest, Scarborough's rugged headland, Kobin
Hood's Bay, and all the bold beauties of the Yorkshire coast. In the evening, while
within doubtful distance of the Dudgeon light-house, our prospects became enveloped
in a thick fog, which necessitated progi-ess at half and quarter speed, to the tuneful
accompaniment of a screeching trumpet that sounded ominovis as an owl's cry during
the night-watches; and although, next morning, the Dutch stewardess assured us it
was not so teek, our satisfaction was qualified by the further announcement that we
were still off the English coast, not far from Yarmouth Roads.
That day, however, restored in great measure the capability of being interested
in our fellow-passengers, who were more or less entertaining,—from a retired M.P. and
his son, who had been over the greater part of the known world, to a Dutch skipper,
engaged in the transportation of quantities of Newhaven oysters in barrels, for the
formation of new beds off the coast of Holland ; besides a yoimg Dutch gentleman of
pleasing address and superior intelligence; a Scotch Castor and Pollux, twins in
opinion if not in age; and our own party proj^er, which included " that fellow of
infinite jest and most excellent fancy," Mr JNlacYorick, with his amiable and lady¬
like wife, and two damsels eager to enjoy themselves under protection of the learned
and excellent professor at the head of the party. The only strange occupant of the
ladies' cabin was an apathetic personage from Dundee, going to an unpronounceable
place, sounding like Alablaasterdam, who chose to enact the role of " sleeping beauty "
till the morning of the third day, when she woke to electrify us by the most alarming
accounts of the inquisitive character of custom-house inspection.
At last, the long-desired coast of Holland loomed on our sight, sandy and green
and flat, with windmills turning lazily in all directions. The first curious impression
of a new country clings to one, through all after-experiences of its characteristics, and
that introductory glimpse of Dutch shores is a vivid remembrance, whose strange
features became homelike in a somewhat amusing sense, when, as we lay close to the
140 THE ATTEMPT.
shore at Helvoetsluys, one of our passengers pronounced the discriminating dictum,
"Ah ! there are the cocks and hens, they, at least, are the same everywhere."    Here,
too, while waiting for the opening of the canal lock, we had leisure to observe the
human inhabitants, whose shoes first elicited astonished comment, from their being
the clumsiest of wooden sabots, worn without any apparent regard to the comfort of
fitting the foot, though they only cost sevenpence per pair, and last six months.   Even
the natural frolicking propensities of the poor Dutch children are necessarily checked
into elephantine gambols,  and their spirits reduced to a level with their shoes.
Several young women, who came on board vending fruit, were very neatly and pic¬
turesquely dressed in jackets with flowing kirtles of lilac pi-int over underskirts of
black stuff, reaching to the ankles, and pretty little white caps on the back of the
head tied neatly under the chin.    The famous Friesland caps or curches, with deep
lappels or borders hanging over the shoulders, and adorned with the enormous brass,
silver, or gilt horns, which form so remarkable a feature in Flemish costume, are
worn by the older women; and it was soon no uncommon sight to see one of those
redoubted Dutch dames, equipped in short walking garb, driving vigorously along
an equipage, somewhat resembling a home donkey-cart, drawn by a couple of dogs,
or perhaps only one.    Indeed, according to the old phrase, Holland may be judged
somewhat of a paradise for men and horses, and a purgatory for women and dogs.
The easy sangfroid of the Dutchman, as he saunters lazily along, enjoying his cigar
midst the display of female talent in such menial capacities as street scavengere, no less
than the elegant ap])earance of the long-tailed liorses, contrasted with the exhibitions
of canine drudgery, suggests a text for the Society for Prevention of Cnielty to A nimals.
The tedious interval of passing through the canal ended at last in bringing us
alongside the quay called the Boompjes, at Rotterdam, where the first strange feeling
of live contact with foreign parts had barely seized ourselves, ere our luckless luggage
was also taken possession of, ruthlessly exjrosed, and examined by those bugbears to
every traveller, the excise officers. Escaped from their clutches, our party was taken
in tow by a commissionair-e, from the Hotel Pays Bas in the Hoog Straat, who, duly
impressed by the profound lingual proficiency displayed by Mr MacYorick in signifi¬
cantly referring to the warning placard, Yerboden doorgang, as translatable, " No road
this way," piloted us through the strange streets, to me soon impregnated with a
strong home flavour from the sight of " Colraan's Mustard" in a shop window.
Rotterdam is not a pretty town, but neither is it uninteresting. The streets,
irregular, narrow, and intersected by canals in all directions, present a picturesque
appearance, heightened by the airy jaunty as[)ect of tlie gaily-painted houses, wliich
THE ATTEMPT. 141
are, moreover, characterized by the eccentricity of being invariably built off the perpen¬
dicular. We could not ascend the stairs in our hotel without being made sensible of
theii- elastic and shaky construction; and from the windows of the higher storeys, the
view of the houses opposite was sufficiently distinct to lead us to take great interest in
the life pantomimes exhibited, if it did not quite realize the old joke of shaking hands
across. Several markets, held in the streets, render them amusing, if not fashionable
promenades, in which l)eggars are permitted to exercise their calling twice-a-week,—a
beneficent stipulation, which, it is to be hoped, prevents their being hungry on other days.
The principal object of attraction in Rotterdam is the cathedral, an imposing
structure, with an extensive view obtainable from the summit of its handsome tower,
after an ascent of 360 steps; but our first dutiful pilgrimage was made to the monu¬
mental statue of Erasmus, the astute and scholarly Fleming, whose satirical genius
threw the shadow of disrepute upon the monkish system, previous to its receiving the
heavier blows of Luther. The burning down of the whilome picture gallery was
pathetically communicated to us by the commissionaire, who, in lauding the gems of
art which it had contained, assured us, we should be " so sorry when we did not see
them." This poor youth's English was not of the most grammatical, notwithstanding
his impressive reference to powerful testimonicals in his favour, from our travelling
fellow-countrymen ; the waiters could speak but little ; and no questions, addressed
either in English or French, to respectable-looking street passengers met intelligible
response, unless in the notable instance of Mr MacYorick, whose deferentially polite, if
not very clear appeal to a good natured Frau, secured for us the way home, by mention of
the Hoog Straat. The analogies suggested by the language were striking and frequent.
Verboden doorgang looked like the Scotch "Forbidden to gang;" apotheeke was " apothe¬
cary," and rooken at once proclaimed its affinity to " reek." Notwithstanding these
recommendations, the Dutch tongue failed to impress us with either a sense of euphony
or intelligibility.
Our first day on terra Jvrma was spent at the Hague, reached from Rotterdam by
a railway that passes the famous towns of Schiedam and Delft. The seat of Dutch
royalty is a gay, clean, bright town, with nice-looking people in the streets, especially
well-dressed ladies. Dutch women seemed to us cither very stoiit and unwieldy, ox petite
and pretty. In Rotterdam I was stmck with the former characteristics ; but here we
saw a number of tidy little creatures, smartly and tastefully attired, tripping across the
promenades in the sunshine. The peasant women trudged along in more sober fashion,
carrying market baskets on the crowns of their enormously broad, slouched sun-hats.
From our inspection  of the little picture gallery in the Hague Musee, do  I
142 THE ATTEMPT.
date my first acquaintance with real genuine art. The building contains also a
collection of curiosities, including divers relics of Peter the Great of Eussia, and our
own William and Mary; but the ruling interest is attached to the pictures, first and
foremost of which stands Paul Potter's world-renowned " Bull." It is, for power
and breadth of conception and execution, an extraordinaiy work of art, while its
life-like vigour is perfectly startling in effect, the strong, downright animal aspect of
the bull being brought out in grand relief against the quietly contemplative expres¬
sions of the cow and " Gentle Shepherd." Eembrandt's well-known representation
of a "Professor's Anatomical Lecture," strikes the mind powerfully with its truth¬
ful expression and wonderful accuracy of detail; but a more pleasing impression is
produced by a " Cottage Interior " of Gerard Dow, painted with all the truth and
naivete of the Pre-Kaphaelite School, without its occasional bold, harrowing effects.
My attention was particularly attracted by two shadow pictures, in one of which the
light of a candle is thrown athwart a jewelled ornament which a lady is putting in
her ear, and in the other, a stream of sunlight, slanting through pillared arches in the
back-ground, falls full upon the figures of a lady and her dog in front; also two female
heads, both Magdalens, the first, dark in complexion and suffering in expression; the
other, with fair hair shining round an exquisitely beautiful and touching face.
Hurrying thi-ough this little temple of painting, we started in a large landau,
thrice seated across, and open at the sides, for the Palace in the Wood, summer
residence of the Queen of Holland, which is more accessible from the haunts of men
than the fairy-tale associations of its name might lead us to supjwse. Darkened by
no bosky glades to hide a Robin Hood or wandered babes, nor tangled thickets to
bewilder a fairy prince, the approach leads through a long succession of avenues of
thinly planted trees, mostly elms, through whose early spring verdure, the sun¬
beams glanced down with a kindlier greeting than that of the east wind which
pursued us during the whole course of our drive with relentless rigour. The
abode of royalty is little more than a plain country house, fitted up in a truly airy
and summery style, lacking any display of that regal magnificence essential to our
insular ideas of court surroundings ; her Majesty's dining-room and boudoir being
furnished in the extreme of simplicity,—the latter decked out in white and green and
gilt, the chairs cane-bottomed, covered with cushions, and the principal ornament in
the room a beautifully soft portrait in oils of Prince William of Orange, to whom
some interest was attached for us, from his frequent visits to this country. Most of the
halls and passages are of marble, and the principal corridor hung with little picture-
gems, illustrative of that natural mellowed style which is the characteristic beauty of
THE ATTEMPT. 143
Dutch painting ; but in a grander respect, the king's audience chamber is the sight of
the palace. The apartment is a panelled octagon, covered with a series of allegorical
pictures, the work of Rubens and his pupils for more than six years. The most con¬
spicuously treated subject is " The triumph of Prince Frederick Henry," whose victo¬
rious car, surrounded by a profusion of grand and imposing figures, is drawn by white
horses, whose heads seem to stand out from the back-ground, with the eyes' watchful
glance meeting the beholder's at every point. The effect of the work as a whole is
striking beyond description, the scale being immense, and the subjects treated with all
the power and brilliancy distinctive of the pencil of the great Flemish artist.
Our out-door route continued through the pleasing vistas of light green foliage,
along a pretty suburban road dotted with nice houses (one of which was rather curi¬
ously christened Banclwry Villa) to Sch\evening, the great marine resort of Dutch
fashionables, in which respect I cannot say we found it at all agreeable. On going
down to the beach, not particularly clean, and very sandy, with some old fishing-boats
hauled out of reach of the angry surf, we were so persecuted with the east wind, redolent
of strong sea-smells, that we were fain to retreat to the shell bazaar, there to examine
the curiosities, and await the result of Mr MacYorick's magnanimous demand for some
refreshment, which the appreciative landlord translated into " brood en kaas en hoffy"
In returning, we passed the Winter Palace, one of the plainest of structures,
and thence again to the station. The disadvantage of travelling at a rate which
permits the guard to walk along the foot-boards, inspecting the passengers' tickets
while the train is in motion, is an endurable ordeal, compared to its enforced pre¬
liminary of being half-stifled in the waiting-room, where, according to the
Continental custom, travellers of both sexes assemble previous to the opening of
the doors leading to the platform. During this interval, it is the self-denying
custom of Dutch gentlemen to walk up and down sipping demi-tasses of eau sucree
and smoking; while the ladies sit with resigned composure and lowered veils, in
the oppressed atmosphere, to which closed doors and windows forbid any egress
or relief. Assuredly, in this country, the use of the weed, though now almost universal,
is still sufficiently restricted within the rules of good breeding to render such an
abuse of the habit obnoxious to English feeling; but facilis descensus averno I
Some of the tendencies of this professedly subjective, undefined, and mystic age
may yet be forced, like this discursive paper, " to end in smoke." Elfie.
{To he continued.)
144 THE ATTEMPT.
OUR   LIBRARY   TABLE.
Memorials of Agnes Elizabeth Jones.    By her Sister.    With Introduction by
Florence Nightingale.    London : Strahan & Co.    1871.
After a long preparation, first as a visitor of the sick and poor in the neighbourhood
of her own Irish home, and then under regular training at Kaiserswerth, and at St
Thomas's Hospital, London, Agnes Jones accepted the charge of the Liverpool Work¬
house Hospital, where the experiment was to be tried, for the first time in England,
of introducing paid and trained nurses, in the place of the ignorant pauper women
usually employed in workhouses. In less than three years, Miss Jones " had reduced
one of the most disorderly hospital populations in the world to something like
Christian discipline, such as the police themselves wondered at." She died at her post,
of fever, caught from some patients. We have, in the life and work of this noble
Christian woman, one of the most striking instances which have been given in our
day of the power of simple faith and entire self-consecration.
We could have wished to find in this Memoir fuller particulars of this work at
Liverpool, with which Agnes Jones's name will always be associated, but the gi-eat
pressure of occupation there left her little time for either letters or diaries. The most
interesting part of the book, as far as personal details are concerned, is the description
of life at Kaiserswerth.
Napoleon Fallen: a Lyrical Drama.    By Robert Buchanan.
London: Strahan & Co.    1871.
Mr Buchanan's poem is an answer,—the only true answer—to the questions he
asks in the dedication,—<' Is the soul safe ? Shall the sick world be well 1" In his
conception of " Napoleon Fallen," we have the type of a strong nature stricken
down, blind and helpless, which, in stretching out feeble arms for anything to cling
to, " touches God's right hand in the darkness, and is Kfted up and strengthened."
A man, whose Life had been one long ambition, who had aimed at the building up of
a mighty empire upon " lies and liars," owning it a failure, and, amidst the ruins
of his throne, turning from the curses of the living, and the reproaches of the dead,
to his old childish prayer at his mother's knee. But Mr Buchanan answers also
his second question, and tells us of the healing of " a sick world." From a dead
France, lying trampled and bleeding in the dust, he points to a coming kingdom, not
reared upon shifting sands.
" A city fairer far than all ye plan,
Built on a rock of strength,
It shall arise at length
Stately and fair, and vast, the city meet for man."
And his description of " this the fair city of man," is perhaps the finest passage
in the poem.    We heartily recommend his little book to our readers.
THE ATTEMPT. 145
^httt^nB   0 i  Curia nir.
No. III.
The Literaten class in Curland, as I have already mentioned, and as its name
denotes, comprises all that portion of the community engaged in the practice of the
learned professions; though I ought to remark, par parenthese, that certain of the
higher walks of the law are only open to persons of noble birth, who, in this instance,
depart from their time-honoured custom of looking down with contempt upon any
pursuit unconnected either with a diplomatic career, or with the cultivation and
supervision of their own estates.
The Literaten are, in their own fashion, as proud and exclusive as the nobles
themselves, laying claim to a kind of aristocracy of letters in virtue of what they
consider their monopoly of intellectual culture. " Do you know," say they, " why
the Adligen are so reserved in their intercourse with us? Because in unrestrained
conversation they would fear to betray to us whom they call their inferiors, their
gross and pitiable ignorance." This stricture may be somewhat severe, but it is not
without a foundation of justice. Much of the bitterness of feeling, however, existing
between the professional class and the possessors of the land, is engendered by their
respective relations of dependent and patron ; for the very spirit of serfdom, though
in a modified degree, seems to pervade every class of society beyond the magic circle
of nobility. Let us glance at the position of a country physician in Curland, and in
doing so, be it remembered that such a functionary is of far higher importance in a
territory where towns are few and far between, than in a country where steam sets
distance at defiance, rendering accessible the most eminent skill that great cities can
afford. A physician, then, is appointed by vote to a group of estates, forming a
wide and straggling district. Each landowner contributes a certain sum towards his
support, and the noble on whose estate he is appointed to reside, allots him a
dwelling house, and supplies him with wood for his stove, and fodder for his ill-fated,
much enduring horses. If he happen to be married, the " Frau Doctorin" and her
daughters are patronised or snubbed at pleasure by the Frau Grafin; the future
career of his sons canvassed by the Herr Graf, and every detail of his establishment
scrutinised and commented upon by all the members of his patron's family. In
return for these manifold benefactions, the man of physic is expected to pay a weekly
visit to every estate in his district, on the chance of finding among the numerous
  T
July 1871. ~
146 THE ATTEMPT.
household, and more numerous out-door servants, some one or more patients in need
of his aid. In addition to these periodical visitations, he is of course liable to be sent
for at any moment to attend special cases. As his visits are contracted for, this
occurs pretty frequently; and the number of miles traversed by the wretched doctor
in the course of a week under a scorching sun, or assailed by pitiless blasts and
driving snow, always in an open carriage or sledge, would surely amaze many of our
British practitioners, who consider themselves over-worked and hardly dealt with.
Did every separate visit involve a distinct fee, it is probable that the " canny"
Curlanders would be more reluctant to avail themselves of medical skill.
But the Curland doctor leads a sufficiently merry life notwithstanding. The
roads are not akvays the next thing to impassable, nor is the snow perpetually
falling in blinding showers; and he no doubt finds much amusing variety in smoking
a cigar in monseigneurs own special apartment, and in retailing the latest and most
piquant gossip, or it may be even scandal, in madame^s salon. His laborious duties
are also, doubtless, brightened by the anticipation of the return in the evening to the
cosy, well-warmed home (cosy enough to him, poor benighted creature, who revels
in the tall shining porcelain stoves, knowing nothing of the bright cheerful light and
heat of a blazing English fire), to the home where wife and children await him, with
a glad welcome and a comfortable meal, to be followed by a pleasant chat and the
reading aloud of some entertaining volume of fact or fiction. Heading aloud is
greatly in vogue in the domestic circles of Curland; and a class of literature often
finds its way to these obscure country homes, of a superior character to the style of
reading mostly in favour among many of our so-called well-educated British youths
and maidens. Indeed, so far as I have seen, a much higher order of intelligence is
generally to be found among these country-bred Curlanders than among persons in
a similar class of life in our own i-ural districts. But, alas ! they lack the one grace
which lends a charm to our English middle-class society;—refinement is wanting,
refinement of thought and expression, so indispensable to our notions of agreeable
company. On high-days and holidays, the worthy doctor usually orders his equipage,
by which grandiloquent name he designates his jolting and cumbrous conveyance,
and drives with his family to the Pastoral, to keep the feast with his old friend and
crony, the Pastor, who in days gone by has probably been his fellow-student at the
University of Dorpat, and exchanges with him the familiar appellation of Du, com¬
mon to all those who have jjassed their college-life together. But the Pastoral well
deserves a paragraph to itself.
This great institution represents the most liberal and primitive hospitality of a
THE ATTEMPT. 147
province, noted from time immemorial for the exercise of this princely virtue : it is the
place of rendezvous, the rallying point of young and old, gentle and simple, from the
most remote points whence it is by any possibility attainable.    Is Baron So-and-So
travelling with his family in his lumbering coach-and-four to visit a distant relation, and
does he wish to break the journey ? He makes a little ditour and arrives at the Pastorat,
sure of a kind reception and substantial refreshment.    Has Count Such-an-One been
paying a spontaneous visit, and has he found that his friend has departed for a day's
hunting to a neighbouring estate ?    He drives to the Pastorat to console himself
with a chat about the crops and other topics of interest with the untiring, unfailing
clergyman of the district.    Do the lonely tutor and wearied governess wish to
exchange for a few hours the stiff routine and formality of the baronial Schloss for a
little social converse and cheerful relaxation ?    Let them repair to the Pastorat, and
whatever may be their creed or nationality, they may be sure of being heartily
welcomed as acquisitions to the family circle.    Then what pen could do justice to
the noble celebration of the seasons of Christmas, Easter, and Whitsuntide in these
hospitable dwellings !    When noble and  bourgeois meet to beguile the time with
cards, dancing, and merry games, for which every facility is afforded by the spacious
uncarpeted rooms ; when the elders join with the juveniles, and condescend to enjoy
themselves thoroughly in simple unsophisticated fashion !    Who but those who have
experienced it, could form an idea of the pleasurable excitement of arriving early
about four o'clock in the afternoon, and stationing one's self at the window which
commands a view of the long monotonous road, to watch the approach of the sledges
or carriages that soon begin to follow each other in rapid succession, and to speculate
upon their probable owners.    For no invitations are issued for these gatherings ; the
generous Frau Pastorin makes her abundant preparations, and then seats herself in
state to receive all who may present themselves, well assured that her feast will be
honoured by a full complement of guests.    But life, even in a Curland Pastorat, is
not entirely composed of Christmas fetes and Easter celebrations; it is therefore
high time to turn to the more serious affairs and occupations of our reverend
entertainer.
The Lutheran Pastor generally commences his career, after leaving the univer¬
sity, by engaging himself as tutor in a noble family, until such time as he is able to
jiass his final examination, and becomes eligible for receiving the rite of ordination.
During this tedious period of enforced sojourn in the rich man's house, the young
Pastor-expectant but too often learns the lesson of—I had almost said servility, which
unfortunately not seldom marks the bearing of Pastor to nobleman ; a too deferen-
148 THE ATTEMPT.
tial manner, which frequently covers bitter jealousy and impatience of the hated
yoke under which he secretly writhes and chafes. Once ordained, his patience is put
to a still further and equally severe trial; that of waiting through long years for the
living which is to enable him to wed the treues Madchen, whose ring of betrothal he
wears, and to whom he has plighted his faith, probably ia the palmy days of student
life; for a Pastor's courtship is proverbially a long one. The happy day, however,
must arrive sooner or later, and at length kind fate plants him in a snug little
Pastoral, where he may or may not realize the golden dreams of sanguine youth.
His revenues are derived from various sources ; the patrons of the living
contribute a fixed amount in both money and kind, and the peasants pay certain
dues and tithes ; but a very considerable portion of his income is derived from the
produce of his own land, for the Curland Pastors are excellent farmers. One great
channel of gain is the Furbitten, or special prayers for various objects (some of these
being what we should regard as very trivial, such as the convalescence of a favourite
horse, or the success of some little speculation) which the Curlanders, especially the
peasants, have a perfect passion for offeiing up through their Pastor, and for which
they pay according to their station in life. For a peasant, a Fiirbitte need only cost
twenty-five ropecks; while the " quality " must pay five roubles at the very least
for this privilege. Baptisms, marriages, and burials are also lucrative ; though, at
the latter ceremony, the Letts often content themselves with the ministrations of one
of the oldest and most respectable of their own friends ; for the luxury of a Pastor in
full ecclesiastical costume costs them several roubles of their hardly-earned savings.
As the parishes are so very extensive and thinly populated, it is impossible for
the clergy to pay frequent visits to their flock ; they therefore choose the most
favourable season of the year to make progresses round their parish, having
previously made public announcement of their intentions in the church. On these
occasions, those who dwell in the same hamlets, congregate in the largest room they
can select, to await the visit of the Pastor, who inquires into their temporal and
spiritual condition, catechises the children, delivers exhortations, and offers up
prayers. This done, he receives the voluntary offcriugs of the faithful. Such an
expedition is called by the clergy a Gebet-Fahrt ; T regret to say, however, that the
profane among their flock shift the accent from the second to the first syllable, and
call it a Gebet-Falirt, thus satirising ■what they are inclined to consider as the
ra^mcity of their sjjiritual shepherds.*
• Gebet-Fahrt, with the second syllable accentuated, means '^tGTS.W.y prayer-journey; while
gehet is the imperative of the verb to c/ire.
THE ATTEMPT. 149
I believe that the pastor receives nothing from government until he arrives at
the dignity of Probst, or overseer; but of this I am not certain. I should have
mentioned, ere this, that when lawyers and physicians have exercised their calling
for a certain number of years, the imperial government confers upon them the title
of Staatsrath, and gives them the prefix of Von to their names. These honours are,
however, considered of very slight value, being merely consequent upon length of
service, and not upon ability and attainments; whereas the title of Probst carries
with it certain duties and emoluments, which are generally the reward of earnest
labour and true merit.
Worldly amusements prevail to a great extent among the clergy in Curland.
It is no uncommon thing for a pastor to hurry from the pulpit or the altar to take
his place at the card table; and Sunday in a Lutheran Pastorat is generally a day of
dancing and festivity, the only limitation being, that the Pastor himself is debarred
from dancing, if he has on that day been exercising the functions of his sacred
office.
Of the real state of religion among the clergy, and in Curland society at large, I
am utterly incompetent to judge. There is, doubtless, much worldliness among all
classes, notwithstanding the frequent recurrence of pious phrases in the most ordi¬
nary conversation, and the relations between noble and Pastor on the one hand, and
Pastor and peasant on the other, are often the reverse of amicable ; the churches in
the country are all but deserted by the richer classes, and coldness seems to be the
predominant feature. But on so grave a subject, I prefer to withhold my opinion,
and content myself with offering my modest but hearty tribiite to the exceeding
kindness I myself have experienced from many worthy members of this influential
fraternity, and expressing my sincere appreciation of the many happy days and
merry evenings which I have spent under the hospitable roof of the dear old Pastorat
on Count K.'s estate.
Jeannie.
eT« he. Crufiti.uijtJtL)
150 THE ATTEMPT.
fig^t   in   i^t   §utkntBB.
When the night of life falls thick and grey,
And the sun and sunshine sink away ;
When I vainly strive to see, T say,—
" I must weep and wait.
" To weep—for what the Lord ordains,
To wait—for all He now restrains,
That in His home for me remains,
Where none can weep or wait."
But a still small voice, a quiet word,
In tones but to my spii-it heard ;
But at whose sound its depths are stirred,—
" Why need'st thou weep or wait?
" Plow can'st thou hope thy Sun to see,
When this gross earth doth sever thee ?
Thus never will a morning be,
Though thou should weep and wait.
" Roll round thy earth a little way,
Turn it and thee unto the Day ;
And lightened by each heaven-sent ray,
Thou wilt not weep to wait.
" For seeing what He bids thee see
In the pure light He sends to thee.
Some sight, with much of faith may be—
Unblinded eyes can wait."
The very earth, that heretofore
Looked densely black, is so no more;
The bright sun flings its radiance o'er,—•
I neither weep nor wait.
LuTEA Reseda.
THE   ATTEMPT. 151
p,alu Sinatraj.
Chaptee II.
Very different from her past life was that which Katie Macrae led during two
years after the events described in our last chapter. She carried out her plans,
obtaining employment enough as governess to make some addition to their income,
and devoting the rest of her time to Nelly and her mother ; but there was little in
such a routine to brighten her existence, and often she felt as if the loneliness of her
lot were more than she could bear. Nelly was necessarily little of a companion for
her, especially as her high and wilful spirit required constant watchfulness on the
elder sister's part; and Mrs Macrae had fallen, as Kate had predicted, into a feeble
and premature old age ; while of Charlie, she had only heard once since their last
meeting under the willows. Then he had written her a short, note, confessing his
own hastiness, but declaring himself unable to endure the life of quiet waiting she
had chosen for herself, and reiterating his intention of abandoning business and
emigrating; this he did, to the gi-eat displeasure of his friends, and since then all
trace of him had been lost. Altogether this was a melancholy fate for a young girl,
and only the consciousness of right could have enabled Kate to suppress all outward
evidence of her weariness. In but one house of the many where she taught, had
she found anything like friendly or considerate treatment, and this was from a
family well known to her in happier days. Henry Martin had been early left a
widower, with one little girl, of whom, as of his house, his maiden sister took charge ;
he had often visited the Macraes in their pretty home, and deeply pitying them for
their misfortunes, had secured Kate's services for his daughter as soon as he heard
of her determination to teach. Little Emy had quickly grown to love her gentle
instructress, and Miss Martin herself had taken a deep interest in the patient
painstakmg girl, who so calmly went about her allotted tasks ; indeed, any gleams of
sunshine that crossed her path, she owed to the kindness of these friends; elsewhere
she had encountered the rebuffs and petty slights that are so liberally showered by
the world on the women who occupy her position.
At the end of two years, it became clear that Nelly must pass under some
stronger rule than that of home, and when by the aid of Kate's old schoolmistress
this was arranged, it was equally evident that the time thus left free must not be
spent iu pleasant idleness, for Harry too was growing up, and Kate must strain every
152 THE ATTEMPT.
nerve to earn more money on his account. Steadily, therefore, she continued to
work, and silently submitted to the disagreeables her work entailed. In one house
particularly her temper was sorely tried, but as her salary there was good, she dared
not rebel. Mrs Plumptree was one of those narrow-minded women, who combine
what would be priggishness in a man, with an unbounded sense of their own import¬
ance and dignity. She had a large famUy, and reaped from her children the natural
fruit of her ungenerous habits of mind ; indeed, she could hardly fail to perceive that
after six months of Kate's tuition, her daughters were far more solicitous to please
their governess than their mother. Their continual reference to Miss Macrae's
wishes and opinions did not induce their somewhat jealous parent to regard that
young lady with greater favour; and it was with something like exultation that, on
a certain afternoon, her quick eyes espied that which she thought would enable her
to administer a deserved rebuke, and bring down what she regarded as intolerable
pride.
Now what she saw was this,—Kate had been enjoying one of her rare pleasures, a
drive with the Martins, and on their way home they had stopped for Miss Martin to
see a sick friend. Finding some letters to be written for the invalid, Miss Martin
proposed that her brother should drive Kate to the street whence she took the omnibus
home, and then return for her; he complied, but in that short distance, fate, in the
shape of Mrs Plumpti'ee, passed by. We have said our heroine was not beautiful,
but her expression was variable to a wonderful extent, and night does not differ
more from day than the sedate daily governess from little Katie, happy in a glimpse
of freedom and friendship.
Very righteously indignant did Mrs Plumptree therefore feel as she took in a
glance the well ai^pointed carriage, " so far above her station," the pleasant face of
the owner, and the sparkling eyes of the girl at his side. Next lesson day came
round, and to add to Katie's coming trouble, it was wet; so wet, that she waited
for a few minutes in a shop, in the hope that the shower would abate. Conse¬
quently she was met at the schoolroom door by Mrs Plumptree, watch in hand, with
an ominous frown.
" Ten minutes late, Miss Macrae; this is not what I expect from you."
" I beg your pardon, Mrs Plumptree, it was very wet."
" It is frequently wet, but I cannot therefore have my children deprived of any
of their fitting amount of instruction.
" I will overstay my time ten minutes," said Kate, nothing under the tone in
which the reproof was administered ; and passing on to her woi'k, she had the com-
THE ATTEMPT. 153
fort of hearing one of the children whisper to another, " There's something wrong
to-day, mamma has gone into the study ; do you think it is Miss Macrae is going
to be scolded 1" Unconscious as she was of having merited any rebuke, it was
with some irritation that, as she pxssed the study door on her way out, she found
herself called in, evidently for the purpose her little pupil had supposed.
Mrs Plumptree began her discourse with more than her usual ^lomposity.
" Miss Macrae, you must have observed that I bring up my children with the
strictest regard to what is correct, and naturally, I wish that similar principles should
guide those around them." Kate Ijowed. " Therefore I think it my duty to enquire
into the manner in which you spent "Wednesday afternoon 1"
" I am at a loss to see how my manner of spending the afternoon can affect your
children, as I am not resident, only with them for the hours of tuition ; and I deny
your right to question me."
" Your evading the question shows that you are aware of your indiscretion."
'■ I am quite unaware of anything of the sort, Mrs Plumptree, and as you must
be under some strange mistake, I am willing to explain. On Wednesday, I drove out
with some friends at whose house I teach."
Mrs Plumptree was a tall woman, and severe-looking withal, and now she rose,
and her tone grew colder.
" Some friends, Miss Macrae ! I am sorry to differ, but I saw you in Netly
Street alone with a gentleman, which is hardly according to the '■convenances:
Perhaps, however, you are engaged to him %"
Kate crimsoned, and looked at lier foe with a dignity all Mrs Plumptree's
inches could not crush.
" If you trust me so little, madam, I think I had better give up the care of
your children. Before leaving, I owe it to myself to account for what you saw,
when I think you will regret your ungenerous remarks."
She then briefly mentioned wliat had occurred, with an air that would have con¬
vinced most Avoinen, however sceptical. Mrs Plumptree, however, could not endure
to be proved wrong ; so she laid a little trap, and speaking as if fully satisfied,
said—■
" Ah, I see ; but you should be more careful.   People in your position cannot be
too much so.   Your friend, Miss "    " Martin," said unsuspecting Kate.    '< Miss
Martin, being your elder, should have thought for you. I shall be happy to see
you here on your usual day.    Perhaps you come direct from the Martins, as they
live in this part of the town 1"
u
July 1871. ' ~~ "
154 THE ATTEMPT.
" No, in Carlton Street, and the day is not the same; I shall wish you good
morning."
And poor Kate having given precisely the information Mrs Plumptree required,
made a hurried exit; for now that her first anger was over, the tears were very near
her eyes. The fresh air, however, helped her to restrain them, but she thought bitterly
of her dependence as she walked to her last lesson, and longed with a fierce longing
to be able to answer Mrs Phmiptree with the indignation she felt, and then turn her
back on her house for ever.
Her wrath had hardly cooled when she next presented herself at the Martins'
house ; but it was with very different feelings that she heard the kind voice of her
friend summon her into the drawing-room.
" Sit down, my dear," she said,—a contrast even in this to Mrs Plumptree, who
seemed to think courtesy to a governess superfluous. " Sit down, and tell me who is
Mrs Plumptree 1"
" I suppose I ought to say a lady ; I feel inclined to say a person who lives in
Bruton Street, and whose husband is some kind of Government clerk."
" Oh, and you teach there, you poor child 1"
" Yes; but dear Miss Martin, what do you know of her 1"
" She has been here enquiring about you ; now you must not be angry : " she
added, for thegirl's colour was rising; " and I think she was rather surprised at the
information I gave her."
" What did she ask 1 What did she tell you 1 I must know," cried Kate, im¬
petuously.
" She talked of her anxiety for her children and the convenances.—I am not sure
which she rated highest; and she told me what had passed between you and her."
" It is too bad, I will not go there again. How dare she spy ujion me in that
way," satd Kate, with flaming eyes; " and yet I must do it. Some of my pupils have
gone to school, and I cannot afford to lose more; and oh. Miss Martin, it is cruel ! "
and the overstrained nerves gave way, and the victim of Mrs Plumptree's suspicious
sobbed at her friend's side.
" Poor child, poor Kate," said Miss Martin, stroking her hair gently,
" yours does seem a hard life, but you are a brave girl, not to be turned aside
by indignities. We must see what can be done to find you more pupils, and
free you from Mrs Plumptree; meanwhile, rest assured I told her we had the highest
respect for you, and you were always a welcome guest in our house ;" and so, after a
while, the girl went away soothed and comforted to her lioTise.   And yet, good woman
204 THE   ATTEMPT.
The equestrian statue of Lord Hopetoun in front of it was the work of Campbell
a Scottish artist.
St Andrew's Church (erected as a counterpoise to the Hall of Physicians) was
founded in 1781, its spire being added in 1789. The body of the building is oval
and plain, but is relieved by the portico, which is supported, after the usual Edin¬
burgh fashion, by Corinthian pillars. TJie spire is one of the best proportioned in
Edinburgh. This church being built a little in advance of the other buildings, and
the Hall of Physicians opposite, a little back, gave rise to Henry Erskine's oft
repeated saying, that "the forwardness of the clergy, and the backwardness of the
physicians spoiled the finest street in Europe."
St George's Church is generally admired by the multitude, though severely
animadverted upon by many critics, but by few so strongly as Ruskin, when he
thus describes it:—"One of your most costly and most ugly buildings, the
great church with the dome at the end of George Street. I think I never saw
a building with a principal entrance so utterly ghastly and oppressive ; and it is as
weak as it is ghastly." The original plan of this church was in much better taste,
modelled, as has been stated, from St Paid's in London; but the low state of the
town's finances rendered a considei'able modification necessary. Even with this
modification the expense of erecting it (about £40,000) reduced the town almost to
bankruptcy.
The Assembly Rooms were built in 1787; the Music hall, under the same roof,
in 1843. The latter, though built when the science of acoustics was supposed to be
well understood, is not so well adapted for the conveyance of sound as was St Cecilia's
Hall in the Cowgate.
The statues of Pitt and George IV. are by Chantrey, the former being one of
his best productions. When Chantrey was asked how the one statue was so inferior
to the other, he replied, that in the one he had only a king to represent; but, in the
other he had a nobler and worthier subject,^a great man, a man of genius.
Melville's Statue in St Andrew's Square is placed on the summit of a pillar
136 feet high, which is copied from Trajan's Pillar at Rome. It has always been a
source of wonder to me, why a statue should be exiled to such a height. The more
modern way is to place a statue on a lower pedestal, that it may be not only
wondered at but seen. Henry Dundas, Lord Melville, was a man of great talent
and weight of character. He rose gradually from the post of assessor to the
magistrates of Edinburgh, to that of Secretary of State. He was recognised as the
official representative of Scotland ; and was practically more (what he was termed)
156 THE ATTEMPT.
Kate to accompany him  down a certain glade, whence he assured her a beautiful
Tiew could be obtained.
Though certain that no view existed in that direction, she assented, for want of
any excuse for remaining behind ; and they wandered off to a shady nook, where
Mr Martin abruptly, and with an anxiety that surprised himself, spoke. He told
her with what increasing admiration he had watched her struggles in her loneliness;
how he had longed to see his daughter follow in her footsteps ; how he had felt the
want of such close companionship as he had once known, and asked her if she would
be his wife. Kate paused, surprised and agitated, for though she had felt that this
s'roll portended something, the actual words seemed to come upon her unexi)ectedly.
He watched her quivering mouth for a moment, and then suddenly laid his hand on
her arm.
" Kate, this cannot l)e quite a new idea to you ; it was suggested at least some
time ago by Mrs Plumptree."
Perhaps something in his tone made her fancy him too assured of success, but
she threw back her head, and at the flasli of her eyes, the smile died out of his.
" When did your sister tell you that 1"
" Only a few days ago ; and you do not know how T wish I could save you from
the possibility of such insults.
" Then it was pity made you think of me—it is pity makes you speak to me
to day !    Mr Martin, I would rather toil all my life than accept such compassion."
" Indeed, indeed, you wrong me, Kate. Nay, do not turn away, 1 do not pity
you ; you are too courageous to need it; but I long to take you from such work, and
chei-ish you as you deserve. We have been such friends—can you not love me a
little 1 "
Then a great yearning came OAer Kate, and she sank down on the grass and
covered her face with her hands. What a prospect this was before her ! 'No more
weary days of ungrateful labour, no more fear of poveity and difficulty ; above all,
no more solitary responsibility ; but instead of these, a comfortable home, a secure
future, a kind protector, on whose care and affection she could i-ely. Only there was
one flaw, one thought to mar it all; this was not the old love that once made her
l)ulses thrill,—and with the recollection of Charlie's last kiss yet hidden deep in lier
heart, how could she give herself to another, how take the vows for him, to which
she had once looked forwcii-d joyously.
He, too,—did he really love her? this grave quiet-faced man, whom she had
hitherto regarded as a friend alone; and here she looked up at liim, and saw the
THE ATTEMPT. 157
quiet face a shade paler than usual, and the  calm eyes gazing into hers with an
expression she could not meet.
" jMr Martin," she said, so low he had to bend down to hear her, " I cannot answer
yo\i now ; will you give me a little time 1    I do not think you know my past history."
" Yes, I do, " he interrupted, " but cannot that be as much a bye-gone as my own 1
We do not forget the past, though we are making the most of the present:" the
words were cold, but his voice trembled, and he went on hurriedly.
" Perhaps not; but if I answer now, I could not speak truly. Let me think a
little first, lest I do you an injustice."
" Very well, 1 must be satisfied with that, I suppose; but Kate,"—and he took her
liands again,—" if I come and visit you as usual, will you, too, try to think of me in
this new light 1 Will you tiy to make our friendship end in something sweeter, and
give me a little hope to live on ?"
" I will try," murmured Kate, blushing, and she felt as if the very quietness of
his affection, the sense of calm and rest that it brought, would draw her into an assent
sooner than she imagined. The sun went down in a warm purple haze as they drove
home that night; and as she watched the departing rays, she found herself
dreamily wondering whether, in that "under world," they shone on Charlie Jocelyn
living, and perhaps forgetful; or whether somewhere an unmarked grave was all
of him they could visit witli their brightness. And as she thought over the
stifled heartache of these two silent years, the alternations of wounded pride
and hopeless grief, there came over her, yet more strongly, the craving for peace
that gave to her new lover's words so great a charm. If she could have sped
out on one of those golden sunbeams, and seen that Charlie was true to her, she
would have waited for him unhesitatingly; but must she, for a possibility, hardly
even a probability, during the years that, to her young eyes, looked so interminable,—
must she cloud the happiness of as kind a heart as she had ever known, for the sakii
of one who was either dead or had not thought her worth a single letter ? If Mi-
Martin, as he bade her good night, could liave seen her thoughts, and pressed his suit
then and there, the course of more than one life would have been altered; but so it
is in half the crises of existence, we are ignorant of the precise moment at which to
strike the heated ii'on,—the precise sesame that would open the closed gate,—and
the precious moment passes by and leaves us, perhaps happily ignorant also of what
we have lost. It was not more impossible for ^ate to follow the sunbeams out into
the west, than it is for one human being to read the innermost soul of another, though
it should be their dearest in all the world. Elsie Strivelyne.
To be continued.
158
THE ATTEMPT.
" He could not abide to hear the spring-tide spoken pulingly of, as if it faded, instead of ripening into
summer ; and youth as if it set, instead of dawned into manhood."—On Both Sides of the Sea.
Whaur are the dew-draps gane,
Sjjarklin' sae rare,
The lark's clear matin sang
Cleavin' the air ?
Whaur's a' the freshness fled
O' day's first dawn ;
The purple gowd an' i"ed,
The joy o' morn l
Whaur's the blythe spring-time noo,
Sae tender green;
That crown't the auld earth's broo
Wi' emerald sheen 1
"Whaur's the bit burnie sped
Wi'ts lauchin' glee 1
Whaur hides the snaw-drap's head ?
Can ye tell me 1
Ay, are the dew-draps gane,
SparkHn' sae rare,
The lark's clear matin sang
Ye'U list nae mair.
But by ilk drap o' dew
The green earth's blest,
The lark her sang's tint noo
To warm her nest.
Ay, has the freshness fled
0' dawn's bright hue.
But the quiet lift owerhead
Smiles warm an' blue.
Ye couldna the blythe burnie keep
Wi'ts lauchin' glee.
But in its steid a river deep
Flows to the sea.
Oh, greet na for the dawnin'.
Grown into day;
Greet na for spring-time ripening
To summer gay.
Spring's made but for summer,
Dawniii' for day,
Youth's April's the forerunner,
O' riper May.
An' when through life's het noon-time
We've warked our best.
Autumn and e'en bring wi' them
The joy o' hairst.
The e'en '11 bring the dew-draj)
We've tint sae lang ;
We'll hae insteid o' matins
The vesper sang.
We'll see the gowd an' pur2)le
We saw afore,
Not brightening noo eartli's portal,
But heaven's door.
Ne'er fading noo in common day ;
For thae lichts come
Frae a blessed face i' that country
That needs nae sun.
Jeanie Morison.
THE  ATTEMPT. 159
'§.tmxnxutinttB    of    Jfor^ign    §lxm^BtB,
Antwerp—Brussels—Waterloo.
'' Stop ! for thy tread is on an Empire's dust."—Byron.
"Slow, on the lazy Scheldt," though at "Telegraaf" speed, according to the
steamboat's name, we tasted the lazy luxury of a gliding voyage between " willow
tufted banks" and staked dykes, from Rotterdam to Antwerp. The most
animated objects on these sluggish waters are certain picturesque fishing-boats for
catching shrimps, called schokkers, which, as they fly past with their high-rounded
prows ruflling the still sea into foam, and sails set close to the wind, form a fresh
breezy picture, charmingly in contrast with the sleepy aspect of all else around.
The skiey influences, too,"are remarkable, from the brilliant variety of tints blended
on the horizon into a unique background, for the else monotonous landscape of flat
meadow land, with the usual complement of stunted trees, shaven willows, and
whirling windmills.
Antwerp is eminently ancient, dark and quaint in its features ; though a more
pleasing expression of welcome we could not have desired, than the pretty picture
which it presented as we sailed up to the quay, with the glorious radiance of the
setting sun reflected on its trees, windows, and spires in a thousand bright varying
hues. The architecture of the town is distinguished by all the grim whimsicalities
and odd devices of the Flemish school; and the narrow streets, decked with rude
statuettes of the Virgin andeliild at nearly every corner, have a sombre air, heightened
in eflect by the black-hooded, nim-like dress worn by many of the women.
The cathedral is an awe-inspiring structure;-from  the very perfection of its
Gothic  beauty,^—the    suggestive   realization   of^high     ideal.    The   magnificent
tower rises in a tapering pyramidal form, which can-ies the mind up with it, in
irresistible fulfilment of its aspiring design, "to point a way to heaven."    External
aids to inward devotion are naturally distrusted by a Presbyterian mind; but in
the  very   mould  of this noble cathedral there is   a spiritual attraction, a moral
sublimity,   an<^ elevating  mental   influence   surpassing  any  ordinary  inwrought
refinement of art.    It seemed rather the embodied essence of some pure spirit, whose
nearness in the solemn heart-stirring atmosphere of the dusky gloaming wrought an
expected silence in the soul; as if
" From behind the stony veil,
To hear a wizard music roll."
160 THE ATTEMPT.
The grand portal ovei"shadows the memorials of a history full of poetry and
romance, in the monument and tomb of Quentin Matsj^s blacksmith, who, to win the
love of a painter's daughter, became one of the greatest artists of whom Flanders can
boast. A fantastic fountain adjoining is said to have been wrought by him
without the aid of hammer or tile.
There is an impressiveness of feeling, natural to entering for the first time .one
of those magnificent temples, which have been supposed to msjiire the devotions of
Europe's largest proportion of worshippers, for many centuries. This influence was
deepened on the occasion of our first morning visit, by the contrast of exchanging the
bright early sunshine of the Place Verte, gay with flower and fruit markets under
its pleasant lime trees, for the " dim religious light" of the shadowy interior. On
entering, I was both impressed and disappointed. The devout aspect of the
congregation, ladies with gilt prayer books, and cushioned prie-dieux, poor old
women kneeling on the steps of some side shi-ine, and young market girls prostrate
before the Virgin's picture, with their baskets beside them,—all alike absorbed
in devotion, with bent heads, lowered eyelids, moving li])s.and fingers^ busy
with their beads, made a touching scene. But my admiration was qualified with
wonder at the taste that makes such a clief-d'ceuvre of Gothic art.the mere casket
Jifty* containing thdjj^ worthless ornaments, for which the princijDal reverence of the
worshippers seems reserved. In this respect there was a striking incongruity
between the noble architecture of the cathedral, and the conspicuous painted cross,
wax figure of the Virgin dressed out in tarnished finery, artificial wreaths of
flowers, garlands of ribbons and lighted candles which deck the grand altar. Such
garish contrasts I afterwards observed ably remonstrated against, in Paul's Letters
to his Kinsfolk.
Antwerp is a city of churches, whose wonders might fill volumes. St Jacques
alone contains more beauties than could be compressed within the limits of a
moderate description. Its carvings, pictures, and general ornaments are of rare value
and interest, including a magnificent altar of black and white marble, which is
esteemed Quellyn's masterpiece; and over the beautifully carved oak pews, we
remarked more than one English name and coat-of-arms. A similar interest attaches
to the monument erected in memory of Mary, Queen of Scots, and her portrait by
Vandyke, in the church of St Andrew, which also contains one of Verbnjggen's
beautiful carved pulpits, on the calling of the apostle. The high altar in St
Augustine's church is designed by Rubens, whose grand genius is everywhere
prominent;—his statue in bronze on the Place Verte, his pew, tomb, and extraor-
234 THE ATTEMPT.
Its unique situation and perfect ornamentation command the homage of the beauty-
loving spirit, apart from those associations which seem to write a history on every
stone, and water it with tears. From the centre, where stands the Egyptian
obelisk on the site of the guillotine, flanked by the two great fountains, Ocean and
Navigation, and an outer circle of female figures, representative of the eight defen¬
dant cities of France, magnificent vistas stretched to the gardens of the Tuileries,
the Arc de Triomphe, the noble Corinthian columns of the Madeleine, and the
handsome palace of the Corps Legislatif. This magnificent square, which has out¬
lived the decay of dynasties, and absorbed alike the blood of monarchs and
republicans, speaks most eloquently of the mutability of human institutions.
Our space will not now permit us to infringe on the office of a hand book, and
expatiate on the various phases of Parisian sight-seeing. Of these, the Exhibition
was of course the first, and vivid is our remembrance of the wonders of the vast
mechanical department, and the beauties of the Italian sculpture. Scotch genius is
notably at home everywhere; and our first joyful recognition in the picture galleries
was of the humour of our genial countryman, Erskine Nicol. Surpassing even the
Exhibition, the Louvre was the grandest wonder of all the sights; and the world
may be thankful that the late awful spirit of devastation spared that grand congre¬
gation of its treasures. It is the most interesting feature of such a collection, that
it traces the history of the world for ages, in the varied specimens of its handywork.
Most of the lions of Paris bear this historic interest. The imposing grandeur of the
cathedral of Notre Dame is strengthened by association; the popular memory of one
good king renders the Pont Neuf and its statue of Henri Quatre for ever celebrated;
the world-wide influence of the Bourse lends an interest to its local habitation ; and
the Tuileries tell their own tale, even in ashes. Alas! that the saddest of all the
records should be the latest, that
" Ruin's merciless ploughshare should pass o'er,
And barren salt be sown on yon proud city,"
which our retrospective fancy again sees celebrating the hey-day of her peace and
prosperity.     The   sad   story written   in   her once   beautiful   but   now   disfigured
lineaments may well move us to apply to Paris the sad poetic apostrophe :—
" 0 thou that hast
The fatal gift of beauty, which became
A funeral dower of present woes, and past,
On thy sweet brow, in sorrow ploughed by shame,
And annals graved in characters of flame."
Here the grand tour is ended, the splendid goal reached, and the lingering
162 THE ATTEMPT.
first crusade, and king of Jerusalem, in the centre; and fine edifices i-anged round,
including the noted Hotel de Belle Vue, and Eglise Godenhurg, remarkable for its
portico of Corinthian pillars, directly opposite the Hotel de I'Europe, where we were
most advantageously lodged, both as regards situation and comfort; our landlord an
Englishman, and our names in the visitors' book under that of the Duke of Edinburgh,
who had been attending the wedding festivities of his cousin, the Count of Flanders.
In Brussels were first revealed to us the peculiarities of a continental Sunday. A
monotonous chanting and succession of attitudes on the part of the gorgeously robed
priests, and change of posture^ on that of the people, accompanied by tinkling bells,
swinging censers, and the pealing organ,—such was to us the celebration of high
mass in tlie cathedral. On the conclusion of their devotions, the worshippers
returned to the streets, whose aspect was even brighter and livelier than usual.
Notwithstanding the holiday appearance of everything, my Scotch education was so
invincible that I could not comprehend the purport of bills forced upon us at every
turn by boys shouting Les Courses, till we learned distinctly that certain great races
were being held out of town, under the patronage and presence of the Eoyal Family.
A small commotion was created at table d'hdte by the Queen passing under the
windows on her return, when I had the satisfaction of a glimpse of Her Majesty's
bonnet, which, for the benefit of the curious in fashions, I may mention was trimmed
with yellow ribbons.
The overflow of life in Brussels, so joyous on other days, became sad on this, in
its bearings upon a system of superstitious observance, supposed to cover any amount
of worldly enjoyment. Thus revealed, the religion of the Belgians, beginning and
ending in church, and exacting a certain sum of adoration, confession, and charity
as the payment of a debt securing certain privileges, must act as a sop to the con¬
science, rather than as a saving, sanctifying influence on the life, itself making the
perpetual music of happiness in the heart. The devotional zeal, fervent to a degree
greater than in any other European country, but unfortunately only commensurate
with superstitious bigotry, is fanned by association with much that is beautiful
in nature and art. There is a certain poetry in the worship of the Virgin, such as
must always invest a noble womanly ideal, and a no less potent influence in the
beauty of music, painting, and architecture, which cannot but aflect the mind power¬
fully in regard to religion, as any other subject. By these associative adjuncts, a
mental attitude of love for the beautiful is attained, which becomes a religion of
itself; and though in one sense ennobling, as the beautiful is akin to the good, the
worship of such abstractions is a miserable substitute for Christianity.
THE ATTEMPT. 163
Waterloo demands a visit from every Briton in Brussels, who would not suffer
the consequences of a most unsalutary moral neglect. A Frenchman is such a rare
object in this alarming neighbourhood, that quite a curious commotion was caused
among our guides by the faultless French accent of an English fellow-traveller, who
had lived abroad for ten years, and acquired great lingual accomplishments.
Our expedition by coach was a cheerfully national one, from the blue veils of our
country-women waving on the roof, to the relics and objects of interest collected for
les Anglais. It is one of the finest evidences of modern patriotism, the attraction
which draws all as by a common bond to visit that glorious field, which witnessed
the righting of the wrongs of Europe, at the hands of Britain's bravest sons, under a
leader who never knew defeat.
The new road fi-om"Brussels is not that by which the armies passed to the eventful
scene of action, and, unfortunately for the lovers of ^s You Like It and Childe Harold^
"Ardennes can no more wave above them her green leaves," as the wood of Soignies
has been for the most part cut down. The village of Waterloo, where the Duke of
Wellington fixed his head-quarters, is the first spot of great interest; and the little
domed church contains many monuments to the fallen brave. At the village of
Mont St Jean, we took up a cicerone—though any traveller, possessed of a map and
adequate knowledge of the history of the battle, requires none. As at Quatre Bras,
our great commander chose a position commanding two roads, viz., those from
Nivelles and Charleroi, which, before joining at Mont St Jean, form an irregular
triangle (with Hougomont and La Haye Sainte at its right and left extremities),
within which the British forces were concentrated; the French occupying the
opposing heights of La Belle Alliance.
The Chateau de Goumont, or Hougomont, as christened by the great Duke,
seemed to me the most interesting spot on the field. The place is now merely a
picturesque ruin, part of the memorable hedge remaining, and the growths of nature
luxuriant as ever, but the paelancholy walls battered and blackened like those of
many another stronghold of ancient story. The day was magnificent, and a joyous
atmosphere of peace and content reigned around the spot; in striking contrast to the
awful din of battle raging there, when, as the much coveted key to the British right,
it was the scene of that sanguinary and protracted conflict which opened the battle,
and only ended with the rout of the enemy. The "speaking quietude" wrapping
the whole scene seemed an eloquent testimony to the nourishing effects on moral
fields of " that red rain which made the harvest grow,"
About the centre of the British position, the clumsy mound erected by the King
164 THE ATTEMPT.
of Holland, in memory of the Prince of Orange's wound, rises to a height of more
than two hundred feet; its summit commanding a capital view of the whole field,
which is a wide flat plain, with slight elevations marking the positions of the
belligerent armies. "With the help of this coup d'oeil, we could easily picture the
particulars and progress of the dread conflict: the desperate sieges of Hougomont and
La Haye Sainte; the patient courage of our noble squares of infantry, tried by the
repeated attacks of the French Guards and Cuirassiers; artfd the rashly successful
charges of our gallant cavalry; our persevering artillery enfilading the advancing
squadrons of the enemy, tUl the grand crisis, when, with their right flank turned at
Hougomont, and left by the Prussians at Xapellote and Plancheo-»it, and their
invincible Emperor's guard repulsed in the centre, the poor French turned and fled.
"It was a noble victory."
At the foot of the Orange column, a small building, divided in character between
hotel and museum, contains an interesting collection of relics and curiosities apropos
to the spot, including old newspaper accounts of the battle, general orders, and
oflicial army reports, pasted up on the wall. Interesting monuments are also raised
adjoining, to the memory of Sir Thomas Picton, whose " soul of fire " dictated a
splendid cavalry charge at the cost of his life; Sir Alexander Gordon, struck down
in the act of caring for the safety of his chief's person ; and Shaw, the Life Guards¬
man, who put ten Frenchmen /tors de combat before he himself succumbed.
A grander moral monument must ever cover the memory of the illustrious dead
of Waterloo in that great victory itself, which testifies so strongly to the might of
right as the real secret of success and most potent stimulant of an army's morale. The
heroes of Waterloo will ever be venerated by their country for the courage, devo¬
tion, and steady faithfulness which, under the plain banner of duty, won for them
honours more enduring than the fleeting fame of conquest. " iVe'er can their glory
fade," for
" Agincourt may be forgot,
And Cressy be an unknown spot,
And Blenheim's name be new ;
But still, in story and in song,
For many an age remembered long,
Shall live, the towers of Hougomont,
And field of Waterloo."
Elfie.
(Ta ht- ConlZTiLLtd.)
THE ATTEMPT. 165
"^x\in   Italia."
Such a wild dreary night it was, that though the fire burned biightly in the grate,
and my own little parlour was cosy and warm, still that dreadful requiem the wind
was sighing, sounded in my ears and echoed in my heart. It made one think of
wrecks at sea, of sailors crying to God for help, and no hand stretched out to save
them ; of fishers' wives weeping and praying, and the morning tide bringing back
an empty boat; of souls that were going away to heaven in the fearful night; of
other souls for which the wind was sighing. It made one think of dreaiy village
church-yards, where the rain was beating upon unkept graves. These are the
thoughts it brought to me, until it flashed upon me that this dreary night was
baby's birthday, and then I fell to wondering how old he was ; though " they reckon
not by years or months where he has gone to dwell." I wondered if he were
playing with the angels to-night, if the baby face had grown any older, if we
should know him again. Ah ! when shall we know all this ] What ages must
come and go before the sunny portals are opened to us; and we, become as "little
children," behold Him " face to face." Was that a child's voice mingling with the
whistling wind and falling rain 1 I went to the street door and peered out into the
the thick darkness ; the singer stopped his song of " Viva Italia," and came up the
steps, holding out a little hand. He was one of the many strolling Italian children
who abound in New York, and walk the streets of that city early and late, singing
their " Viva Italia." Often, very often, they go home at night " empty handed,
heavy hearted." Last winter, one little fellow was found on a door step, his head
resting upon his harp, frozen to death ; and I wondered if he would ever be asked
to play a harp in heaven. I led my " Viva Italia" into the house, where the
light and warmth were pleasant enough after the dreary storm.
There he sat by the fire warming his hands, with such a look of happiness on
his face, that I think I have seldom seen a prettier picture. Dark brown eyes ;
thoughtful,—and perhaps a shade too sad for such a child, for he was not ten years old,
—frank, noble forehead, with the damp black hair clinging to it. His voice was
childishly sweet, as he answered my questions in his pretty broken English. " So
you came from Italy with your brother only a year ago, and he is dead," I said.
" How I wish I could take care of you always." Poor "Viva Italia," though he
answered all my questions, I could see that he was very tired, and that his cheeks
and hands were feverish ; so I led him away to bed, and I am not sure but that I
1G6 THE ATTEMPT.
breathed a prayer over him, quite as I might have done over that other little child,
for whom no prayers were needed. In the morning, poor " Viva Italia " was in a
high fever, and I sent for coxisin Jamie, who said it was only weariness, that the
poor child had walked too far in the storm of the night before. But, oh, the weary
nights that followed ; how eagerly I watched for every change for the better, and
how I listened to the childish words he said in his delirium. And, oh, the relief I
felt when a few red streaks of light in the east said that the dawn had come. How
sadly I began to think that the dawn was coming for little " Viva Italia." He
talked of heaven now, almost as if he stood at the " gates ajar," and saw the little
children beyond the garden walls. Sometimes he heard sweet voices, it may have
been his fancy only, or perhaps he was so near " home " that he could hear angel-
voices ; for " little children are nearest to God, as the little planets are nearest the
sun. " He used to wonder if Jesus would come and touch him, that he might be
well and strong again; and I used to hope that that kind friend would come, and
lay His hand upon the child's burning cheek, and spare him a little longer. Ah,
what weary work it is to watch and wait; such a burden upon the heart and mind,
that can only be lifted when all danger is past. At last the change came, and I was
called to my little Italian boy, who called me " sister Lisa," and held out his little
hand for " Good-bye." It was at the time of day when the sunbeams were hurrying
home, and "the robins at vespers crooned low." I felt that before the sunbeams had
reached the west, "Viva Italia" would be treading that bright path that leads to "home."
How beautiful that path must be with the footprints of those little children who have
grown tired of earth. If we could only see that bright array of little snow-white
chUdren, their baby faces lit with glory as with the sun, could we ever sin again ?
For all my hopes and plans for this poor little wayfarer were lost. The wind
in the trees was very like the rustling of wings, and little " Viva Italia " held out
his hand and called me " sister Lisa." I remembered all about the other little child,
and how lonely the house had been without my baby brother. I thought, " Heaven
is so full of little children, cannot this one be spared?"
Somebody is standing by me as I write these lines, and looking up I see a pair
of sad dark eyes, that are like those of the child I took in from the storm. Yes, it
is " Viva Italia," and he has become very dear to us all. I love him best on dreaiy,
rainy nights, when he sings his sweet Italian songs. And whenever he sings his
" Viva Italia," he looks up, with tears in his dark eyes, and calls me " sister Lisa."
Nobody.
THE  ATTEMPT. 167
#n  an Infant.
Thy pretty babblings now are hushed,
Thy sparkling eyes are shaded,
Thy germ of infant life is crushed,
The tiny bud has faded.
'Tis but one brief year since thy birth
Our hearts like sunshine gladdened;
And now thy soul has fled the earth.
And left us lone and saddened.
Faint grew thy little failing breath.
Though daily, nightly cherished;
Too strongly pressed the hand of Death,
And thou hast slowly perished.
O mourning mother 1 on thy breast
No more thy babe is lying;
Gone to a more untroubled rest,
Where cease all tears and sighing.
'Twas all in vain the toil, the care.
The prayer from bosom anguished ;
Thou could'st not save the flow'ret fair
That slowly drooped and languished.
O sweet, brief life ! O tiny star !
Now passed through heaven's high portal ;
Thou shinest yet, but ah ! too far
For vision not immortal.
No touch of sin, no thought of guile
Had stained the soul's pure whiteness ;
No shade of sorrow dimmed that smile,
Which shone with child-like brightness.
168 THE ATTEMPT.
Perhaps thy spirit, here to stay,
Too bright and pure was reckoned ;
Perhaps from regions far away
An infant spirit beckoned.
Perhaps God sent a messenger,—
Thy brother fled before thee ;
Perhaps, in tones we could not hear,
He whispered, bending o'er thee.
" Come, little brother, come with me,
Thy soul to God is given ;
My kindred spirit yearns for thee,
O flee away to heaven ! "
But these are things we cannot know,
We only know that slowly,
As melts a fresh-fall'u flake of snow,
Thy spirit vanished wholly.
Two years ago thy brother died,
We lay you both together ;
Sleep, little loved ones, side by side.
In perfect rest for ever.
Now are the infant spirits met.
The little souls united ;
The opening buds we weep for yet,
Are perfected, not blighted.
Melita.
THE ATTEMPT.
169
Chapter III.
Weeks pa^ssed on, and Kate had not given a final answer, and at last it had been
agreed that ]\Ir Martin should not press her further till six months had elapsed from
the day of the pic-nic. A severe illness that had attacked her mother had been the
immediate cause of this request, and indeed for some time she was so fully occupied
in nursing her, that even her teaching had to be abandoned. During this period,
nothing could exceed the care and attention lavished on her by the Martins, and
deeply did Kate feel her apparent ingratitude, when Miss Martin had proffered her
assistance in the sick-chamber with the whispered, " Surely I at least may help you,
my sister that will be some day, I hope ! " And yet Kate could not bring herself to
speak that sentence which would have secured to her so much apparent hap23iness.
Once she had striven to make Mr Martin understand that love was not possible to
her, but he had refused to listen, and had spoken of her unprotected state in the
event of her mother's death, as giving him an additional reason to implore her
consent, thereby damaging his own cause more than he knew.
Kate could not forget her dependence, could not repress the pride that nt^de
her rebel at the faintest suspicion of commiseration, could not help contrasting the
present with the past, when her hand was thouglit by far too great a boon for one
in Jocelyn's position ; whereas now she was well aware that she would be considered
almost worse than foolish by her friends, if she did not thankfully accept the home
offered her. Her mind was in a morbid state, full of self-questionings, nor could
she shake off the vague fancies that oppressed her.
Harry flashed down upon her for a biief holiday^ before settling to his work in
Manchester, and even he increased her trouble, saying, with the frankness of a
brother, and the roughness of a boy, that Martin was a right good fellow, and that
if she did'nt see when she had a good chance in her hands, she should be taught
better. '' You'll be damaging my prospects if you don't take him," he went on,—
the selfishness of boyhood, which had made him sharpsighted to divine the ^tate of
affairs, blinding him to the pain he was causing his sister,—" he's a man might be no
end of a help to me by and bye, and I can't take it from him if you refuse him."
And the young autocrat went off again, qiiite convinced that this marriage was
a part of the duty Kate owed to him and to her family.    Nelly, too, returned home,
August 1871
170 THE ATTEMPT.
and if she had dreaded to think of the solicitations to which she might be exposed
from her, the dread redoubled when she saw how thoroughly the wilful child had
become a woman of the world. Mr Martin had fallen into a habit of spending most
of his afternoons at the Macraes', as, since her mother's illness, Kate was less often
absent, so there accordingly he was sitting one beaiitiful August day. He was some¬
what silent, meditating on the chances for and against him as he watched Kate's
downcast face and busy fingers; she was working close to a large bay window that
opened in the centre on the lawn, while the sides were filled with cushioned seats.
Suddenly a merry voice burst on their ears, and a beautiful girl flung herself across
the low sill nearest Kate.
" Good gracious, Kate, you are looking as grave as a judge, and as old as the
hills !    What's the matter 1"
" Nelly, do you not see Mr Martin? " said Kate, colouring.
The new comer turned round, and, without rising, acknowledged the introduction
with easy self-possession. " No, I did not see Mr Martin, but he is too great a
friend not to forgive me, though I have not come in at the door properly."
" Certainly, Miss Nelly, I am only too glad to be accepted on friendly terms."
Something in the tone made Kate look up keenly, and catch as she did so the
glance of unfeigned admiration in his eyes, of which Nelly's too seemed shyly con¬
scious; for a moment she felt a pang of mingled surprise and fear, and then
recovered herself, and acknowledged that there was enough excuse for him. The
girl was certainly very lovely, with clear blue ej'es, a wealth of wavy golden hair,
and a figure every movement of which was full of grace ; she was still leaning on
one arm on the window seat, and the creepers outside made a delicate frame for her
bright fresh face; she had been gathering flowers, and a mass of gorgeous colouring
lay beside her, making the white hand that played with the blossoms whiter by the
contrast. Somehow the contrast was great too between the sisters, as she laughingly
remarked, that Mr Martin must have overheard her impolite observation.
" Very likely," answered Kate, " and my looks do not belie me, I do feel as old
as the hills."
" How absurd, why you are only twenty-one, not half old enough to look after
me ; I am neai-ly as old with my eighteen years, and quite as wise."
" Wiser in some ways, I daresay, Nelly, but not so old; I have had more to
think of these two years than you have."
" Yes, Miss Nelly, and now you have come home, I wish you could induce your
sister to think a little less; she wants a holiday to refresh her."
THE ATTEMPT. 171
" Instead of which, Mr Martin, I mean to return to my full work, now that
Nell can look after mamma."
" Kate, will you never be reasonable?" said Mr Martin earnestly, " will you never
take the pleasant side of life while you may ? "
" Not while I think the pleasant side inconsistent with either honour or duty."
" You are too inexorable," he said, with a vexed air. " I shall trust to your
sister to bring you to a cheerier frame of mind ; I do my best. Miss Nelly, and you
will be a valuable ally."
" I will gladly help you, Mr Martin," said Nelly, watching her companions
doubtfully, for she had not yet been told that there was anything more than friend¬
ship between them. " If Kate sets up for so much age and experience, I shall
expect her to take the consequence, and chaperone me, and I mean to go out
whenever I have the chance."
" Then you must honour our house first, my sister will be delighted to see you.
Shall I tell her when I go home that you are longing to see the sights of London ?"
" You must tell her what you like, Mr Martin, but I hope she wont think the
worse of me for disliking to be buried alive before I have seen for myself whether
the world is as nice as people say."
" It is sure to be nice to you," answered he, smiling. "And now I must take my
leave, so do not forget your promises; you have to enliven your sister, and come as
soon as you can to see us," and so saying, with a quiet adieu to Kate, j\Ir Martin
departed.    She turned almost angrily to her sister the moment the gate closed.
" Nelly, how can you beg so for invitations ! you might be sure Miss Martin
would ask you without almost sending her a message to do so."
" My dear Kate, I never lose chances, as I said a little ago; I think Mr Martin
very pleasant and handsome, and I know he is well off. Why should he and his sister
not help me to a little amusement i You need not be jealous, I think," she added
sharply.
" I am not jealous," was the somewhat sad answer, as Kate went upstairs to
think out the impressions that had seized her. What if this girl, with her fresh
joyousness and beautiful face, were to take from her the one possibility of gladness
that was open to her; it would be her own fault, but that did not make it less sure;
after all she was a woman, and no woman could endure such a loss unmoved, for
with natural inconsistency, the thing hardly valued when lying ready for her to pick
up, became doubly precious the moment it seemed vanishing from her grasp. By this
time, however, Kate was practised in self-restraint, and, her communing over, she
172
THE ATTEMPT,
went down with an unmoved face, only resolved that from her lips Nelly should not
learn the pending proposal. The next afternoon brought Miss Mai'tin to call and
make Nelly's acquaintance, and not many days elapsed before her brother brought
an invitation for the two girls to a ball in the neighbourhood.
" It is not a large ball, Nelly," (he had dropped the Miss already), " but it will
do as a first taste of what is to follow; you see it is rather late in the season to begin
going out. My sister is anxious to have a hand in your debut, so she has ventured
to send wreaths for you both, and I will charge myself with your bouquets."
It was thoughtfully done, for there was no money to spare for personal adorn¬
ments in the Macraes' house, but whOe Nelly accepted her delicate fern leaves with a
face ratliant with pleasure, Kate only felt a double pain ; first, that they should accept
so much, and secondly, that it had never occurred to her friends that an invita¬
tion to a ball could please her, before this young beauty had appeared upon the
scene.
" I do not think I shall go, I am too old and dull, you know, for dancing."
" Not go to my first ball,—oh Kate, how unkind !"  said Nelly, who really
loved her sister in her own wayward fashion.    " Mr Martin, do persuade her."
" I think you ovight to come, it will do you good, and besides, it will look
strange if you do not accompany your sister; I am too old to dance, so we will sit
together." This was said laughingly, and then, in an earnest tone, so low that
she only heard it, he added,  " Come Kate, do this one thing at least for me."
Refusal would have been too ungracious, so, on the appointed evening, the two
girls, well, though simply, dressed in white, with their tasteful green wreaths and
exquisite bouquets, made their appearance in the ballroom, where they speedily
attracted notice, partly from their being strangers, and still more from Nelly's
piquant countenance. She was at once in request, and Kate overheard many a
remark, sometimes pleasant, sometimes of a kind that pained her, as the speakers
alluded to herself as the other sister, " whose day is half over"; or to her father, whose
name and mode of death had been known to many of them. At first Mr Martin
kept his'word, and did not attempt to dance, but remained beside Miss Martin and
Kate to pilot them through the crowd, but she saw that his eye followed Nelly as
she floated round the room.
"How very well she looks," he said at last, as she returned towards them.  "I
think I must break my vow and ask her for a dance, if you will spare me."
" I have no wish to detain you, perhaps I shall change my mind too," responded
Kate who was not unconscious of the old fascination of the music returning upon
THE ATTEMPT. 173
her in spite of herself. In another minute she had seen Mr Martin move off with
the fair debutante, who looked even more animated than before, and suddenly seized
with the desire to show that she too could enjoy herself, Kate accepted the offer of
a partner, and returned no more to the corner where she had hidden herself.
She was an excellent dancer, and thoroughly enjoyed the mingled charms of the
brilliant room, the gay faces, and the well known strains of the favourite waltz.
All her late gravity disappeared, and she was once more the merry girl of former
days. Mr Martin, observing her, wished she would thus throw aside for him the
impassiveness of her ordinary demeanour, and yet when he claimed her for a dance,
some undeGned feeling threw a constraint over his conversation, making her wish in her
turn that he would not consider her too grave for the pleasant badinage he talked so
easily to her sister. These two were, in fact, drifting away from each other, and a
fresh impetus was given to the new tide of affairs by Nelly's announcement that
she was going to spend a week or ten days with the Martins, for the purpose of
seeing some of the sights of London. She went, and during those ten days the two
families hardly met, work and amusement being valid enough excuse, though in
reality there was an unexpressed reserve which kept them apart, as the day drew
near on which Mr Martin might insist on Kate's answer. It drew near, indeed,
with rapid strides, and as it approached, she saw that only one decision was
honourably possible to her; she, who had known what love was, easily read the
meaning of the subdued light in Nelly's eyes, the fitful silence and absent manner
that made the blithe school-girl at times scarcely recognisable, nor less did she
interpret rightly her lover's absence, and the nervous embarrassment of his sister.
Altogether the period of probation was a painful one, and it was almost with relief
that Kate saw the decisive day dawn.
She remained upstairs till she heard Mr Martin arriA'^e, and knew that he was
in the drawing-room ; she had feared that he might try to meet her in the garden,
made sacred to her by another parting; then she looked at herself in ilie glass, saw
that her face betrayed no sign of her inward agitation, and bravely went down to
put away from her what now seemed her only chance of a life of rest.
Not as calm her own was the face that met her when she entered, the anxious
eyes and trembling hand betrayed to her yet more clearly how Mr Martin had
longed for his release, and she hastened to put him out of his pain.
" It is as well to speak at once and openly," she said, shaking hands with him,
" you and I have both been mistaken, I in deferring the answer I should have given
long since, you in fancying you cared for me enough to make me your wife.      We
174 THE   ATTEMPT.
must forget the past as completely as we can, and you will continue to be our friend,
I hope, as before."
Brave Kate, she was looking him steadily in the face, and did not flinch,
though she read the inexpressible relief there even while he answered warmly,
" I don't deserve to be more than your friend, Kate, I did not know till lately
my own weakness, but I shall go abroad now for a while and endeavour to know
myself better, and then return to perhaps still closer intimacy with you all."
It was an awkward interview for them both, and each was glad to conclude it, as,
with a few more words of leave-taking, and a hesitating message to Nelly, Mr Martin
left the house. Slowly Kate went upstairs, feeling that now she had deliberately
given up this prospect of a home, she must return to her work and the remembrance
of a faded dream. She was not prepared for the sight of Nelly, flushed and imperi¬
ous, at the door of her room, her eyes glittering with anger.
" Kate, what have you done with Mr Martin ? "
" Nothing;   he is gone away."
" Gone away ! Do you suppose I have not watched him come and go ? Do you
suppose I am blind and deaf, and his sister dumb 1    Where is he gone, and why 1"
" He is gone abroad, Nelly, for a few months."
The girl's face whitened to the very lips as she listened, and she stammered out,
" Gone ! without seeing me."
" He could hardly see you to-day, I think," said Kate, somewhat sharply,
" he bid me tell you he trusted to find you here on his return. Nelly, you are
very strange.    What is the meaning of all this 1"
" The meaning is, that you are robbing me of all I love, of what is mine, do you
hear, that I care for him as you never cared for anyone, and that you have sent
him away," and sobs finished her incoherent sentence.
" Don't be uneasy Nell, I have refused him;" and as she saw the eager look,
Kate added, sadly, "Poor child, you should have trusted me before. I saw it all,
and you surely don't think I would destroy your hopes and marry a man who
loves you; besides, I do not love him."
" You do not; are you sure ?   Oh, sister, are you quite sure ] "
" Quite sure, he is not so irresistible as you seem to think," and having said
this much quietly, Kate went away, to thank heaven she had not marred the young
life whose uncontrolled impulses struck her so painfully.
The horse-chesnuts were in bloom again when Henry Martin carried Nelly
away with the bright sunlight shining on her golden hair; and if Miss Martin and
THE ATTEMPT. 175
her little niece were hardly contented, theirs were the only two hearts that did not
think the best of the beautiful bride.
They were gone, and a change, brought about by reaction, came over Kate. She
had heretofore deserted the seat by the willows, for it seemed sacrilegious to go there
with other than her first love in her heart, but now she would sit there listlessly
through the twilight and evening, while her mother dozed in her arm chair, thinking
regretfully of
" What had been, and might have been,"
and longing with increasing intensity that she could know something, even were it
something sad, of Charlie Jocelyn's fate ; and this longing and listlessness grew upon
her, till, her pupils being mostly absent for their summer holidays, she would spend
almost the whole day in sitting by the river. There she was sitting on a brilliant
morning, when a tall sunburnt man rang the bell, and asked, nervously, if Mrs
Macrae still lived in that house.
" Yes sir," answered the maid, "but she's not down yet."
" Is she not well?" he continued.
" She's not strong, sir, but,"—as he was shown into the drawing-room, and his
eye fell on certain knots of white ribbon lying in a little basket,—" Mrs Macrae has
mostly been better since the wedding."
"What wedding?"
" Our young lady's, sir.   She is Mrs Martin now."
The stranger sat down, and in an altered voice said—" I understood Miss
Macrae was still here."
" Oh yes, sir, it's Miss Nelly that's married. Miss Macrae,"—now an inferior
person in a domestic's eyes,—" Miss Macrae is out by the river."
Without a word, the visitor turned and went out by the bay window, leaving
the puzzled damsel gazing after him open-mouthed, and by no means sure that she
had not done something wrong.
We need not feel the same doubt, while we see him walk softly forward to the
willow trees, and as he pauses behind the seat on which Kate sits, and utters her
name in the well remembered voice, it does not need another chapter to tell how
pride made the wanderer resolve to be silent till he had earned wealth enough
to win his wife, how then his fear of finding her married had deterred him from
writing, and how, finally, he could bear the uncertainty no longer, but had hurried
back to learn whether she had been true to him. All this, and the joy that followed,
is more easily imagined than described ; for if a great painter veiled the face whose
176 THE ATTEMPT.
sorrow he could not depict, much more should the writer be silent in the presence
of a happiness at once so subtle and so intense that no refinement of expression will
fix its rays upon the page.
Enough to say that Kate Jocelyn, in her bright home, lived to be thankful for
her trials; and above all, for that decisive morning that left her, when her first love
returned, stiU Kate Macrae. Elsie Strivelyne.
nx  E^tb.
Thou Sun of Glory, Everlasting Day,
With whom no darkness is, to Thee we pray,
Give us Thy light, 0 God !
Lest we like slaves do fall before Thy face.
When we should children be in thy embrace.
Give us Thy light, 0 God !
Lest we court virtues Thy rewards to win,
Or be by fear of wrath deterred from sin,
Give us Thy light, O God.
That we be not by narrow creeds confined.
But seek from Thee enlarged heart and mind.
Give us Thy light, O God !
That we may tread with firmer steps thy way,
And press with ardour to the perfect day,
Give us Thy light, O God !
That brightness may adorn our Christian life,
No morbid fancies mar the holy strife,
Give us Thy light, O God !
That we be swift our brother's wound to bind,
And heal where'er we can, with accents kind,
Give us Thy light, O God !
THE ATTEMPT. 177
That we have faith to scan the height above,
Of Thy all-bounding and unchanging love,
Give us Thy light, O God !
And search its depth, until her voice can tell,
That it lies deeper than th' abyss of hell.
Give us Thy light, O God !
Thus to our latest breath with Thee we'll plead,
O Father, hear, for great's Thy children's need,
Give us Thy light, O God !
Fbucara.
Sliitr^^s   of   Otttrlanb.
No. IV.
In this concluding paper, it remains for me to attempt a brief description of the most
numerous, and perhaps the most problematic, of the classes into which society in Cur-
land is divided, namely, the peasantry.
The peasantry, as a body, present a strange bundle of contradictions; they are
at once devout and immoral, faithful and treacherous, well-instructed in the elements
of learning, and, at the same time, profoundly ignorant. The first quality is attested
by their strict attendance at public worship, and on any other occasion upon which
the church happens to be open. No weather is too stormy, no road too bad to
hinder the Lettish peasant from harnessing his rough, tiny horse to his culbing
(a kind of rude sledge), or in the summer-time to his telega, and driving, it may be
many verstes, through blinding snow or keen north wmd, (and a north wind in
Curland is almost as piercing, if not so boisterous, as a vernal gale in Edinburgh),
through beating rain, or beneath a blazing sun to join the assembly of the faithful.
Perhaps they do not always give their undivided attention to the sacred offices;
and during the sermon, they not unfrequently wander forth from the church to take a
hasty refreshment at the neighbouring krug or tavern; but they join lustily in the
musical portion of the service, often rising into a perfect roar of fervour ; and when
all is over, after carefully enveloping their singing books in their many-coloured hand¬
kerchiefs, they crowd into the little churchyard to exchange cheerful greetings.
August 1871.
178 THE ATTEMPT.
under a comfoi-table sense of having done their duty. It is possible that worldly
motives may influence them somewhat in their passion for church-going; for, as it is
S-lmost the only opportunity of meeting together in great numbers, it is to them a
sort of " going on 'Change," and much business is often transacted on these occasions.
But side by side with their national virtue of piety, comes the national vice of
drunkenness,—strange and incompatible though such a conjunction may seem; yet it
is not alone in poor Curland, uncivilised, servile, down-trodden Curland, that such
anomalies occur; they are but too flagrant in lands professing pre-eminence in Bible-
reading, intellectual culture, and all religion and virtue, yet where the mask of
sanctity too frequently hides the hideous face of vice and corruption. We must not
then be too severe upon our Lettish brethren; besides, they are at least open in
their misdemeanours, and can scarcely be said to add the basest of all sins, that of
hypocrisy, to the list of their shortcomings. They go boldly in the light of day, and
in the very face of their lords and superiors, to join the dance and quafl" the schnaps
at their Sunday carousal, hojjing, perhaps, that theii* previous display of devout
behaviour may, like charity, cover a multitude of sins.
Their faithfulness is exemplified in extreme devotion to the children of theii-
liege lord. A Lettish nurse is proverbial for her tiger-like attachment to her nurs¬
ling ; and yet, the very same pattern of fidelity, the very woman who will give up
rest, sleep, and if need be, even food, for the children placed under her care, who
would unhesitatingly give her life for her charge, will not scruple to over-reach and
defraud the parents in every possible way, resorting to lying, pilfering, and all
duplicity, to accomplish her underhand purpose. It is a remarkable fact, that in the
Lettish language there is not to be found any equivalent for the word honour.
Such a fact scai'cely requires commentary. Sense of shame seems unknown. In
proof of this, I will quote a circumstance which happened on the estate of Count K.
One of the out-door servants, a favourite with the Countess, had been detected in
large defalcations of corn, hay, straw, and other stores of a similar nature. He was
brought before the Count, who was of a singularly humane disposition; after much
cross-examination, which the delinquent ably eluded, the Count told him that if he
would make a frank confession he should be retained in his service. Neither touclied nor
daunted by this magnanimity, our peasant-friend requested a remand, in order that he
might consult his wife upon the propriety of making a clean breast of the matter. The
remand was granted. On the following day, the culprit reappeared and informed the
Count that he and his wife had considered the subject, and had decided that on tlie whole
it was better to decline confession, adding with great naivete that, in fact, if disposed
THE ATTEMPT. 179
to own his thefts, they were so numerous that many of them had escaped his memory.
The man was dismissed ; yet, strange to say, scarcely lost caste by his disgrace, and
continued to present himself before the Count, often seeking protection from the
Countess when he desired work or pecuniary assistance. Nor did he seek in vain,
for he continued to be a favourite, and lost but little by his expulsion from office.
Perhaps this latter part of the story in a great measure accounts for the former.
Nothing is expected of the peasants. It is considered hardly more disgraceful for a
peasant to be detected in thieving, than for a dog to be found out in the same fault.
This contemptuous clemency scarcely redounds to the credit of the master, who is so
little disposed to recognise in his servant a fellow-creature and a fellow-immortal, as
to expect from him no more than he would expect from the horse in his stable or the
ox in the stall. It seems to me that this expecting nothing of the Lettish labourer
is at the root of much that is cunning and unworthy in the Lettish chai-acter.
Perhaps, also, the tyranny, whether mild or severe, under which the Letts have
bent for centuries, may in a great measure account for their extreme fearfulness and
dread of danger. A sudden fright, even of the most ordinary kind, will often pro¬
duce a fit of epilepsy ; and cases have been known where a Lett has died instantane¬
ously from a sudden shock of fear. Of course they are superstitious. Many of their
superstitions bear a close resemblance to those of their Scandinavian neighbours, so
well described in Miss Martineau's delightful stories. They pour out libations of
every fresh brewing, and when they bake, put into the oven an especial cake or loaf
to propitiate the spirit of evil (which generally takes the form of a stray wolf or a
hungry fox). They place faith in a singular exerciser of mischievous demons and
unclean spirits. When a Baren-fUhrer, or leader of a tame (^) bear makes his
appearance in a hamlet, the inhabitants subscribe a sufficient sum to make it worth
the bear exhibitor's while to lead the bear into all their stables and cow-houses, from
which buildings the wicked spirits are supposed instantly to depart at the first growl
of their ursine enemy.
Some of the social customs and observances among the Letts are sufficiently
curious. Marriages are celebrated with much ceremony and rejoicing, the length of
the festivities depending upon the means of the relatives. If these are well to do,
the celebration will often last as long as three days. Previous to the service in the
church, prayers are said, and an address delivered by the most venerable and
respected friend of the bride ; this preliminary is called " opening the door," and
no marriage would be considered complete without it. Funeral obsequies are also
protracted to a similar length; and among the wealthier of the peasants it is customary,
180 THE ATTEMPT.
in the case of a child, to celebrate not only the funeral, but also the wedding which
would probably have taken place had the child Kved to mature age; an instance of
the characteristic far-sightedness of the Lett.
Such, then, is a rough outline of the state of affairs among the Lettish
population of Curland in the present day. Until lately, these unhappy people have
groaned beneath the weight of oppression and tyranny ; as a natural consequence,
they display all the vices incident to such a condition. But better days must be in
store for them. Education is spreading, their privileges are becoming extended,
and the light of a brighter era seems to be dawning. It is no uncommon thing now
to see the sons of Lettish parents mingling with the sons of the nobles at the
University, and taking their places as pastors and physicians among their German
fellow-students. This is a good sign for the future. And when freedom really
becomes known and understood,—as there is every reason to hope that she will be in
no very distant age,—we shall then be able to form a better and juster estimate of
this little community, just struggling out of the toils of serfdom and consequent
degradation.
In concluding these sketches, no apology is offered for their numerous defects
and incompleteness. They are intended merely as jottings down to amuse a passing
moment, not as political treatises. Much has been omitted that might have been
said, but I have feared to encroach upon our very limited space. Therefore they
are offered just as they are, and recommended confidently to the indulgence of our
little circle of readers. Jeannie.
gilas  iax  fir!
Our ladye she left us yesterday even, Thirty years of life had she led,
Alas for her ! Alas for her !
Her spirit went softly up into heaven, Thirty years, and none of them glad ;
God knew all, and all was forgiven. Why was she given a life so sad 1
Alas for her ! Alas for her !
She said good-bye to us yesterday, Thirty years of dolour and pain,
Alas for her ! Alas for her !
She was very weary, she could not stay; Giving her love, and giving in vain,
Christ go with her all her way. Giving and getting nothing again :
Alas for her ! Alas for her !
THE ATTEMPT. 181
Lovely eyes and pitiful face, Thirty years of dolour and woe,
Alas for her ! Alas for her !
Left alone in the old home place ; Only that, and her hair like snow :
The good God grant her ever His grace. God He knows she was glad to go.
Alas for her ! Alas for her !
Proud they called her, and cold and strong. Put on her heart the pansies fair,
Alas for her ! Alas for her !
Bearing hardly her cruel wrong,— God hath taken her into His care.
We who knew her had loved her long.      So we may settle the heartsease there.
Alas for her ! Alas for her !
Looking down from her throne above.       Lay her little hands over her breast,
(Alas for her !) Alas for her !
The mother who fathoms all mother's love, God, who knew her, knew what was best;
Pitied the heart that with anguish strove. God, in His mercy, grant her His rest.
(Alas for her !) Alas for her !
The mother who sitteth so high in heaven. Our ladye has left us ! 'Tis even so,
(Alas for her !)   [riven, Alas for her !
Saw  how  her heart had been  rent and Mayhap she smiles while we weep below,—
Came and called for her yesterday even.       But thirty years of dolour and woe—
(Alas for her !) Alas for her !
R.
C^^ MBt of tl^t Imaxjtnalion in ipainitng anb ^ttsrt.
We live in a world of motion, change, and variety. 'No two landscapes are alike, no
two trees, no two tiny leaflets. The creating and developing power of our Maker
is infinite ;—creation bears the stamp of the hand of the Almighty, who knows no
limits to his power; nothing is copied, but every tiniest object in the universe is in
itself the embodiment of a new thought. How weak and finite do our powers seem
when we turn to consider them, after having thought of the omnipotence of Him
who created all things by the breath of His mouth ; but yet, although we are our
Maker's creatures, ignorant, feeble, less than nothing in his sight, our minds are
made in His image, we can, in a certain sense, create. In thought we may create
mental pictures, which we may embody or not as we choose, or as we have
ability. We create as creatures, it is true,—our powers are finite ; we can only
group together the materials already prepared for us, but the whole may be a creation
182 THE   ATTEMPT.
and no copy.    What, then, is this wonderful creative power, so graciously bestowed
on man by the infinite Creator ?    It is imagination.
Gifts vary and differ in this world, and to one man has been given much
imagination, and to another very little. Some men seem to be little more than
mere copyists all their life through; but most of us are ever building up and
creating new thoughts. Why do we do so 1 It is because of our innate yearning
after progress—our sense of incomplete development; it is the imperfect and finite
straining after the perfect and infinite. We read, or study lying around us, the
expressions of other men's thoughts, and we are dissatisfied with them. We fancy
(often foolishly enough) that we could do better, and so we (each one for himself)
build up and create our own ideals, what we think perfection; ideals to be found
only in the soft dreamy land of the imagination, never in the domain of stern reality ;
for, if sometimes for a moment we fancy we have found them embodied, outwardly
expressed in material form, we soon turn back with a sigh to the cherished creation
of fancy ; the ideal was perfect, the real has ever a flaw.
Some men seek fo express, to the best of their ability, those works of their
imaginations. Of these, let us take the painter and the musician, and let us con¬
sider in how far each of them is dependent on the imagination.
We shall first look at the painter.
To him has been given much of the creative power—ability to frame new ideals,
new mind-pictures. He thinks, for example, of a happy home, and this thought
he represents in his mind, not by a mental picture of some home which he has seen
or heard described, for then it would be a copy and no creation. But he gathers
together, from many different sources, all the attributes which go to make up his
ideal of a happy home;—his ideal, which he has never met with but in the fairy
land of his imagination, doubly beautiful to him, for it is what he longs for, and
it is his by right, his own creation.
Or if we take a more abstract subject, of which we may have seen a picture,
for example, " The Pursuit of Pleasure," the process is just the same. The
painter's thought gradually expresses itself in a mental picture of his ideal of
the pursuit of pleasure; that is, what he considers to be the perfection of the
pursuit of pleasure. Here the imagination is even more brought into play than
in the former case, or at least the process is more refined. In the other picture,
all the various objects, figures, etc., may be copies, and the grouping may be rough ;
but a personification of Pleasure has never been met with in reality, and the painter
must first express his thought—Pleasure,—by giving it a form which includes all
THE ATTEMPT. 183
the attributes which go to make up his ideal of the pleasure which he fancies men,
pursue. Then the pursuit of pleasure must also be created in the regions of fancy.
Nowhere has the group of pursuers been so pictured or met with in the world, but
one is taken from one nook, and another from another, till they form together a
whole,—the painter's perfection, his ideal.
But we are not here speaking of pictures on paper or canvas ; we have to do
only with mental pictures, for with them the work of imagination ends. When the
painter takes up his brush and his palette, he ceases to be a creator and becomes a
copyist. The forms, the colours,—the entire expression of his thought is already
painted in the wonderful picture galleries of his mind. He must now bring into play
his correctness of eye, his lightness of touch, and all the little etceteras which form
the mechanical part of painting; but the master-mind has ceased to work, the mental
picture is the creation, the outward expression is but the copy, more or less correct,
according to the mechanical skill of the artist.
Of course we see from this that imagination is not the only requisite of a great
painter. It is essential, but not sufficient; he must also be a great copyist.
Many have all the imagination of great artists, and yet we never see masterpieces of
form and colour from their hands. Many of us, no doubt, have our creations in our
own especial fairyland, and our ideals may sometimes be as striking and original as
any ever created by man, and yet we wisely never attempt to daub on canvas in
the vain hope of ever so embodying our cherished ideals. We may have all the
imagination of the painter, and yet none of his copying talent, which involves too
many requisites for us to describe at present.
Let us now turn to the musician, and consider how he produces his master¬
pieces. His compositions, like every work of man's brain or hand, are the
embodiment of thought; and, as we are here speaking of master-musicians, as before
we spoke of master-painters, his work bears the distinctive mark of a great mind ; it
is the embodiment of original thought, a new grouping of the materials lying
around, a new creation of the ever-busy imagination, a new ideal. All thought,
we know, is mentally expressed by a series of mind-pictures. This we know each
one of us for himself, or can know, by watching for a few minutes the process of
thouglit. These mental pictures are here again the work of the imagination, and so
far she helps the musician as she helps the painter, but with the musician she does
not stop here. She does not now desert him, and leave him to sit down and copy the
scene from the inexhaustible picture-gallery of the mind. She leads him into a new
region, from the fairyland of sight to that of sound, and helps him to choose tones
184 THE ATTEMPT.
from the myriads hovering around him, and to build up a melodious whole, which
he fancies perfectly expresses to the ear what slie has first framed to the eye.
Imagination has with him a twofold work to perform ; she first helps him to
create an ideal picture, and then fits it to an ideal of sound; and then, not till then,
does the work of the copyist begin. This twofold process must go on. If a
musician wishes to compose, he must first think. His thoughts express themselves
in mental pictures, and then corresponding sounds must be suited to them.
Now, as we see that the work of the imagination, the original thought, is
here twofold, we must note that a musician may be original in the one process of
thought and not in the other. His first thought may be merely a copy, to which he
may attach an ideal of sound,—what he considers the most perfect manner of
embodying in music, thought which may be an exact copy of what is in many
other men's minds,—but such a composer is not a genius of the first order. His
works would not rank amongst the higher branches of the art. The secondary
thought, the adaptation of the sound, must not alone be original, but the primary
thought must be an ideal.
I cannot better exemplify what I wish to prove, than by referring to a beauti¬
ful picture, which many of my readers may have seen. It represents the dying
Weber, composing his "Adieu to the Piano •" be is going to bid farewell to what has
been the study and pleasure of his life. Now, what are the thoughts which he is
beautifully expressing 1 He does not think merely of the instrument before him—
his ideal of an adieu contains more than that. His imagination frames a vivid
picture of all his past compositions, which crowd up and hover personified around
him,—for we ever personify what we most cherish. And as he gazes on them, and
bids them farewell, imagination again conies to his help and aids his dying fingers,
to breathe forth that touching " demiere pensSe," which we seem to hear as we gaze.
Would Weber have been a musician of the first order, if his thought of what an
adieu to the piano was had been nothing original, but something which would
ordinarily present itself to every man's mind ? No! The imagination first created
for him a beautiful ideal thought, and then adapted to it a second beautiful ideal,
and the two creations of the imagination are combined in the one beautiful expres¬
sion. The painter himself here comes forward to our aid. His wonderful imagination
exemplifies,   and  in exemplifying, acknowledges and pays homage to the twofold
imagination of the musician.
M. M. L.
THE ATTEMPT. 185
® p X g r a m
On Michael Angelo's Statue of "Night."
By Strozzi.
Fair Night, that in such lovely sleep ye see
From stone was sculptured by an angel's hand
She lives—for see, she sleeps—if ye demand
More proof, arouse her, and she'll speak to thee.
Jilt S fo f r.
By Michael Angelo, in Person of "Night."
Slumber is sweet to me, and 'tis more sweet
To be of stone, while sin and shame abound,
And not to see or feel is bliss profound;
Therefore awake me not !    Hush ! I entreat.
Echo.
Luxembourg—Strasbourg—Basle.
" Gay, sprightly land of mirth and social ease,
Pleased with thyself, whom all the world can please."
Goldsmith's Traveller.
The humour—half-grave, half-gay—which saddens the brow and touches into
smiles the mouth of artist or poet, as he mentally decorates an idea in which
gentle pleasantry is shaded into tender pathos, may well sway a weaker pen
seeking to record remembrances whose pleasing character is inseparably associated
with the glad living presence of foi'ms, since changed by time's relentless ravages,
and faces banished from mortal ken, " beyond that bourne from which no traveller
returns." The morning-star of memory rises pale over a retrospect dimmed by the
setting of life's sun, and as in most mental roamings over the Elysian fields of the
2a
August 1871.
186
THE ATTEMPT.
past, the ghosts of pain appear side by side with the visions of pleasure.      It is too
ti-ue in every sense that
" Let the living wander where they will,
They cannot leave the footsteps of the dead."
Such reflections naturally overshadow a chapter of this narrative, which must
record the dismemberment of the party so harmoniously associated together as far as
Brussels, whence Mr and Mrs MacYorick retraced their homeward steps, to the
regret of the travellers still en route. A good travelling companion is as valuable
as the perfect combination of qualities that furnishes his best equipment is rare.
Let patience, good humour, and enthusiasm be sought as the principal c?e*i(Zerato, and
there are few places in the world where anyone may not travel to advantage with
these in his knapsack, especially when combined with such an appreciation of
humour as will sufficiently spice with the ludicrous all misadventures and contre¬
temps. The presence of comedy banishes ennui, and liglitens the most depressing
atmosphere. Even the dull monotony of our long day on the canal had been
enlivened by the linguistic achievements of oxir irrepressibly humorous travelling com¬
panion, Mr MacYorick, Avho, after frightening the waiters by demanding sacre for
su^re at dessert, and failing generally to prove an intelligible interpreter of Dr Loth's
Polyglot Guide to any nationality on board, effectually posed his audience at last by
recourse to Gaelic.
Linguistic accomplishments are of immense advantage in travelling, not only from
the additional interest imparted to a transit through any country by a knowledge of
its language, but because of the power which that knowledge gives in all social deal¬
ings. It is a curious sensation at first to make serious use of what we are apt to
consider at home as a toy tongue; but progi-ess is encouraged and facilitated by the
unvarying politeness with which the clumsiest or most timid efforts are received, the
most amusing mistakes failing to meet ridicule, or provoke any display of mirth on
the part of native listeners. Shopping in Brussels (the most enchanting of places for
tliat occupation) afforded an excellent opportunity for beginning practice, and there,
the most disjointed speeches were deferentially listened to, gravely answered, and
even prettily complimented. The French spoken in Brussels is considered very pure,
and certainly sounded very delightful, sweeter and more elegant than the Swiss
accent which we afterwards heard. Soft, flowing, and piquant, it is the language of
politeness, compliment, and petty sentiment, imparting a charm to the merest little
nothings of pretty sayings, that would be simple hetises in any other language,
especially English, as in it few verbal principles of flattery seem engrained.   Through-
THE ATTEMPT. 187
out our route ce doux Fran^ais was the language requisite, and, as several accom¬
plished travellers informed us, it is the best lingual passport for travelling on the
Continent; except in Italy, where the provincial dialects are so numerous and con¬
fusing, that even Italian is of small use.
As a gauge of the foreign opinion of our national characteristics, it is amusing
to observe the estimation in which English travellers are held abroad. The ideas
entertained of their loi'dly character cannot be better illustrated than by reference to
a story with which Mr MacYorick entertained us, on returning from our morning
visit to the cathedral at Antwerp. Disapjjroving, on princijile, of excursions before
breakfast, he had remained behind to enjoy that meal in solitary state at the head
of the long table in the sallea-manger, whence his magisterial orders to the waiters,
regarding proper provision for himself and the coming 23arty, made such an impres¬
sion on a lovely vision of nuns near the foot, that they whispered to each other,
" with voices like running brooks," ^'Ah, il est Anglais, il est Anglais!" Milor is
also supposed to have no end to his purse. I do not know how many travellers gave
it as their experience, that a rule should be made to know the price-list before settling
down anywhere; and distasteful as must be such a practice to all but the very
strong-minded, it is also strongly recommended by Bradshaw, whose comprehensive
advices are all of such recognized and well-tried value.
The journey of any moderately agreeable tourist may be cheei'ed by the frankness
and affability which meet him on every side,—the readiness to answer questions, supply
information, and be generally helpful. The universal politeness was something
as pleasing to observe as to encounter. Not only would it have been extraordinary
for a gentleman to enter or leave a railway carriage or omnibus, without lifting his
hat and saluting his fellow passengers with Bon jour, or Bo7i voyage, inessieurs et
mesdames; but the same principle of courtesy was exercised in a lower scale of
society. Never did I see one of the many priests, flocking at the railway stations,
speak to the meanest peasant woman without uncovering his head ; and the railway
guards touched their caps to each other, and shook hands with a native urbanity
which would have provoked the scornful astonishment of any imperturable Sawney
in the same rank. A gi-eat deal is made of the rugged grandeur of the Scotch
character, and its solid elevation above the level of such niceties; but if the theory
of George Macdonald is correct, that " Polish is a taking off, rather than a laying
on," this noli-me-tangere superiority, which is apt to look uncommonly like isolated
pride and concentrated selfishness, would not lose in quality by being mixed with
those gentler elements which promote the amenities of society.    It would almost
188 THE ATTEMPT.
seem as if an ethical law were laid down by modern opinion, that strength of
mind and refinement of manners are necessarily disjoined and antagonistic as
national characteristics, notwithstanding the notable example of the old Romans,
who combined the exercise of an exalted courtesy with the cultivation of the nobler
and sterner virtues.
Throughout the whole course of our tour, I cannot record a more delightful
period than the week spent in speeding through the pleasant plains of Belgium, the
sunny groves of France, and the mountainous passes of Switzerland, to
" Where the Ehone
Hath spread himself a couch, the Alps have reared a throne."
The north-eastern corner of France, lately invested for the whole world with
such a painful interest, was then the heau ideal of a pleasant and fruitful land.
The landscape smiled all around, green and fresh and fair; the sparkling Moselle
rolled its sparkling waters between banks beaming with gay vineyards and peaceful
villages; the courses of the smaller streams being indicated by the well known rows
of poplars and willows, and shady resting-places by the wayside cross. Wrapt day
after day, in delicious, dreamy enjoyment of the bright sky and gay scenes of ia belle
France, a curious association of tag-ends of poetic descriptions kept rhyming in my
mind, the combined efiect of which was the following—
"Along the banks that bear the vine,"
" The pleasant vine-clad fields of France,"
" I see their glorious black eyes shine,"
" Fair maidens in the glowing dance."
On the recommendation of a gentlemen at the table dliote, who drew a picture
by no means pleasing of the attractions of Luxembourg, it was our intention thence to
make a detour to Treves, the oldest town in Germany, with many Roman remains in
its neighbourhood; but even this prospect failing to reconcile us to two hours of tra-
travelling after a long day's journey from Brussels, via Namur and Arlon, it was our
fate to go to Luxembourg and find the accounts verified. It is a close, dirty town,
permeated with stiflng atmospheric odours, such as, in my estimation, might well rival
the seventy scents of Cologne, though less known to fame. The town lay in a basin,
encircled by a succession of hills and valleys wholly impregnable when properly
fortified. The slopes were defended by strong ramparts, and the wide ravines
crossed by bridges, under the supervision of military authorities, who amused us much
by their suspicious inspection of the contents of our omnibus, at each of the numer¬
ous gates we passed before reaching the enceinte, which  was yet  more efliciently
THE ATTEMPT. 189
strengthened than the outer earthworks. The streets were thronged with soldiers
busied in burnishing innumerable helmets, in apparent preparation for preserving, by
force of arms if necessary, the integrity of the fortress, just then threatened by
Pi-ance and Prussia, in a manner which woke the interest of Europe in the negotia¬
tions soon after brought to an unexpectedly peaceful issue through the able diplo
macy of the English foreign secretary, Lord Stanley.
That treaty is now read as a mere preamble to the awful passage of arms, which
has since stained the debateable ground of the banks of the Rhine with the blood
of the bravest and best of the two great nations whom its waters then separated.
Trival associations twined themselves for us round names now written in indelible
characters on the pages of history. Thionville was only a little frontier town, as¬
sociated with the ungrateful announcement, Ilfaut descendre pour oiler a la Doudne,
tout le monde descend ; the grim walls of Metz (where we changed carriages) told
no tale to mar the beauty of its picturesque situation on the magnificent Moselle;
and our most vivid memories of JSTancy are of a most welcome chicken and
champagne lunch, granted by an interval of two hours between the trains, which
also happily permitted an inspection of the beauties of which we had already
heard much as belonging to La plus jolie ville de France—a title well bestowed on
this most interesting town. The entrance gates were remarkably handsome, the
streets quiet and elegant to a degree, and the principal square, or Place Stanislas,
picturesquely situated, and adorned with fine buildings, including the Hotel de
Ville, and a monument in the centre, with the inscription, "A Stanidas le
Bienfaiscmt, la Lorraine Eeconnaisante."
The warlike associations continued at Strasbourg, a strong, lively, frontier
town, with the same military stir in the streets as at Luxembourg. The houses were
closely and irregularly built, with quaint roofs inhabited by storks, regarded as
sacred birds by the inhabitants ; a suj)erstitiou which makes one wonder what
became of them when misfortune seized the city. Strasbourg boasts a national
honour in the tomb of Marshal Saxe, over which is raised a noble monument in fine
white marble, with sciilj^tured allegorical representations of the grief of his country
over the loss of her hero. The cathedral is considered the finest in Europe, and
is certainly a chef d^oeuvre of architectural art. It is magnificent in proportions,
and noble and imposing in character ; but wanting in the poetic impressiveness of
effect that is so touching in the more sjnrituelle temple of Antwerp. The carving,
which includes thousands of small figures delineated with the most wonderful accuracy
and elegance of outline, is so fine as to present the general appearance of rich lace.
190 THE  ATTEMPT.
As a mechanical and scientific curiosity of worldwide celebrity, the Strasbourg
clock claims a few words of special description.    It stands in a small side chapel
apart from the cathedral, reaching nearly to the roof in height, and presenting a
symmetrical front to the eye, the centre  divided  into compartments  containing
figures illustrative of some branch of mathematical science, flanked on the left by a
A'
geometrical  staircase, and on the right by a column, and by portraits.of St Peter
(^surmounted by a cock,Whieh figure is again prominent in a preaching attitude
among the fretted ornaments on the very top of the clock-case. Directly underneath
are two small platforms, with figures in the centre of each, the first, of our Lord
as a sheijherd, and the other, of Saturn as Father Time, with scythe and wings.
Below these niches is an arched space, representing the heavens dotted with stars,
and the moon according to her actual size and age at the time; and under that again, a
circular diagram of all the signs of the Zodiac. The face of the clock is supported on
either side by little cupids whose function it is to strike the quarters, and projects
over a long narrow niche, containing a chariot driven by the presiding god of one
day of the week, which is always changed at midnight. A rotatory calendar of the
year, flanked right and left by female figures representing the world's dark and fair
races, whose wands point out the remarkable events incident to each day as it
passes, reaches to the ground'; and the remainder of the space within the railing
that guards the lower department, is filled with celestial globes and diagrams
illustrative of various astronomical facts.
The wonders that occurred during our visit between the hours of eleven and
twelve, when the automata are specially life-like and entertaining, are worthy of being
recounted. At a qiiarter past eleven, one of the dial cupids striick the small bell in
his hand, and immediately the figure of a little boy, like a cherub for 3'outh and beauty,
emerged from one of the side scenes of the stage, in front of Father Time, and
passed to the other side, striking the quarter on his bell in passing, thus proclaiming
the hour still young ; at the end of the second quarter a similar ceremony was per¬
formed twice by a bright, smart youth ; next three smart strokes wei-e dealt by a
strong warrior in the prime of life, and armed cap-a-fie; but the four quarters
were faintly told by an aged dotard trembling on his staff. It was now twelve
o'clock, and Father Time himself commenced to knell the hour, with slow, solemn
strokes, the while the cock crowed three times lustily on his perch, and the
twelve apostles filed out in imposing procession before the figure of our Lord, his
shepherd's staff bending and blessing each in response to his low inclination in
])assing.     The whole performance was curiously interesting, and sufficiently extra-
THE ATTEMPT.
191
ordinaiy to  attract  the  considerable  crowd  that  assembles regularly as midday
appi'oaches.
In travelling, we often miss the companionship of our dear friends who must be
left behind ; but the greatest and best of our mind's associates can be often with
us in an influence which renders each spot dear and familiar. The mighty wizard
who has enchanted Scotch scenery for all the world, treads also the banks of the
Khine; and his wand, which still transfigures each scene with the beauty of association,
will never be buried, like that of Prospero, but bud and blossom—
" A thing of beauty, and a joy for ever."
The vine-clad plains of Burgundy recalled the brave journey of Quentin Durward;
the mysteries of the dagger and the cord wrote themselves on the walls of Strasbourg,
where the noble Earl of Oxford was judged by the Holy Vehme ; the musical voice
of Anne of Geierstein seemed to ring in the mountain call of the Swiss ; and even
the dark shadow of the presence of Count Albert haunted the streets of Basle, our first
resting-place in the land which claims brotherhood with our owninbeautyand freedom.
In such an exalted mood it was somewhat mortifying to be obliged to make
the remark " Garcon, ce jambon n'est pas Men cuit,'^ and find from the satisfied
answer '^Cuit,madame, ce n'est pas cuit du tout," that our first experience in Switzer¬
land was in being treated to raw ham, by no means a sublime association, though
not inappropriate to the Hotel Sauvage, where it was formed.
Basle is most picturesquely situated on the banks of the Rhine, which is spanned
by one bridge in the centre of the town, the crossing service at the extremities being
performed by small ferry-boats. The cathedral, though not large, is a fine old
building with two spires, situated on a terrace adorned with noble chesnut trees,
whence we first viewed the Ehine flowing beneath, not as at Strasbourg, " cabin'd,
cribb'd, confin'd," but green, fresh and free ; the river of history, poetry and romance.
The moon was up, and the night beautiful as a poet's dream, the stillness
of nature only broken by the rush of the noble river, and the gentle hum of town
life on its banks, the lights of the ferry-boats gleaming like glow-worms' sparks
midst the dusky shadows of twilight. It was a night for forming impressions, the
force of which might dictate the farewell:—
" Adieu to thee, fair Rhine, a vain adieu,
There can be no farewell to scenes like thine ;
The mind is coloured by thy every hue,
Although, reluctantly, the eyes resign
Their cherished gaze upon thee, lovely Rhine."
(To he continued.) Elfie.
192 THE ATTEMPT.
OUR   LIBRARY   TABLE.
Calvinism: An Address delivered at St Andrew's, March 17th 1871.    By James
Anthony Froude, M.A. Rector of the University.    London : Longmans & Co.
The problem which this noble address strives to solve is, how it comes to pass that,
if Calvinism is indeed the hard and unreasonable creed which modern enlightenment
declares it to be, it has numbered among its adherents some of the greatest men that
ever lived; and if it be subversive of morality, by denying free will, how its first
fruits should invariably have been the highest form of morality in nations and in
individuals. Mr Froude begins his answer to this question by proving that the
predestinarian doctrine, which lies at the root of Calvinism, is not a mere tenet of
Calvinism, but an undeniable fact, which no casuistry can explain away. Whether
we like it or no, it is true. Calvinism did not invent it, it only recognizes it. At
the heart of the universe there is law,—law which we cannot alter, cannot modify,—
conformity to which is the only true morality, and the only possible condition of
human well-being.
He goes on to show how, through all the mighty cycles of history, this belief in
an over-ruling will or destiny, which is called the reproach of Calvinism, has ever
issued, not in self-indulgence, but in self-restraint; not in making men selfish volup¬
tuaries, but in making them " soldiers of the Almighty." Calvinism, he explains, is
not properly a system of opinion, but an attempt to make the will of God an authorita¬
tive guide. And while ifc remains true that all rebellion against that inexorable
will, that unchangeable law, is nothing but " kicking against the pricks," so long
will the strength of Calvinism remain.
Vera.    By the Author of The Hotel du Petit St Jean.    London : Smith,
Elder, & Co.    1871.
We do not think this story, as a whole, is equal to The Hotel du Petit St Jean.
Perhaps it is only because the events of the Crimean war have been so often described,
that one feels in the first part of the book an absence of the freshness and originality
■which were so striking in the former work. The great attraction of the story, and
it is very great, lies in the character of the heroine. It is useless to attempt to
describe by a collection of adjectives the lovely Russian princess, who is as good as
she is lovely, but we are sure that all readers, when they lay down the book, must
feel deeply grateful to the author for having brought them for a short time into the
pure and noble presence of the Princess Vera,
THE ATTEMPT. 193
^0rg{   Eliot's  |tchj   jpo^m.
Macmillan's Magazine for July opened with a new poem from a well-known pen. We
are prepared to expect great things from George Eliot, and " Armgart" does not dis¬
appoint us. It is a short tragic drama, full of all the power and fire characteristic
of its author; full, too, of the sort of passionate hopelessness which seems also insepar¬
able from her writings.
The first scene opens with a description of a young pritna donna, in all the
ecstasy of her first triumph, with the world lying at her feet, yet glad, not with the
mean gladness of gratified vanity, but with the proud joy of an artist rejoicing,
" That I myself have part
In that I worship."
Half despising the unappreciating delight of an audience who,
" Were I the virgin-mother, and my stage
The opening heavens at the judgment day,"
would still
" Peep, jog elbows, rate the price
Of such a woman in the social mart."
Yet, glorying in the power which could sway tlie mighty multitude as the heart of
one man; proudly owning and glorying in her high ambition, and answering the
half-cynical, half-kindly philosophy of her old music-master, who evidently has a
hard struggle to make out of all his assumed composure, anything like a decent
cloak for his real enthusiasm, when he tries to bring her down from her exalted
mood, by reminding her that
"She was proud
To find the bouquet from the roy.al box
Enclosed a jewel-case ; and proud to wear
A star of brilliants, quite an earthly star.
Valued by thalers,"
by frankly owning her delight in these things, because,
"If the world brings me gifts,
Gold, incense, myrrh,—'twill be the needful sign
That I have stirred it, as the high year stirs
Before I sink to winter.'"
" Shall I lie ?
Pretend to seek obscurity, to sing
In hope of disregard ? A vile pretence !
And blasphemy, besides.    For what is fame?
But the benignant strength of one transformed
To joy of many."
2b
Septemha- 1871.
194 THE ATTEMPT.
It is a noble picture, the beautiful young nature fired with love of her divine art,
and ready to throw her whole being at its feet; and surely it is true for all true
artists.
The second scene is between Armgart and her lover. Count Dornberg. Some
critics seem to regard this scene as the turning point of the story, but I cannot
think that it is so. It seems to me only the second step, of which the third scene is
the climax. The whole poem has been spoken of as being meant to exemplify the
triumph of an inborn passion for art, even over love itself, but I cannot accept that
as the true interpretation of the poem, I would venture to question, not only
Armgart's love for Dornberg, but even the depth and reality of Dornberg's love for
Armgart—and the sequel of the story bears out this theory. No doubt Dornbei'g
would have liked to have been: the envied of all men, as the possessor of such a
priceless pearl, and he was greedy of his treasure, he would fain have kept it all to
himself, he would have had her merge her being in his, and was jealous of every joy
in which he could not share; and no doubt he thought that jealousy proved the
intensity of his love. But, in truth, it only proved its selfishness, and Armgart's
woman's instinct was quick to detect the false ring. True love would have loved
her art for hei sake.
If Armgai-t's character showed nobly in the first scene, when she glories in her
success, only as securing her a part " in what she worships," it stands out still
more nobly in the second, in her grand acceptance of the sacrifices and pains to
which her lover predicts that her art will lead her:—
" I accept the peril !
I choose to walk high with sublime dread,
Eather than crawl in safety.    And beside,
I am an artist, as you are a noble,—
I ought to bear the burden of my rank."
In her grand defence of womanhood and denial of
" The oft taught gospel, Woman, thy desire
Shall be that all superlatives on earth
Belong to men."
And her indignant appeal, from men's narrow theories of what a woman ought to be,
to the great mother herself :—
" Oh blessed nature !
Let her be arbitress ; she gave me voice,
Such as she only gives a woman child ;
THE ATTEMPT. 195
Best of its kind.    Gave me ambition too,
That sense transcendent which can taste the joy
Of swaying multitudes."
" I am an artist by my birth.
By the same warrant that I am a woman ;
Nay, in the added rarer gift, I see
Supreme vocation.    If a conflict comes.
Perish—no, not the woman, but the joy
Which men make narrow by their narrowness."
As I said before, I do not believe that Armgart loved Count Dornberg. She was
attracted by his professions of love, she was even sorry that she might not love him,—
for the " old sweet song" has such a power, that anything that even sounds like it will
attract,—but I do not think there was any real love for him in Armgart's heart. Cer¬
tainly she did not love him as such a nature as her's could love—nor was pei-fect
love possible between them. True love must waken the whole nature, and there were
aspirations, in Armgart's heart to which Count Dornberg had no key. Had he truly
loved her, such love might have created a sympathy with what she loved with which
she might have tried to content herself, (if nothing deeper chanced to come in her way);
but as I have said, his love was not deep enough to create such a sympathy. And
so these two part. Not, I think because the artist triumphed over the woman, but
because, to satisfy Armgart, it was needed to satisfy both artist and woman, and
Count Dornberg satisfied neither.    There was not between them that
"Mysterious fitness that transcends
Any agreement."
The third scene shows us Armgart in her hour of calamity and despair; her
glorioirs power for ever ruined; the " meaning" gone out of her life.
" Oh, I had meaning once.
Like day, and sweetest air!    What am I now?
The millionth woman in superfluous herds."
The dull gray of her life seems too teiTible to be borne, and her first thou'j-lit is
suicide.    Her cousin tries to comfort her by begging her
"To change the light, throw into shade,
The loss you aggrandize, and let day fall
On good remaining. . . .
Count Domberg loved you well."
But Armgart's true instinct had detected the false ring in Count Dornberg's love
long ago, and at once her answer is,—
196 THE ATTEMPT.
" Not me, not me,—
Think you lie loves a woman's inner self,
Aching with loss of loveliness ?"
" Nay, my charm
Was half that I could win fame, yet renounce
A wife with glory possible, absorbed
Into ber husband's actual."
To her cousin's suggestion,—
'' WTiat would you say.
If now he came to you and asked again,
That you would be his wife ?"
Her proud answer is,—
" No, and thrice no !
It would be pitying constancy, not love,
That brought him to me now.    I will not be
A pensioner in marriage."
But as her true insight foretold, her generosity was not to be so tried. Count
Dornberg writes her a letter of condolence and farewell, but says nothing more of
the " refuge, shelter, guard," he had so pressed on her acceptance before. His letter
provokes only the contemptuous remark,—
" The Graf has much discretion."
And so ends the episode between them. And Armgart turns to face her lot in all
its barrenness and grayness. How forcibly, how bitterly, and, alas, how truly she
draws the dreary picture of many a woman's life :—
" A woman's lot, a tale of every day !
A middling woman's, to impress the world
With high superfluousness."
Then the common-place cousin, who had been her patient drudge for years, turns
round upon her, and asks what right she had to claim exemption from the common
lot ?    And Armgart answers proudly—
" Because heaven made me royal."
Then the lame girl,
" Whom no one ever praised
For being cheerful,"
j)ours out all the accumulated bitterness of long years of life condemned to conscious
waste.     Bitter indignant resentment  at the thraldom that foi'ces ujion so many of
THE ATTEMPT. 197
our sisters an existence of unwilling, wretched trifling, which starves their natures,
and makes lives, which were given for activity and happiness, but one long, dreary
patience. Bitter words, but words that are rankling now iinspoken in how many a
silent woman's heart I It is all a revelation to Armgart. Herself gloriously
endowed with powers which the world could not afford to do without, she had
never thought of the joyless, aimless lives of her less-favoured sisters. A new-born
sympathy awakes in her broken heart towards the universal sufferings of humanity.
Her personal loss sinks into insignificance
" Beside that mighty deficit,"
and she confesses, that if there were one near her needing her help,
" Then it were worth the while to live."
She has recognized at last that " the sorrow that is voiceless and tuneless, is not the
least pitiable—but the most."
With characteristic impetuosity, she turns her new-born sympathy on the first
object she meets, and astonishes her old music-master, whom she had always looked
on before as formed simply to do her pleasure, with the abrupt question—
" How old are you ? "
and the naive confession—
" I never thought till now how you have lived,
They hardly ever play your music,"
and discovers, to her great sui-prise, that in the old man's breast there sleeps also a
buried ambition and a broken heart, which years have mellowed into a half-cynical,
half-kindly resignation, which counts it quite natural that
" Youth thinks itself the goal,
Of each old life ;"
and comforts itself for the world's neglect by the reflection—
" My old friend, Leo,
Much grain is wasted in the world, and rots,—
Why not thy handful ? "
In her new .spirit of self-abnegation, Armgart resolves to take \\p her abode, and
teach others to use the gift that she has lost, in the little town where her cousin was
born, and which she had quitted for her sake. And the old music-master approves
of her resolution, and thus sums up his philosophy :—
" We must bury our dead joys
And live above them with a living world."
198
THE   ATTEMPT.
And so Armgart resolves to "bury her dead joy," and to bury also "self" in its
grave.    One sting, however, remains, she can bury it, but
" Oh it is hard
To take the little corpse and lay it low,
And say, ' None misses it but me.' She sings,
I mean Paulina sings ' Fidelio,'
And they welcome her to-night."
And the old kindly cynic answers,
"WeU, weU,
'Tis better that our griefs should not spread far."
And so " Armgart " ends. It is a noble lesson which it teaches,—a lesson which, in
one waj' or other, every noble man and woman must learn, that true life begins only
when self is dead. It is the very lesson of the New Testament, and yet, surely
there is a want.
In reading "Armgart," as in reading George Eliot's last noble poem, "The Legend
of Jabal," we close the book with a long-drawn breath and a half sigh, poor
" Jubal! " poor " Armgart ! " And why is it so 1 It seems to me that it is because
thtiy teach the first half of the New Testament lessons, and stop short of the second.
The comfort that comes to Jubal in his lonely death, and to Armgart in her young
blighted life, is much the comfort that might have occurred to a noble nature
struggling to reconcile itself to an adverse fate in the days of the old heathen
philosophy, and our human nature instinctively shrinks from the coldness of a self
renunciation which points to no "hope full of immoi'tality." It is the cross without
the crown ; the grave without the resiirrection. Ah, why having gone so far, may
we not go further? Having accepted the beginning of Paul's sentence, " For I am
dead/' may we not go on to its triumphant conclusion, " and my life is hid with Christ
in God j that so when He, who is our life, shall appear, we also may appear with
Him in glory." Jeanie Morison.
Salji0itr 0f t^t  Souls  |  '§obt
Jesus ! wert Thou mine alone,
Half Thy value were unknown ;
Me from sin's perdition caught.
Thou alone of love hast taught.
Back to Thee returns again
Love-taught spirits' full refrain.
If, as self s Redeemer seen,
Jesus, Thou hast precious been ;
Deeper now I feel Thy wortli.
Star of Hope for all on earth !
Feel Thy value, price above.
Saviour of the souls I love !
THE ATTEMPT.
199
From the love I bear mine own,
Day by day intenser grown;
(Love that, but for Thee, would find
Hell in death-expecting mind ;)
Down where passing glances woke
Transient yearnings left unspoke.
Every sympathetic thrill
More unveiled Thy beauty still,
More revealed Thy boundless worth,
Star of Hope for all on earth !
Proved Thy value, price above,
Saviour of the souls I love !
Faults that jarred, where love had fain
Beauty seen without a stain ;
Shrinkings, while the tongue of pride
Scoffed at failings love would hide ;
Terrors for the loved untold,
Clouds about their future rolled ;
Ghastly hands upraised to slay
Phantoms of their coming day,—
These revealed Thy boundless worth,
Star of Hope for all on earth !
Proved Thy value, price above,
Saviour of the souls I love !
Probings needed, there where heart
Traiterous played the coward's part;
Sympathies required, where I
Powerless felt for all reply ;
Loneliness I might not charm ;
Fearfulness I could not calm ;
Griefs and wounds I might not heal;
Secrets I dared not unseal;—
These revealed Thy boundless worth,
Star of Hope for all on earth !
Proved Thy value, price above,
Saviour of the souls I love !
Shudderings when mistrustful thought,
Fiend suspicion hoarsely taught;
Marvel how gulphs yawned between
Hearts had once united been ;
Anguish of the parting day,
Yearnings for the far away^
Tremblings by the sufferer's bed,
Callings for the silent dead,—
These revealed Thy boundless worth,
Star of Hope for all on earth !
Proved Thy value, price above,
Saviour of the souls I love !
But, if Thou wert their's alone.
Still Thy value were unknown ;
Love we may, yet faithless fall,—■
Mutual failures are we all.
Friendships* wounds may prove a gate
Opened wide for those that hate.
From our failures Thou can'st raise,
Larger life of hope and praise ;
Larger show Thy boundless worth.
Star of hope for all on earth !
Prove Thy value, price above,
Saviour, where we fail in love !
Mutual failures though we be.
Beauty in the loved we see ;
Beauty like, in all may rise,
Born of Love's transfiguring eyes ;
Born of Thee, whose Love was strong,
Conqueror over grief and wrong;
Love taught here, through boundless loss,
Given the crown from off Thy cross ;
Grieved and shamed I know Thy wortli,
Star of Hope for all on earth !
Know Thy value, price above.
Saviour, where I fail to love !
X. H.
200 THE ATTEMPT.
6tox^t Street (ibtnburjg^) anb its Jlssociattoits.
The remarkable formation of the ground on which Edinburgh stands, and which
gives to that city its peculiar character, renders it necessary to say a few introductory
words on this subject.
Geologists tell us that, in the long past ages of the world, our island was covered
by an ocean, which, with the soft strata of clay and sandstone forming its bottom,
was subject to frequent disturbances, arising from the workings of volcanic agencies
under the crust of the earth. One or more of these disturbances was caused by the
upheaval and protrusion of a quantity of hot igneous matter among the soft sedimen¬
tary strata, through which it ramified, and over which in some places it flowed. In
course of time the land began to appear,—whether this was caused by the upheaval
of the land, or by the waters from other causes finding a lower level, it is unneces¬
sary here to consider. The mountains and hills were modified to their present form
by great currents,— chiefly by the latest from the west,—which swept across the
country. It is to the action of this current that the remarkable form of the eleva¬
tions of our city is due. The current, in its course across the country, naturally
wore away the soft strata (of aqueous formation) from the front of the hard trap rock
(of igneous origin), leaving a "tail" of tlie soft strata behind, and a lower and
flatter ridge before each trap prominence thus formed. The trap clifi", to which the
ridge of the Now Town of Edinbui-gh thus owes its origin, is the Calton Hill. That
ridge is composed of strata of shale, clay, and sandstone, horizontal at the eastern
extremity, and towards the west dipping north-east at a very high angle. Only one
trap dyke has been found among these strata; it lies about the middle of the ridge
on the southern slope, and runs from north-west to south-east.
The earliest indications of human occupation of the present site of Edinburgh
and neighbourhood, consist of the leaf-shaped bronze swoi-ds, found some years ago on
the southern slope of Arthur's Seat. These remains probably belonged to the tribe
which first availed itself of the natural advantages of the Castle rock as a place of
defence. That the Castle was the nucleus of the present town, is undoubted. The
precise date of its foundation is unknown, but from the fact of its most ancient names
(Mai-dyn, and Castello Mynyd Agned) being Gaelic, we may infer that it was of
Pictish origin. It was subsequently called Vallis Dolorosa, Castrum Puellarum,
Dunedin, and Edinum. It is said that a Koman colony existed here, but this is un¬
certain.    However, the remains of the Roman wall across the country, and the various
THE   ATTEMPT. 201
ancient names of Latin derivation attest the presence of the southern conquerors in
this part of the country.
The Anglian kingdom of Northumbria extended to the Firth of Forth, and
the borderland between the' Picts and Saxons was the scene of many struggles. In
one of these, about the year 626, this fortress fell into the hands of Edwin, king of
Northumbria, who strengthened it, and named it after himself, Edwinesburch or
Edwin's burgh. The castle, from its peculiar adaptability for defence, was the object
of long and frequent contention between these neighbouring kingdoms, but remained
eventually in the hands of the Picts.
In the year 854, the houses built near the castle and under its protection,
amounted to a village or small town, which, in 1128, was erected by David I. into a
royal burgh, the castle being converted by him into a royal residence. He also (in
fulfilment of a vow made after a narrow escape while hunting) founded the Abbey of
Holyrood, bestowing upon the abbot and canons the profits arising from the mills
of Edenourgh and Dene, on the Water of Leith. Further, he granted them the
privilege of ei-ecting a burgh between Holyrood and Edwiuesburch, and this, when
erected, was named the Canongate. These burghs and the abbey soon received the
collective name of Edinburgh.
The city, which occupied only the slope or " tail" of the castle rock, was, about
the year 1450, enclosed within walls. The chief street, extending from the Castle to
HoljTood Abbey, was called Market Street, since changed into High Street, in
contrast to the low lying suburb—Cowgate or Common Gate, via Conimunis—
built to accommodate the nobility who flocked to the court. After the battle of
Flodden, the city walls were extended, in oider to include the Cowgate and Grass-
market, and as a protection on the north side of the castle and town, the valley—
watered since the disappearance of the original loch by a little streamlet fed by two
springs from the castle rock—was converted into a marshy loch called the Norloch ;
so called, according to Hugh Miller, in contradistinction to the traditionary Cowgate
or South Loch ; and, according to Maitland and others, to distinguish it from the
then existing South, or Borough Muir Loch.
For some centuries the town increased but little in extent, its growth being
mostly in height. This peculiarity was caused by the inhabitants seeking as much
as possible to nestle under the protection of the castle, the country being very
unsafe in these times of frequent warfare between England and Scotland.
It is recorded that James VII., while Duke of York, meditated an extension of
the town towards the north, with a communication by means of bridges.    But on bis
2 c
Septemher 1871.
202 THE  ATTEMPT.
accession to the throne, and consequent removal to London, the scheme was abandoned.
It was, however, revived in the second half of the eighteenth century. In the year 1763
the town council resolved to apply for an act for the extension of the royalty on the
north side of the town. But this scheme met so much opposition, chiefly from the
county people and the inhabitants of the Canongate, that it was allowed to lie over
for some years; during which period the Norloch was drained, the North Bridge
built, and a rival suburb sprang up rapidly on the south side. Provost Dnimmond,
to whose exertions we are indebted for various public institutions, accomplished the
building of the North Bridge nominally (to prevent opposition) as a better way of
communication with Leith ; but in reality, as various notices of him show, to pave
the way for the future New Town. After considerable delay and difficulty, the act
for the extension of the royalty was, in 1767, obtained; and plans were immediately
brought forward for the erection of a New Town.
The ground which this and the supplementary new town were destined to
cover, was then occupied by a number of villages, of which there are interesting
accounts in various histories and annals of Edinburgh. The chief of these villages
were—Mourtries Hill, Picardy, Broughton, Sil verm ills, Canonmills, Stockbridge,
Bell's Mills, and Dean. The family mansions of Bellevue and Drumsheuch,
surrounded by fine old trees, were situated at the east and west ends of our present
Queen Street. The Queen Street Gardens were occupied by a large farm ; and
George Street was represented by game preserves, over which Henry Mackenzie,
" The Man of Feeling," often shot.
Various plans of the New Town were submitted to the provost and magistrates,
the one ultimately chosen being by James Craig, nephew of Thomson, the poet. It
comprehended Queen Street, Princes Street, and George Street, with St Andrew
and Charlotte Squares. This plan, with some alterations, was carried out, and the
building proceeded rajudly. The necessary stone was obtained from Craigleith
Quarry ; and the sand for the mortar was obtained from the Gallow's Lee, a sand
elevation between Edinburgh and Leith, on which the gallows used to stand.
In the original plan, St Andrew's Church was placed in St Andrew's Square,
where the Koyal Bank now stands ; a cii'cus, with an equestrian statue in the centre,
occujjied the crossing of George Street by Frederick Street; and St George's Church
was modelled from St Paul's in London. The circus would have done much to
break the dull uniformity which characterised George Street, and which Cockburn
so vehemently denounces in his Memonals of his Times. There is extant a guide
book publishetl in 1816, in the engravings in which, of the streets of the New Town,
THE  ATTEMPT. 203
there is something extremely monotonous in the long rows of plain buildings, unre¬
lieved by a single projection or ornament, the windows and doors being mere uniform
holes in the walls. This style of building—it hardly deserves the name of architec¬
ture—seems not only to have contented the inhabitants of Edinburgh, but to have
excited in them the most lively admiration ! There is, however, greater variety in
Charlotte Square, obtained by the introduction of pilasters and other ornaments,
although these are of so many styles as to be in questionable taste.
Craig's chef-d'oeuvre was the Physicians' Hall, which was founded in 1775 by Dr
Cullen, on the spot now occupied by the Commercial Bank. The architecture was
purely classical, and, judgipg from an engraving in Storer's History of Edinburgh,
the building was singularly chaste and beautiful. The College of Physicians removed
to this site from Fountain Close, having been in treaty successively for the sites now
occupied by the Register Office and the Scott Monument. That in George Street
was ultimately fixed upon, and the hall erected at a cost of £4800. As the funds
of the College were not then in their present flourishing state, this sum exceeded
their available finances by about £1000; and after fruitless efforts to raise the
requisite sum, it was agreed to sell the building. A proposal was made to purchase
it for assembly rooms; the terms (£3750) were actually settled, and other prelimi¬
naries begun, when both purchasers and sellers changed their minds, and the sale fell
to the ground. The college having ultimately overcome the pecuniary difficulty,
occupied the hall, and eventually, when more extensive accommodation became
necessary, sold it for £20,000 to the Commercial Banking Company. This company
erected, at a cost of upwards of £50,000, a building equalling the hall in good pro¬
portions, but of a handsomer and more imposing character. It also is of Greek
architecture, its massive pillars being, like those of its predecessor, Corinthian.
The origin of this Banking Company is interesting. Before its existence, all
the banks were either Whig or Tory, each class refusing to transact business for any
persons of opposing politics. This, of course, was often very embarrassino- and so
strongly were the evils of the system felt, that the Commercial Banking Company
was formed to conduct a people's bank, and to serve all alike, independently of
political or other opinions. That the principle worked well, is shown by the flourish¬
ing state of the bank. There are also banks in St Andrew's Square, remarkable
(though not in so high a degree) for their external and internal ornament. The
National Bank is plain and unpretending, and acts as a foil to the British Linen
Bank. The Royal Bank was originally the town house of Sir Lawrence Dundas.
It was subsequently converted into an Excise Office, and eventually into a Bank.
204 THE   ATTEMPT.
The equestrian statue of Lord Hopetoun in front of it was the work of Campbell
a Scottish artist.
St Andrew's Church (erected as a counterpoise to the Hall of Physicians) was
founded in 1781, its spire being added in 1789. The body of the building is oval
and plain, but is relieved by the portico, which is supported, after the usual Edin¬
burgh fashion, by Corinthian pillars. TJie spire is one of the best proportioned in
Edinburgh. This church being built a little in advance of the other buildings, and
the Hall of Physicians opposite, a little back, gave rise to Henry Erskine's oft
repeated saying, that "the forwardness of the clergy, and the backwardness of the
physicians spoiled the finest street in Europe."
St George's Church is generally admired by the multitude, though severely
animadverted upon by many critics, but by few so strongly as Ruskin, when he
thus describes it:—"One of your most costly and most ugly buildings, the
great church with the dome at the end of George Street. I think I never saw
a building with a principal entrance so utterly ghastly and oppressive ; and it is as
weak as it is ghastly." The original plan of this church was in much better taste,
modelled, as has been stated, from St Paid's in London; but the low state of the
town's finances rendered a considei'able modification necessary. Even with this
modification the expense of erecting it (about £40,000) reduced the town almost to
bankruptcy.
The Assembly Rooms were built in 1787; the Music hall, under the same roof,
in 1843. The latter, though built when the science of acoustics was supposed to be
well understood, is not so well adapted for the conveyance of sound as was St Cecilia's
Hall in the Cowgate.
The statues of Pitt and George IV. are by Chantrey, the former being one of
his best productions. When Chantrey was asked how the one statue was so inferior
to the other, he replied, that in the one he had only a king to represent; but, in the
other he had a nobler and worthier subject,^a great man, a man of genius.
Melville's Statue in St Andrew's Square is placed on the summit of a pillar
136 feet high, which is copied from Trajan's Pillar at Rome. It has always been a
source of wonder to me, why a statue should be exiled to such a height. The more
modern way is to place a statue on a lower pedestal, that it may be not only
wondered at but seen. Henry Dundas, Lord Melville, was a man of great talent
and weight of character. He rose gradually from the post of assessor to the
magistrates of Edinburgh, to that of Secretary of State. He was recognised as the
official representative of Scotland ; and was practically more (what he was termed)
THE  ATTEMPT. 205
the " King of Scots," than was the king himself. He considered Scotch interests
and Scotch people his especial care; and well did he look after them, for every
privilege and office that could be procured for them was bestowed, Pitt's friendship
for him putting much in his power. Although we may question the justice of carry¬
ing this national feeling so far, we cannot but acknowledge the great benefits for
which Scotland was indebted to him.
The names given to the streets of the new town of Edinburgh show which
political party was in the ascendant at the time of its erection, George, Charlotte,
Queen, Prince's, Frederick, and Hanover Streets were all named by the Tories.
Among the most striking features of George Street, are the charming and
varied views obtained at the openings. That of the castle from Castle Street, is
remai-kably grand. I always associate this view with a striking phase of it
I witnessed one summer afternoon. The day had been sultry ; and as it wore on, it
became evident that a storm was impending. I was passing along George Street;
and on reaching Castle Street, the scene that met my eyes was truly grand. There
was the frowning rock, with its castellated crown, framed as it were on either side
by the stone walls of Castle Street; above it and beyond were heavy masses of
black clouds piled up one upon the other, seeming so deep and dense, that I almost
wondered if there could be a sun and smiling sky hidden behind so impenetrable a
screen. Everything partook of the same grey hue shading off to black, one faint
lurid streak in the east being the only relief to the prevailing leaden aspect. The
heavens grew darker and darker, stiller and stiller the world below; this awaiting,
that preparing for the coming encounter. At last a vivid flash, closely followed
by a loud peal of thunder proclaimed the conflict begun. The storm raged long
and fiercely, and it was only by the fall of the heavy rain, that the awe-struck
band of spectators were recalled to a sense of the necessity of seeking shelter.
Frederick Street commands a refreshing view of the soft green banks adjoining
the castle rock. From the openings at Hanover Street and St David Street, we see
the Old Town towering upwards, with the Scott Monument—" an architectural
poem,"—and the Mound, with its interesting buildings, as a foreground; each suffi¬
cient in itself for the subject of a theme. The artistic effect of the Old Town strikes
the eye; but a deeper emotion is awakened in the mind while gazing at this scene,
which has witnessed so many changes in successive generations. We look with
reverence, and we find a strange fascination in seeking out stories, pleasant or pain¬
ful, connected with bygone events. But alas! where once dwelt the noble, the
learned, the refined, we now find the miserable, the ignorant, the vicious.    No one
206 THE  ATTEMPT.
who has neither read of, nor seen the state of the closes of the Old Town, can imagine
to what a condition they have sunk. So bad indeed are they, that the only remedy
is to provide the wretched inhabitants with proper dwellings, and to pull down these
dens. Much has been done, under the auspices of the late Provost Chambers, to let
in sunlight and air, by opening up wide cross streets. But the work is only begun.
"We of the present generation have a solemn responsibility resting on us, to labour
to improve the condition, not only of the dwellings of the poor, but of the poor them¬
selves. To return:—The views towards the north from George Street are also very
fine. We see the land sloping down to the Firth of Forth, thickly dotted with
woods and dwelling-houses. Then there is the Firth, always a charming object,
looking even cooler and fresher when viewed from the dusty crowded streets. Be¬
yond the Firth we see Fife, its Lomonds rising in relief, and a sea-margin stretching to
the east, along which there are numberless villages nestling in bays and sheltered
nooks.
There is something peculiarly gratifying to an artist in the contrast of the
various views thus presented to him. Here is the sombre rock standing up against
the sky, with its castellated summit, there the verdant banks; here the picturesque
irregular buildings of the Old Town, and there the blue waters of the Forth, with a
wide-spread landscape of hill, valley, field and moor. Eta.
(To he Continued.)
(founded on fact.)
Der lieben Tante
Lina hochactungsvoll gewidmet.
" And thou can'st not love me, then, Alex ?" It was evening; evening in the fairest
time of the short lovely Curish summer. All nature looked radiant, and seemed to
rejoice in her brief escape from the bands of her snow-crowned tyrant, winter. The
sky was pure and calm, deep blue overhead, but flecked towards the west, with gold
and crimson cloudlets, which told that the sun had but just set beneath the still glowing
horizon. One or two birds warbled their evening lay, and the sweet music was borne
far upon the perfumed air. Turning one's gaze earthward, the scene was passing
fair.    No marvels of sublime scenery called for wonder and admiration from the
THE  ATTEMPT. 207
enraptured beholder; but the gently undulatiug land, mapped out in many a tract
of corn and pasture ground, seemed suggestive of domestic peace and plenty ; and
the monotony was relieved by here and there a noble forest of pines and birches,
which raised their dark crests against the sky. But few human habitations were to
be seen. In the distance, near the borders of a still, clear lake, and approached by
two fine avenues, one of chestnuts, and the other of birch-trees, could be desci-ied the
mansion of the lord of the soil, surrounded by a few dwellings occupied by his imme¬
diate dependants. Nearer to the point from which we take our survey, on a slight
elevation, stood the little Lutheran church with its modest white tower; and close
by, on another hill, the windmill to which the small farmers and peasants, from far
and wide, brought their wheat, rye, and barley to be ground. But the building
which has most claim on our interest is the Pastoi-al or Presbytery; a long, low
white house, with red-tiled roof, flanked by a fine orchard of apple, cherry, pear, and
plum trees, and overlooking many a broad acre of growing corn, and tall rich grass
nearly ready for the scythe,—for the pastor was an excellent farmer, and his fields
were the admiration, and perhaps envy, of all the country-side. Fine herds of cattle
grazed upon the sward, and the shrill voices of the herd maidens, raised to a kind of
chaunt, mingled with the even-song of the birds.
On the verandah before the house was seated the pastor's aunt; a comely
lady, past middle age, who appeared to be watching with great interest two
figures standing upon a rustic bridge, that spanned a stream, which formed the
western boundary of the pastor's garden. One of these, who had just uttered the
words quoted, was a tall, fine-looking man in semi-military costume, apparently
about five-and-twenty years of age. The dark brown hair lay close to his well-
shaped head, and his handsome features were unshaded by beard or whiskers; only
a thick well-trimmed moustache hung over his upper lip, giving a soldierly air to his
face. Deep melancholy earnestness was in his dark grey eyes, as he bent them upon
his companion. This was a young girl of some eighteen summers, tall and graceful
in figure, with a countenance expressive of gentleness and intelligence, though the
features were marked and plain. A look of sadness, and, it seemed, of embarrass¬
ment too, passed over her face, as she half turned from her interlocutor.
" And thou canst not love me, then, Alex?"
" Ah, Leopold, forgive me," she murmured at length.
" Forgive thee !    Alas, what have I to forgive 1    I love thee, Alex."
The young girl raised her eyes to the soldier, and half offered her hand, with a
timid gestxire.
208 THE   ATTEMPT.
" I love thee too, Leopold, if not in the way thou wouldst have me do. From
childhood thou hast ever been my favourite companion at play, and my brave
protector in all my childish fears and dangers. I love thee as a sister; will not that
suffice ?"
"As a sister ! " echoed the young man, with a bitter sigh. " Oh, Alex, Alex,
couldst thou but love for one short hour "as I have loved for years, thou wouldst
know the futility of such consolations. Speak not of sisterly affection. A man who
loves with all the strength of his being, who loves as only a man can love,—can he
stop short at that moonlight sentiment, that miserable pretence called sisterly affec¬
tion % Alexandrine," he continued, passionately, " I have loved thee from early
boyhood; thou wer't ever my first thought, the dream of my youth. When I first
donned the uniform which marks me as a servant of my emperor, 'twas no personal
vanity which mingled with my boyish exultation as T asked myself, ' Will she think
it becomes me %' When, day after day, I performed the monotonous round of mili¬
tary duty, the tedious routine was cheered by the inward hope, ' I shall the sooner
win a position for her.^ When my sovereign himself hung this decoration on my
breast, with gracious word and smile, that breast throbbed high, but only with im¬
patience to lay the bauble at her feet. Oh, Alexandrine, thou art cold; thou art
cruel.    Hast thou no return to make for the devotion of a life ?"
And his countenance, as he turned it upon her, glowed almost to fierceness.
Alexandrine trembled visibly.
"Spare me, Leopold," she faltered; "I did not mean to wound thee. I too
suffer."
The expression of anger vanished instantly Leopold gently took the hand
which had been until now disregarded.
" Alex, canst thou pardon me 1 I am but a I'ough soldier, and I have loved thee
very dearly. I mmst leave thee, for to-morrow I must be far on my way to re-join
my regiment. Love me as a sister-, since thou canst not love me otherwise. Give
me only the sprig of jessamine from thy belt, in token that I am forgiven."
And as Alexandrine mutely proffered the flower, he raised both the gift and
the hand that tendered it to his lips.
" Farewell, Alex ! It may be that I hold this hand for the last time ; but
remember that no other woman shall ever call Leopold Wassieliewitch bridegroom."
And with one more hand-pressure, one more wistful gaze, he was gone.
Alexandrine stood looking at his retreating figure as if in a dream. Tears,
which she had hitherto painfully restrained, coursed down her cheeks in abundance,
THE   ATTEMPT. 209
for she truly loved Wassieliewitch, if only as a sister, and the sight of his pain
pained her deeply. Perhaps she loved him more than she knew; but she had been
accustomed for so long to regard him as a friend and brother, that any warmer or
more romantic sentiment seemed utterly strange and inadmissible. Presently she
dried her tears, and walked slowly towards the house.
" Alex, my child," began the old lady, " I had hoped for a different ending to
this interview.    Thou gavest the poor lad no hope, then ? "
" Ask me nothing, I beg of thee, dear Tante Elsie ; I think my heart is break¬
ing." And Alex passed on into the house, leaving Tante Elsie to the sole companion¬
ship of her knitting-needles.
Alexandrine von Kleinberg was the only daughter of a sea captain. Her
mother, who resided in the coast town of Windaw, was of so eccentric a disposition,
that many deemed her unsound in mind. Sad indeed were the recollections of the
poor maiden's childhood. The strange conduct of her mother rendered the little
Alex so unhappy, that a gravity beyond her years grew upon her ; so much so, that
her father, a bluff, kind-hearted sailor, at length remarked it, on one of his brief
visits to his joyless home, and he made arrangements for his daughter being at once
removed to the care of the Pastor and Pastorin of Ihlenberg, whose boarding school
for girls enjoyed a high reputation throughout the province. This happened when
Alex was about twelve years old. During the course of her unhappy home life,
the poor child had had but one solace; this was the companionship of the son and
daughter of the Pastor "Wassieliewitch, Lutheran clergyman in Windaw, and nearly
related to the Pastorin of Ihlenberg. Leojwld and Olga were almost the only com¬
panions whose society the caprices of Alex's mother would allow her to enjoy, and
the friendship was close indeed. Although several years older than the two girls,
Leopold delighted in sharing the simple amusements of his sister and her friend, and
was their champion and guardian on all occasions. When, however, Alex was about
eleven and Olga fourteen, the latter was seized with a nervous fever, and died after
an illness of a few weeks. Poor little Alex bitterly mourned her friend, and grew
sadder and more melancholy than ever. Leopold now remained to her alone; but,
about six months after his sister's death, he was obliged to leave his native town for
the university of Dorpat, and after his departure Alex was very desolate. Her
removal to the Pastoral of Ihlenberg was the dawning of the first real happiness the
poor child had ever known.    The regular hours of study, the healthful recreation, and
above all, the society of girls about her own age, all contributed to develo^De the
2 D
September 1871. ~~~
210 THE   ATTEMPT.
naturally amiable and cheerful temper of Alexandrine; and when, after she had
been at this admirable institution about two years, Leopold came on a visit to spend
the Christmas fetes with Pastor Bielenstamm's sons, his fellow students at Dorpat,
he found his old play-fellow so remarkably improved, so graceful aud unafl'ectedly
charming, that, almost unknown to him, his old affection ripened into a warmer
sentiment. This impression became more and more confirmed by subsequent visits.
Alex alone was unaware of this change in her old friend's feelings, and his sojourns
at the Pastoral were a source of unmixed tranquil happiness. It was only when, on
the evening referred to, Leopold frankly declared to her that his future fate was in
her keeping, that she became suddenly awakened to the real state of things; and the
shock was rude and bewildering.
Yeai'S had passed away since that parting on the bridge, in the Pastor's garden
at Ihlenberg. The good Pastor and Pastorin Bielenstamm still dwelt in their
peaceful home, surrounded by young and happy faces, but Alexandrine von Klein-
berg was no longer of the number. Twice since that eventful evening had she met
Leopold Wassieliewitch, now lieutenant in a regiment of Polish hussars, and no
more gallant officer could be cited in all the Czar's army. Once had he renewed
his proposals, but had met with the same response. " I love you as a sister, Leopold,
but I cannot be your wife."
Alexandrine was now in Stockholm, domesticated with the family of a brother
of her father, who was established there as a merchant. The eccentricities of her
mother had so greatly increased, that a formal separation had taken place. Leopold,
the friend of her childhood and youth, was still held in tender remembrance ; but he
had been told off to a station far in the interior of Russia, and Alexandrine only heard
of him at rare intervals, through the Pastorin Bielenstamm, with whom she maintained
a regular correspondence.
Our heroine was now six-and-twenty ; a graceful and interesting, if not hand¬
some, woman. Several proposals ot marriage, all more or less advantageous, had
been laid at her feet, but she had refused them all, and gossips began to whisper that
Alexandrine von Kleinberg was destined after all to " dress the hair of St Catherine ;"
that is, that she would remain a spinster to the end of her days.
One evening the merchant attended his blooming daughters to a ball, given
by a. friend to celebrate the betrothal of his daughter. Alexandrine was of the
party. In the earlier part of the evening she danced but little, and was chiefly
occupied in conversing with an old Swedish ofiicer and his wife, who, in past years,
had  known  her parents.    Supper  being over, the  guests  again repaired to the
THE  ATTEMPT. 211
dancing-room, and began to arrange the gi-and dance of the evening, the cotillon.
This dance, with which balls generally conclude, is of almost interminable duration ;
and, indeed, may be prolonged ad libitum until the ingenuity of the executants in
devising   new  figures   is   exhausted.    Not  wishing  to   enter  upon so arduous a
campaign, Alexandrine had withdrawn to a window recess, when the voice of the
hostess made her turn; and she perceived that a partner was being introduced to
her.    Never before had she encountered such eyes as those which now met hers.
They were not large, nor particularly brilliant; there colour was undecided, and
appeared to change as one looked at them.    But they seemed to rivet those upon
whom their gaze fell, and to hold them in a kind of spell.    Alexandrine was long
afterwards heard  to say that, even   at the first glance, they exercised a kind of
mesmeric influence over her for which she could not account, and from which she
could not escape.    The rest of the features were ordinary enough ; indeed, Alex
scarcely noticed them, as she mechanically took his offered arm.    For the rest of
the  evening  the stranger's  attentions were unremitting; and when he attended
her  to  her  sleigh,   she  heard  her  uncle  inviting  him  to  call.    He  ^^resented
himself the next day, and from that time his visits were constant.    In six weeks
Alexandrine von Kleinberg was publicly betrothed to Harald Keyserling.
Jeanie.
(To he, conthmed.)
Lausanne—Geneva—Chamouni.
" Above me are the Alps :
The palaces of nature, whose vast walls
Have pinnacled in clouds their snowy scalps,
And throned eternity in icy halls
Of cold sublimity."
Childe EaroUCa Pilgrimage.
Most travellers must be familiar with that inquisitive effort of memory which, on
the first approach of waking consciousness, strives to redeem present localities from
the confused geography of dreamland. So did I awake to the electric realisation of
being " blinded with excess of light," by the scene of dazzling beauty, viewed from
the windows of the Hold du  Faiicon, Lausanne, on  a glorious summer morning.
212 THE   ATTEMPT.
Earth, sea, and sky alike etherealized into their most entrancing aspect. The eter¬
nal snows of the noble Alps melted into indistinguishable unison with the fleecy
clouds of the cerulean arch, which threw its deep tinge on the blue expanse of waters
beneath, reflecting each changeful shadow of the mountains.
Our arrival overnight, on the darkened shores of the lake, had barely saved our
reputation as compatriots of Forbes Mackenzie, of eleven o'clock notoriety, after a
tedious day on a chemin de fer Sidsse, proverbial for luipunctuality. Each petty
station claimed a halt as prolonged as those granted to our jvmctions at home; and
not till the gossip-loving propensities of the railway ofiicials had been satisfied, would
the guard's whistle give the signal for the engine to favour us with a screech and a
few iniatory jerks previous to the train's [)roceeding at a rate, leisurely enough to
tiy the patience of any Briton, and drive a Yankee to distraction. The Swiss
carriages are handsomely built, with communication throughout, on the principle of
the American cars; the first classes magnificently furnished, and generally tenantless;
the second almost equal to our first.
The town of Lausanne occupies a striking and elevated position on several hills
near the lake. The valleys between, spanned by many arched bridges, the streets
themselves, naturally an excellent illustration of the vicissitudes of life, the very
attitude of the town, scrambling up to the eminence of the hill-tops, render it pictur¬
esque and interesting, apart from such associations as those set forth by the Hotel
Gibbon, and the quiet cemetery, where rest the ashes of that grand master of tragic
representation, whose it was
" To fret and strut his little hour upon the stage "
and then for ever exit, even John Kemble !
Embarking at Ouchy, another spot of well-known fame, near Lausanne,
" Lake Leman wooed us with its crystal face "
to ignore the presence of the prosy bateau d, vapeur, and believe in the illusion of a
revived fairyland, begirt with
" Mountains, that like giants stand
To sentinel enchanted land."
The deep bhie of the lake of Geneva is a magic hate to dream of and wonder at,
rather than philosophically discuss and scientifically account for ; the very winds waft
poetry on their wings, and the air is redolent of romantic and inspiring associations.
The smiling aspect of the " little isle " is saddened by the groans of the Prisoner of
Chillon ; the sweet names of Clarens and Julie eloquently testify of one who was
ever in love with his own woes, and the homage due to genius is willingly paid to the
THE   ATTEMPT. 213
the lady of Coppet, who gave to the world that gifted, noble, true-hearted womanly
ideal, Corinne ! "What a wreath of interest has fame woven around this magic
lake, as the chosen retreat of illustrious men and women ! Overshaded by the
grand genius of Byron and the daring spirit of Shelley, troubling its waters
with impetuous poesy; it was also the haunt of that gifted trio of unhappy
men, Voltaire, Gibbon, and Rousseau. Many and touching are the memorials of
women great in genius, rank, and suffering. These shores soothed alike the decayed
fortunes of Josephine and Marie Louise, the two unqueened queens of the greatest
and the least of men, and the repose of her who ruled her monarch and country
under the plain name of Madame de Maintenon. A grander moral contrast is brought
out in the lives of Madame de Stael and Madame Guyon, both great, and yet how
antagonistic in character, both persecuted, and yet bearing it how differently !
What a commentary upon the vanity of human wishes is supplied in the histories
of failure, disappointment and suffering associated with those grand and opposing
names, which ai'e here read together as in a grave yard, where the choicest hopes
were buried, while their authors survived in a new and dimmed existence.
In direct conti'adistinction to such vague philosophies, stands the grand positive
life of John Calvin, a man whose influence, whether recognized or not, has governed
every age since his own with regenerating power. His character, however criticised,
defies disparagement; and the grand doctrines which he lived to uphold find their
seat in the soul of the universe beyond reach of the superficial ruffling of adverse
modern criticism. A striking antithesis may be drawn between the kind of fame
that has crowned the memory of Calvin and Rousseau. In Geneva, there is an Ide
de Jean Jacques Rousseau, with a bridge and a garlanded statue, and a certain old
house wherein the great man was born, is preserved and shown to strangers as the
most valuable of relics ; while far away out of town, in the quiet Protestant cemetery,
we search for the little insignificant stone, marked J. G, which may possibly cover
the grave of the great Reformer. On the other hand, what are the effects of
Rousseau's distracting and fallacious eloquence compared with the grand immortality
of Calvin's elevating and concentrated teaching 1 Weigh the influence of the works,
and then say which of the authors has the nobler monument!
Scotland and Switzerland, as two countries, resembling each other in general
features and sympathies, notably illustrate the influence of physical causes on the
moulding of national character. Each, as a " land of the mountain and the flood,"
has reared a simple, hardy, brave race, whose love of counti-y and worship of freedom
furnish similar histories of oppression resisted and religion defended, till right is
214 THE  ATTEMPT.
finally victorious over might. Each country has her martial and religious hero, her
John and William; forming the noble quartette, Wallace and Tell, Calvin and
Knox. The physique of the two capitals (where the spirit of each country breathes
and reigns), expresses the moral rapports which have suggested the comparison
between Edinburgh and Geneva and the two extremities of the whispering gallery
in St Paul's Cathedral, each accent breathed at the one end of which reverberates
to the other. Dun Edin's guardian, Arthur Seat, is brought to mind in the Salisbury-
Craig-like shaping of Mount Sal^ve, which flanks the Swiss metropolis; the fine old
cathedral of St Pierre in which Calvin preached, and of which the Genevese are so
pi-oud, is not unlike our own St Giles, without his crown ; and the Rue de la Cite is
a hill of difficulty to climb to church as well as the High Street.
The influence of such moral, physical, and aesthetic associations, added to the
simple, kindly and gracious character of Swiss hosjjitality, imparted a strong home
feeling to our pleasing sojourn in Geneva, where we had also the happiness of re¬
ceiving our first home lettei's. Who that has experienced that keen pleasure after
vmusual deprivation, will wonder that our first enquiry on anival should be for the
post-ofRce, and that thither we wended our way without further delay, than that
necessary for refreshment after the day's fatigues. Blessings on that most amiable
of institutions, the Poste Restante ! Wi-apt in the illusion of other companionship,
while continuing our walk, I only woke to consciousness of the outer world with
the rush of waters sounding in my ears, and my feet on the brink of the low bank,
" Where the swift Rlione cleaves his way between
Heights, which appear as lovers who have parted
In hate, whose mining depths so intervene
That they can meet no more, though broken hearted."
Above this low walk, the opposing heights rise upright and frowning as far as
the j)oint where the blue waters of the Rhone are joined by the less impetuous
Arv6, grey from the glaciers. The two currents join without mingling, and flow on
for miles in one tide of two separate hues, in apt illustration of union of fate with¬
out assimilation of will and character. The " meeting of the waters," as best viewed
from above, is a favourite drive.
The "arrowy Rhone " cleaves its way through the town of Geneva, forming the
Isle de Jean Jacques liousseau and La Cite, the original nucleus of the town. In
crossing the bridges, any real lover of the music of streams must pause to watch the
pure white foam curling round the piers beneath, in contrast to the intensely blue
current rushing under the arches from the  " bosom of its nursing lake."    There it
THE   ATTEMPT. 215
still urges its swift career, in the midst of a scene replete with beauty and liveliness,
as when our abode was fixed in tlie Hotel des Bergues, a magnificent establishment,
necessarily wanting in smigness, in the heart of all the gaiety, with the crowning
advantage of a peerless view from our windows of the " Monarch of Mountains,"
who rarely veiled his spotless majesty during our stay. The streets of Geneva, par¬
ticularly the Rue du Rhone, exhibit a gay array of shops, with tempting varieties of
bijouterie, pretty trinkets, and Swiss carved work. Museums there are, and picture
galleries, and libraries ; but leisure and skill are alike wanting to particularize even
elegant buildings and interesting collections. The suburbs are extremely pretty,
with villas and gardens on the borders of the lake, where, in the evenings, the voice
of the nightingale is heard, while the moon rises upon the waters. The cheapest
of drives may be had for dix centimes, by tramway omnibus, from Geneva to Car-
rouges, whence we undertook a grand walking excursion to Mont Sal^ve. The day
was the fullest realization of glorious summer, with a lazy brilliancy in the atmos¬
phere. The only sounds stirring the golden stillness were the chirp of the grass¬
hopper, the soft " coo " of the wood-pigeon, and distant cry of the cuckoo, the whole
landscape bathed in luxurious warmth and brightness, and over all
" The summer heaven's delicious blue."
The climb is a pretty stiff one after passing the hollow that divides the Petit from
the Grand Saleve,—but what a view when the heights are reached ! Lake, town, and
valley, woods and streams sleeping in quiet beauty at our feet, with the dark Jura rising
in frowning grandeur opposite. All the elements seemed to have signed a treaty of
peace; but grand and sudden are the outbreaks of war, when Jura and the AIjds
wax loud in the angry strife ; the waters of the lake become agitated as by a troubled
spirit, and clouds of mist and whirling dust clear the streets of Geneva as if by
magic. On one occasion of this kind, our guardian professor returned from a walk
covered with dust and consternation, and a dismayed /emnie de chambre burst into
our apartment to shut the windows, exclaiming so wildly, " Oh, la Rise 1 I-a Rise !"
that I inquired, " Mais qu'est ce que c'est la Rise ? " to which she returned, in amaze¬
ment, " Mais, mademoiselle, c'est le grand vent." And a great wind it certainly was;
but fortunately its blow was soon over."
Mauvais tem^^s was also our fate in starting for tlie grand mountain excur¬
sion. During a halt in the streets of Bonneville, a peal of thunder rattled
overhead; and after entering those dark and narrow defiles which the little village of
Cluses (as its name implies) shuts and locks, only an occasional unfolding of the grey
216 THE   ATTEMPT.
mist would reveal little bits of grey rock, and the angry rush of a cascade break the
the monstrous plash of the horses' feet. The view of Mont Blanc from the
little bridge of the village of Sallanches was of course out of the question; but from
the little inn, where we put up for the night, there were some magnificent glimpses
of dark rock rising to an immense height within a few yards of the windows.
Starting next morning at seven, in a caleche, drawn by a couple of ponies, whose
prowess eventually proved superior to their size, we went merrily on to the music of
the tinkling bells through that Swiss Arcadia which, in the bright morning, looked
yet more charming than the ideal picture, familiar to the minds of all imaginative
readers of descriptive literature. At a little village called CheiRs or Chatigny,
a mule was added to our equipage, and the valleys left behind. Winding up a
meandering path with a deep precipice on the right and high x'ocks on the left, our
progress was as picturesque as the scene around us ; the two drivers walking in front,
singing snatches of songs, while the decent old mule took charge of our progress with
a sagacity worthy of being recorded with thanks. The grandeur of the Alpine
passes was heightened by the rain-clouds lingering upon the mountains in wreaths of
white mist, far above which the dark gaunt rocks often rose in fantastic shapes, as
if suspended in mid air. Here the veil was lifted to show a patch of green fir, there
a bit of dark rock, now a grand peak.
The scene on emerging from the pass, upon the valley of Chamouni, is an
embarras de richesses, the memory of which almost " dies in its own too much,''
losing in vividness what is gained in grandeur and infinitude. From the summit of
the Chapeau, the height on the other side of the Mer de Glace from the Montanvert,
the cold sublimity, infinite grandeur, and speaking harmony of the scene wrought a
due impression of the greatness of creation and the littleness of man. It was but a
glimpse of the glories of the Alps, and their intimate acquaintance cannot be made
in a day ; but it sufiiced for reverent homage to
" The kingly spirit throned among the hUls,"
and a warning to journey homeward on having reached
" The barriers of a world
Saying, thus far and no further."
Elfie.
{To he Continued.)
THE  ATTEMPT. 217
a   Curlattb   f 0lj^-^ tort).
(pounded on fact.)
Part II.
The betrothal took place in March, and the marriage was fixed for the following
summer. But a change had come over Alexandrine. Her cheek became pale, her
step lost its lightness, and her haggard eye began to wear an habitual expression of
restless uneasiness. She said but little ; but those gossips who had before consigned
her to old maidenhood, now began to predict that Alexandrine's marriage would not
be a happy one ; and that there was something strangely amiss between her and her
lover. As for Harald, he was assiduous as a lover should be ; never failing in the
requirements of courtesy, but, on the contrary, scrupulous in every minute attention.
Indeed, so ardent was he, that all wondered at Alexandrine's apparent distaste for
her future husband. Time wore on, and brought the period fixed for the wedding nearer
and nearer. At length, Alexandrine sought an interview with her uncle, confessed
her disinclination for tlie mariiage, and besought him to aid her in breaking it off.
But her uncle was a stern man, regarding a promise once ma^e as too sacred to be
violated without the strongest reasons,—and poor Alex could only urge a vague senti¬
ment of antipathy, and the shortness of her acquaintance with Harald previous to
the betrothal. He assured her that such feelings were merely nervous, and would
soon wear off; and that so serious a matter as a public engagement could not be
thus lightly put aside. Alexandrine was in despair. She found herself in the position
of a woman bound to marry a man whom she not only did not love, but for whom
she had an undefined, though strong, feeling of fear. She had been surprised into
accepting Harald Keyserling before she had had time to deliberate ; and, indeed, the
same mysterious influence which she had felt when they first met, had seemed to
fascinate her, and compel her to submit to his will. Bitterly had she learned to
repent this submission. Perhaps, also, another feeling, the existence of which, until
now, she had ne^er suspected, tended to heighten her repugance to her accepted
suitor. To add to her uneasiness, indistinct rumours reached her about this tiibe of
the wild life led by Harald,—hints were heard of his gambling propensities, and of the
strange company in which he had been seen. Alex formed a desperate resolution.
Seeking an interview with her lover, she bravely told him all, and implored him to
release  her  from  her  promise.      A   stormy   scene   ensued.    Harald  alternately
2 E
October 1871.
218 THE  ATTEMPT.
reproached and entreated, and finally quitted her, uttering dark words, the full
meaning of which she was to comprehend at a later period. Keyserling loved Alex¬
andrine ; his love for her was the purest feeling he had experienced throughout his
dark career. But it was with a vehemence amounting almost to a species of ferocity,
which could occasion nought but misery to the object of his passion. He had run a
course of vice, and tasted of every unholy pleasure ; yet, so well had he known how
to conceal his vices from the world, that they were suspected by few beyond those
with whom he shared them. Now that his appetite for base indulgence of every
kind was sated, his love for Alex, one so pure and high-minded, possessed a singular
charm ; it seemed to him like a revelation of better and nobler things. Her petition
to be freed from her plighted word inflicted a sharper and deeper pang than he had
thought himself capable of experiencing.
A week had passed since Alexandrine had sued for freedom at the hands of her
affianced husband. To her, a week of bitter anguish,—what it had been to Harald, he
never by word or sign betrayed. It was evening, calm and beautiful after a day of
sunshine; for summer was now come. Alexandrine was alone. Her uncle and
cousins had driven out some miles into the country to pay a visit, but she had de¬
clined to accompany them. The door opened, and a servant entered. " A mes¬
senger is waiting for an answer," he said, handing a note. Alex started as she
recognised the handwriting. The note contained these words.—" You have asked to
be released from your engagement; it shall be as j'ou desire. Accord me one last
meeting, and you shall receive fullest guarantee for my written word. I ask you to
come to me, and at once; the reason of my request, which will doubtless seem
strange to you, shall be explained when you arrive. The messenger is trustworthy,
and he will conduct you. Trust me this once, Alexandrine, and do not refuse my
request." A vague uneasiness seized Alexandrine. Not daring to pause to consider
the propriety of the step, yielding to the strange influence which her lover had
always exercised over her, above all, urged by a secret presentiment of evil, she did
not hesitate. Desiring the servant to summon the messenger, she hastily enveloped
herself in a large hooded cloak. " I am ready to follow you," she said briefly, as he
appeared. " A carriage waits, madam," he returned with a bow, and attended her
to the door. " Tell my uncle, in case he should return, tliat I shall be absent for an
hour or so, Hansen," was her order to the servant. They drove ofl". In about ten
minutes the carriage stopped before the door of a handsome, but deserted looking
mansion, well-known to Alexandrine, for a portion of this dwelling had been in-
THE  ATTEMPT.
219
habited by Harald Keyserling and his servant ever since his arrival in Stockholm.
The messenger assisted his charge to alight, and conducted her through the hall into
a long corridor. " My master desired me to wait here, madam ] he is in the stilon,"
and the man pointed to a large door near the end of the corridor. The undefined
dread which filled the heart of Alexandrine, prevented her from noticing the
strangeness of this proceeding. She walked to the door indicated, and knocked ; re¬
ceiving no answer, she repeated the signal. Still no answer. After debating for an
instant, she gently turned the handle, and advanced a few paces into the apartment.
The day was now darkening into twilight, and a dusky, uncertain light filled the
room. The moon shed a faint radiance through the uncurtained windows, rendering
the dark shadows more, visible. At first, Alexandrine thought the room was un-
tenanted, but, as her eyes grew more accustomed to the dim light, she perceived a
figure seated at a writing table. It was Harald. His back was turned towards
her, and his left arm lay across the desk, supporting his head, as he partially leaned
over the table. He seemed to have fallen asleep while in the act of writing upon
the paper which lay before him. His right hand hung over the arm of his chair,
the fingers half clenched, half convulsively stretched, as though wearied of the work
on which they had been engaged. "Harald!" She shuddered involuntarily, for
the sound of her own voice, breaking on the dead stillness of the chamber, startled
her. She went forward, but still he did not turn his head ; she gently touched his hand,
and then, with a wild cry that rang through the apartment, regained the door, and
sank fainting upon the threshold of the fatal chamber. For Harald Keyserling was
dead.
• • • . • *• • . •
An empty phial upon the table, and a faint odour issuing from the half-closed
lips, told the tragic tale. A note addressed to Alexandrine von Kleinberg, the ink
scarcely dry, lay upon the table,—" Do not reproach yourself; I have always con¬
templated this deed. I knew I should die by my own hand. Your refusal of my
love was but the climax. I am indeed unworthy of you, but I could not live with¬
out you. I have proved life and found it worthless, therefore I relinquish it.
Forgive me for bringing you to witness such a scene, but it is my wish, my caprice,
if you will, that your eyes should be the first to rest upon my lifeless form. Adieu,
Alexandrine. I now pray to God, whose name for years has never passed my
lips but in blasphemy, that you may be happy, and soon learn to forget
" Harald Keyserling."
220 THE   ATTEMPT.
Four months had elapsed since the events last related. The pine-forests of
Curland had donned their wintry garb, and the intervening plains seemed like wild
and dreary wastes; the road-tracks only marked by double rows of posts, placed at
regular intervals, and painted with the Russian colours of black and white, divided
by a thin streak of red. The scejie was desolate in the extreme. The pastor's
garden at Ihlenberg would have been a complete wilderness of snow, had not sundry
paths been carefully swept and cleared, to afford facilities for pedestrian exercise.
The figure of a lady, well wrapped in sables, was standing upon the bridge (already
described at the commencement of tbis story), looking out upon the dreary land¬
scape. It was Alexandrine. A long and dangerous illness had i-esulted from the
shock of that summer night; and when at length she was able to rise from her couch
of suffering, one desire alone took possession of her,—this was, once more to re-visit
Curland and the familiar scenes of Ihlenberg. A settled sadness had fallen upon
her, and she craved for a sight of the dear well-known faces. The terrible fate of
her betrothed preyed upon her mind, and seemed to forbid the return of peace and
happiness. Yet it was not that she had discovered, when all too late, that she had
loved him. Far from that; for, during the tedious night-watches of her long malady,
a new truth had revealed itself to her, and added another pang to her unavailing
sorrow. She had become aware that she had repulsed the only man to whom she
could proudly and joyfully give the title of husband ; she now knew, after long
years of separation, that she truly loved Leopold. As she mused over old reminis¬
cences, her ear caught the sound of sleigh-bells, and her eye listlessly rested for a
moment upon a sleigh, rapidly approaching the avenue which led to the Pastorat.
She turned away again with a heavy sigh; many visitors came to that door, but
none in whom she had any interest. She did not see that the sleigh, after the
stranger had alighted, was driven round to the stables, and that a military i)ortman-
teau was carried into the house. She did not notice that, after a short interval, the
door again opened, nor did she hear hasty steps coming towards her over the snow.
She only heard a well-known voice pronounce her name, as she was suddenly
enveloped in the furry folds of a huge military cloak.       Poor Alex, happy Alex had
at length found her heart's true resting place I could not jiossibly
undertake to chronicle the interview which followed; the second important one
which had taken place upon this fateful rustic bridge; partly because a considerable
portion of it was purely personal to the two concerned ; and partly also, because the
rest was merely pantomime. I only know that a dried faded sprig of jessamine,
produced by the handsome officer fi'om  the breast-jDOcket of his coat, played an
THE  ATTEMPT. 221
important role; and judging from the expression of both faces, as often as they were
visible, the whole transaction must have been of a highly satisfactory nature. Two
discreet, solemn-looking old crows, perched upon a branch overhead, seemed to be of
my opinion, for they cawed a duet of approval and sympathy; or, perhaps, they
were only cawing to welcome the sun, which just then looked forth from a rift above
the leaden horizon, shedding a tinge of tender rose upon the glistening, glancing
snow, and lighting up the brown stems of the pine trees into a magnificent ruddy
red.
It would require a more facile and graphic pen than mine to do justice to the
wedding festivities which followed shortly upon the scene last recorded. The good
Pastor and Pastorin Bielenstamm insisted upon the marriage being celebrated at
Ihlenberg, and the engaged pair gratefully accepted the offer. To the great joy of
Alexandrine, her father arrived from a voyage about a week before the ceremony,
and, of course, lost no time in repairing to the Pastorat. One contretem2)S
happened, which threatened to throw a gloom over the affair. This was the
arrival of the bride's mother, Frau von Kleinberg. She appeared suddenly one
evening, just two days before the wedding, and declared her disapproval of the
alliance. By tlie united persuasions, however, of the Pastor, Pastorin, bride and
bridegroom, she was induced not only to recal her veto, but even to remain and
be present at the nuptials, contenting herself with wearing a black gown, in sign of
her protest, on the auspicious occasion.
The Polter Abend was an immense success. (I may liere remark, for the
information of the unitiated, that the Polter Abend is a preliminary festivity,
held the evening before the wedding.) The clever Frau Pastorin had composed
a series of poetical charades. These were admirably arranged and performed by the
troop of merry, blooming girls under her superintendence, and the costumes
extemporised for the occasion, with an ingenuity unknown to British maidens, were
picturesque in the extreme. Seats of honour wreathed with evei'greens, were pre¬
pared for the hero and heroine of the evening. The wedding day dawned. Great
was the excitement and bustle among the inmates of the Ihlenbei-g Pastorat.
The morning meal of coffee and rye-bread having been quickly despatched, the
younger members of the household were told off into parties, each detachment under
the direction of an elder, to prepare for the great event. Some twined garlands of
evergreens, others received these as soon as completed, and hung them tastefully
about the mirrors and chandeliers of the great saloon, where the ceremony was to
222 THE  ATTEMPT.
be performed. To a select few, and these were the most eager of them all, was
allotted the solemn duty of dressing the bride and her demoiselles dlwnneur. These
latter consisted of four of the tallest and prettiest of the pupils, and greatly were
they flattered by being chosen. At length, about half-past eleven, a general lull
took place. The arrangements were pronounced to be completed. At twelve o'clock,
cups of chocolate and slices of a peculiar kind of cake, coloured a deep yellow by
the use of saffron, were handed round, and the doors of the saloon thrown open.
At the upper end of the apartment was placed a table, covered with a spotlessly
white damask cloth; and on i t were a large Bible, psalm-book, and a pair of tall
candelabra. On the polished floor, in front of the table, was spread a rich, brightly
coloured carpet, small in dimensions, according to the fashion of the country—for
in Curland large carpets are not used. The garlands disposed about the walls
gave a festive air to the scene. All the assistants quietly seated themselves, and
waited in silence. Presently, a side-door opened, and the pastor, clad in a long
black talard or gown, and wearing a large gold crucifix upon his breast, advanced
towards the table. Almost at the same moment the folding doors were again
thrown wide, and the bridal party entered. Alexandrine, in her myrtle wreath
and simple white dress, fitting well to her elegant figure, looked all that a bride
should look, while Leopold, with his frank, manly face and soldierly bearing, was
splendid in his rich uniform of light blue, heavily laced with gold, and long
tasseled boots reaching to the knees. The service was short and simple ; a few
prayers, a hymn, and a l)rief exhortation, then the newly-wedded couple knelt before
the venerable pastor to receive his blessing. After a short pause, all crowded round
to offer congratulations, and the health of the bride and bridegroom was drunk in
champagne.
" I have waited for this day for eleven years," was Leopold's brief remark,
as he clinked glasses with Tante Elsie.
The banquet which followed was rich and abundant, and furnished forth with
blithe and cheerful guests. But the unwelcome moment of departure arrived, as
such moments do arrive, retard them as one may. The sleighs glided and jingled to
the door. Farewells were spoken—long and sad ones,—for Leopold was to carry his
bride far away from Curland into the heart of Russia. But she was willing to
follow her soldier husband ; and I think even the wildest waste could be cheered
by the presence of such faithful, trusting love as theirs. Even then, it seemed
to have rekindled a spark of what might have once burned brightly long ago,
for as they drove off, the old weather-beaten sea captain gave his hand to his wife.
THE  ATTEMPT.
223
and for the first time for years, they took their way towards home together, the
same vehicle sheltering them both. One word more. The sudden and timely
appearance of Leopold that wintry day at the Pastorat has never been satis¬
factorily explained. For my part, I have always attributed it to a deep-laid scheme
of the wily Frau Pastorin. Jeanie.
§n l0  iht  Mar."
I STOOD at the window, and watched him,
Hurrying down the lane ;
As he crossed the bridge, my tears fell fast,
And wet was the window-pane.
I wept and sighed as I watched him,
And my heart was lone and sore ;
For, alas ! he's gone to tlie battle-field,
And I ne'er may see him more.
He came up the cottage pathway,
To bid us all farewell; [will know,
But he knew not my love, and he ne'er
For, alas ! I may not tell.
My father gave him his blessing.
My mother she kissed his cheek ;
But I ran away to my little room,
I knew I could not speak.
I listened and heard him calling,
To say farewell to me.
But I moved not, and I answered not,
His face I dared not see.
And then I heard his footstep
Across the kitchen floor.
And he paused a moment, as if for me,
On the threshold of the door.
But, oh, T dared not venture
To breathe the word " Farewell ! "
And I felt as if my heart would break.
With love too great to tell.
Fainter and fainter his footsteps
Fell on my listening ear.
Till behind the clump of linden trees
I saw him disappear.
Then how I wished I'd seen him,
And answered to his call;
And tho' I tried hard to bear it well.
The bitter tears would fall.
Oh, I can not forget him.
E'en tho' he ne'er return ;
And love's bright light within my heart.
Shall never cease to burn.
Gretchen.
224 THE   ATTEMPT.
§tot^t Bititt (^btnburjgb) anb xin Jlssoriatbns.
Part II.
The associations connected with George Street are, for so modern a street, un¬
usually numerous and interesting. Its day, and that of its terminal squares, as
fashionable residences, were coeval with the two groups of literati, poets, and
philosophers, who lived in what may be termed the golden age of Scottish literature.
Many of these great men had houses in George Street; others took a prominent
part in scenes and events which took place there.
In 19 St Andrew's Square, Henry Brougham, afterwards Lord Brougham, was
born ; and his childhood was passed in 7 George Street.
David Hume, celebrated as a historian and a philosopher,—but even more widely
known in consequence of his sceptical opinions,—built, occupied, and died, in the
house at the corner of St Andrew's Square and St David's Street. The street was
named after him; whether his subsequent canonization was in ignorance or in irony,
is dubious.
The Earls of Buclian and Leven, the former the originator, the latter an ardent
supporter of the Antiquarian Society, lived in St Andrew's Square. The Earl of
Buchan (brother of Lord Erskine) was remarkably vain and eccentric. He showed
the latter quality when he insisted, on one occasion when Sir Walter Scott was ill,
upon seeing him, in order to consult him on some details of his funeral, which he
had been arranging in case the illness should prove fatal. Scott did not for many
long years require such friendly services.
Sir Walter Scott, for some time after his marriage in 1797, occupied a flat in
108 George Street, removing subsequently to 39 Castle Street, where the most of
his town life was spent. The name of Scott must bring up to every mind such a
variety of recollections and associations, that I need not dwell upon his life and
character. But as everything belonging to such a great man is now regarded in the
light of a relic, I may be excused for inserting the " adventures " of the desk upon
which Marmioti was written. One of the six gentlemen to whom the cantos of
Marmion were dedicated, was a much loved and valued friend of Scott's. As a token
of friendship, Scott presented to him the desk upon which he had written Marmion.
The gift was highly appreciated, put in a place of honour, and used only as a reposi¬
tory for Scott's numerous letters.    This gentleman died ; his son died ; and the next
THE  ATTEMPT. 225
heir being in infancy, his mother was appointed guardian.. In this lady^s mind the
practical must certainly have far outweighed the sentimental, for she converted the
desk into a wash-hand stand. Then she had the leather stripped off, and the table
was further degraded to do duty in the larder, the letters it contained being ruth¬
lessly cut up to cover preserves. We are in-esistibly reminded of Peter Bell, of
whom the poet records that—
" A primrose by the river's brim,
A yellow primrose was to him,
And it was nothing more."
Let US, to please the fancy of the moment, transport ourselves back to the
time when these men lived. By so doing, we may often see, in the afternoon, three
friends walking home together from the Parliament House, talking perhaps of the
events of the day, or exchanging repartee and anecdote. The centre figure we at
once recognize, from the slight limp, to be the " Magician of the North/' Walter
Scott. His two friends are Lord Kinnedder, and William Clerk, the " Darsie
Latimer " of Redgauntlet. They branch off from George Street to their respective
homes, leaving the great man to seek his own ; or perhaps, on second thoughts, to
go on to Charlotte Square to fetch his little " Pet Marjorie." Then, on Friday
evenings, we sometimes see the meeting of Scott's literary club, which counted
among its members Henry Mackenzie, Jeffrey, Playfair, Dugald Stewart, Alison,
Sidney Smith, Cranstouu, Brougham, John Archibald IMurray, Cockburn, Francis
and Leonard Horner, Thomas Campbell, Eobison, Rutherford, Pillans, the Earl of
Selkirk, Count Flahault, the Earl of ]\Iinto, William Murray of Henderland, and
James Abercromby, afterwards Lord Dunfermline. Years later, we might have seen
the poet Crabbe emerge from Scott's house, in search of a day's enjoyment among
the picturesque closes of the Old Town,—his careful host having directed a " caddie "
to follow the poet in his wanderings, lest harm should befall him in his explorations.
Looking back again, we see another party of friends, Rutherford, Kichardson,
Jeffrey, and Cockburn, passing along George Street, probably on their way to
Cockburn's house, on the west side of Charlotte Square, and standing " on the still
nights at the opening at the north-west corner of Charlotte Square, to listen to the
ceaseless rural corn-craiks, resting happily in the dewy grass." What a glimpse
this gives us of the contemplative mood of these minds ! Harry Cockburn we
generally think of as brimming over with fun and frolic, hardly able to refrain from
seizing upon the ludicrous in every subject which presented itself to him.
Jeffrey lived in 92 George  Street for seventeen years, from the year 1810.
  2 F 
Octoljer 1871.
226
THE   ATTEMPT.
His literary fame rests chiefly on his talent as a critic. Cockburn calls him " The
greatest of British critics;" and Hugh Miller thus speaks of him, "The most
eminent of our Edinburgh literati; a man who, for nearly half a century, enjoyed
European celebrity as first in the realms of criticism, and a reputation at least
co-extensive with his native country as a jiolitician and a lawyer." Nor was it in
powers of mind alone that he shone. He was generally beloved for his amiable and
genial disposition, and his great urbanity of manner. This urbanity must have
been somewhat tried on the occasion of the visit of the celebrated " Lady of
Pitlyal," with her "rosebud," to "tak a word o' the law frae him." His keen
appreciation of fun and humour is shown in the letter he wrote to her on discovering
the hoax. Jeffrey was the editor of the Edinburgh Review^ his chief supporters being
Sidney Smith, Francis Horner, and Henry Brougham. This periodical was the
organ of the Whig party. In those days, political opinions ran so high, that members
of the two parties could not meet in company, so sure was a quarrel upon politics to
ensue ; and as to writing in the enemy's Magazine,—though the subject might be
purely literary,—that would have been considered an open desertion of colours.
This leads me to speak of Blackwood's Magazine, started as the organ of
the Tories in opposition to the Edinburgh Review. The office of I>la.ckwood's
Magazine was, in 1830, removed from Princes Street to 45 George Street, "Ebony
Hall," as it was called. This magazine mustei'ed a strong staff of contributors.
Tliere were Sir David Brewster, De Quincey, Gait, Moir, Hogg, Gillies, Eraser
Tytler, Captain Hamilton, Henry Mackenzie, Scott (occasionally), and chief
among them. Professor Wilson (Christopher North), and John Gibson Lockhart.
At the time of the move to George Street, Lockhart had gone to London to join
the Quarterly, but Wilson and most of the others remained staunch to Maga.
The saloon at " 45 " was not used for purposes strictly connected with the maga¬
zine only. It served as a meeting place or club for the literary men and wits of
the Tory party, where new books, politics, and other subjects were discussed. The
Catholic Emancipation Bill was canvassed here : so opposed were its frequenters
to the opinions of the rabble, that the saloon was in danger of being burned. Grave
subjects such as these were varied by jokes, tales, and caricatures. In these, Sir
William Allen excelled, his imitations being one of the great attractions of the place.
We can fancy how the walls must have re-echoed to the mirth of the fun-loving
frequenters; and how Wilson and others must have enjoyed describing the concoction
of the famous Chaldee Manuscrijjt, and other personal and political squibs, which
were so unscrupulously attributed to the pen of any, or every one, save the right
THE  ATTEMPT.
227
man.     " Ebony Hall" and its frequenters are admii-ably described in Peter's Letters
to his Kinsfolk.
Sir James Hall, the geologist, another inhabitant of George Street, calls up
a fresh series of associations. He moved in a different sphere from most of the
foresoinsr characters. It is to him that we are indebted for the elucidation and
demonstration of the theory of glacial action, and consequent striation on Corstor-
phine Hill and the Castle Rock. Agassiz, in Switzerland, had commenced the same
vein of reasoning and demonstration a little before. "We can imagine the pleasure
tliese two enthusiasts must have had when they met at the British Association, and
talked over their mutual discoveries.
" The Giant's Causeway," the north corner of George Street and Cliarlotte
Square, received this soubriquet from an unusually tall family residing there—the
Sinclairs. Sir John used to say that he had thirty-six feet of daughters ! This was
not the only characteristic of this family; they were well known in the literary,
religious, and philanthropic world. Sir John Sinclair made a name for himself by
founding the Highland Society, and by originating and editing the first Statistical
Account of Scotland. Sir George Sinclair (Sir John's son) was a man of decided
evangelical opinions. Miss Catherine Sinclair wrote many popular books, and is
also remembered for many benevolent and philanthropic deeds.
Space fails to dwell upon all the celebrities of George Street and its extremities.
There were Raeburn, the " Reynolds " of Scotland, celebrated for the breadth of his
style and accuracy of his portraits; Mr Combe, the author of the Constitution of Man,
Systeyn of Phrenology, &c. ; Professor Pillans, the late Professor of Humanity, called
by Byron, in a liasty moment, " Paltry Pillans;" the Hon. Baron Hume, Baron of
Exchequer ; Andrew Crosbie, the original of " Lawyer Pleydell;" several Lords of
Session ; and others who were of interest du-ectly or indirectly.
Leaving these, we next come to an event deeply interesting, not only to the
Presbyterian Church, but to all who take an interest in religious questions,—I refer
to the Disruption. There had long been a growing feeling among a large party
in the Established Church, of dissatisfaction at the degree of control exercised by
the civil powers over the church. This feeling was brought to a climax by the
patrons of some parishes arbitrarily enforcing the appointment of certain ministers
in opposition to the proclaimed wishes of the people. This led to a demand to
have the law of patronage amended, and other grievances redressed. As the
Government refused to accede to this demand, and threatened those who resisted
the right of the State to control the church in purely spiritual matters, with fine
228
THE   ATTEMPT.
and imprisonment, a large section of the church decided that they could not con¬
scientiously remain connected with the establishment; and after long deliberation
and anxious consideration of ways and means, they determined to secede. The crisis
came on Thursday, the 18th May 1843, the day on which the General Assembly
held its first sitting in St Andrew's Church. We can picture to oiirselves the dense
crowd of spectators in the church, gathered since the break of day ; the surging
masses without, all waiting in eager expectation; the membeis taking their places,
many for the last time ; the arrival of the moderator, Dr Welsh, and the Queen's
commissioner, Lord Bute. Then, amid the breathless hush of the assembled multi¬
tude, Dr Welsh rises and reads the protest, signed by 203 members of the house.
That ended, he bows to the commissionei", and turns to leave the church, followed by
Drs Chalmers, Gordon, Thomas Brown, Candlish, Cunningham, and all the protesting
members. As they emerge into the street, the crowd, moved by sympathy or
admiration, utters a triumphant shout, and opens a way for the impromptu
procession on its way to Canonmills. ] t is over; the die is cast; and the results of
this step must be accepted " for better for worse." Such a deed as this ranks high
in the annals of heroism ; and though many may consider the step to have been
unnecessary and ill-judged, surely no one can refrain from according deep respect
and admiration to those who voluntarily gave up houses and lands, and the means of
support, for  " conscience sake."
In the present day, there are various institutions in George Street, interesting
to different classes of the community. The Assembly Rooms now, as formerly,
attract crowds to their gay gatherings. The Music Hall affords opportunities of
gratifying higher and more artistic tastes. Who is there, possessing an appreciation
of the divine art of music, but feels a throb of pleasure when recalling the intense
enjoyment often experienced in this place 1 To another class, the Masonic Hall
calls up interesting associations. The Hall of 117 George Street is endeared to us
aa being the lecture room of the Ladies' Edinburgh Educational Association ; as well
as for the many meetings for different objects held there. The place in which, if I
may introduce a personal predilection, I take most interest in George Street, is the
office of the Board of Supervision. This Board is the visible controlling power of
Scottish pauperism under the "new system," established in 1843. The question is
so frequently raised in the present day, " Does the new system work better than
the old system 1" that, by all who direct their attention to the subject of pauperism,
the Board of Supervision must necessarily be regarded with no little interest.
The external appearance of George Street is much changed since Scott and
THE   ATTEMPT.
229
Jeffrey resided there. They, and the other great men of their day, have left us a rich
inheritance not only of literary works, but of increased national prosperity. Scotland
has been opened up; money, commerce, and traffic introduced; and the national
mind enlarged, by intercourse with other people and nations, brought about in
great measure by the influence of their lives and writings. One effect of this is,
that the increase of the population and wants of Edinburgh has converted George
Street into a street of shops, dwelling-houses being pushed onwards to the west. I
do not, for my part, sympathise with the regrets many express at the so-called
desecration of the abodes of the literary heroes ;of the past generation. Great
would have been their rejoicing had they known that the town which their
presence adorned and honoured, should after their dea,th be so beneficially influenced
by them. The projections and ornamentations introduced in adapting the dwelling-
houses to other purposes, have added much to the beauty of the street, by
modifying the fault of too great uniformity. Though few of these alterations have
led to the introduction of fine architecture, we may be content with the absence of
the many vicious styles introduced in the remodelling of Pi'inces Street. The general
aspect of George Street may best be described -by the word " grand." Its length,
breadth, terminations, and tout-ensemble present a coup-a'ceil equalled in few, if in
any instances. Never did it appear to greater advantage than on the night of the
illumination, on 10th March 18G3. All its salient points were brought out; and
so gorgeous and extraordinary was the scene, that we could almost fancy ourselves
spectators of the realization of one of the Arabian Night Tales, with Aladdin's Lamp
performing its prodigies before us.
In this short sketch, many interesting matters have been necessarily omitted
from fear of too great prolixity. But I have read and written myself into an
opinion widely differing from that of Euskin, when he says, " Take away the sea
waves and the dark basalt, and I fear you would find little to interest you in George
Street by itself."    I hope my opinion is shared by others. Eta.
230
THE   ATTEMPT.
ChcugHs   ui   Sunset*
Bathed in the golden glory of the hour
"When wearied Day, ere sinking to his rest,
Turns his bright face, and sheds upon the world
A parting smUe,—his last and loveliest.
Alone I stand upon the grassy hill,
Facing the western splendour, rich and deep ;
While from dark-hidden caves of eastern space,
Up-soars the moon to watch the Earth asleep.
The air is filled with stillness—nought is heard,
Save wooing leaves that whisper each to each;
And far below, where Ocean gleaming lies.
The roll of surf that breaks upon the beach.
Serene, in consciousness of might thou sleep'st
Dread sea ! all-beauteous with the sunset's dye ;
While thousand snowy sails upon thy vei-ge.
Twinkle and flash like stars in midnight sky !
As fluttering birds upon'a breeze-tossed bough.
They nestle white-winged on thy heaving breast;
And thou, oh sea, dost rock them gently there,
As mother rocks her wearied babe to rest!
And yet, perchance thou mean'st, ere morn shall break,
To woo the tempest to thy bidding wild,—
To gulph them (vainly trustful) 'neath thy waves,
And leave the sands with ghastly wreck-waifs piled !
Thy murmur, sea, beats on this heart of mine.
As beats the surf upon the di-eary shore !
It mocks me with the mem'ry—sad, ah me !
Of hopes, and thoughts, and loved ones now no more.
THE   ATTEMPT.
A beauty weird and wonderful, we dream,
Lurks where thy dark wreaths wave, and pearls lie spread,
But from such thought my heart affrighted shrinks,—
They wave, they glisten round our low-laid dead !
Oh, low-laid, long-lost dead : blest in your rest!
What reck ye of our tears that gather still'!
What know ye of the desolation drear,
Born of the heart-void ye alone could fill ?
What tale of sadness tell the wailing waves
To you, as pitiless they sweep o'erhead ?
To us they shriek-—" Here sleep your loved ones—here."
Oh, weary life ! The bliss is yours, ye dead !
Melensa.
231
'§tmxnxnctnttB   of  Jfor^ign   Climjjscs.
Paris—London—Edinburgh.
" The sun rises bright in France,
And fair sets he ;
But he's tint the blithe blink he had,
In my ain countrie."
" For, it's hame, and it's hame, and it's hame we fain would be,
Though the cloud is m the lift, and the wind ia on the lea,
The sun through the mirk blinks blithe on mine e'e,
Says, ' I'll shme on ye yet in your ain countrie.' "
Allan Cunninyham.
Faris, c'est la France, France c'est le monde civilise, was the proud shibboleth
of that unstable national creed, which the events of a few short months served to
shatter and lay low, with the fallen prestige of its upholders. It is diflicult to picture
Paris, the rich, the gay, the beautiful, the incomparably fascinating among the
cities of the world, with her glory dimmed, her spells broken and her power over¬
thrown, after witnessing the apotheosis of her greatness in the Exposition Universelle.
232
THE  ATTEMPT.
The Paris of our acquaintance was then the grand continental centre of wealth
and splendour, the head-quarters of pleasure and luxury, the abode of taste and
refinement, the seat of science and the arts, the boast of France, the glory of Europe,
the magnet of attraction to the civilised world. Now, even the careless phraseology
of the most pliable of languages, acknowledges the serious fact, 3[ais, 7ious avons
change tout cela.
The favoui-ite halt on the route from Switzerland to Paris is at Dijon, the
ancient capital of Burgundy, with its old ducal palace keeping ever green the
memories of the good Duke Philip and the fiery Charles; and a fine cathedral, built
in the Moorish style, with round arches, domes, and minarets, heightening the predo¬
minant historic flavour of the place. An appropriate taste in antiques displayed in
a charming old curiosity shojJ, furnished with much to tempt the fancy of the vir¬
tuoso, was strongly rivalled by a popular preference for sweets, to judge from the
preponderance of confectioners' shops, with particular kinds of fancy cakes and bon¬
bons in the windows, claiming for themselves, a special local superiority and celebrity.
Owing to the trivial episode of the accidental dropping of a railway ticket inside
an umbrella, which, like the losi|iug of the horse's shoe in Waverley, was thus pro¬
ductive of serious conseqiiences, our first view of Paris was by night, when, in the
distance, it presented the appearance of a vast illumination on earth, reflecting its
brilliant glare on the darkened heavens. Driving through the streets was almost as
luminous a process as by day-light, and fully as lively. Supplementing the street
lamps, the liglit streamed out through the doors and windows of the open cafes,
flooding with radiance the pavement and its busy groups of talkers, who lounged
about under the awnings over the chairs and tables, sipping eau sucree or coffee, and
chatter, chattering incessantly. This night aspect of Paris was wonderful, but not so
striking as in the morning, when the great city, awaking to the normal display of its
vivacious energy, rolled the full tide of its great life along the wide Boulevards, with an
abandon characteristic of Paris, and of Paris only, as a grand community ruled by a
well considered system of order and enterprise. Alas ! that in gratitude for eighteen
years''hard and faithful working, this beneficent iron hand should have been crushed
powerless, on tlie first successful outburst of that irrepressible restlessness which
none but the genius of resolution could have kept in check so long.
The volatile temperament of the Parisian forcibly expresses itself in the eager
enthusiasm with which he invariably welcomes the passing of a band of music, or
a regiment of soldiers along the street, as if, instead of occurring daily, nay hourly,
these wore rare events.    This love of spectacle alone rivals his passion for military
THE ATTEMPT.
233
glory; and hence, in this notable year, when old wrongs and animosities were raked
up and revived in new disputes, the wise policy of the Emperor substituted an
international exhibition for an international war, and welcomed the King of Prussia
with all the pomp of a royal guest, in preference to going forth to meet him as an
enemy. It was our fortune to encounter a rare specimen of the genus Parisian,
for glibness of tongue and forwardness of manner, in the course of our journey to
Paris. Never had I seen such a living impersonation of Jack-in the-box, as this
imperturbable little man. On first entering the carriage, he commenced a disquisi¬
tion, that was more graphic than agreeable, on the horrors of the mal de mer, to a jMssee
female who had previously favoured us with the history of her life and all its ti'agedies
in a few minutes' time. Launching out wider, he seized and dismissed innumerable sub¬
jects, of which he evidently knew nothing, with the greatest savoir faire, till, probably
by way of compliment to the English present, he at last got hold of Shakespeare, and
handled him with the greatest familiarity, complacently unconscious of the poignant
reference to himself, in the professor's question, if he knew the famous quotation :—
" I am Sir Oracle,
And when I ope my lips, let no dog bark."
A yet harder sentence graced his departure, in the remark of a quieter fellow-
traveller from Lyons, ^'■Ilparle toujours et ne dit rien, voila le Parisien !"
The street physiognomy of great cities is generally expressive of a nation's tastes,
habits, principles; and less than the skill of Lavater will suffice to recognize in
Parisian street exhibitions of fashion and splendour, the reflection of a showy moral
system that also deals in unlimited advertisement, and puts the most attractive
goods in the windows. In the eyes of a world that is " still deceived with ornament,"
what could equal the glories of the P^ie de Bivoli, the Pue de la Paix, the Pve
Richelieu, or the Pue St Ilonore? Delightfully bewildering as were these.haunts of
glittering enchantment, the afternoon scene along the Avenue des Champs Ely seas
was yet more fascinating, for there was the dazzling vision of the most brilliant and
varied equipages, with the most fashionable and elegantly dressed women in the
world, and the most splendid dandies, passing before our eyes with the bewildering
rapidity of a dream. To watch from the shadow of the A re de Triomphe de VEtoile,
the motley crowd whirling under its arch, careless, in the eager ardour of the chase,
of the significant memorials blazoned on its pillars, was a more complete study of
" The Pursuit of Pleasure," than any picture ever painted.
Something far higher and nobler is suggested by the Place de la Concorde, a
triumph of architectural art, whose heart-stirring impressions approach nature's own.
 2g  
Ocloler 1871.
234 THE ATTEMPT.
Its unique situation and perfect ornamentation command the homage of the beauty-
loving spirit, apart from those associations which seem to write a history on every
stone, and water it with tears. From the centre, where stands the Egyptian
obelisk on the site of the guillotine, flanked by the two great fountains, Ocean and
Navigation, and an outer circle of female figures, representative of the eight defen¬
dant cities of France, magnificent vistas stretched to the gardens of the Tuileries,
the Arc de Triomphe, the noble Corinthian columns of the Madeleine, and the
handsome palace of the Corps Legislatif. This magnificent square, which has out¬
lived the decay of dynasties, and absorbed alike the blood of monarchs and
republicans, speaks most eloquently of the mutability of human institutions.
Our space will not now permit us to infringe on the office of a hand book, and
expatiate on the various phases of Parisian sight-seeing. Of these, the Exhibition
was of course the first, and vivid is our remembrance of the wonders of the vast
mechanical department, and the beauties of the Italian sculpture. Scotch genius is
notably at home everywhere; and our first joyful recognition in the picture galleries
was of the humour of our genial countryman, Erskine Nicol. Surpassing even the
Exhibition, the Louvre was the grandest wonder of all the sights; and the world
may be thankful that the late awful spirit of devastation spared that grand congre¬
gation of its treasures. It is the most interesting feature of such a collection, that
it traces the history of the world for ages, in the varied specimens of its handywork.
Most of the lions of Paris bear this historic interest. The imposing grandeur of the
cathedral of Notre Dame is strengthened by association; the popular memory of one
good king renders the Pont Neuf and its statue of Henri Quatre for ever celebrated;
the world-wide influence of the Bourse lends an interest to its local habitation ; and
the Tuileries tell their own tale, even in ashes. Alas! that the saddest of all the
records should be the latest, that
" Ruin's merciless ploughshare should pass o'er,
And barren salt be sown on yon proud city,"
which our retrospective fancy again sees celebrating the hey-day of her peace and
prosperity.     The   sad   story written   in   her once   beautiful   but   now   disfigured
lineaments may well move us to apply to Paris the sad poetic apostrophe :—
" 0 thou that hast
The fatal gift of beauty, which became
A funeral dower of present woes, and past,
On thy sweet brow, in sorrow ploughed by shame,
And annals graved in characters of flame."
Here the grand tour is ended, the splendid goal reached, and the lingering
THE ATTEMPT.
musings of our nomadic  pen  must  draw to a close.     The curtain drops on our
foreign scenes, and we turn our eyes in search of more familiar pictures.    And even
while stirred to loyal sympathy with the tender music of our Scottish Queen's
" Adieu, plaisant pays de France,"
the patriot chords are swept by a yet nobler strain, which should wake a ringing
response in the heart of every true Scot—
" As home his footsteps he doth turn,
From wandering on a foreign strand."
Seldom does native country assume aspect more attractive, or home seem more dear,
than after a thoroughly enjoyable absence from their benign influences. The very
experience of foreign flavours imparts a relish to home tastes, and preference is
strengthened by the power of contrast. What scenery is anywhere like that of
home ] How does the fastidious elegance of the French votaress of fashion compare
with the gentle mein of a well-bred Englishwoman, and the delicate, though lively,
features of foreign peasant girls, pale beside the rosy beauty of a Scotch lass's cheek.
And from the phlegmatic Dutchman, the astute Belgian, the simple Swiss, the lively
Frenchman, and all other varieties of foreign social excellence, the national taste
reverts to the companionable superiority of a cultivated Englishman. In such
congenial companionship was our farewell progress through France accomplished,
though, in idea, I believe, we were most of the time in Spain, viewing such golden
visions as inspired us all with a strong desire to see their realization.
Our parting experience of the chemin de fer suggests the interpolation of a re¬
mark on one or two of its distinctive usages. Considerable trouble and anxiety are
spared the traveller by the system of relieving him of all charge of his luggage till
the end of his journey, when it is reclaimed by a ticket for which, on being taken
out at starting, the nominal sum of dix centimes is paid, unless in those countries
where all heavy baggage is regularly charged. A less satisfactory arrangement pre¬
vails with regard to the waiting-room accommodation, access to the platform being
denied, except through the special salle d'attente for the class by which the passenger
is to travel, to which he is only admitted on producing his ticket, so that till the
bureau is opened, there is litei-ally no place of rest for the weary traveller. The
ever-recurring appearance of the Douaniers is another source of annoyance; but the
invaluable policy of a readily offered compliance with their demands, rarely fails of
the desirable effect of securing for any honest baggage, merely a nominal inspection.
On our arrival on British shores, it was pleasing to find that in this respect, English
courtesy bore away the palm, even from the much-boasted foreign politeness.    In
236 THE ATTEMPT.
passing, we may advert to the utility of the circular notes granted by home banks
on those abroad, in preventing the disadvantageous accumulation of the coinage of
different countries, and sa;^ng a percentage.pn the exchange of English sovereigns.
" Never been in London !" was the thrice-repeated exclamation which testified
to a fellow-countryman's well-founded surprise at the idea of two Scotchwomen having
visited the princij^al cities of the Continent before the great centre of our own empire.
Certainly our introduction to London was at a disadvantage, with the remembrance
of clean, bright, foreign towns darkening the aspect of the great city into yet
deeper shadow. The smoky and begrimed appearance of St James's and Bucking¬
ham Palace, by no means strikingly illustrated their palatial prestige, and the dingy
atmospheric vapours could not possibly be taken for poetic mists. Still, " London is a
great place, and it is a great thing to be there," we thought, as our first hotel
welcome of " Quite full, sir! Derby week, sir !" brought us the fortune of being
quartered at Charing Cross, in the hotel Golden Cross, immortalized by Chai-les
Dickens as the centre of interest of the meeting between David Copperfield and
Steerforth, and its tragic consequences. Here, in the heart of our own dear empire,
looking upon English faces, listening to the music of English voices, and surrounded
with English comforts, we again acknowledged the superiority of home over all the
world beside. Still, the force of habit is so strong, that it was occasionally difficult to
refrain from addressing garqon to the waiters; and when an accidental jostling
against a street passenger elicited the involuntary exclamation, '■'Pardon, Madame !"
I have no doubt we were taken for distinguished foreigners.
In the pleasant twilight, we strolled out to make acquaintance with London's
neighbouring lions, first pausingto[reconnoitreSir Edwin's famous quartette, and that
yet more striking specimen on the top of Northumberland House, whose elevated taij
was once made the subject of a moving tale by an imaginative Cockney. The awful
memories of Whitehall were not ill expressed in its stern military aspect and
guarded entrance ; the Houses of Parliament rose above us in solemn grandeur, still
and silent; and the elegant outlines of Westminster Abbey were softened and hid
by the waning light. Next morning being Sunday, it was yet more interesting
in the " dim religious light" of the Poet's Corner, beside the grandest sUent company
of the land's mighty dead, to hear
" The pealing organ blow
To the full-voiced choir below,"
and in the afternoon to listen to one of Canon Melville's excellent discourses, under
the grand dome of St Paul's.    The long walk, too, through the city, on the way to
THE ATTEMPT.
237
church, was a sermon in itself, preached from the most familiar texts. The Strand,
Cheapside, Fleet Street, Ludgate Hill,—each name was a household word, even in
the far north ; and the feeling of recognizing names of well-known interest, was like
shaking hands at last with friends with whom one has long been intimate through
the medium of correspondence. I could understand Geoi'ge Warrington doffing
his hat in passing under Temple Bar; and it did not seem too much to expect
our old friend Ftmch to step out of his office and greet us, while Toby should bark
" How d'ye do ?"
But the grand overwhelming impression of London's greatness was reserved for
the morrow, when the full rush and roar of life, impeded by Sunday's rest, began
again for the week. Here was something entirely diffi^rent from the Parisian flow
of pleasurable gaiety. This was indeed the grand moving sight of London; and
strong and loud is the beat of her mighty heart in those busy streets, where the noise
and bustle and energy of half-a-dozen great cities would seem concentrated. The
glories of the Champs Elysees were too fresh in mind for any great impression to be
produced by the flitting beauty and fashion of the Bow; and after the magnificence
of the Louvre, the National gallery was disappointing, with the best pictures removed
to Kensington. The Tower's attractions are of a higher, more enduring nature. The
traitor's gate, the state prison, the block, suggest histories of sad and thrilling
interest, too often associated, in the past, as in the present, with the glittering insignia
of royalty. It was indeed a kingly experience that framed the phrase—
" Uneasy lies the head that wears a crown."
As if to point such a moral, the regalia were described by a female cicerone, Avith
an air betokening the most expressive weariness of the world and its follies, repre¬
sented by such baubles. More interesting than this languid lady of the crown jewels
was our grand old warder, although he dropped his Ks in rather an alarming manner,
as for instance, in assuring us that a piece of naval grape shot, in Sir Walter Ealeigh's
room, flying through the Aair would make our 'air stand on Aend ; and recommending
to our notice a grand device made of three thousand pieces of /iarms, which was a
correct representation of the Princess of Wales' bridecake turned Aupside down.
Grander even than the Tower, our own castle looms in sight at last, and Char¬
lotte Bronte's well-drawn comparisons occur to us,—" Edinburgh, compared to
London is like a vivid page of history compared to a large dull treatise on political
economy; and great London, as compared with Dunedin, ' mine own romantic town,'
is as prose, compared to poetry, or as a great, rumbling, rambling, heavy epic, com-
pai-ed to a lyric, brief, bright, clear, and vital as a flash of lightning."    Thus, the
238
THE  ATTEMPT.
three great capitals may be specially characterised :—Paris, as unrivalled for archi¬
tectural grandeur, London, for concentration of life, and Edinburgh, for beauty of
situation. Paris is the place for pleasure, London for business, Edinburgh for
thoughtful retirement and elegant association. After visiting the most attractive
capitals in Europe, we return to our old allegiance, and in our eyes, ancient Antwerp,
bright beautiful Brussels, gentle Geneva, even Paris with all its piquant power, and
London in its all-embracing largeness, pale before the still beauty of " Caledonia's
queen." Standing on the Mound, looking up to the dusky heights of the old town>
where the old castle " holds its state," and thence " all the steep slope down " to the
verdant valley gardens and the elegant parallel of Princes Street, can any one fail to
feel that the " Empress of the North " may rightfully reign in all Scottish hearts, the
most beautiful city in the world 1
Elfie.
^^t   Spirit's   <§£arrfj.
From its lonely narrow dwelling.
In the still sepulchral tomb.
Came my spirit forth at even.
When the world was wrapt in gloom;
And I said, " I will revisit
Those who loved me long ago.
For they cannot have forgotten.
They will mourn me still, I know.
" He will teach my child to love me;
She will pause in game and glee,
To say ' mother' to my picture,
And to name me lovingly.
It is sweet to be remembered,
It is joyful to depart,
If my image still is treasured
With affection in each heart."
" My beloved, he will mourn me.
He who clasped me as a bride,
And whose face grew wan with anguish.
When I faded at his side.
He will kiss the glossy ringlet
That he cut when I lay dead
On a couch all strewn with lilies.
Two years after we were wed.
So I entered in the chamber,
Where the firelight shed a glow.
Where we two had sat together.
Often, often, long ago.
There I saw him, my beloved.
Sitting in the oaken chair,—
In his smile no shade of sadness.
On his brow no look of care.
THE ATTEMPT.
239
And a stranger sat beside him.
Tall she was and jjassing fair,
With serene and stately aspect.
Flashing eyes and raven hair.
And his eye was resting on her
With a look of love and pride j
On her finger was the circlet
That betokened her a bride.
And a child was standing near them,
Full of playfulness and hiii'th,
And she called that woman " mother,"
Who had never giv'n her birth ;
And she knew not T was near her,
Who had clasped her to my breast,
And had wept and mourned to leave her.
And for grieving, could not rest.
So I turned away and left them,
And I sought the home of one
Who had been my friend and sister
Since our childhood's days begun;
We had laughed and wept together.
We had wandered side by side ;
And her love was true and tender,
And she sorrowed when 1 died.
She was robed in festive garments,
Dancing gaily with the gay ;
All remembrance of her sorrow
Like a dream had passed away.
And her face was bright with gladness,
And her laughter was as keen.
As tho' death had ne'er existed,
As tho' / had never been.
Ever thinking, O my darling !
Who will tend thee, pretty one.
Who will cherish thee and guard thee
Tenderly, when I am gone ?
He was satisfied, contented.
Looking calmly in her face ;
And his heart no more was vacant.
For another filled my place.
So I wandered hither, thither,
Seeking mourners, but in vain ;
For my place was filled by strangers.
And could ne'er be mine again ;
And my name was never mentioned.
Like a footprint on the shore
1 had vanished from remembrance,
And they spoke of me no more !
Then there came a voice from Heaven,
Stilling all my spirit's pain ;—
" Grieve no more o'er earth's afl!"ections,
Turn thee to thy rest again.
Would'st thou have them mourn for ever?
It is I who from on high
Soften all the heart's affliction.
And the tears of sorrow dry ;
They will meet thy soul hereafter
With a love more true and pure ;
Rest contented, wandering spirit,
In My love thou art secure."
Melita.
240
THE ATTEMPT.
OUR    LIBRARY   TABLE.
A Memoir of Charles Mayne Young, Tragedian., with Extracts frorn his Son's Journal.
By Julian Charles Young, A.M., Kector of Ilmington.
Among the many interesting books which appeared last winter, a prominent place
may be given to this very pleasantly written memoir. The memory of the kind,
genial character of Charles Young yet lives in some hearts ; though, of those who
enjoyed his public talents or loved his private virtues, many must have passed away.
This brief story of a long and, on the whole, singularly fortunate and happj' life Avill
interest for its own value. With the exception of the sad sweet story of his great
love and short married happiness, those few months which hallowed the name of
woman for ever in his heart, all is charming, all is prosperous, and one rejoices in
it, because one loves and esteems the man.
The extracts from the journal of the biogra2:)her are full of anecdote and very
amusing • besides which, they have the great merits of perfect simplicity and good
faith. The short account given at the close, of how a troublesome, and, at first,
unruly parish was brought into order by the wisest means, namely, by opening the
mind and interesting the heart, makes one feel that even as the father graced
a profession often under-valued and misunderstood, so the son, while following the
highest vocation man can aspire to, brought to its aid the talents and the virtues
inherited from one who both on and off the stage attained and deserved the love and
esteem of his fellow-men.
Stepping Heavenward: A Tale of Home Life.    By the Author of The Flower of
ilm Family.    T. Nelson & Sons, London, Edinburgh, and New York, 1871.
This little work, from an already known contributor to the American press,
owes much of its value to the undisguised and truthful spirit in which it is written.
Dealing with the difficulties of the Christian life, it seeks to explain and account for
some of those inconsistencies between profession and practice, which are often incom¬
prehensible to outward observation, by showing that the springs of action are hidden,
and that seldom in this world do the " righteous shine as the light." This is revealed
in the diary of a life, which interests us by its naturalness, and wins us even by its
faults. We commend the peiaisal of Katie's confessions, both as a stimulus to the
faithful and courageous performance of Christian duty, and as a healthful antidote
against the modern error of fallaciously representing Christian lives as patterns of
saintly perfection.
THE ATTEMPT. 241
C^t   Jfricitbs^ip   of  §ooKs.
We often read of people who " have not a friend in the world •" and perhaps we have
now and then thouglxt over our probable condition if such were the case with us.
What should we be without the numerous tics which wc take as a matter of course,
and which, if even one of them be Avreiiched asunder bj'' deatli or separation, leave
such a terrible void, awakening us for the first time to a sense of tender nearness
and passionate individual loss 1
But have we ever thought what we should be wdthout our other friends, who
lie silent and patient around us till we choose to take them up, and then will talk
as long as we choose to listen, to whose quiet presence we have groAvn so accustomed,
whose sayings we have drunk in till they, in a measure, have tinged our lives 1
What should we do without tlie friendship of books?
Perhaps dwellers in towns, Avho find but little time for readuig among the
abundant human companionship about them, may say, or at least thiuk, that they
could manage to dispense with most books; but it is not so with those Avho live
quiet Kves in the country.
It may be said that people who see a great deal of society are acquainted with
books, but that those who happen to live apai-t, if they have any taste for reading, make
friends of them. It is a very different thing to skim through a book because everybody
is talking about it, and one must " get it up," and to read it page by page, slowly and
carefully imbibing its contents, taking its spirit into our own, sorry at length to
lay it down, but feeling that it is henceforth a friend, that it has made its mark
upon our minds. There are many books which ought to be friends to all of us; if
we do not know them, a gTeat deal is missing out of our lives. And of these I
think the head and chief is Shakespeare. It will be understood that I am writing
of books written by men for men, not of the one book from which our first lessons
and our last comforting thoughts are drawn. Leaving the Bible out of the question,
I think Shakespeare is the author whose friendship, whose familiar words we could
least afford to lose. Which of his characters would we give for half-a-dozen ordinary
acquaintances 1
We have only to open his plays, and lo, instead of the wet English day we
have just been looking out upon, instead of the grey mist clinging to the hills, the
dripping disconsolate trees, the low heavy sky, we are in an enchanted wood, deep
in whose green mysterioiis heart Titania holds her revels.    The very living sunshine
H
November 1871.
242 THE ATTEMPT.
seems to " trickle through the shade" on the mossy bank where she " sticks musk-
roses in the sleek, smooth head " of the ti'anslated weaver of Athens, and glistens on
the butterfly wings of her attendant elves, as they hail the mortal intruder into their
haunts. Or we lean out with Juliet from her balcony into the flood of moonlight, under
the Italian sky, and Komeo's voice rises tremulous with new passion from the garden
below, freighted with the tenderest words that ever were set to the old old tune
which was first heard in Eden. Or we sit waiting with Lorenzo and Jessicafor
Portia's return from her errand of mercy, while the music whispers through the
trees in the silence of the night, and they jest together on their flight from Venice,
till silence grows more sweet than talk, and harmony -wi-aps her spell about their
souls. Or we ride with Petruchio and his unwilling bride from Padua, and sit by
while she attempts to choose that never-to-beforgotten cap and gown, " so qiiaint,
so pleasing, and so commendable." One cannot help sympathizing in a measure
with the half-tamed shrew and hitherto victorious scold, " killed in her own humour,"
bullied, badgered, beaten at every point, and all " under name of perfect love."
But this essay has not space for half the exquisite scenes which the name of
Shakespeare summons iip;—for the sad ominous quiver in Desdemona's voice, while
she sings the half-forgotten snatch of " Willow, willow, willow," and thinks of the
sudden change in her " noble Moor;" for Prospero's magic cell, and Ariel's wander¬
ing melody ; nor for Viola, so tender and womanly in her man's disguise.
The books we make friends of are sure to become very dear to us; and no book,
07ie reading of which suffices our minds, can ever become such a friend. No, to
have a real affection for a book, we must be able to say, " Yes, I remember this
chapter. I read it to my friend on such a day, it may be years ago." Does not reading
the self-same words bring back the past more clearly than anything else could do ? as
Browning's rock-plant takes him back to a "fortnight since," when one was with him
who is now gone—
" This flower she bent o'er, finger on lip,
Paused for a moment, as settling its claim ;
Then gave me, -with pride to make no slip,
Its soft meandering Spanish name.
What a name! was it love or praise ?
Speech half asleep, or song half awake ?
I must learn Spanish, one of these days.
If only for that slow sweet name's sake."
There is a very sad and very beautiful part of Aurora Leigh, in which the
author thinks of the happy circles where her books would be read, of the father
THE ATTEMPT.
243
bringing them home to his daughter, the lover to his beloved, of the hearts that
would meet together in loving looks over her pages, while she herself sat lonely by
her fire, giving the joy to others of which her own life was empty. Certainly we
often love a book for the sake of some one else who loved it, as much as for its own ;
and more frequently still, we love it because it expresses in noble language what we
feel, but cannot express, or opens up to us a wealth of new ideas, radiant fancies, glow¬
ing imagery. Or it tells in strong quiet language the stoiy of a life,—a life which even
here on earth has "borne immortal fniit," leaving an example of work nobly done, or
suffering nobly borne, to make stronger and truer all hearts that shall read of it as
long as the world endures. Certainly all true poets are friends to those who know
and love their works, yet some of them are much nearer and dearer friends than
others. Milton, for instance, cannot exactly be called a friend. He never comes
near you, never sits down beside yoii, as it were, and tells you that as yoa feel, so
he has felt, and all will be right at la^gt. No, he stands apart in solitary majesty :
we wonder at his glorious thoughts, but we do not feel his heart beating through
his lines.
"The devotion to something afar,
From the sphere of our sorrow,"
is all we can feel for him.
It is widely different with Wordsworth, Keats, Shelley, or, in our own day,
Tennyson or Browning, or those two sweetest of song writers, Burns and Heine.
All of these are friends, dear and familiar, strong in their sympathy, and sym¬
pathetic in their strength. Whether we are glad or sorry, wc can open their
pages in confident assurance that there we shall find either the echo of our own
thoughts, which is sometimes a great comfort,—for there is in our nature a strong
tendency to imagine that any trouble which besets us is peculiar to ourselves, and
that the same has never assailed any one before ; or, better still, some new inspira¬
tion, as it were, of strength and inward support. Such are found in abundance in
In Memoriam:—
" O living will that shalt endure,
When all that seems shall suffer shook,
Rise in the spiritual rock,
Flow through our deeds and make them pure; "
these lines, and the verses that follow, are full of the new light that has risen upon the
poet's heart. " The tender grace of a day that is dead" is gone for evermore, but some¬
thing even better has been given in its place, and reading his words we grow calmer
244 THE ATTEMPT.
and stronger. Wordsworth has also many such passages; while Browning's poems
are  full  of hope  and  faith, so  strong  and  vigorous,   that  not one of them   is
. thoroughly sad.
" The dark shall be light,
And the wrong made right,"
is his motto. Trouble may come, clouds may lower, but what of that 1 Is there
not a life in store for us, where our failures and losses shall seem like the dust on
the pilgrim's sandals 1
" What is our failure here, but a triumph's evidence
For the fulness of the days."
Each pain that makes earth more bitter, is but a pledge of the sweetness to
come ; therefore let us go forward in unfailing trust and resolute liope. Eveiy one
who can get over Browning's peculiarities, his unexpected turns of thought, and
abrupt terminations, his carelessness as to polishing up his idea after he has dug it
out of his miud, and his occasional obscurity, must feel him to be one of the poets
wlio can truly liecome a friend.
We have friends many and various among prose writers too, old and new,
Thackeray, Scott, Dickens, Charles Land>, Carlyle, Knskin,—there are so many
ancient and modern writers, who are familiar and dear to us all, that it would be
vain to try to number tbem.. And while we are thankful, heart and soul, for the
human friendship and love that make life dear, let us not forget the friends who
" have left fclieir souls on earth."
Let me close with Keats's lines—
" The souls ye left behind you
Teach us here the way to find you,
Where your other souls are joying,
Never slumber'd, never cloying.
Thus ye teach us, everj' day
Wisdom, though fled far away."
O. M.
THE ATTEMPT.
245
flib  Stoinf^it's   iwartr.
I was one of Lord Swiufeu's guard.
Ready early or late ;
Steadily I kept watch and ward
By the iiortli postern gate.
The harvest-moon was under a cloud,
'Twas barely one by the clock.
When, as I stood by the postern door,
I heard the click of a lock.
I left the castle—the door ajar—
In the breath of the summer air.
And over the pleasaunce,and over the brook,
I followed my lady fair.
Fifty yards from the northern door.
Where the old pollard willows are,
Lord Lyon was holding her in his arms,
And kissing her face and hair.
Lord Swinfen's daughter was sweet and Lord Lyon put her on his Barbary mare,
And as fair as Mr could be,     [young, That was desert born and bred ;
And, by my faith and the Holy Eood, And he flung himself on his black destrere.
Who should come forth but sho 1 And eastwards turned his head.
Lord Swiufen's daughter was little and Lord Swinfen's bay in the stable stood.
Her feet made never a sound     [light.       Saddled and ready to ride,
O'er the oaken floor to the oaken door— Lord Swinfen's bay was of better blood,
She waked not the sleeping hound. Than any by Eden side.
She wore a cloak of the cramoisie. Lord Swinfen's bay was of better breed
Embroidered withj^eMr de lys, Than any Lord Lyon rode j
And over her hair, which flowed so free. And he knew my need was a bitter need.
Was a hood of the silver gris. When his broad back I bestrode.
Holy Mother ! where goes she now ? They had taken the pasture smooth.
The hour of the night is late ! I went over the hill :
No sound I made, as I stood in the shade. Three times we rolled on the stony ground.
As she passed through the postern gate.     But we were tracking them still.
Lord Swinfen's castle with warriors strong They had gone by every gap.
Was fully and bravely manned ; They had gone 1 ly every gate.
Lord Swinfen's honour was lightly held    But only death could have stood in our track.
In his daughter's lily hand. So the bay and I rode straight.
246 THE ATTEMPT.
They had taken the upper ford, I tied the reins of the black destrere
The river was full to the brim, To the reius of the Barbary grey,
Thewhitefoarabubbleswereswirlinground, I hit them each with the flat of my sword.
But the bay and I could swim. And left them to find their way.
Biding tranquilly, side by side, I put my lady, all pale and wan,
After they passed the water— Up on the saddle bow,
Little they recked who was riding behind. And while the day did brighten and dawn,
Fit groom for Lord Swinfen's daughter.      We wearily home did go.
Biding peacefully side by side, So we came to the postern gate ;
All in the summer night,— I lifted her off the horse,
Up dashed the bay, and my battle cry She gave me a glance of deathless hate.
Was, " Swinfen guard the right!" And she gave me a whispered curse.
Lord Lyon bent over the lady fair. Gliding, most like a tired ghost.
And pressed her once to his breast; Up to her chamber door—
Then quickly he wheeled his black destrere, I watched till my eyes'grew somewhat dim,
And laid his lance in rest. And then I watched no more.
While the moon was going adownthe sky, Theysaid that the witcheshadridden the bay
We fought for an hour well told ; Over England from east to west;
My lady sat still on the Barbary mare, They found Lord Lyon there where he lay,
And she shivered, but not with cold. With a deadly wound in his breast.
When the sun came up from behind the hill, But my lady had slept in her lily bed,
And the moon went down in the west.       And I had kept watch and wardj
Lord Lyon was lying all calm and still, There was never a stain on Lord Swrufen's
With a foot of steel in his breast. Nor a traitor among his guard,   [name,
B.
It is scarcely possible to see without sympathy the various demonstrations in honour
of peace that meet one this year in Germany. Sometimes it is the triumphant entry
of the troops into a rejoicing city : stately arches close in the vistas of the streets, so
gay with fluttering flags, so jubilant with cries of welcome.    The ladies at the win-
THE ATTEMPT. 247
dows, or on the tribunes made for the occasion, rain down wreaths and flowers on the
procession of weather-beaten soldiers home from the fierce campaign ; the bells clash
out from the clnirch towers, and the beautiful military bands fill the aii* with music.
Or it is a church service : perhaps a splendid mass, or a Reformed service
made beautiful by hundreds of tuneful voices singing the grand old chorales. Nor
are the dead forgotten. After one such service, we saw the troops, and also the
children of the city schools, marched down to the new addition to the church-yard,
where the crosses of the ofiicers and men who died in the town hospitals stand
thickly. Every cross had its wreath of leaves and flowers; even those, we were glad
to see, to the memory of French soldiers. Here a short commemorative service was
held, and some fine hymns were sung to the accompaniment of the military band;
and finally a little book, containing a history of the war, was given to every child
present.
Then all the principal railway stations are decorated with green branches and
mottoes of welcome; every town has its triumphal arch; and the trains which bring
home the troops often look like bowers of greenery, or Birnam wood on the march.
Often tables are spread out alfresco at the stations, as when we halted at Saarbruck,
where the dusty heroes who sprang from the crowded train had indeed a welcome to
their own country. The men were singing a vigorous chorus as the huge train
moved up, and what shouts there were—what hand-shaking, and talking, and eating,
and clinking of glasses, round the half-ruined station, where you may still see some of
the only French shells that fell on German soil.
Or the peace festival takes a dramatic or a musical forrci, in a play written,
or a concert arranged for the occasion. The Whitsuntide Lower Rhenish
musical festival, held this year at Cologne, was entirely dedicated to it. There
were three exquisite concerts on succeeding days, for which choral singers
and orchestral players were gathered from all parts of Germany. A new
cantata, written by Dr Hiller, the conductor, in honour of the triumph of Ger¬
many, had a tremendous reception. The words, taken from the Psalms, at one time
ran thus, " The heathen have sunk into the pit they have made, but we are risen
and stand upright." And the audience, after the enthusiastic German fashion, rose
and stood upright and shouted their delight, while the young ladies of the chorus
pelted the old conductor with flowers. One day we had the oratorio "Joshua" in full,
and while the ruins at Paris were still smouldering, they sang—
" See the raging flames arise,
The tottering towers, the ponderous ruins fall."
248 THE  ATTEMPT.
The coincidence was too striking, and one couM only think sadly of the poor
beautiful holiday city, so brave in vain, fallen a victim to the enemies of order,
who are ready now to profit bj'- any national disaster.
And this brings mo to the feeling in France about the peace, which, of course,
is pretty evident to travellers there this year. ICow does it look to our allies, our
gay kindly neighbours, on whose errors so)ne of us have lately been, as I think, too
hard 1 We made a little tour in Alsace, under the drawback of finding only two trains
a day, and these quite uncertain as to time, and over-crowded. Of course we were
prepared for the ruins at Strasbiu'g, and sucli like devastation. T>\\t we could not have
realised, without seeing, the melancholy of a newly-conquered country. As soon as one
is known to be English, one hears on all sides, from all con\ers, the expression of bitter
grief for the loss of nationality, and hatred of the foreign ]nasters. " TJiey may call
us what they will—French we are, and French we must remain," was the burden of
their talk; " the affair is not yet finished—things cannot remain thus; we would
gladly have led a hard life for yeai/s, to pay the Prussians, if only we might have
kept our country, but now we detest them more than during the war." And once,
when we siiggosted what a pity that ever war was declared,— "Yes," was the
answer ; " tJie last war may Iiave been wrongj but the Prussians have changed that—
the next will he right."
Perhaps quite on the frontier this feeling does not run so liigli. At "Weissenburg,
for instance, where the first battle was fought, we had an impression that the
people were fairly satisfit'd with their lot. The quaint old city, watered by a clear
running stream, and dcfi^iided by iiseless, shady, and picturesque fortifications,
looked as German as if it wcw far iu the Palatinate.
Saverne (or Zaboni on the now maps), seemed most melancholy. It is
surrounded by picturesque hills, each clothed with forest, and crowned with some
ruined tower or ancient castle. It is a delightful little town, with a splendid red-
coloured Bishop's palace reflected in stUl water; witli picturesque old streets, and a
carved fountain, where we observed how the girls drawing water ceased their talk,
and slipjied quietly .awaj^, when a German soldiei' came to fill his can. The town
was crowded with these soldiers, who seemed sj-steraatically " cut" by the population ;
even in the forest we met some white cuirassiers riding,—beautiful apparitions in
shining mail, lUce the cavaliers of our civil wars. The little fortress town of
Phalsburg, seven miles off, to which the Erckmann-Chatrian novels have given a
peculiar interest, was a picture of desolation. The sun was beating fiercely on the
bare high plateau on which it stands ; it glared on the piles of ruins which marked
THE ATTEMPT.
249
where some of the streets had been, and on the heaps of rubbish surrounded by
blackened walls, which, together with a high scathed tower, was all that was left of
the large parish church ; some black twisted fragments of altar-rails stood among the
rubbish, and high against the blue sky, on the top of the tower, a saint in bronze
still held up a cross of metal that had resisted the flames. In the streets a few
inhabitants sauntered listlessly, and crowds of black Brunswickers, ominous looking
and grim in their dark uniform and skull decorations, moved here and there,
masters of all. The bright sun and sky looked so pitiless, one half wished the
weather would be sympathetic; but, in fact, the best friend that poor France has
left is that '''beau Boleil;" that, with the fertile soil, may yet repair her misfortune.
Thionville, where we slept in an inn that had been badly shelled, and was still
under repair, had a whole quarter in ruins. The town had suflered fright¬
fully from the bombardment, and we do not envy the Prussians the fellow-subjects
they have acquired by its annexation. Not less desolate, though less injured, is the
fine old city of Metz, where the commerce and pi-osperity of the town has suffered
the more complete collapse, because largely dependent on its schools; and the youths
are now all sent into France proper, that they may recruit the French, not the
German armies. We drove over the ground that had been the scene of the
tremendous fight of the 18th of August, the battle of Gravelotte ; as the distances
are great, this occupied five or six hours. The first part of the drive from Metz
to St Privat is through a charming narro w wooded valley, watered by a clear stream.
The war had left its traces in shattered frees and ruined cottages, but all was peaceful
now. At one of the prettiest spots, a white stone cross marked a grave in the
meadow, near it was the square elevation that marks a horse's burial place ; a large
hay-cart drawn by oxen was being piled with hay by peasants, whose voices came to
us pleasantly mixed with the ripple of the stream and the rustle of the scented
breeze.
From the village of St Privat a wide bare plain stretches downwards for miles,
and the Germans had to march up this to storm the French position on the heights,
fully exposed to the French artillery fii-e. And here were scattered thickly those
huge square tumuli, which one learns to recognize as the graves of twenty or fifty, or
it may even be several hundred men. These are now neatly built up two or three
feet; many are about fifteen feet square, but some thirty or forty feet long; little
paths run between, and they are thickly studded with crosses bearing inscriptions,
often very touching, and generally of a religious character. Near the village of Grave¬
lotte, some two miles further, where long rows of these mounds have been enclosed
November 1871.
250 THE ATTEMPT.
together, we sat down to rest on one gaily covered with rye-grass, poppies, and wild
pansies, and recording on its cluster of crosses such a history of youth and life and
promise, all quenched on one fatal day, that no wonder the question forced itself on
us irresistibly—What was the meaning of it all 1 That in our reflective calculating
days, it should still be possible to dress men difl'erently, and set them therefore to
destroy each other; that so far from wars being over, a fresh one was probably now
brewing, seemed an anomaly the more striking, as we were fresh from the hospitals
where the late enemies lay side by side, to be tended and mended with the same
anxious attention.
Certainly positive " sociology," the belief or rather unbelief of the mass of edu¬
cated Frenchmen, has no answer to give. That there is something in this world
thoroughly amiss—that war is but the evil spot showing on the surface, which is for
ever lurking somewhere—we can afford to face, who can tui'n to the great remedy.
The previous Sunday, at Ammergau, we had heard the wonderful message about
suffering and sacrifice most touchingly delivered. Not in vain, read by its light,
was all the self-sacrifice and heroism expended on this fatal field; not in vain were
those lives laid down at the call of duty, miserable and unaccountable as the war in
itself appeared,—though it seems unfair to view it as if the history of France
and Prussia began in the year 1870. It is somewhat the fashion now to say
that the French cannot even fight well. No doubt the bad behaviour of spiritless
national guards, and a rabble of raw recruits, have caused the earlier fields, which
were well contested by the regular army, to be partially forgotten; but here at
Gravelotte, the French, though largely outnumbered as usual, fought splendidly.
The pleasantest thing we saw near Metz was, amid much weedy waste and
fallow land, some young corn springing. We remarked on its lateness for the
season, and our guide then told us that it had come from England. It had indeed
been sown late, but in time to produce a good crop; and "never," he added, "will
it be forgotten here what England did for us in this time of misfortune."
It was a relief to leave the land shadowed by the worst of political mis-
foi'tunes—forced transfer of nationality—and to return to France proper. A fine
harvest was being gathered in, and the country, we were assured, was fast
recovering itself. Sedan is becoming something of a show-place, and therefore
less interesting to the passing traveller. The country round is full of beauty, and
the little chateau among the roses whei-e Napoleon and William met, commands a
charming view of the Mouse winding among its low groves and poplar trees, and
the wooded heights of Belgium beyond.    Of Paris there is no need to speak now;
THE ATTEMPT.
251
the startling devastations there have been so thoroughly described.     Only, what struck
us  most in  the city, once a familiar  residence, was  a  complete but  indefinable
change in its general appearance : possibly owing to a want of smartness, brilliancy,
gay toilettes, cldc, it certainly looked rather like some quiet provincial city such as
Poictiers or Is^'aucy, than like the Paris of eighteen months ago.    Perhaps the fall of
the dictatorship  and luxury  of Pai-is  marks the  dawn  of  better days to come.
Certainly the press and people on all sides agree in denouncing the luxury which
has enervated the nation, and the centralization which has paralyzed its freedom*
In the recognition of these truths lies the one hope for France; in that and in the
reformation of the army, a Frenchman would probably add.    Dare we hope then,
that the present peace will be lasting 1    It seems as if it were not accepted as such
by the French nation; the   terms  exacted   by  the Germans, whether  rightly  or
wrongly, have made it but a truce, and the outbreak of a new war is probably only
a question of time.    May  no   utopian  ideas  prevent   our  being  prepared for all
emergencies. E. J.  O.
^ anmi
IN MEMORY OF ONE OF HORATIO M'CULLOCH'S PICTURES.
He gives us nature with her speaking power.
Her sounds and forms refresh our weary souls;
As lakes and streams, mountains and purple knolls
Seem mirror'd on his canvas.    Great's the dower
Which brings us face to face iu any hour
With ever varying beauty.    Siich controls
Our daily sinking tendencies, and holds
A mighty influence ; though, like the flower,
We are apt to grow unconsciously, yet feed
Meanwhile in quiet rapture on the light
Which true artistic skill hath made so bright;
His fleecy clouds move on through upper space.
We glide from earth, and feel already freed
From cares, whose petty origin we trace.
E. L. E.
252 THE   ATTEMPT.
C^£   Mings   ai   Jcarus.
(From the French of Emile Souvestre.)
The Bastour blind alley is a sort of lane opening into the Rue St Denis, and is
almost exclusively occupied by workmen who labour in their own rooms, and on their
own account. In Paris, this kind of industry is one of the most important, and one
of the most trying. A single artisan must bear the responsibilities of the manufac¬
turer, as well as those of the workman. Obliged like the one, to make advances, to
open credit, and to sustain failures, and like the other, to labour without relaxation,
he struggles painfully under the double load of obligations. Yet these very difficul¬
ties arouse in him a persistence and respect for order, rarely to be met with among
other artisans. Freedom of labour, responsibility to others and to himself, the con¬
sciousness that his energy will secure a future for him, all contribute to elevate
and encourage him; and if his labour is more severe, the very severity only serves
to sharpen his intelligence, and quicken his moral feeling.
Stei)hen and Francis Lefebre were examples of the truth of these reflections.
They had lived for hve years in this Bastovir alley. They had endured cruel privations,
and all their efforts had not yet been able to secure for them a capital sufficient
to permit them to labour ^at their ease; still their independence and their hope of
final success sustained them amidst their severe toils. They became each day more
industrious, and more confident of success; for the struggle which weakens the
feeble or the cowardly, gives strength and elasticity to the courageous. They
were cousins, and some years ago had taken under their charge an aged paralytic
relative, called Martha, to whom, out of kindness, they gave the name of grand¬
mother. Martha could neither speak nor move, but her eloquent eyes so well trans¬
lated her thoughts that the two cousins were easily able to comprehend them. As
they laboured with more or less zeal, the eye of Martha was smiling or sad; it was
a miri-or to their conscience; they read in it the judgment they ought to pass on
themselves.
Their life was too regular to becloud often the eyes of their grandmother.
Their chief pleasure, after the hours of labour, consisted in reading. They went over,
for the twentieth time, some odd volumes of our poets, bought at an open-air book¬
stall, or sang together some of our national songs. They had themselves early
attempted to make their own inspiration submit to the laws of rhyme, and these
THE ATTEMPT.
253
attempts, rude at first, became insensibly more lively and more correct. The warm
breeze which had made, in every part of France, so many poetic workmen blossom,
had passed through Bastour alley, and had heated the " verve " of the two cousins.
Stephen's muse was the more sober and self-sustained; that of Francis more
imaginative and impetuous. The inspiration which the latter had breathed only in
his leisure hours, now encroached upon his labour. Carried away by the charm
of this intellectual intoxication, he forgot promised commissions, his graver rested
idle upon the metal, and every evening he would find that he had done less engraving
and had made more poetry.
Stephen warned him sometimes, but very gently, for he enjoyed listening to the
stanzas of Francis. He applauded with the naive warmth of that admiration which no
jealousy chills, and imprudently encouraged an ardour that ought rather to have been
restrained. On his return one day from several errands to tradesmen who had em¬
ployed him, he heard that a customer had called to take Francis to repair a rich suit
of armour, which the owner was unwilling to allow to leave his apartment. The
young workman was absent several hours. At last he arrived, panting and excited ;
as soon as he saw his cousin, he cried, " I come from his house ! I have seen him !"
" Whom ?" asked Stephen.
Francis named one of the most celebrated authors of the time, whose works
had always occupied the most prominent place in the little library of the cousins.
Stephen could not restrain, a cry.
" Where hast thou seen him, how, and for what?" asked he quickly.
" He wished some armour repaired," replied Francis.
" What ? it was he ?"
" And I have spoken to him !"
" Thou!"
" I have done better, I have written to him."
" How r
" After having arranged the detached pieces, I improvised six stanzas, scribbled
them in haste on one of my invoices, and placed them in the gauntlet."
" And he has read them ? "
" He will read them, for I came away immediately."
This adventure was a subject of conversation for the two workmen during all
that evening. They represented to themselves the surprise of the academician on
finding this poetic improvisation. Perhaps he would write to Francis ; perhaps he
would wish to see him again.   Stephen envied his cousin's good fortune, and asked
254 THE ATTEMPT. ^
him a thousand details. He wished to know the figure, the manner, the sound of
the voice of his favourite author ; he rejjeated to himself many times the words he
had addressed to Francis ; he wished to recognise the great poet, even in his manner
of ordering the repair of armour.
The next day the conversation returned to the same subject. While labouring
at their work-tables, the cousins repeated the finest passages from the illustrious writer,
for they had almost all his verses by heart. Then, intoxicated by the melody, tliey
commenced to repeat their own songs, with that warmth which one piits into one's
own works. Three knocks at the door interrupted them. Francis turned and
cried, " Come in !" but perceiving the visitor arrested on the threshold, he let fall
the implement he held.    It was the owner of the armour himself.
At his name, stammered by the young workman, Stephen rose quickly, and
discovered himself, with an exclamation of astonishment and of joy which said more
for him than any Avords.    The celebrated man bowed graciously.
" It is j^ou that I sought," said he, recognising Francis. " I come to thank you,
sir, for the beautiful verses you left me yesterday as a visiting card."
Francis, trembling, excused himself for his boldness, whilst Stephen brought
forward a chair for the illustrious visitor. It was some time ere the two cousins
could master their emotion, but they were aided by the cordial thoughtfulness of the
poet, who had been really struck by the stanzas of Francis.
He questioned him with an eagerness which was not long in encouraging him.
The young workmanr latad how he and his cousin had come to put their thoughts
in rhyme, and to overcome the difficulties of this kind of composition, so hard for
beginners. The academician wished to hear their most recent verses, and ap¬
peared seized with a true enthusiasm. He declared that neither should continue
to engrave copper and steel, when God had evidently destined them to a higher
mission; that they ought to give to France a Burns and a Wordsworth; that, for
his part, he wished to set them in their place, as Jupiter had formerly set the twins of
the fable. He added, that henceforth he would charge himself with the sale of their
verses, and he retired only after having fixed the day on which they should visit him,
to bring him their manuscripts.
Left alone, the two cousins abandoned themselves to outbursts of joy, and the
noise even reached the inner room where Martha sat. She wished to know the cause
of these transports, and Francis commenced relating to her, with pride, the good
fortune which had happened to them. But to his great surjirise, the old woman
gave no sign of satisfaction.
THE ATTEMPT. 255
" She has not comprehended," said he, aside to Stephen.
" Dost thou think so ?"   replied he.
" Dost thou not see that she gives us no congratulations 1"
Stephen looked at the grandmother, who appeared quite thoughtful, and he him¬
self became more serious. Francis spent part of the night in collecting his scattered
poems, and in correcting them. When he awoke next day, he expected to find his
cousin absorbed in the same employment, but, to his great surprise, he perceived him
busy at his work table.
" Well," cried he ; " what art thou doing there 1"
" I am finishing the commission we must give in this evening, " replied Stephen.
" A commission !" repeated Francis, "but, unfortunate, thou hast then for¬
gotten that we have changed our trade 1"
" I have not done so," replied the young workman, tranquilly.
•' What dost thou mean 1"
" That I have reflected since yesterday, cousin, and that, all things considered,
I prefer to remain as I am."    Francis drew back, bewildered.
" Dost thou speak seriously?" cried he. "What! when a great genius opens
to us a glorious career, thou refusest to enter on it 1 Thou preferrest the mechanical
and low work of the burden-bearer, to that of the thinker 1 A place is offered thee
amidst the kinsfs of intelligence, and thou art determined to remain in the lower
ranks ?"
" Because my place is made in the lower ranks," replied Stephen ; " because
there I am sure of my ability ; because, in short, all my education has been that of a
workman, and not that of a literary man."
" That is to say," cried Francis, " that we ought to be the slaves of chance 1
What matters our inclination or our talent, if it is necessary to remain chained to the
condition that our early circumstances have imposed upon us. If Andre Chenier had
learned to cast metal, wouldst thou have forbidden him to give that up in order
to mould verses 1"
"Andr^ Cheniers are rare, cousin," I'eplied Stephen, smiling, "and we too
often mistake a simple taste for the impulse of genius. I desire, however, to believe
the praises that were given us yesterday, and I shall always keejj a j^leasant remem¬
brance of them ; but has the lively imagination of our visitor exaggei'ated nothing ?
Dost thou not think that the surprise of finding poets in blouses and leathern aprons
may have somewhat influenced his warm approbation 1 Has he not been moved by
the contrast between the trade we work at, and the powei's of which we have given
256 THE ATTEMPT.
proof?    In short, dost thou believe that thy verses, sent by a laureate from the
university, would have excited his sympathy to an equal degree 1"
" What does it matter, if they deserve it 1" replied Francis hastily. " Should
the excess of kindliness in a protector make us give up his protection ?"
" It ought at least to make us accept it with more reserve," said Stephen.
" Why give up besides a position for which we need not blush, and to which we may
do honour 1 Is the certificate of capacity that a great writer gave us yesterday a
reason for deserting the ranks of labourers ? Is it necessary to regard them as an
oiitcast class, abandoned to brutality and ignorance ? What is the use of carrying
our intelligence elsewhere, when we can employ it where we are 1 Why become poets
of a world that we know not, when we can be the poets of that in which we live 1"
" That is to say, that thou wouldst work for the ignorant ?" interrupted Francis,
with disdain.
" In order they might cease to be so," replied Stephen warmly. " Dost thou
believe it impossible to cultivate amongst workmen the delicate tastes hitherto
reserved for men of leisure 1 Dost thou not see the progress already made 1 Read¬
ing and music are now popular, poetry may become so. It is for us to aid in
this education of our brothers, to sing for them and with them, and to show them,
by our example, that the sweat of toil does not prevent the motion of thought."
" Foolish illusion ! " said Francis, shaking his head ; " the labour of the body
makes us resemble the brutes, and inspiration comes only in ease and leisure. Poets
are like bees, and can make their honey only from the nectar of flowers."
Stephen wished to reply, but his cousin would not listen to more. Attracted by
all its allurements of vanity and of softness towards the new sphere proposed to him,
he cut short the objections of the young workman, by declaring that each must act
accoi'ding to his own humour; and he went back to the correction of his poems,
while Stephen returned to his work-table.
Some days afterwards, Francis carried his manuscript to the academician, who
had already found a publisher for him, and remitted to him the first half of the
price arranged. He invited him at the same time to one of his soirees, telling him
that he wished to introduce him to his friends.
" Henceforth you will be one of us," added he, graciously; " a new life is about
to begin for you ; you must serve your apprenticeship in it. The commerce of
minds resembles any other; what it demands before everything, is tact. It is in¬
dispensable that you should know other writers, and that other writers should know
you ; that they should i-eceive you, and that you should receive them.    A man
THE ATTEMPT. 257
criticises sharply a brother to whom he has never spoken, but he treats kindly one
whom he meets every day, if not from affection, at least from human respect. Take
my advice, then, and lay your plans."
Francis did not let him speak twice ; he forsook his workman's clothes for the
black coat of the " bourgeois," and he left Bastour alley, to rent a small apartment
in the Hue de I'lJuiversite.
When he took leave of Martha, the face of the old woman seemed covered
with a cloud, and a little tear gliding through her eyelashes rolled over her motion¬
less face. " Look !" said Stephen, quite touched, '' our grandmother has not wept
since the death of her son."
" I shall redeem that tear, by making her share my success," replied Francis.
And again embracing the paralytic, he grasped his cousin's hand and departed. But
next day lie returned, then on following days, and at each visit he announced some
new triumph. Once he had read his verses in a reunion composed of the best
known writers and artists of the time, and all had applauded with enthusiasm ;
another time he brought a review, which placed him high in the first rank of con¬
temporary poets. His co-operation had already been asked by several journals ;
and the bookseller wished to treat with him for a second volume. Stephen frankly
rejoiced at so much success; but when Francis tried to induce him to follow his
example, he shook his head, and all his doubts returned. Lutea Reseda.
{To he continued)
From the Italian op Giovanni della Casa.
Thou Care, that nourishest thyself with Fear,
And hast more strength as Fear within thee grows ;
Thou mak'st love's kmgdom sad and dark appear,
By mingling in its fire thy frost and snows.
Hence ! leave me ! for thy venom'd arrow throws
Its poison o'er the joys that once were dear ;
Back to Cocytus !    There enjoy thy woes
In Hell's deep regions, desolate and drear.
K
November 1871.
258 THE ATTEMPT.
There without rest or peace do thou remain,
'Mid cheerless days and restless nights, to grieve
Not less o'er future than o'er present pain.
Why come again 1 Why must I yet receive
Thy venom'd stings that pierce my every vein ?
And shall I from thy woes find no reprieve 1 Echo,
S   iha   for   Stwpib   |co^U.
It is becoming more evident every day that there is no room now iu the world
for persons of limited intellect. Not only can they get no work to do, not only
are they invariably rejected in all competitions, contemptuously thrust aside from all em¬
ployment, but an impression is rapidly gaining ground that those unfortunates have
positively no right to exist, and at anyrate deserve to be treated with the utmost rigour
and severity. "Poverty is not a crime, but something worse," said the Frenchman,
who married his laundress because he couldn't pay her bill; and certainly, in the esti¬
mation of the age we live in, stupidity is either a crime or something worse.
Let us look first at the stronger sex. I am very sure that the question nearest and
most difficult to the hearts and minds of parents is—" What shall we do with our stupid
boys?" In days when the march of intellect is rapid as the rush of the race-horse, when
Admirable Crich tons jostle each other in every public school, when lads crammed with
every species of erudition are considered barely learned enough to put stamps upon
envelopes, when boys in tunics write essays on the development of species, and misses in
pinafores discuss questions of political economy, when all the powers of genius and all
the weight of learning barely suffice to obtain success—what, I say, is to become of "our
stupid boys ?" The army and navy, once their refuge, are barred to them now ; we
shall see if cramming and training can supply the place of the many stout hearts and
strong hands they have shut out. Not a single profession is open to the stupid boy .
scarcely even a trade, unless he is backed by capital. But the question, "what is to
be done with him ?" is altogether too deep for me to answer ; 1 leave it to the con¬
sideration of his gifted brethren, and pass on to his treatment by the world at large,
pending the decision of his fate.
THE ATTEMPT.
259
Take the case of a stupid boy who, more fortunate than many, is not obliged
to earn his own living;   why should the poor creature  be  the scoflF and  scorn
of his more intellectual acquaintance 1     He may be truthful and honest,  frank
in  manner and  fearless in disposition,  genial,   kindly,  and affectionate,  open of
heart and hand;   but all those qualities put  together will  not now-a-days save
him from ridicule.   We are told contemptuously that " he will never set the Thames
on fire," as if the conflagration wei-e to be the saving of the State ; and that " he will
do for a country gentleman," as if that were a position without responsibility or care.
His sharp Oxford brother " trots him out" before a party of college friends,  and
remarks that John is better acquainted with partridges than with Plato, with horses
than with Homer : forgetting that John's hunter has been at his service the whole
vacation, and that when they came in that afternoon with fifteen and a half brace of
partridges, John carefully concealed the fact that the fifteen brace had fallen to his
own gun, and the remaining bird to his clever brother's.    His intellectual sister
sneei-s at the legislation which gives John a vote and denies it to her, and bewails
her fate in living with a brother whose reading is limited to novels and newspapers;
ignoring the fact, that it is from him she has acquired the knowledge of country
matters which enables her to show to such advantage beside her town-bred friends
and unmindful that the day is never too wet or too windy for John to ride over to
town for her magazines and library books.    His father and mother, though they are
more lenient towards his deficiencies, still cannot conceal a sense of failure and dis¬
appointment when they see him sitting silent among a company engaged in learned
discussion,   or  standing in  an attitude   of dejection and timidity at one   of his
sister's intellectual "evenings," where the feast of reason and the flow of soul
wear in his eyes a very Barmecidal aspect.    His father cannot resist a joke at his
expense; his mother cannot restrain a sigh at his occasional blunders; and he is
tolerably certain  to marry a strong-minded and  superior person, who wUl take
possession of him with great good nature and perfect coolness, and manage him
and his affairs to the complete satisfaction of his friends, and the admiration of the
world at large.
O you intellectual, philosophical, logical, passionless worshippers of human reason!
will nothing show you that there are higher qualities in man than any intellectual gifts ?
that no philosophy can make up for the want of kindliness and forbearance, and that,
though a man's brains may be those of a sage and a philosopher, his heart may be hard
and cold. Will nothing convince you of all this t Nothing, I fear, now-a-days, except
experience; and a hiUer experience it often is, to find, in your hour of need, the
260 THE ATTEMPT.
man whose brilliant intellect you had envied, whose eloquent sayings had been your
guiding principles, whose reason you had looked upon as all but infallible, to find
him measuring out with icy, passionless, faultless logic, the exact amount of assistance
he may rightly and safely extend to you ; while the humble, unintellectual friend
whom you had regarded with pity, indiiference, or contempt, comes with all the
wealth of his large heart and warm feeling, and gives himself up to your service. I
would be loth indeed to say or to insinuate that high intellectual gifts are always,
or often, unaccompanied by the nobler qualities which render friendship precious.
How many bright examples to the contrary rise before me as I write ! But what I
would most earnestly deprecate is the feeling, gradually growing stronger in this
high-pressure and utilitarian age, the feeling of contempt for the man whose abilities
are poor, no matter what his qualities may be ; the constant exaltation of head over
heart; the preference, the subservience, the worship accorded to men of high intellect,
even when that is their only claim to our respect; and the scornful pity too often
extended to men who, in all points save that of mental power, are as high above
those who scorn them as the stars are above the earth.
But I am becoming much more serious than I ever intended to be. Let us look at
the thing in another aspect, and see how tlie high culture of the age affects " the stupid
gii'l," or rather, as we generally hear her called on platforms and in pamphlets, " the
silly girl." Poor thing, what a life she does lead now-a-days ! Born with capacities
which, twenty or thirty years ago, would have been considered perfectly satisfactory,
she has worked her way respectably, if not brilliantly, through her school-room days,
won the good-will of her governesses, and finds herself at last at what she has been
looking forward to as the goal of her labours, her eighteenth birthday. How joyfully
she takes leave of books, and slates, and dictionaries, and version-books, and cold, ugly
class-rooms, and uncomfortable school-room chairs; how she revels in the bright
prospect opening before her of liberty, and amusement, and enjoyment, after the
routine and hard work of school-room life. How delightful to think that now she
may read, or write, or sew, or practise when and where she pleases; that her
evenings may be spent in the family circle, and not in the study racking her
brains over next day's lessons; that she will have time now to help Papa
with his letters, and Mamma with her housekeeping and shopping, and go with her
brothers to the promenades and the exhibition, and dress her little sisters' dolls in
every new fashion that appears. Visions of balls and parties, pic-nics and archery
meetings, visits to Uncle James in London, and to Aunt Mary in the country, float
through her mind; and she falls asleep on her birth-day night planning her dress
THE   ATTEMPT. 261
and Mamma's for the Club ball that Papa has promised to take them to, and wonder¬
ing if it isn't too good to be true.
And so it is, poor " silly girl !" You are born a quarter of a century
too late; the pleasures that sufficed your mother and grandmother are now
called frivolous and absurd, if not downright sinful; the ti'aining that made
them beloved wives and honoured mothers is denounced as "vicious," "degrad¬
ing," and " unfit for reasonable beings;" a different style is to be tried with
you. You will be set to study logic and philosophy and mathematics,—no matter
whether you understand them or not, no matter that they fill you with weariness
and detestation—you will be forced to listen to lectures utterly beyond your compre¬
hension, and study pamphlets till your head aches in trying to discover their drift.
Think no more of the balls and assemblies you had promised yourself; if you name
such things to your fellow-students, they will turn on you a stony stare of horror, a
smile of cool contempt, or possibly a severe reproof. Your brothers will pursue their
amusements alone, or with friends more at leisure than yourself; your father and
mother must get throiigh their work by themselves, and not interfere with your
mental development; little Mary and Bessie must throw away their dolls, and get
rid of their childhood as fast as possible. Your kind old friends, your mother's
friends perhaps, must be neglected now, for " calls are a mere waste of time;" and
let your mother do your plain sewing, a high authority has pronounced sewing a
badge of woman's degradation. As to your dress, what does it matter what you
wear? the more ungraceful, inartistic, and odd, the better it will please your
intellectual companions. Don't be afraid to express your opinion on any
subject, no matter how new to you ; you will soon learn to contradict an M.D.
upon a question of medical treatment, a lawyer upon a point of law, and the
Moderator of the General Assembly upon a question of theology, for, of all the
sciences, theology is now-a-days the easiest to acquire, the great point, the only
thing absolutely necessary, is to beware of orthodoxy ; let your views be heretical, and
they are sure to be popular.
Alas, poor silly girl, with your simple dreams of life's duties and pleasures, how
much you have to learn and to unlearn ! how many a bitter lesson is before you !
Hardest of all, perhaps—most difficult of belief, most bitter if belief is learned—
is the lesson which will be set before you early in your new course of study,—the
lesson that men are not, as you have believed, and have been so happy in believing,
yoiir guides, protectors, defenders against the world; but your rivals, your natural
enemies, your tyrants and oppressors.    You will be taught to view with suspicion,
262 THE ATTEMPT.
to oppose with sullen obstinacy or pert self-sufficiency every authoritative word and
desire of your once honoured father; you will be encouraged to cast off with pride
and petulance the once light and easy yoke of sisterly service ; and worst,  and
hardest, and bitterest of all, should you marry, you will be told that your husband
is not, as your mother has taught you, the man whose will is to be your law, whose
judgment is to be your guide, whose people are to be your people, and whose God
your God; but an individual on an equal footing -with yourself, whose opinions you
must test, whose will you must combat if it is opposed to yours, and who must never
venture to remind  you that the law of God and man has given him power and
authority over you.    Alas, poor silly girl ! who had fondly hoped for the shelter
and protection which were not thought a degradation when offered by the strong to
the weak.
O loud-tongued, learned, logical ladies,  advocates of women's rights! great is
your eloquence, weighty are your arguments, many are your disciples,—as you are
great, we implore you to be merciful; go your way with clamour and triumph, let us
go ours in peace and quiet; spare us a few specimens of the " silly girl," whose faith is
stronger than her reason, whose affections are more developed than her abilities ;
whose eyes sparkle at the prospect of a ball, and who is not ashamed of longing for
a new bonnet; who goes into paroxysms of admiration at the sight of a baby, and cries
her eyes out over her favourite novel; who will carry water in a sieve, " if papa
wishes it," and believes black is white "because my husband tells me so." Do not
exterminate from the face of the earth this creature, so loveable in the eyes of many,
so harmless in the eyes of all; spare us her, and we will overlook a large portion of
the trouble and annoyance you inflict upon the rest of the world.
Dido.
Wkitten after seeing Sir J. Xoel Paton's Picture of " Faith and Reason."
Blest be the art divine Soaring above the mists
That with such matchless grace That gather o'er life's way,
Pourtrayed Faith's mighty power She keeps her garments white,
In that sweet childlike face. Unspotted by earth's clay.
THE ATTEMPT.
263
She sees within the vail,
Her face reflects the light,
The love, the purity and joy
That dawn upon her sight.
In adoration rapt,
She clasps those pure white hands,
What Reason battles to attain,
At once she understands.
Unconscious of her strength,
She feels not Reason's touch,
Nor that she is his guide,
To him she loves so much ;
Knows not she is the link
'Tween Reason and his Lord :
" Oh, woman ! be it unto thee.
According to thy word."
No ! Reason's sword alone
Cannot divine God's way,
Unless he lays his hand
On Faith, who will him stay.
And journeying thus, at length,
Faith lighting up life's road.
Death's   river  crossed,   they  see   in
The Apocalypse of God.     [heaven
OUR    LIBRARY   TABLE.
A Memoir of Jane Austen. By her Nephew, J. E. Austen Leigh. To which is
added. Lady Susan, and Fragments of Two other Unfinished Tales. By Miss
Austen.    London : Bentley.
A MEMOIR of such an authoress as Miss Austen calls for a more detailed notice than
we can here offer, but a volume which gives us various particulars of a writer
whose every sentence contains some thought, some delicate touch, or some playful
allusion, cannot be left longer unnoticed. The memoirs, though slight, are pleasantly
written, and will be prized by the many lovers of Miss Austen. There may be two
sides to the question as to whether it is wise to bring to light MSS. which, during
the life of a writer, have been kept from the public ; but it scarcely becomes us,
who have thus the privilege of hearing the old familiar voice again ringing in our
ears, to find fault with those who have decided that they do no violence to the
memory of her whom they hold so dear, by laying before the public those hitherto
unpublished fragments. Lady Susan is interesting, only as a specimen of the
early writing of her who, in later life, was to become one of the most finished of
264 THE   ATTEMPT.
novel writers; but it is far inferior to The Watsons, a fragment consisting of a
few chapters of a tale which was never completed. There is the true Miss Austen
humour in these few chapters, such as we despair of finding in the writings of any
of the novelists of the present day.
Sensation Novels Condensed.    By Bret Harte.    London : J.  C. Hotten.
Burlesque literature, whatever may be our own opinion of its merits, certainly
takes for the time being as strong a hold as any upon the mind. The little
volume before us will not, we think, detract from the fame of its species. As
the preface mentions, the author is of American fame, and little known in this
country; but since more than half of his parodies find their originals in sensation
novels by British authors, he is well entitled to claim readers in the old world.
Though this son of America has not hesitated mercilessly to turn some of our
favourites into ridicule, let us be magnanimous and acknowledge that the amuse¬
ment wo derive from these condensations is amply sufficient to compensate for our
wounded feelings.
There must be few, if any, persons in this novel-reading age, unacquainted
with at least some of the authors whose characteristics are here so cleverly touched
off; the wonderful coincidences of Miss Braddon—the naive self-control of Jane
Eyre — Dickens' practical lessons in benevolence — the anomalous combination
of savagery and gentleness in Guy Livingstone—the politesse and premature
sentimentality of the demoiselle of some French authors, are only to be mentioned
as specimens of the variety of the caricatures of Bret Harte. Let our readers who
like a laugh withsome foundation, speedily make his acquaintance.
THE   ATTEMPT. 265
0 s p i 1 a I Cfj i 1 b r ij n.
Child-nature is delightful to study anywhere ; in village schools and country lanes,
where the little faces are rosy, shy, and guileless ; in town schools and dirty alleys,
where they are paler and more wide-awake, yet often not less sweet; in elegant
drawing-rooms, where our small friends are usually on their best behaviour; in
nurseries and gardens, where they graciously unbend ; and in hospitals also, where
you see them lying in weariness and pain, like poor caged and wounded birds. A
short time ago, my sister and I paid weekly visits to the boys' ward of the London
Ormond Street Children's Hospital, and we soon learned to love that room as I think
we had never loved any other. It contains thirty beds, and there was seldom an
empty one to be seen. Of course there were constant changes, but several children
remained long enough to be made intimate friends of, and to some of them we became
much attached.
Perhaps our greatest favourite was a boy, whom we always spoke of to each
other as " the weary one," because his every look, movement, and attitude gave you
an idea of the most intense fatigue. "We always found him sitting up in bed, but
stooping forward, and leaning slightly to one side. He supported his head with one
wee worn hand, and feebly turned over his playthings with the other. One cheek
was usually a deathly white, and the other a deep pink. He was a very pretty little
fellow,—the brightness and intelligence of his eyes, the patient sadness of his tiny
mouth, and the refinement of his expression attracted you at once. But loveable as
he looked, it was by no means easy to make friends with him. It was strange to
feel that this child of six or seven could keep one just as much at a distance as if he
were a reserved man of forty. I felt almost afraid to speak to him at fir-st. His
silence and steady look seemed to say,—" I don't require your friendship and sym¬
pathy, and you need'nt offer them to me." I believe my sister made the first inroad
into the well-kept citadel of his little heart, and I followed througli the breach she
made. But our progress was slow. We were grateful for the faintest smile, and a
little laugh we accounted a great victory. After a time, however, he began to ask
to look at our picture-books, and at last he talked freely about the " bunnies " at
home, and upon other subjects which interested him.
Having been in the hospital for many months, he understood all that went on,
and seemed to be looked up to as a great authority by the other children in the ward.
L
December 1871.
266 THE   ATTEMPT.
When the touching cry of " Mammy, mammy !" was heard, he would remark,
" That boy's new, he's calling for his mother." And once when I was trying in vain
to soothe a little fractious sufferer, he said, " Play the organ, that'll stop him, it plays
' Cheer, boys cheer,'"—a not unsuitable air for the boy's ward of a hospital, I
thought. Those cries for, and appeals to absent mothers were sad to hear. One little
fellow, after having his lungs examined, said to the doctor—" I'll tell my mother
you've been a squeezing o' me." But to return to " the weary one," courage he pos¬
sessed as well as great intelligence. " We hears wicked men in the street some¬
times," he said to me one day, " and Charley's afraid they'll come through the
window when it's dark, but / know they can't, and if one did, I'd get a big stick and
beat him off," added the little man, valiantly, but looking as if he could scarcely
wield a rush.
Sometimes a sudden pain extorted from him a pitiful little cry, and a few tears,
but he would soon draw a diminutive handkerchief from under his pillow and dry
his eyes, and then the usual quiet look of suffering settled down on his face again.
Yet we occasionally saw him overcome by what might be thought a very trifling
disappointment. " A little fretful," you say 1 Well, it may have been so, but if you,
my good-tempered reader, had a hole in your chest, and another in your side, it is
possible that you might become somewhat nervous and irritable. To me, the " weary
one's " patience appeared something quite heroic, and one of the nurses told my sister
that in all her experience she had never met with so brave a bearer of pain.
What a strange affinity there seems to be between some children and the bu'ds
and flowers. Our darling little friend loved everything bright and beautiful, but of
all liviiio- creatures, I believe the " robin red-breast " was his favourite, and when
he talked of blue-bells and daisies, his eyes grew wonderfully brilliant. One sunny
day in February he greeted me with the laconic remark—" Summer's come ! " It
was little use telling him that spring had scarcely yet begun. He could not bear to
be contradicted. " Yes, 'tis summer," he repeated, " 'cos the sun shines so. It always
shines in summer time."
Dear, pretty little " weary one !" Perhaps your best dreams of sweet flowers,
singing birds, and bright sunshine may be realised ere-long. How could I be sorry
to hear you were resting at last !
The " Charley," who has been accidentally mentioned, was a rather handsome
boy, much bigger and older than " the weary one." There seemed to be a little of
the street Arab nature in him. " I say, can you turn 'ead over 'eels 1" he suddenly
asked my sister one day.    No, she could not say with truth that this ivas ou'^ ^^ her
THE   ATTEMPT. 267
accomplishments. Oh, "I b'lieve you could if you was to try—it's very easy. / could, if
my leg was'nt so bad."    And we were sure he was right about himself at least.
On entering the ward, we often heard a merry mocking laugh, musical as a scale on
bells. It proceeded from a bed wherein kicked about, rather than reposed, another great
favourite of ours, whom we knew as Ambrose. This uncommon name immediately
brings the ancient father to one's mind, but certainly not the smallest portion of that
great man's gi-avity could we ever discover in our young friend. It was perfectly impos¬
sible to look at him with a serious face. Such mischievous brown eyes he had ! Such a
wilful, unresting, droll little mouth. He was almost young enough to be talked to in
baby language, so that the horses, dogs, and trains in our picture-books became " gee-
gees," " bow-wows," and " puif-puffs," when we showed them to him. He said " me ''
for " I" when a little excited and off his guard. This is a specimen of his remarks,
which were poured forth with great rapidity if he happened to be in a chattering
mood—" Do zoo go church 1 Me go church and school when me well. Me sing,"
then off flew his thoughts to the old nursery rhyme, and he added—" And de black¬
birds, de great big black-birds sing in de pie." His favourite book among those we
brought was " Mother Hubbard." I know why. He had a strong fellow-feeling
for that remarkable dog which gave the poor old woman such a world of trouble.
" Shaving the cat ! " With what trembling delight would Ambrose have watched
the operation ! There was a monkey-like quickness in his movements, and you had
the same feeling of uncertainty about what he was going to do next that you have
with a monkey. He made a sudden dash at an ornament upon my bonnet one day.
" Wbat are you doing 1" I demanded, with a backward start. " Wanted one o'
dem gapes " (grapes) " to eat," he replied, with much coolness.
Quietude so altered his face, that once on finding him asleep, I did not at first
recognise him, but lie soon opened his eyes, and the waking look of bewilderment
was followed by tli(> well-known smile of fun and mischief which belonged to no other
child in this ward. He could, however, cry as lustily as he could laugh merrily.
During our visit one afternoon he was having his poor diseased leg encased in some¬
thing thick and white,—plaster of Paris it looked like,—and loud and constant were
his lamentations. I thought there was as much impatience as pain in his cries, and
when the operation was over, I went to see how he fared. I found him with a tear-
stained face, ruefully contemplating the doctored limb, which looked as if it had just
come from a sculptor's studio. But the roguish smile returned the moment I looked
at him. " Ambrose," said I, " I've heard such a noise in the ward. Do you know
what it was 1 "   He gave me a quick understanding glance, but stopped all further
268 THE ATTEMPT.
inquiries by saying with a half-pout, " Want some water to dink."    He was always
friendly enough,
" But the baby heart receiveth
More than it bestows."
We loved Ambrose, and he liked our playthings and picture books, and enjoyed
having a little fun with us. The fact is, that young children, who are brought up
with fondness, take it for granted that there is an unlimited supply of affection in
the world for them, and therefore why should they be expected to receive gratefully
all that comes.
Ambrose is no longer in the hospital, but wherever he may be, I am convinced
that he is as fascinating, if as troublesome, as ever.
One day, in going as usual from bed to bed, I came upon a face which quite
startled me by its ghastly appearance. There was a strange wild stare in the eyes,
and the colourless cheeks seemed to have shrunk into nothing, which made the mouth
look large and unnaturally prominent. I fancied I heard the child speak, and asked
him if he wanted anything. His lips moved, but no sound came. " Surely he is
dying," I thought, and I went to enquire from one of the kind lady nurses (some of
them look more like angels of mercy than any women I ever met elsewhere), the
nature of his illness. " Starvation ! " was the unexpected reply. His father was a
respectable workman, who had had no employment for several months, and he, his
wife, and four children had been reduced to a dreadful state of destitution. Another
boy and a little girl had also been brought to the hospital, and the former had died.
" I think we shall not save this one," added the lady. It was not surprising that
the wasted face haunted me for many hours, and gave me most sorrowful thoughts.
If a stranger's heart swelled with a yearning pity at the sight, what must the mother
have felt as she looked at her famine-stricken children 1 Could she still believe that
there was love—love divine and human for her and for them ? And the father
longing for work, but unable to get it—what were his thoughts? I asked myself
Did a sense of wiong burn in his breast 1 Was he almost ready to commit some act
of desperation, or did he sink into a calm despair ? We may well wonder some¬
times at the grand patience of the suffering poor.
The following week I quite expected to hear of the boy's death, but to my sur¬
prise found him sitting up in bed and able to talk. Veiy touching was the story
he told me. His father had gone from place to place seeking work, and the mother
had sometimes tried to follow him with the children. Occasionally they had sought
woik-house shelter, but all had suffered from exposure to cold and want of food.
THE ATTEMPT. 269
" My little brother was took ill at last," said the boy, " and he came here, and I
came to see him before he died, and he was so bad he couldn't speak a word to me
and that made me fret worse than anything." His voice suddenly choked, and tears
sprang to his eyes at the remembrance of this last interview.
" Don't grieve, dear," I said, " your little brother won't be ill and hungry any
more."
" I know that, ma'am," he replied quietly.
His recovery was very rapid, and soon after he left the hospital. I heard,
with thankfulness, that his father had at length obtained some situation. May
want never more cross his threshold !
In quite another part of the ward lay, for a few weeks, a boy named Samuel,
who returned our first word of greeting with a smile which went straight to our
hearts. What a great pleasure it is to see one's own common-place smile thus
reflected, as it were, and made beautiful on the face of a little child. Sir Joshua
Reynolds' " Samuel " is undoubtedly a lovely boy; and there are cherubs in some of
Raphael's pictures, and in other old paintings which are tndy charming to behold ;
but this living hospital Samuel had a sweeter face than any one of them, to my
thinking.
" To see a child so very fair,
It is a pure delight."
One day, in looking .t a book together, we came upon a picture of a kneeling girl,
with angels looking down upon her, " Oh yes, ma'am," cried Samuel, smiling
radiantly as if he knew all about it, " angels comes near and listens to us when we
says our prayers." " Dear child," I thought, " an angel face could scarcely be brighter,
purer, and more lovely than is yours at this moment."
He always seemed busy and happy. You might have found him reading, or
knitting- a shawl for a little sister at home, or amusing the two or three convalescent
children who would gather at his bedside. And the pain from his bad leg was
always most patiently borne. I only saw him two or three times, but I trust it will
be long before his face fades from my memory. The coldest, hardest heart might
almost warm and soften at the mere thought of his smile.
Perhaps the little child whom our Saviour " set in the midst" of the disciples
to teach them love and humility had an expression like his. " Of such," we know,
" is the kingdom of Heaven." M. S. S.
270 THE ATTEMPT.
Another year is added to our life,
Another round of fleeting days and hours.
Another year of this world's weary strife,
Of autumn's leaves, remains of summer flowers ;
And leafless trees, where once in fairy bowers
We dreamt of joys to come ; and felt more blessed
In dreaming of the bliss that ne'er was ours.
Than if on fortune's lap, with smiles caressed,
We tasted joys, which once attained, had lost their zest.
Another year has travelled o'er our head.
Another round of sunshine, storm and rain.
Another year is numbered with the dead,-—
A year which brought us mingled joy and pain,—
And now that it can never come again ;
For it we mourn, as for some loving"one,
Who, leaving us on earth, to heaven is ta'en ;
To whom we did not all we should have done.
And whom we knew not that we loved till he was gone.
LlEBCHEN.
C Ij s   Mings   of  |frarws,
From   the   French  of   Emile  Souvestre.
(Concluded Jrom page 257).
The young workman's volume at last appeared, and its debut loudly announced,
was a sort of event in literature. Everybody wished to know the engraver's works.
The edition was exhausted in a few days, and a second was published. Francis,
introduced by his protector into the fashionable salons, had become the curiosity of
the day.    People asked  him to recite his verses; they enquired about the details
THE ATTEMPT. 271
of his old life; the fashionable ladies made a circle round him, and went into
ecs asies at every word. The young workman, intoxicated with joy and with pride,
let himself drift down this stream of triumjih. His time was spent in paying or
receiving visits, writing in albums, replying to the letters which were addressed to
him ; and the idle life which he had fancied so favourable to inspiration, left him
no leisure for it.
On the other hand, his expenses increased every day. Mingling in the
fashionable world, he had been forced to adojjt its extravagant customs. Glossy
boots, white gloves, carriages by the hour, ruined him; and he discovered, at the
end of three months, that there remained nothing of the sum paid him by the
bookseller. Justly alarmed, he wished to turn to the speediest way of renewing his
resources. He hastily wrote an article, and carried it to one of the reviews that
had recently solicited the aid of his pen, but after some days' waiting, the article
was returned as too light for the journal. He found a less important publication ;
there they thought the article too grave ; a third objected, that its arrangements
had been made for some time—in short, everywhere he met with some excuse
covering a refusal. Astonished, he ran to his protector's house ; but he, far from
sympathizing with his defeat, loudly rejoiced at it. Francis was not made to spend
his inspiration on these vulgar restaurants of the mind called journals; he owed
himself entirely to the high worship of art; God had marked him with the seal of
poetry; his muse could not without a crime descend to the character of a house¬
keeper,—what it demanded was the tripod of the pythoness, and the fiery car of
Elijah. Here the academician, who had finished his chocolate, stopped, to go out in
his carriage, and the young workman returned to his house more bewildered than
satisfied. He wished, however, to shake from him his sadness, and recall his
inspiration; but his spirit, greived by anxiety, could not abstract itself,—the
remembrance of the truth arrested every idea. His first verses, besides, had
blossomed after the manner of the flowers of the field, freely and without efibrt; he
knew not how to control his restive imagination, to spur it when jaded, to animate
it in spite of itself, or to change its wandering thoughts into serious work. He
resembled the amateur who, after having cultivated a garden-plot at his leisure,
because his taste told him to do so, found himself all at once a gardener by trade,
forced to do continuously, and for his livelihood, what he had at first done occasionally
and only for his pleasure. He had the taste for poetry, but he did not know the
trade of the poet, he was forced to learn it in the midst of anxieties for the present,
and of fears for the future.    Francis renounced the dissipations that had hitherto
272 THE  ATTEMPT.
devoured his time. He shut himself up in his house, and appealed to all the
energies of his intelligence. He succeeded in finishing a new poem, and hurried
with it to his publisher. The printing was hastened, because of the impatience of
the young man, and at the end of a month his second volume was published. He
expected to find the plaudits renewed which had welcomed his first work, but the
kind of retirement to which he had condemned himself durinsr three months had
made him forgotten. The attention of the fashionable world was now concentrated
on a young traveller who had just arrived from Timbuctoo, and was very willing
to show himself in some drawing-rooms in African costume. Thus, when Francis
re-appeared in the circles where he had formerly been the admired one, they received
him with that abstracted kindliness which is the most cruel indifference. The novelty
of the poet-engraver was exhausted ; everybody knew him, and he found himself
banished, in his turn, to the firmament of the fading stars which had, like himself,
successively shone above the horizon of fashion. His most ardent admirers contented
themselves with shaking hands with him, and asking if he was still working; a
customary question of those lazy beings who fancy they are proving their interest in
your latest works, while showing that they did not even know of their existence.
Francis was thunderstruck with the change. He could have braved envy, or
sustained a struggle, but he was not prepared for such unforeseen oblivion. The
complaints of his publishers increased his surprise. Nobody was speaking of the
new volume, and all the copies remained at the bookbinders. Threatened with
ruin, it was necessary for him to make an effort to attract the attention of the
public. The young workman did violence to his pride, and made up his mind to
solicit it himself. But in as much as he had found indulgence for his debut,
he found difficulties for his new work. The critics, whose approbation he had taken
by surprise, had had time to bethink themselves and regain their bad humour. The
poets, who had at first welcomed the debutant as a stranger to whom they paid the
honours of the house, closed up their ranks when they saw him disposed to demand
a place among themselves; as to the indifferent, they knew his style, and having
nothing more to learn, they had turned to some newer curiosity.
Thus repulsed by a tacit league of every bad feeling of cruelty, jealousy, and
frivolity, Francis could obtain nothing. He had had his day and his triumph ;
all was ended for him.
When he expressed his sad surprise to his protector, he shrugged his
shoulders.
" It is the common rule," he said, sighing; " we live in a time of literary
THE  ATTEMPT. 273
ingratitude; the masterpiece of one day is forgotten the next; the public lends us
celebrity, it does not give it to us. It is necessary to maintain our place by con¬
tinual efforts and constant novelties. An artist's career is at present a succession of
incarnations, find out how you may re-appear under some new form, how you may
remould the physiognomy of your talent. Perfection itself would displease if it con¬
tinued always the same. Nevertheless the resources of art are infinite. Do not lose
courage. There is a Latin proveI'b which says, that "fortune favours the brave."
Francis wished for nothing better than to prove the truth of this proverb. It
remained only to divine the kind of bravery to which he might have recourse. Our
unfortunate poet, however, tried every kind of boldness without deriving profit from
any of them. His prose and his verse, carried by him from journal to journal, from
publisher to publisher, scarcely found a little corner granted as a favour at rare
intervals.
His muse fell gradually from poems to romances, and from romances to
Christmas stories. Meanwhile, time was passing, his resources diminished, wants
grew more pressing, at last debt came. Francis, who had been able hitherto to
walk with head erect, began that life of constraint, of anxiety, and of subterfuge, in
which dignity infallibly perishes along with peace. It was necessary to accustom
himself to avoid the creditor whom he could not satisfy, to support his reproaches
without anger, to invent deceitful promises. But Francis succeeded badly in these
shameful manoeuvres. He took his position much too seriously, he did not know
how to joke about it with the dunning creditor, and he always sent him away
more badly disposed than ever.
These painful trials had also imbittered his temper. He laid the blame on the
world, and shut himself up in a solitude, which ended in making the world forget
him. Displeased with the protector who had drawn him into a career, whose dangers
were only too well known to him, he had nearly ceased to visit him. Even the sight
of Stephen had become painful to him, for it recalled a past which he continued
to scorn in speech while in his heart he regretted it.
He felt now that his change had made him lose one position without acquiring
another. Sometimes even in those cruel hours in which the suffering was intense
enough to stifle the voice of pride, he avowed to himself the justice of his defeat,
recognised that, to occupy any rank in the literary world, studies were necessary
which he had not pursued; and reading for which he had not had leisure. Genius
alone would have been able to retain its place, when burdened by his disadvantages.
Ah ! he recognised at last that art also demands long years of apprenticeship.    Taste
December 1871.
274 THE   ATTEMPT.
may shorten them, but cannot stand instead of them. Unfortunately these reflections
came too late to remedy anything, and they increased the discouragement of the
young man. Each day, more incapable of workings and more pressed by creditors,
he reached at last the extremity a more skilful man would have been able to delay,
if not to prevent.
Awakened one morning by the bailiffs, who told him that a writ had been
issued for his arrest, he permitted them to lead him to prison. Although the blow
had been foreseen, it was terrible. Brought up in the severe principles of absolute
probity, Francis did not know the distinctions established in the world among the
different kinds of disgrace. The debtors' pi-ison seemed to him not less infamous
because it usually contained more elegant occupants. He had failed in his engage¬
ments, and consequently merited the chastisement which struck him down ; his ideas
reached no further. Unable to redeem what he regarded as his honour, he had some
thoughts of not surviving the humiliation. In a delirium of despair, which per¬
mitted no further reflection, he sat down to write a letter addressed to the celebrated
man who had snatched him from his humble condition, and opened to him the fatal
path which had just conducted him to prison; bitterly he reproached him for the
imprudence of his encouragement, revealed the extremity of the position into which
he had been dragged, and declared that since he had nothing more to hope from life,
he would demand from death liberty and repose.
At this moment, two hands laid on his shoulder stopped him. He turned,
trembling. Stephen was behind him. " What dost thou wish 1" cried Francis,
bewildered.
" To prove to thee that all hope is not lost in life."
" Who has said that to thee 1"
" I was there, I read over thy shoulder," said Stephen,
" Then what dost thou come here to do ? "
" To seek thee."
" Dost thou not know I am a prisoner ? "
" Thou art free ! " and Stephen gave his cousin the bills which had been pre¬
sented some hours before by the guardian of trade, and had just been receipted. The
young man at first refused to believe his own eyes. Stephen had to tell him how he
had learnt all at his lodging where he had gone to see him, some minutes after his
arrest, and how he had run to Bastour alley to look for all his savings, which had
fortunately been sufficient to settle with the bailiff". At this explanation, Francis
threw himself into his cousin's arms, and tried to stammer out his thanks, but Stephen
THE ATTEMPT.
275
leaving him no time, dragged him off half-running to the cab which he had brought,
and both found themselves soon with their grandmother Martha, who awaited them
with anxiety. The interview was full of joy and tears. Francis read in the eyes of
the old woman reproaches mingled with the tenderness she could not express, she
translated them to himself with a softened vehemence. He accused his pride,
reproached himself with the sacrifice that his deliverance had just cost them, deplored
his uselessness and folly. Stephen interrupted him, " We shall speak of all that
afterwards," said he, pleasantly. " To-day we ought to think only of the pleasure of
finding ourselves together again; grandmother would have killed her fatted calf for
thy return j  let us sit down to the table and speak only of the present."
Francis was obliged to yield, and to take his place by Martha's side. He
found the chair which used always to be kept for him, the glass given by his cousin
on which his monogram was engraved, the old knife which had belonged to his father,
and which he always liked to use; all, in short, had been preserved as if they had
reckoned upon a speedy return, and it seemed as if he had been absent but for a short
time.
Stephen added to this illusion by speaking to him, as had been his wont, of
his last commissions, and his last poems.    All went well on both sides, they began
to  repeat  the  songs  of the  young  workman  in  the   neighbouring work-rooms.
Stephen repeated new verses to Francis, who, letting himself glide on on this poetic
tide, regained inspiration enough from the past to repeat in his turn some  stanzas
nearly forgotten.    Martha contemplated this exchange of confidence with cheerful
and affectionate looks.    The hour of rest had arrived.     Francis found the closet he
had formerly occupied just as he had left it.    The bouquet of violets that he liked to see
uj^on his little deal-table was itself in its usual place.    The young workman felt
himself moved to the bottom of his heart; he contrasted the affectionate intimacy
of this industrious home, with the egotistical indifference of the world that he had
passed through,  and a thousand contrary projects chased each other through his
mind.
Stephen and Martha were scarcely more tranquil.   They awaited with anxiety
the resolution of Francis, without daring to anticipate it.    The lesson had been cruel,
would it be sufficient to enlighten him 1    At first, he might yield to necessity and
return to his former labour ? But would he not submit to this condition in the hope
that it would be temporary 1    There was the  question,  and upon this dejiended
whether he would be contented or unhappy.    Stephen, who had passed a part of
the night in these reflections, awakened later than usual.    Opening his  eyes,   he
276 THE ATTEMPT.
recognised by the day-light that he had forgotten himself, and leaped from his bed
with an exclamation of disappointment.
All at once, as he di-essed, an unexpected noise struck his ear. Astonished, he
stooped his head to listen. It was the grating of the gi'aver upon steel. Seized with
a sudden suspicion, he I'an to the door of the workroom, pushed it open rapidly, and
stopped with a cry. Francis was in his old place, and was finishing a j)iece com¬
menced the day before. He too had reflected, and his resolution was taken. He
put on once more the bloiise and the workman's apron. We need not tell the joy of
Stephen and of Martha. As to Francis, he held courageously to his new decision,
and when his cousin seemed to fear that he would weary himself with the hard work
he had again undertaken; he said to him, with a smile, " be easy, I know now that
all conditions have their trials, and that the best for every one is that condition for
which his education has piepared him. I have at last comprehended the fable of
Icarus, to raise one's-self, it is not sufficient to 7imke wings; it is necessary that
they should be born and should groiv with us." Lutea Reseda.
The wild dashing sea on the cold heedless rocks,
Is beating its passionate breast,
While the unchanging stars looking down through the rack,
Seem to mock at its wailing unrest.
The loud winds are tossing all over the sky,
The snow-laden clouds, in their pitiless might,
Do they think of the hearts that are trembling below,
- And the eyes that are watching for light ?
Lone, lone as my way throiigh the wide-sweeping storm,
Is my path over life's dreaiy height;
And dark as the soul when to hope it is dead,
Is the gloom that shuts Heaven from my sight!
Weary, oh weary, I sink to the earth,
And pray for the light in my restless despair,—
But through the black night comes no answering gleam,
And tlie storm's voice alone fills the air !
THE ATTEMPT. 277
But the faith in my heart sayeth, " Rest shall be thine,
Long though the night be, the morning shall shine,
Pure from the east shall its soft radiance stream.
Guiding thy steps with its Heaven-sent beam.
Till at the far goal shall thy wanderings cease.
And voices of angels shall whisper thee ' Peace,' "
Melensa.
The story of Persephone is one of the most beautiful of all the legends of the
Greek mythology. There is a picturesque beauty in its alternations of light and
shade, gladness and gloom ; and there is a touching human interest in the long
search of the sorrowful mother for her lost child, and their joyful meeting at last.
The legend tells how the beautiful maiden Persephone, daughter of the earth-
goddess Demeter, was wandering with her companions on a flowery plain, and all
were filling their laps with the blossoms which grew on every side, when Persephone
saw, far across the meadow, a nai-cissus flower with a hundred stems. She ran to
gather the bright fragrant blossom. Suddenly the earth shook and opened, and there
arose beside her, as she stretched out her hand to the flower, the dark chariot and
horses of the king of the lower world, and the gloomy Hades seized her in his arms,
and carried her away, to reign as his queen in the shades below.
Demeter, frantic with grief at the loss of her child, wandered over sea and land
in search of her, shrouding herself from head to foot in a dark mantle, so that none
might recognize her. At last she learned from Hekate, and from the all-seeing
Helios, the maiden's fate. Still she refused to be comforted till she might see her
child again, and all the earth felt her displeasure, for the seed would not grow, and
the corn would not ripen, while Demeter mourned for Persephone. At last Zeus,
moved with pity, sent Hermes to demand that Persephone should be sent back to his
mother; but though the command was obeyed, the king of the under-world would
not so easily part from his bride.
" He takes the cleft pomegranate seeds,
' Love, eat with me this parting day :'
Then bids them fetch the coal-black steeds—
' Demeter's daughter, would'st away ?'
The gates of Hades set her free ;
' She wUl return full soon.' saith he,
' My wife, my wife, Persephone.'"
278 THE   ATTEMPT.
The spell of the pomegranate seeds compels her to leave her mother and return
to the dark dominions of her husband, for four months in every year. " But even
with this condition, the joy of the meeting is scarcely lessened. A third part only
of the year she must be queen in Hades; through all the other months she is to be
once more the beautiful maiden, who sported on the plains of ISTysa. The wratli of
Demeter has departed with her grief, the air is filled with fragrance, and the corn
fields wave with the ripening grain."
This ancient myth, which has.been embalmed in the verse of Greek and Roman
poets, acquires a new beauty when we have found the key by means of which we
may decijiher its original meaning,—the meaning its words had for those who first
sjioke of the bright maiden imjnisoned in the dark under-world, and the mournful
mother shrouded in her dark veil, grieving for her lost child.
The modern science of comparative mythology, based on the study of those
ancient sacred writings of India, in which are found the earliest forms of all the
myths of the western world, and on the application to this study of modern dis¬
coveries in philology, has shed a flood of new light on the old mythological legends,
showing that they have all arisen from the jioetical and metaphorical language used
by the first ancestors of our race in speaking of natural phenomena. For us, the
experience of many generations and the discoveries of science have removed much
of the mystery, which, for them, surrounded the works of nature. To them the sun
and the sky, the clouds and the wind, the earth and the spring time, were all strange
mysterious beings, possessed, for aught they knew, of life and personal will like them¬
selves, having, as they themselves had, their joys and sorrows, their labour and rest,
their struggle and victory.
So those who first told the tale which afterwards grew into the myth of
Demeter and Persejihone, when they spoke of the blooming maiden with her lap
full of flowers, were thinking of the spring and summer time—the whole bright and
pleasant time of the year, which, at the end of the year—becomes subject to the
gloomy winter-power, and disappears altogether from the eyes of men. And in
Demeter we have, as the name implies, the mother-earth when the summer is gone
and the green leaves have fallen from the trees, and under her dark winter covering
and her aspect of gloom you could hardly recognize her for the same earth that
seemed so full of gladness in the bright summer days. The seed cannot sprout, and
the gi'ass cannot grow until the spring returns, but when she comes back, all nature
wakes to life, and the mother-earth is glad once more. But " it is not always May,"
the earth cannot keep the summer with her long.    Every year the "great tragedy
THE   ATTEMPT.
279
of nature" must be repeated, the summer must vanish and lie hidden till the
appointed time has passed, when she returns again to wake the mourning earth to fresh
life and joy.
The main idea of this myth—the death and resurrection of the summer—has
been worked out in a great number of various forms, and with many different details.
It is found among the modern Hindoo legends, and the Norse and German fairy tales,
for the fairy stories of our nurseries are only the latest form of the old mythological
legends.    The most popular modern form of the myth, is the German story of lovely
Briar-rose   (Dornroschen)   better   known  in England as the   Sleeping  Beauty,—
t!ie king's daughter who pricks her finger with a spindle, and suddenly falls, with all
the inhabitants of her father's palace, into an enchanted sleep, from which she can
only be awakened by the coming of the fairy prince who wins her for his bride.
There is a difference between the northern and the southern forms of the myth in
some of their details, corresponding with the difference of the climates in which the
metaphors were first used which afterwards crystallized into the different legends.
When the summer-maiden vanishes from the shores of the Mediterranean, her dis¬
appearance is connected with the stupifying narcissus  (so called from its narcotic
properties); and the image of such narcotic sleep well expresses the dreamy languor
of the " bright, yet sad autumn days " of those southern climates.   But the northern
Briar-rose dies suddenly by a sharp stab—the stab of the fierce frost of the northern
winter, which kills the summer at one blow.
(It may be objected that the interpretation here put upon the narcissus is too
fanciful, especially as Persephone did not fall asleep, but was carried away. It must
always be remembered, however, that these myths have grown out of a great mass
of metaphors applied to the same object, and were not worked out into consistent
stories until the first meaning had faded out of them, and they were recognised as
metaphors no longer; so that the same natural phenomenon may be symbolized two or
three times over in the same story, or in two or three separate and apparently
totally unconnected stories.)
There is one point brought out very strongly in the northern myth, which is
hardly, if at all, touched on in the southern one,—the power of the sun to wake the
spring to life, symbolized by the coming of the fairy prince, who surmounts all the
barriers which had prevented the entrance of those who had gone before him, for,
in front of those bariiers all his predecessors had failed and died. These predecessors
are the weak suns of the short days of winter and early spring, which cannot break
the icy chains by which the frost keeps the earth fast bound in a death-like sleep.
280 THE ATTEMPT.
But when the destined prince comes at last, his kiss wakes the maiden from her
magic slumber, and all the inhabitants of the palace wake along with her, and at
once resume all the occupations in which they were engaged when sleep suddenly
came upon them. This gives a vivid picture of the coming of the spring in the far
north, when the sun wakes the frost-bound earth from her winter sleep, and sud¬
denly the whole face of nature is changed; and within a few days, the frost and the
snow vanish, and where there was only cold and desolation, there is now life, and
warmth, and brightness.
In one of the latest and most poetical versions of the story, Tennyson's poem of
the " Sleeping Beauty," one could almost fancy the writer had the oldest meaning
of the myth in his mind when he describes the sun-prince.—
" He travels far from other skies,
His mantle glitters on the rocks ;
A fairy prince with joyful eyes,
And lighter footed than the fox."
And again, where he speaks of the westward home-journey of the prince, after he has
wooed and won his bride,—
" Across the hills, and far away
Beyond their utmost purple rim,
And deep into the dying day."
But the happy maiden is never again parted from her j^i'ince; for, in the hands of
the poet, the old myth has grown into a love-story, and has gained fresh beauty in-
doing so.
In one point, the Greek myth is more complete than the northern one. In
the legend of the Sleeping Beauty, we have only the story of one year,—the summer
falling asleep in autumn, lying fast-bound under the magic spell in winter, and
waking again in the spring. (We cannot help some seeming confusion in putting
these myths into modern words, because of our applying the names, spring, summer,
&c., to different times of the year, instead of imagining one bright being living on
the earth, or hidden beneath it, as the months went round.)
In the Gi'eek myth, on the other hand, we are made to look on into the future,
beyond the happy moment when the long lost spring returns to the mourning earth,
and to read the inevitable decree of fate by which every year, for an appointed time,
the summer must vanish, and the earth lie dark and dead; so that the gladness of
summer is tempered by the thought of the inevitable wintei-, while, on the other
hand, the gloom of winter is lightened by the certain hope of the return of spring.
THE  ATTEMPT. 281
In studying this  old   Greek story of death and  resurrection, one cannot help
being reminded of the image used more than once in the New Testament, of the corn
which must fall into the ground and die before it can rise to new and fuller life; and
of the thoughts which the hymn writers of the early Church drew from the coincidence
between spring-time and Easter.    But to treat of the symbolism of nature in its
highest sense, would be to enter on a new and very wide subject.
Grace.
fittU   loHs.
What is the use of second-rate poets 1 we hear contemptuously asked. Have we not
enough poetry and to spare of the highest order ? Why waste time and taste over
what is inferior 1 But they have their place, and something can be said on their
behalf. First, let it be observed that they can't help writing, they " do but sing
because they must," for in many minds thought finds an almost necessary out-let in
poetry. Let the thought be genuine, and the expression faithful and unaffected, and
it has its value. For no two people see exactly alike, no two histories are the same,
and a different beauty scintillates through every existence • let those who perceive
beauty sing it with what voice they have ; nor need we silence the linnet because it
is not the nightingale. Some of the lovliest gems of poetry we owe to the short,
it may be, and unsustained, but nevertheless true, inspiration of minor poets.
Again, while the great poet of any age is often the great instructor also, and in
advance of his generation, the smaller men who catch fire from him diffuse his ideas,
popularize his thoughts, and bring the beauty that he has first revealed in simpler
form home to the hearts of the community. Those who are capable of thoroughly
appreciating and delighting in great poets, are almost invariably poets in some degree
themselves ; and they ought to train others less gifted to a genuine admiration of
what is greatest in art, by creating a sort of literary atmosphere of good taste and
high feeling. For instance, well-written verses for children, hymns of real literary
merit, graceful snatches of poetry for magazines, are useful in the same way as
spirited artistic popular engravings, needing no great power or study to enjoy
them, but always leading upwards to a true ideal.
These, I venture to say, are some of the uses of minor poets.    Let us glance at the
other side of the question, and I think we shall find that, if they are taken out of
December 1871.
282 THE ATTEMPT.
their place and jDuffed off as first-rate artists, and if, further, they lend themselves to
the assumption, they become worse than useless. Have we not read them, quaint,
affected, trying above all things to astonish and catch the attention their resources
are too weak to arrest by noble means ? Then let the public be told, that because
less restrained in choice of subjects and expression than greater men, they are more
wide and earnest; because more turbid and obscure, they are deeper and grander,
and they become the very plagues of literature. Here, for instance, is a short
. extract from a long review of D. G. Rossetti's poems in a book called Our Livmg Poets.
Of a ballad called " Sister Helen," the critic writes :—" I know of no such intensity
in any ballad—nor does any other composition of the class arrive at the same
dazzling height of finish, or superlative manipulation of burden. No one verse is
less thoughtful than the weightiest, none less comely than the fairest; not one line
can be dispensed with, and not one word rings a tone higher or lower than the tone
of flawless things rung on the counter of the whole soul's judgment. It is the poem
in which Rossetti has placed himself most unmistakably beyond the reach of detrac¬
tion—the achievement I would call to witness—of splendour, of great poetry,"—and
so on, for many pages. If we turn eagerly to this masterpiece, we read a story, told
in hysterical, jerky lines, of an impossible crime, utterly ignoble in sentiment, and
with some weighty words lugged into a meaningless chorus :—
1.
^ " Why did you melt your waxen man,
Sister Helen,
To-day is the third since you began,
The time was long, yet the time ran,
Little brother."
Chorus.—" O mother, Mary mother,
Three days to-day, between hell and heaven."
4.
" O the waxen knave was plump to-day,
Sister Helen,
How like dead folk he has dropped away,
Nay, now, of the dead ? What can you say,
Little brother."
Repeat cJiorus.
So on for thirty-four verses, not one, in good truth, a "tone higher" than the trash quoted,
which less excites one's indignation than the laudation on it which, I hope, astonished
THE  ATTEMPT. 283
the author. For, especially in his translations, he has shown some fine poetic feeling,
though the ideas, which are generally unwholesome and exceptional, are not well
carried out; a sense of incompleteness pervades all, together with an affectation
of quaintness that becomes very wearisome. Alas, that he is, as our critic assures us,
the head of a school! I think any of us who chose might belong to that school;
their verses cannot be very difficult to write, the recipe seems simple. Take a
quaint figure in an odd attitude, colour strongly in the pre-Eaphaelite style, and
drag in by the head and shoulders,—something that at first sight looks like philo¬
sophy ; finally, reverse the motto in " Alice," take care of the sounds, and let the
sense take care of itself, and you have this sort of result:—
Selina swung upon the gate,
One rose celestial foot was whirled
Aloft in circles radiate ;
And ruddier than the tiles above,
Ripe radish gleamed her meteor hair,
The while she swung in dreamy state
There, but not there, where ?    Anywhere.
Swung slowly to the goal, and thence
Back to the Quiet, issuant
From nescience, through Becoming, whence
All Being paces degradant;
Oh mystery of getting on,
And getting nowhere, competence
To shadow thee, we find upon
The grim grey shuddering garden fence.
Let US try another strain, and as the same critic praises, as " perfect in their
way " the rhymes of another poet which run thus :—
" I, while the shop-girl fitted on
The sand-shoes, looked, where down the bay
The sea glowed with a shrouded sun,—
I'm ready FeUx; will you pay," etc, etc.
Let us boldly take up the strain, and go on till our friends implore ua to stop,
very much in the style of this bard who, we are informed, " marks an epoch iu the
history of poetry."
284 THE  ATTEMPT.
She bade me fetch the odd galosh
That lay beneath the old hat peg ;
The roads were in a state of slosh,
The sky was like a robin's egg-
Pearl grey, with russet spots atween;
She laughed, and then the sunshine broke,
The old umbrella's dome of green
Seemed overhead a gentle joke.
O love, the sun is dear to me,
Because it shines, or not, on you;
O love, the black galosh I see
Transfigured to a tender hue;
No darkness lingers round thee, dear,
A radiance gilds thy very shoe.
Ah ! spare it me, behold it here.
Safe nestled in my grey surtout ! etc., etc.
Then my reviewer, who is coldly critical to Tennyson, goes into raptures over Swin-
bourn, giving admired extracts, judging from which, he seems to possess considerable
powers of expression, but very few ideas, and these bad ones. The critic is more
moderate in his praise of Arnold and Morris, who have both something to tell, and
tell it beautifully; and, indeed, though they may not belong to the highest aristocracy
of poetry, yet they should not be discussed under the heading " Little Poets."
Still, after enjoying verses not quite of the first order, how refreshing it is to
turn to a master-work, where not talent alone, but genius, enthralls us at once.
We stand entranced before it as before a great Alpine landscape,—powerless to
criticise or to define the charm, but aware of splendour, clearness, sweetness, and
strength. In general, there is but one first-rate poet in a generation ; we are indeed
fortunate to have two living; that to our times belong the rich vein of thought
which redeems the roughness of Browning, and the quiet force, the faultless style
and exquisite grace of Tennyson. E. J.  O.
THE END.
J'^ri^/^'i*®
>^,"«.
^^,««^ig«w«'Sii
v^'
l^,S1'^^'^S;i^*^*^^«=^Sl.S1S1«^,r ,1' A' ,(• ,1' ,!• ,!• ,1' ,!•  ,!'  ,V^,tz,t?
SlSlEil5l5l5lS15l51Sl51Sl5il50SlSlSl5lSiaiSl51^^
