.u.v
National Library of Scotland
*B000444683*
u/i-i?.
THE   LADIES'
EDINBURGH MAGAZINE.
JAX.   TO   DEC.   1877.
Vol.   III.     NEW    SERIES.
THE   EDINBURGH   PUBLISHING   COMPANY,
22   HOWE   STREET.
donttnts.
Acrostics, Double, 33, 65, 98, 130,163, 193, 224, 258, 291,322, 352, 382
After the Rain, by Crocus Foster Leigh,          .... 241
Alcestis : a Tale of Self-sacritice, by Oi-atia,    .... 242
-^.Austen, Jane (Our Female Nuveli.sts), by A. Dundas,     .        . 261
Birthday Wishes, bv L-sdiii W. Melland,         .... 55
Blue Eo'ses (Our Library Table),  225
-«Burney, Miss (Our Female Novelists), l)y Eiina,     ... 69
Bv the Seaside, by Suburbana,        .....    46, 76, 111
" Carrots :" Just a Little Boy (Our Library Table),         .        . 35
Christinas in Christiania, by C. Ray,  1
"Commit thy way unto the Lord," by Crocus Foster Leigh,   . Ill
Contraband, by Mrs R. O. Leslie,   . '  127
Corresponding Students, Exiierieiices of,         .... 347
Corsica, Try (Where shall we Go 0, by E. M. D.,   .        .        . 249
Dark Days, by .Joan Scott,       .......
Debates of the Ladies'Edinburgh Ijiterary Society,         .        . 30
Domestic Art, by E. J. O.,      .'      .        .        .     '.        .        . 23
'   Drive to Fortobello, A, by S. M.,  187
Edelraute ; or, Five and Twenty Years Ago at the Aclien See,
bv Catherine Ray,        . "     .        . ■■      .        . 148, 182, 203
-—Edgeworth, Miss (Our Female No\elists), by Gratia,
Edinburgh Past and Present (Our Library Table), .
Edinburgh University Local Examinations, Notes on the,
A. Dundas, 
Experiences of Corresponding Students,
ty
325
99
305
347
- Female Novelists, Our, 37, 69, 101,133,165, 197, 229, 261, 293, 325, 357
;> Ferrier, Miss (Our Female Novelists), by L. Dundas,      .        .        293
Great St Beiiedictus, &c. (Our Library Tabile),        .        .        .        194
Helvellyn (Where shall we Go ?), by L. Dundas,    .        .        .        283
Higher Education of Women in Scotland, The (L & II.), by L. R., 7,56
„ „ „        (III.), by An Old Student,      87
Home, by Duma;,  215
Homely Words for Young Women and Girls (Our Library Table),    67
House-Hunting in London, by Estelle, 14
.—Inchbald, Mrs (Our Female Novelists), by Jane Meiizies,_      .        165
In Memoriam—E. H. M., '      . 69
Johnykin and the Goblins (Our Library Table),     ... 6
Joshua Haggart's Daughter (Our Library Table),    ... 35
Hjf^ngslev, Chailes (Our Library Table), 131
Library'Table, Our, . . 34, 67, 99, 131, 163. 194, 225, 258, 353
Log Letters from the " Challenger" (Our Library Table), . 226
Lucca, To, (Where shall we Go'/), by M. S.,    .        .        .        .        378
Madcap Violet (Our Library Table), 67
Marquis of Lossie, The (Our Library Table), ....        353
IV Contents.
I'AGk
Mary Crudelius, by E. H., 319
259
Elizabeth
357
214
122
Miss in the Kitclieii (Our Library Table),
j^Mitlord, Mary Russell (Our Female Novelists), by
L. Seton,      ......
Monk's Vision, The, by Jessie P. Moncrieti',    .
Month in Granada, A, by C. Ray,   .
——^lore, Mrs Hannah (Our Female Novelists), by L. Dundas,    . 101
o—^Morgan, Lady (Our Female Novelists), by Jeanie Morison,     . 229
Mrs Carrington Jones' jMagic '\\^atcli, by Nono,       ... 16
Musical Notes, by Gail)each,             159
New Poem and an Old Story, A, bv E. J. 0.,          ... 139
Our Library Table,   .        34, 67, 99, 131, 163, 194, 225, 258, 353, 382
Our Scotch Cousin, bv Crocus Foster Leigh,   .... 277
Our Trip to Blnnderland (Our Librarv Table),       .        .        . 382
—Porter, The Sisters (Our Fenude Novelists), by Martyn Hay, 197
r~Radcliffe, Mrs (Our Female Novelists),   .        "        . "     .    "   . 37
Records of tlie Coinage of Scotland (Our Library Table),        . 34
Sermons for the Christian Year (Our Library Table),     .        . 258
Sir Arthur's Inheritance, by Annibal,     .     " .        .         309, 340, 369
Skye ! Let us go to (Where shall we Go ?), by Jane F. Stuart, 331
Song, by Margaret Thomas,  305
S(jnnet—To * * *, by Estelle,  339
Stray Notes,      36, 68, 100, 132, 164, 195, 228, 259, 291, 322, 355, 383
Three Sculptors, The, bv Lvdia W. Melland, .... 220
Tripp's Buildings (Our Library Table),           .        .        .        . 163
Virginia (Our Library Table),  259
Western Islands, Among the, bv Charlotte Carmichael, .        . 174
" What is a Word r'bv Annibal,  173
Where shall we Go ?   ",.... 249,283,331,378
Work and Love, bv L. G. C,  277
AVorking and Selling (Our Liljrarv Table),     .... 382
Young Girl, To a, by M. Reid,     "  220
THE
LADIES' EDINBURGH MAGAZINE.
While good people in England are celebrating Christmas
with the usual concomitants of prize cattle, plum-pudding,
mince-pies, Christmas cards, holly, mistletoe, Christmas
trees, and Christmas boxes, and society is fermented through
and through with an atmosphere of benevolence which
finds expression in Christmas gifts, dinners to orphans,
suppers to outcasts, and indulgences meted out even to the
pauper and the criminal, it is pleasant to see how all this,
and even more, is being done in a foreign land. In this
modern offspring of ancient Oslo, this young northern
capital—where education, science, art, commerce, and politics
(in a mild, unrevolutionary form) have impulses almost as
strong, if the competition is by no means so great, as in
larger metropolitan cities—the offerings at the shrine of Old
Father Christmas, and the festive wreaths that encircle the
head of the New Year, as it arises from the cerements of its
predecessor, are perhaps more numerous and more absorb¬
ing than with us in England. The influence of advancing
civilization is levelling our enjoyments; as it levels classes,
sexes, sects, and, to a certain degree, even intellect itself.
In Norway, where luxury has crept only over the higher
pinnacles of society, leaving the valleys and mid-heights
as yet unenlightened by its artificial rays, these old-
fashioned periods of high festival reign with the undis¬
puted sway they held in Great Britain long years ago.
For six or seven weeks before Yuletid,iai' back into November,
in every well-to-do family busy fingers have been working
according to their means, manufacturing gifts not only for
No. 1.—January 1877. A
2 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
each individual member of the home circle, but for friends
beyond it: a task entailing an amount of labour and indoor
confinement that would be irksome in the extreme to such
lovers of fresh air and outdoor exercise as the women of
Great Britain are known to be.
These presents have mostly to be executed by stealth,
when the future recipient is out of the house or asleep.
The greater the amount of finger-labour bestowed on them,
the higher is their value  in   the eyes  of both giver and
receiver.    What patterns for slippers, cushions, and chairs;
what magnificence of design for braces, cloak-straps, otto¬
mans, and bags; what ingenious application of woolwork
and beadwork,  to  every possible  use  and  article,  have
streamed  over  here  from  the  warehouses  of  Paris  and
Berlin!    Dainty baskets witness how much beauty can be
wormed out of straw; while delicate ruffs and cuffs move
the hearts of the feminine portion of the community who
stand   round the drapers' windows   of Karl  Johann and
Kirkegade with as sudden jog, and as torturing envy, as stir
the  morning promenaders of Eegent  Street and  Oxford
Street.   Here, too, the husbands, fathers, lovers, and brothers
hurry along the pavement with a quickness of pace, and a
directness of aim, that bespeak the   same inward convic¬
tion of the gins and snai-es being laid for the contents of
their trousers' j^ockets, and a determination to avoid them
as long as possible, as characterises the long-suffering male
population at home.    Housewives and mothers have even
deeper cares.     All the mysteries of Ytdehager are pressing
on their minds.    "Fattigmand's-hakkelscr" literally, " poor
man's bakeries;" "Goderaads," "good advice," of which one
soon takes in enough to last a lifetime; " Fire species," "iouv
species," meaning equal quantities of sugar, flour, butter,
and almonds; " Peberkager" " gingerbread," with some real
pepper in  them; " Flodekager," " cream-cakes," and otlier
varieties too numerous to mention, hang round  them, in
addition to  other Christmas fare, and the  necessities   of
ordinary eating.    While Frdkemn'^ stitches away over muslin
and canvas, Fruen ^ stands seething in the sweat of her brow,
by the  kitchen stove, upheld by the proud consciousness
that the reward of her labours will be found in the approval
of   friends  and  neighbours.     A  savoury  smell pervades
every fiat, presses out into the passages, down the public
staircases, and even into the streets, where odours of baking
and   browning meet  one  in  whiffs,  pleasant   enough  to
1 The young lady, Miss.. ^ Mrs, or the lady of the house.
Christmas in Christimiia. 3
set the heart of an anchorite sinfully longing for the
flesh-pots of Egypt. Alas, as days and' weeks roll on, and
one becomes the daily and hourly beholder of Fattigmand's-
lalikelser—the consumer, nolens volens, of Fattigmand's-
baJJcelser, as Fattigmand presents himself in morning calls
and afternoon visits, at lunch, dinner, and supper, at home
and abroad, at the confectioners and the restaurants, on
the stands at the street corners, and in the cellars beneath
the pavement—it demands all the patriotism of a born
Norwegian not to tire, thus sated, more than satisfied, with
the charms of Fattigmand} Nothing equals it but our own
enthusiasm for roast-beef and plum-pudding. As December
moves on, and the 20th or 21st is come, one believes a
second Birnam Wood has arrived at Dunsinane, viz., that a
fir-grove has really moved bodily from the hills around
into the streets of Christiania. It is a study to watch the
countenances of the different buyers, as they stand among
the fir-trees, each fitted into a stand of two cross-pieces of
deal, and ranging at prices varying from twopence to a
shilling. Here a tall bony coachman, with a handsome
bear-skin cap and collar over his livery, from one of the
villas in the environs, carries off a giant, ten or fourteen
feet high, for the children of wealth and luxury. Tliere a
poor widow or forsaken wife stands with her pale little boy,
spending a portion of her hard-earned ready cash on the
sapling, as tiny as the child himself It will have three or
four wax-tapers, no gilded walnuts or painted effigy of
Nissen,^ on the topmost bough a few apples and cheap
goodies, with perhaps one solitary present underneath, from
the mother, likewise; and that will sum up the Christmas
wealth of the boy, pathetic in its poverty and the loneliness
^ Poor man.
2 Nissen is a sprite, generally represented as a very little old man,
clothed in gray, mth a pointed red cap on his head—a cross between
our fairies and the German Kohold. He plays all sorts of tricks in the
house, if not propitiated by a portion of grod (porridge) being set in
an outhouse for him on Christmas Eve.- This is a habit still regularly
observed in the country, and an English lady was greatly scandalized
at being asked by her servants for permission to carry out the practice,
within three miles of Christiania. Another pretty custom, striking to
the eye of a stranger, in the streets of a large town, is the sheaves of
corn hung out from every window and balcony on Yideaften, so
that the liirds may have their share of good living also. The raising
of the Yuleneg (Christmas sheaf) outside a Bmulerhuus, has l)een the
subject of pretty pictures both by Tiedemann and Dahl.—Holly is
unknown as a decoration in Norway, and grows sparingly, if at all, as
a native production of the country.
4 TJie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
of its celebration. Yet his happiness is undoubtedly more
thoroughly complete, more centred, more radiant, than that
of richer children, bewildered amidst the multitude of
objects, and quarrelling oyer their heaps of quickly-gotten
treasure : doomed almost certainly to lie in bed next day,
sick from overloaded digestion, and peevish and cross
because tliey are unable to enjoy their playthings. The
small pale boy has brought his own little sledge or koilke
for his Christmas tree, and drags it home in triumph to the
single room that is bright with his mother's love, and the
tenderness that shines in her face, the embodiment of all
earthly beauty to him.
But elsewhere in the big toy bazaar there are buyers of
all ages and classes: stout middle-aged merchants, busy
well-to-do maiden-aunts, hard-handed artisans and slight
girls, who go to make this purchase, while mother bakes
the Yidekager at home. Very few out of the whole number
forget to thread their way through the market to some
stalls beyond; where evergreen wreaths, brightened with
everlastings, or grey lichen, hang in endless profusion:
not, as witli us, to deck the dwellings of the living, but
to be laid tenderly on the resting-places of the dead ; of
some, maybe, who last year moved among tlie busy throngs,
but are now lying peacefully under the snow—their spirits
so much wiser than ours in the far off-land we can only guess
at here below.
The trees are all bought at last, and now paterfamilias
must go with mamma and buy presents to hang on it. It
is only ten, and yet the bazaars are all full to overflowing,
and have been so for days in succession,—a maze of toys,
knickknacks, cheap jewellery, vases, every mortal thing child
or woman could wish for, yet not one they can fix their
minds on sufficiently to choose straight away, and spare the
fond father the torture of being jostled backwards and for¬
wards, and of wiping his heated forehead, as he audibly vows
he will never go through the same thing again. His
Hustru, as the Norwegian wife is called, looks up at him
and smiles knowingly; he has said the same thing every
Christmas for the last fifteen years, ever since pretty
Ing'erda, his eldest daughter, first toddled thither between
them; and he knows equally well he will be a victim for
many years yet to come. Eh ! dear ! Good husband, and
fond father! When Yulcaftcn is really come, and his
youngest daughter puts the slippers on to his feet which
she has worked at school; when the tapers, gleaming from
CJiristiiias in Christiania. 5
the Christmas tree, light up her golden hair, and her blue
eyes sparkle over her Hushed cheeks, he is far happier
watching her pleasure, than all the old bachelors in creation
put together, be they as rich as Crcesus. His youngest
boy grows apoplectic over the trumpet, that in his hands at
anyrate gives no uncertain sound. All have something
given them they most wanted; and when the fun is at its
zenith, the true wife comes up and lays her hand on her
husband's shoulder, saying nothing very likely, but throwing
a world of thankful love into her fond eyes, that makes him
feel there is something worth working for in life,—worth any
sacrifice, worth any trouble. There are homes in Norway
as cosy and united as in happy England. The club, the
theatre, and the billiard table, have at present few votaries
among the married men of Christiania. They smoke their
cigar, and drink a glass of grog with a friend, in one of the
three or four sitting-rooms that open into each other in
pleasant perspective ; and if a whiff' of the pernicious weed
does reach the wife and daughters, they get compensation
for it in the presence of the man they love; while he enjoys
his chat none the less because of the picture of busy
women-kind before him. His Christmas joy does not con¬
fine itself to home. Many a joint of pork (which is the
favourite Christmas fare here instead of beef), with a good
piece of cheese, and a packet or two of chocolate, may find
their way to less plentifully supplied tables. Perhaps the
pale, sickly little boy wonders why mother weeps when she
gets just such a present; he cannot understand why she
does not laugh and caper as he does; so he grows still at
last, lays his cheek to her hand, and whispers, " Perhaps,
mamma, God sent it."
Yuleaftcn, our Christmas Eve, is the family reunion
time 'po-'>' excellence here : then every member if possible is
present; and no strangers, unless they are waifs and
strays admitted out of cliarity. Christmas Day has
its services, some as early as seven in the morning; but
the day is largely devoted, like Sunday, to the exchange of
friendly visitings, and receptions, dinners, or private balls
in the evening. The 26th, called second Christmas Day, is
that devoted to special religious observance; men and
women go to church then who seldom appear there at other
times, and partake of the Communion either on that day or
New Year's morning, which is a time of exceeding solemnity
among the Lutherans. The week between the two days is
filled up by enjoyment and gaiety of every description.
6 TJie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
Sledging, skating, if there be ice, in the day ; evening parties,
dinners, children's balls, theatres, and reunions of all sorts,
at a day's notice at night, till New Year's Eve. Then comes
high festival again. Parties assemble in more or less
numbers, to watch the old year out and the new one in.
The style of dress generally is simple in the extreme, low
dresses and short sleeves being confined entirely to balls.
The great object of care is the dressing of tlie hair; elaborate
coiffures are indispensable, and their extent and variety
must form a study and occupation for many hours a day.
The result is best left alone. The friseur and the artiste
have long had a standing bone of contention between them,
and the first seems to enlist most female sympathy on his
side.
The general style of entertainment is simple enough.
Tliere is a room for talking, a second for supper, a third for
dancing, and a fourth entirely carpeted for general use and
comfort. The stoves keep all one uniform heat, and there
is no lack of light. Pretty bouquets of trained ivy, bowers
of delicate plants brought in for the winter, stand in tlie
place of costly furniture, as a rule. There are no invaluable
bits of china, and the ladies' toilettes boast little expensive
lace, but portraits hang on the walls that would be no dis¬
grace to national collections, and the glorious natural features
of the country are rendered in studies that are a pleasure
to loolv at and recognise. And to crown aU, the Norwegian
is not ashamed of being poor,—poor, that is, in comparison
with the millionaires of other countries. There are
luxuries of a certain sort,—wines, whicli here are cheap
and good, green peas, French beans, and fruits of all sorts,
preserved for winter use by the careful hands of housewives
not afraid of trouble. The stranger finds a %velcome; and be
he English, French, German, Italian, or Spanish, he will find
not one, but very many anxious and able to speak to him in
the accents of his mother tongue. All Norwegians who
have the means delight in travellim:; and travellers.
But this is New Year's Eve; supper has been taken
standing, as it mostly is when there are many more than
the family circle; it is nearing eleven. Toasts fill up the
interval till twelve. Skaal (health) is drunli to friends
present, to those absent, to each individual of mark or note
at tlie table; glasses clink; and those wdio look on it in the
light of a plain duty to empty them to each toast, will soon
cease to see anything else clearly at all. But the magic
hour  approaches: the  host comes  forward, expresses the
TJie Higher Education of Women in Scotland.        7
thanks of all present for the blessings of the past, and pours
out hopes and good wishes for the year to come. They are
old words, known far as the world is wide, but they never
lose their importance or significance, and they bring on the
solemnity of feeling which all decisive divisions of time
must ever inspire. Thus we passed in Christiania out of
1873 into 1874, kindly kept from the knowledge of the evil
that might come; hopeful, with the light-heartedness of
children, of the good sure to be in store. C. Eay.
|lig^cr ^butution of ©lomtit iit Stotlaittr.
Part I.
THE ST ANDREWS CERTIFICATE.
&
While spending last winter in the south, I tried more
than ever to find out the causes that keep Scotland lagging
so much behind England in the advancement of the higher
education of women. No doubt, in our own country, many
women desire the highest education, and contrive to (jd it
to a degree that could bear favourable comparison with any
English results. Still we do not here find the same cordial
desire to help on the cause in any or in every way; nor do
we see the popularity, the fashionableness, so to speak,
amongst the women themselves, of this higher education.
Does it depend on the latent conservatism said to be
inherent in every Scot, even the most liberal; or upon their
greater distance from the centre of impulse ? Is it that,
accustomed to feel a recognised superiority in national
education, the country forgets that all things comparative
vary according to the relative positions of the objects com¬
pared ; or is it dependent on some of those subtle differences
that still exist between the two nations ? There are certainly
two sides to this advancement—the gaining of tlie education
itself, and the gaining of the witness of this in the shape of a
certificate. In regard to the latter, I asked the lady-principal
of perhaps the first girl's school in England, if she could give
any reason for the fact, that examinations were popular in
England and were not so in Scotland, and she answered:
" It has only been the growth of time. You can hardly
imagine what hard and uphill work it has been to me and
many others, the inducing of parents to allow their girls to
8 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
go forward for examinations."    On talking to the girls on
the same subject, some of them said: " We would never
have  thought  of trying  an  examination; but  the  lady-
principal wrote so urgently to our parents, that they said
at last, we might do so."    Another said : " Papa does not
want me to go up for examination, neither do I; but you
know we must do it for the good of the   school!"    That
school-girl gave me one real reason for some of the favour
shown to certificates: the school that passes the largest pro¬
portion of girls in a high class, gains as it were a certificate
for itself at the same time.    Another, it seems to me, lies
in the fact, that the reformation in education in England
occurred simultaneously with  the  awakened attention to
the claims of women; so that the numerous new schools
started all over the country for girls, were intrusted to the
care of lady-teachers; and those likely to become competitors
for the posts eagerly took advantage of every opportunity
of preparing themselves for such duties.    In Scotland, we
have had such good schools for so long a time taught by
men, that the reformation was less needed, and so for women
the  same  necessity has not been felt for securing those
advantages for professional purposes.    And for the women
who have no professional aims, it is just possible we may
find   a national distinction to account for a part of the
difference.    I   think, as a rule, that Scotchwomen  are a
little ashamed of knowing more than their neighbours ; and
if they happen to do so, they try to keep it quiet.    They
very much prefer to know, than to seem to know, or even
than to be known to know.    An English lady, on the other
hand, supported  by the feeling of her country, is  rather
pleased  at  the  acknowledgment  of   her  success;   while
among those weak types that always seek popularity, I have
heard many say, " I do not care to know, but only to pass."
It was impossible not to feel, that if more opportunities
were offered to the women of our  country, more   would
take  advantage  of them.    Edinburgh is the  only centre
of anything systematic, but every one does not find it con¬
venient to go to Edinburgh.    It seemed to me that Scotland
still wanted two things : a certificate attainable by private
study, which would save Scotchwomen the trouble of seeking
one in England, from Cambridge, Oxford, or London; and an
institution which would virtually give women education of a
standard identical with that of the Universities, such as Girton
does in England.    A preparatory system was also required
to lead up directly to this higher education.   Seeing that, in
The Higher Education of Women in Scotland.        9
spite of the example set by Edinburgh, no one seemed to be
doing anything elsewhere, I thought it could do no harm,
at least, to try if I could by any means stir up an interest
in the subject. In the beginning of May last, I wrote
to the principals of the Universities of St Andrews and
Glasgow, asking them to consider the question. My
letter to Principal Tulloch was enclosed by Mrs Daniell,
who, strangely enough, had just been urging the University
of St Andrews to attend to the examination of the schools
in Dundee, so that our schemes coincided.^ This letter was
handed over to the convener of Senatus, Dr lioberts, who
wrote to me very kindly, saying that, though much interested
in the question, nothing could be done until the first meeting
in November, when he would bring it before the notice of
his colleagues. I received a similar answer from Principal
Caird.
But St Andrews seemed too small and inaccessible to
support anything like Girton College; while Glasgow,
influenced by greater numbers, wealth, and ambition, might
be induced to do something for women worthy of the
largest town in Scotland; accordingly, in my communica¬
tions with Professor Koberts, I chiefly laid stress upon
the want of an open examination. I had heard of several
teachers in the north of Scotland who would like to
take certificates, but could not afford to give up a year's
work or more, in order to be present at the Edinburgh
classes. I had known many Scotch girls go to England, in
order to be able to get through the Cambridge examination
in one year; and it was only wise to attempt to supply the
demand, especially as it is one that it needs no prophetic
eye to see is likely to increase.
Personally I have comparatively little liking for exami¬
nations, because a dread of cram and superficiality makes
me often forget how much better superficiality is than
blank ignorance. I never agreed with Pope : a little know¬
ledge is a great deal better than none. But, if one only
thinks of it, one sees how much they fail in being true
tests, under existing and possible circumstances.    An ideal
' This coincidence may be accounted for by the fact that the
Edinburgh Ladies' Educational Association had, at a mjeeting held on
January 7th, 1876, directed its Committee to take steps for the raising
of Local Examination Bursaries in the provincial towns of Scotland.
Tlie Sub-Committee on Bursaries had accordingly been for some time
in correspondence with Mrs Daniell on the subject of Local Examina¬
tions.—Eds.
No. 1.—January 1877. B
lO The Ladies Edinbiirg-h Magazine.
examination ought to be impromptu.    Professor Tait seems
also to have felt this, as he once said he thouglit that, after
a fellow had thorouglily got up a subject, he ought to be
sent to sea six months before being examined in it.    It Avould
be much better if there were no specified time, but that the
examiners should be entitled to pounce upon their  victims
when and where they pleased, because, with the exception of
a little judgment, good taste, and legible handwriting, the
thing that is really examined in a candidate is the state of
his memory.    What is stored up within his mind ; what
materials has he acquired whereon and whereby to found
judgments ?     The  other  qualities   are   more  permanent;
but  since memory is the  power to  be  tried, how  very
imperfect a test is it to take a mind, immediately after the
act   of   impression,   in   the  very focus   of   concentrated
attention, it may be aided by a whole battery of mnemonic
arts, to hold, with a frantic grasp, facts known to be on the
point of escaping.    A deeper question forces itself on our
consideration—What are the chief characteristics of a good
memory ?   Is it one that can hastily and temporarily acquire a
vast number of unconnected facts; orisitone that,more slowly
and more carefully acquiring, so fits these facts and arranges
them in its storehouse, that they gain a permanent vitality
from their associated ideas ?    A well-known psychological
law regulates the permanence of impressions.    The impos¬
sibility of this ideal examination is of course apparent, and
yet its desirability may be seen at once  on  considering,
that it is only the part of our knowledge that we do not for¬
get which remains our own possession.    What we can do
noiv, depends upon what we know now, and not on what we
knew at the time of some long-past examination.    If all the
candidates that have been examined in any one year were
to  be  re-examined  unexpectedly on the same subject a
few  years later,   it  would   be   amusing   to  witness   the
relative changes of place.    Very probably the brilliant first-
class would fall to the foot, the second-class remain second-
class, and some neglected third, or unlucky plucked victim,
gain  the  highest  number  of marks  amid  much general
haziness     We  are   apt  to   smile   at   people  wlio,   under
other circumstances, have a belief in the identity of " now "
and " then;" and yet what greater right has a man to say,
" I know all these arts, and I must have tlie credit of know¬
ing them, because sometime in my youth I was assured by
competent judges that I did so, and I still possess their
certificate to that effect;" than a woman of eighty has to
The Higher Education of Wot/ien in Scotland.        11
believe that she is still beautiful, graceful, and charming,
because the homage of the ball-rooms of sixty years ago had
given her certificates to that effect ?
But since we cannot remedy this,—since we cannot put
any one through an examination every time it ought to be
done,—we can only for ourselves morally and conscientiously
avoid what is the most dangerous element in the present
system—haste, unreality, superficiality, and self-satisfaction;
for, as Adam Bede says, " A good solid bit o' work lasts, if
it's only laying a floor down; somebody's the better for it
being done well, besides the man who did it."
Leaving my ideal examination, I would consider theoreti¬
cally what, under existing circumstances, would be the best
that could be framed for women in Scotland at present.
The age is advancing, and it is as well to look forward a
little, instead of looking back. The more a certificate is
drawn up to suit the requirements of the future, the more
permanent and valuable it will be. Now for this it is
necessary to have—
1. A high standard. This is shown in three relations in
each subject: 1st, in the amount of study required, i.e., the
number of books prescribed for preparation; 2nd, in the
kind of questions put from that reading; 3rd, in the number
of marks required to give a pass.
If each of these is high, then the standard is good in each
subject. But the difficulty of the preparation depends also
on the number of subjects taken up at the same time. This
materially alters the standard of an examination. Tor in¬
stance, the London, as a whole, is popularly considered
higher than the Cambridge ; but in each subject the Cam¬
bridge is genei'ally more difficult, so that the relative value
of the London examination greatly depends upon the
number of subjects taken at once. It is worthy of careful
consideration—How much ought to be required at the same
time ? The balance ought to be held duly between the
avoiding the necessity of cramming and superficiality on the
one hand, and the ensuring hard, earnest work, and superior
ability on the other. For an examination that can be
passed by anybody will be valued by nobody. That the
field prescribed in each department ought to be well chosen,
and the questions searching, every examiner knows; but I
do not think they know equally well that it is no true
kindness or justice to pass a candidate with too low marks.
Some of the candidates that have " gone in " and " come out"
of the Cambridge examinations, com/c^ ?io<have known enough
12 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
to deserve any reward. Their percentage must have been
very low. It is extremely damaging to the value of an
examination, in the eyes of real workers, if they see such
students pass by at their side. It would be a most valuable
guarantee for the standard, if it were announced that nothing
short of 50 per cent, would pass, and that a first-class must
be very high.
2. It ought to have a definite standard. Since the
University of London has given the same examination to
women as it requires for the matriculation of its male
students, it has acquired a definiteness that has many times
enhanced its value. Girton examinations are the same as
those given to the Cambridge students, and that gives them
pre-eminence, although their so-called " Degree Certificate "
is not given under the seal of the university. The Cam¬
bridge Local Examinations have, to some extent, gained
definiteness through the gradual effects of repetition and
comparison; and the Oxford Examinations are further assisted
by the fact, that they confer the title of A.A.
Edinburgh, in some of its papers, gives " the same ques¬
tions as have been presented for the M.A. pass ; but as it
does not do so in all, and has not yet had time for the com¬
parison of successive years of printed questions, the standard
tliere is not definite.
In drawing uj) any new form of examination, there should
be a careful consideration of all the existing plans, to profit
by their experience, and avoid their errors. I think it would
be wise to group the subjects, as tliey do in Girton, into
Tripos-work, or as in the Cambridge Local, into Groups. It
tends to prevent the desultoriness that is apt to creep into
a woman's work when she educates herself, and selects
subjects at random.
One fault in some of the present schemes is, that while
limiting the examination to some particular sphere, say the
period of a century in literature or history, the candidate may
get up that alone, and remain in blank ignorance of anything
beyond the prescribed bounds. If this had been a humorous
paper, I could have cited some amusing illustrations. This
might be remedied by letting it be known that the examiners
reserved the right of putting some leading questions, to test
general knowledge, even when special periods are set.
I have just lieard from headquarters that my season's
correspondence with St Andrews has not been in vain.
They have arranged, 1st, a system of lower and higher local
The Higher Education of Wouien in Scotland.        13
examinations, very much like otlier Universities, in common
subjects, taking up also French, German, Italian, Latin,
Greek, Mathematics, and the elements of Natural Philosophy;
Botany, Zoology, Physiology, Chemistry, Pliysical Geography,
and Geology. This examination will take place in June,
and the candidates will be arranged in order of merit, in
honours, or in first and second class.
In the second place, they have arranged a woman's higher
University certificate, which will, I believe, be a specially
good one, and I think I may now safely give a sketcli of it.
This certificate is to be granted to those who have passed the
lower examinations either in this or some other University,
the only centre at present being St Andrews. The examina¬
tion will take place on the 12th of June, and intending
candidates must send in their names, with the subjects on
which they wish to be examined, to the convener, on or
before 31st March 1877. So much for the examination.
The standard is intended to be the same as that required for
the ]\I.A. both in pass and honours, in the subjects taught.
at the University; and in other subjects, an analogous
standard is to be aimed at.
The subjects are to be chiefly those taught in the Uni¬
versity ; but Englisli History, French, German, and Italian
languages are to be added, thus making a goodly array,
which perhaps I ouglit to draw up in file : English Language
and Literature ; Logic ; Psychology and Metaphysics; Moral
Philosophy; Political Economy; Latin Language and Litera¬
ture; Greek Language and Literature; French Language and
Literature ; German ; Italian; Comparative Philology; His¬
tory ; the Theory and History of Education ; Mathematics ;
Chemistry; Botany; Zoology; Geology; Physical Geography
and Palaiontology; Physiology; Hebrew; Biblical Criticism;
Church History ; History of Doctrines.
But our great hope is, tliat the professors may agree to
certify the certificates hy granting a title. This, at present, is
proposed to be the meed of those who pass high in four
subjects, or take honours in one, passing in the otlier three.
It cannot of course be M.A., seeing that the number of the
subjects is so much smaller. They talk possibly of granting
" Licentiate in Arts," thinking, not without reason, that
this would be of great use to women proposing to become
teachers, being to them a sort of diploma or licence to teach
in the subjects in which they have passed.
Whether or not this title be granted, it remains the fact
that the examinations will take place in June, and we
Among the Western Islands. i8i
suggesting the polishing of the granite, he sent some speci¬
mens to be polished and tested. The answer was that " it
took a good polish, but was too hard to be worked pro¬
fitably by hand, and steam-polishing would require consider¬
able outlay." So it seems as if even the most modest tower
of my granite " Chateau en Espagne " is at present imprac¬
ticable ; but other suggestions may be made by other people,
when the want becomes more generally known. In The
Hiijhlander for March 3d, we see that in the stormy
weather of the opening year, " one wild gust swept down
upon three boats, which were drawn up above high-water
mark on tlie shore of lona, raised them into the air, and
carried them bodily out to sea. What renders this the more
remarkable is the fact, that the boats were tied together, and
that two of them had in tliem a considerable quantity of
stones. The place where they were drawn up was a sheltered
hollow, apparently safe from danger. Fragments of two of
them were cast up a day or two after, on the shore, but of the
third no trace has been seen." So there are these three boats
to restore, as well as the other boats that Mr F. Clapp had
set his heart on providing; and surely there are some people
in Scotland able and willing to help our Southern friend
in his noble attempts to benefit our own coasts. We cannot
close better than by quoting one of the little poems written
by John Harris, the Cornish Miner Poet, in aid of the move¬
ment, and in encouragement of his friend.
THE DEVONIA.
" In the island of lona, ' Send a boat, Ah ! Tenax Exon,
Rife with legend-lore and lay. Send a boat, ye friends afar,
Dwelleth many an honest fisher, That I may pursue my calling
Sadly tried from day to day : Under sun, and moon, and star.
Sighing when the dusk increaseth. Then my little ones shall bless
Sighing when the skies are clear— As the curfew fills the glen,
' Sport the bright fish in the waters. Mingled with their sire's petition.
But I have no boat to steer.' When are hushed the sounds of men."
•Came the winds o'er heights romantic, Tenax heard, when day was waning.
Fierce and cruel from their caves. Heard as if an angel spoke;
And the skiff my father left me. Entered he upon his mission,
bank amidst the trembling waves. Laying on his Master's yoke.
Scarcely I escaped by swimming, And he prays his friends to rally
Dashed upon the boulders dread ; Round the hand outstretched to save.
How we talked, when tears were streaming.   Aiding him to launch ' Devonia/
When the evening meal was spread !' On Hebrides' lonely wave."
Note.—Small contributions of money, or books for the library, will
be gladly received by the minister of lona ; by Mr Fred. Clapp,
44 Magdalen Street, Exeter ; and by Messrs Thomas Cook & Son,
Ludgate Circus, London.
Charlotte Cakmichael.
Xo. 31).    JiNF, 1.S77, 2 k
Hoitse-Hu7iting in Londoti. 15
Save a cherished frame or mirror
Veiled in yellow or in brown.
Done up in a bag last summer
When the world went out of town.
From the best front bedroom upwards.
What a desert comes in view!—
Eooms uncarpeted and dreary,
Blankets of a doubtful hue ;
All is scantier and blacker
In proportion as you rise,
Worst of all amongst the boxes
In the attic next the skies.
But your troubles are not over;
You must see the kitchen floor,
Where the beetles live in clover.
Multiplying more and more.
So the harpy turns the gas on.
That you may not break your nose
Down the stony stair in darkness,
More to complicate your woes !
Odours of departed dinners
Seem to linger underground.
But within the dirty saucepans
Nothing now but dust is found;
And the only ray of comfort
Issues from a tiny grate
In " Pug's Parlour," where the harpy
Has been doomed to lie in wait.
When you've amply done your duty.
Every hole and corner spied.
There is always an objection
Far too strong to be denied ;
For the house is small or dirty.
Or the situation bad ;
If by any chance it suits you.
Ten to one it can't be had.
Where am I to go ? you wonder;
Must I leave Belgravia quite.
Place myself in far Tyburnia
Out of mind and out of sight ?
16 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
Or inhabit gloomy Bromptou,
Or be banished to the east,
On to some suburban region
That I do not know the least ?
So you get into your carriage,
Seek the agents out once more,
And repeat your tiresome story
While they hunt their ledgers o'er.
" Houses, ma'am, are getting scarcer,
lients are rising every day;
Jwst the very thing you wanted
Has been let again till May."
Jones and Trollope, White and Gouldsmith,
Are exhausted one by one.
Till the winter day is closing—
Nothing further can be done.
Furnished with a dozen orders,
You decide that it is well
To resume your task to-moiTow,
And return to your hotel.
ESTELLE.
glrs Carringtan loius' Ulagit Wiviit\.
A Christmas Stoky.
I AM Mrs Carrington Jones. My husband was christened
John Carrington; so you see I have an undeniable right to
the title, for I do not consider John a name at all. Last
Christmas Eve, I was formally engaged to Carrington, and
next morning he brought me the most exquisite little watch
and chain you ever saw in your life; each link of the latter
is a monkey, and the former is positively encrusted with
pearls and turquoises. Of course, I was delighted with such
a nice Christmas present; and when not wearing it, I always
kept it safely enclosed in its beautiful morocco case. A
watch is so very useful, if you remember to wind it up;
otherwise it is apt to mislead, as I found to my cost on
several occasions. But as my brothers and sisters asked
me at least every half-hour what o'clock it was by my
watch, I soon found out and remedied the omission.
Mrs Carrington Jones Magic Watch. 17
It was my first watch; for I was scarcely seventeen then,
although Carrington was thirty-five. Unequal marriages
in point of age have become quite fashionable, I am told;
and of two extremes, I prefer being the least. That is to
say, I consider it better for me to be seventeen, and Carrington
thirty-five—I should hate being thirty-five.
I got a very expensive trousseau, and a very superior
maid, who said she was twenty-nine, but looked as old
as mamma. I wondered the family, with whom she had
been eleven years, Uked to part from such a treasure; but
she wished a change, and they seemed very desirous to
gratify her without considering their own loss, whicli I
thought very nice of them; and 1 think I am a good mistress,
for I never bother about trifles, and put on whatever is
]aid out for me.
We were married in April, and went at once to the Con¬
tinent. Soon I began to find my watch rather troublesome.
It was no longer necessary, as there was a pendule in every
room; while, out of doors, it was easier to ask Carrington the
time, than to pull out my own watch. Then the chain was
always catching on something or other, and breaking the
monkeys' tails ; so altogether I found it more convenient to
leave it in its case. The first thing I remarked as very
peculiar was, that it wound up itself. I forgot it one night,
and next day I purposely did not do so, in order to see how
long it would go, and it never stopped for a whole week.
The next strange thing happened one oppressively warm
evening, when I left the table d'hote early,and went to lie down
in my own room. Before settling myself for a nap, T tliought
for company's sake I would put my watch beside me; to
my horror I found the case empty! I was wondering what
Garrington would say, and if he would give me another,
when 1 suppose I fell asleep. I was aroused by my maid's
entrance.
"0 Daly," I called to her, " my watch has been stolen."
" Your watch, m'm ?" replied she, looking very queer.
"Yes, my watch. If you look at the case, you will find it
gone."
She walked to the table where I had left it. " Your watch
is here, ni'm."
" Nonsense !" I exclaimed.
Daly, in answer, brought to me both watch and case.
" It is very odd, for it was not there when I came upstairs,"
I said.
" Have you not been, dreaming, m'm ?     I saw the watch on
No. 1.—January 1877. C
18 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
the table as soon as I came into the room," suggested Daly,
respectfully.
Carrington said the same thing when I told him the
mysterious occurrence, but I knew I was wide-awake when
I missed the watch.
Some weeks passed without further incident.
We were in the habit of attending spiritual seances. One
evening the meeting was deferred, but we were not aware
of it till we reached the door. I did not care to go any¬
where else, so we returned to our hotel. As I laid aside
my hat I glanced at the table, and perceived my watch
was gone again. I instantly seized the case, and ran into
Carrington's dressing-room. "We are both awake; but
the watch is away," I cried incoherently.
He did look amazed. " It is very extraordinary," he said;
"but I shall be still more astonished if you ever see it
again.  Don't say a word, and put back the case in its place."
I did so; and at ten o'clock, when I went upstairs, the
watch was ticking innocently in its usual position. I sent
away Daly immediately, and said to my husband in jest,
" I believe a spirit has a prior claim to this Avatch, and
takes the use of it whenever it pleases." He turned pale,
quite ghastly indeed, but tried to laugh. " Has any one
else possessed it ?" I asked seriously.
" No one but yourself has used it. I am going to tell
you. Alberta, what I have meant to tell you ever since our
marriage, and indeed before it, when I gave you the watch ;
but you were so merry over it, I did not like to sadden you
by my tale. I ordered it for a lady to whom I was engaged
eleven years ago. She never lived to possess it; the very
day of her death it was sent home."    He paused.
"Did you love her very much ?" I could not help asking.
" I was sincerely attached to her, but it was a boyish
affection; she was older than I was. The feelings you
inspired, love, were quite different."    He paused again.
" I am glad you have told me," I said simply.
" You understand now how painful even your innocent
little jest was to me. I think it will be wiser, too, to wear
your watch instead of leaving it lying about, for it will
inevitably be stolen."
At that moment I distinctly heard a footstep, and ex¬
pected every instant to see a spirit-hand advance and grasp
the chain. There followed the rustle of a wing, or of a dress,
and a cold wind came under the door. " Oh! Carrington,
what is that ?" I cried.
Mrs Carriiigton Jones' Magic Watch. 19
" An eaves-dropper," he replied, and threw open the door;
but, as might have been expected, no one was there. I did
not take my husband's advice, for I did not wish to interfere
with any spirit's amusement. From this date my watch
became very erratic, and disappeared for hours, days, and
even nights, and never required to be wound up at all!
We returned to Carrington Park, my husband's new
country place; and from the moment we landed in England,
this wonderful watch gave up its bad habits, and was
always to be found at home, and grateful for small atten¬
tions. This lasted till All Hallow's Eve. I was alone that
evening, for my husband was presiding at an agricultural
dinner. Daly and most of the servants were at a Halloween
party, given by our Scotch gardener. Before she went she
had been describing to me the various incantations to be
performed on the occasion. I was made quite nervous by
her stories, and did not look into the mirror without a
shudder, although I had no intention of eating an apple
before it. To add to my dismay, I found the drawing-
room timepiece stopped, so I returned to my room for my
watch. It had vanished. I resolved then and there, if it
ever returned, to lock it into my wardrobe, and never look
on its treacherous face again. I spent a wretched evening,
and was recounting my troubles to my husband, when there
came a tap at the door; and in answer to Carrington's invita¬
tion (I was so frightened I could not utter a word), Daly
walked in with my watch in her hand, saying, " I found it
on the hall-table, m'm, as we came in, and was afraid
you had forgotten it."
Carrington laughed, and looked meaningly at me, but it
was no hand of mine which conveyed that watch out of my
room. I locked it away in a box inside my wardrobe that
very night.
I find people living in the country have a great number
of trials. I got a beautiful new winter bonnet in London,
and found, after wearing it one Sunday, that the butcher's
wife had one exactly the same, except in colour. I was
much annoyed, especially as next market-day the hateful
woman was parading the streets in a very bad imitation of
my velvet jacket, trimmed with sable. I complained to
Carrington.
He only smiled. " These sort of people get the fashions
immediately; it is probably a coincidence, and not an
impertinence; but order a new bonnet, my dear, if it
annoys you."
20 Tlie Ladies Edinburs'/i Mas:aziiie.
<b'^
" But what am I to do with this one ; it is so • very be¬
coming ? " I said regretfully.
" Can't your maid change it somehow, put in new feathers,
and tilt up the other side of the brim, and circumvent Mrs
Lamb that way ?" he answered.
It was an admirable suggestion, and I went straight to
Daly's room to act upon it. She did not hear my first
knock; but at my second she came to the door with a half-
trimmed bonnet in her hand.
" I am glad you know something of millinery, Daly, for I
wish you to alter my bonnet," said I.
" Certainly, m'm. I was just sorting some little things of
my own at present; for you give me so little to do, m'm,"
said Daly apologetically, as I gazed in some wonder at the
confusion around of ribbons, laces, wires, and feathers.
" But surely you don't mean to wear this ?" I said, lifting
up a very coquettish velvet hat, covered with flowers and
feathers.
"Oh! no, m'm," she answered smiling; "that is for my
little sister. I hope you have no objection to my trimming
her hat; she is motherless, and I have always been in the
habit of helping her as much as I can."
To these laudable sentiments, of course, I could say
nothing, except meekly request her to do my bonnet as
soon as she had finished her own.
When I told Carrington of Daly's sisterly kindness, he
said I ought to give her more to do for me, as idleness is
the mother of mischief Accordingly, I procured a large
quantity of velvet and cashmere to make a costume, and
sent to Paris for a bonnet to match. I began to think the
whole neighbourhood. bewitched; for no sooner had my
bonnet arrived—actually before I had worn it—than the
postmistress had a facsimile on her head, and the grocer's
daughter smirked into church before me with a polonaise
of the same stufl' as my dress.
I could have cried with vexation. To appear to imitate
these people I Avould not. So my old dress and bonnet
appeared every Sunday, I hope to the disgust of my worthy
imitators.
As Christmas approached, we were very busy witli pre¬
parations for mirth and jollity. All my family were to spend
the holidays with us, and we meant to give three Christmas
trees, several dinner parties, and a dance. I Avished to be
an example to our neighbours, whom I considered very
shabby in their dealings with rich and poor alike.    Speaking
Mrs Carringtori Jones Magic Watcli. 2i
for myself, after the first formal dinner no one paid me the
slightest attention. But I resolved to gain the hearts of
the common people, and show the county magnates that a
little money well spent would gain more love in a year,
than their parsimonious habits could win in a century. I
literally had a whole ox roasted in pieces, to dispense as
Christmas cheer, and gave away quantities of clothing. My
cook, an old fellow-servant of Daly's, was a very pleasant
person, and always willing to aid my benevolent schemes,
by suggesting people who would be so grateful for a bottle
of wine or a blanket. She knew every one in the village,
and told me my generosity was the universal theme.
Doing good at Christmas time is tlie very easiest, as well
as pleasantest of pursuits.
The only drawback to my happiness was that Carrington
looked depressed, and received almost daily ill-written
letters, which he never offered to show to me.
I meant to give dresses to all the household: a silk one
to Daly, a poplinette to the cook, and serges to the others.
When I offered cook her choice of patterns, she hummed
and hawed, and seemed almost disappointed. I asked her
if there was anything else she would have preferred. She
brightened up considerably, and said she had long been
saving up her wages to buy a black silk. I gave her £2
to assist, instead of the other dress. She thanked me
civilly, but looked as if I was doing her an injury instead
of conferring a favour. I was thankful that the others
looked pleased with their gifts. My people arrived, and
we were all as happy as possible on Christmas Eve, when
Norali asked for the loan of my watch, as she was going a
long walk with the boys, in search of holly berries. I gave
her the keys, and told her where to find it. She returned
to say there was nothing in that box, nor in the jewel-
case beside it, which ought to have contained my plain
gold set. I was telling mamma about my magic watch,
which appeared to have infected things it touched with its
own vagrancy, when the second post came in, and brought
a dirty, ill-written note to me, which ran, or rather crawled
thus—
" HoNERED Madam, i feels it my dooty espessialy at this festif
seson to worn you of the vieper you cheris in your "buzzum, which
weres your close and lalTs in her sieve at your innersense with respec-
ful complemens.—Yours, etc. etc. Well-wisher."
It took some time to read, and longer still to understand.
22 The Ladies Edmbiirgh Magazine.
I was still staring at it when Carrington came in. " You
have received one of those precious epistles at last, Alberta ;
and I think it is time now to act, for they have been coming
to me for weeks. I see yours is on a different tack, however,
and the first of its kind. Look at mine." He gave me a
much better written and expressed note than the other,
filled with abuse of the cook, and pointing out cupboards
downstairs in which would be found the brandy, wine, and
blankets of the poor, ready to be despatched with other
stores to her own friends.
" Can it be true ?" I said, and handed the notes to
mamma.
" She must have stolen your watch and ornaments also,"
replied she.
" That unlucky watch, is it gone ?" asked Carrington.
"Yes, and my gold set."
" I am glad to hear it," he replied calmly. " Do nothing
till my return, and only discuss the matter among your¬
selves."
The consternation in the household may be imagined,
when Carrington returned with a search-warrant and two
policemen. Every one was anxious to exculpate himself
and inculpate his neighbour. The very page-boy exclaimed,
grinning, " I can point out the sperrit thot wears missus'
Avatch. I saw it at Mr JMTarlane's, and the earrings and
brooch too—blessed if I did not! "
Oh! to think that Carrington's lost love should have
been the jest of the servant's hall, and my credulity so great!
I actually believed a spirit could need a watch '
The cook wept and confessed all; but said Daly had put
her up to it, and told her that her friends were as poor as
any to whom I gave charity.
But the worst revelations were in Daly's room. My watch
was on her table, and my clothing, worn and torn, in her
drawers. Fancy her making gowns and hats for all the
village after my models, and sometimes Avith my materials !
Her little sister was a milliner and dressmaker—certainly
not a tall person,—but whose orphaned condition was not
extraordinary, as she was on the verge of sixty. Daly
was calm and injured; said she had only taken the loan of
my watch, as I never used it, and brought up the other
articles to mend. Both wretched women were sent out of
the house at an hour's notice.
I shall be very much astonished if I spend a merry
Christmas after all this ; and how I am to manage without
Domestic Art. 23
a cook at Christmas time I do not know. The kitchen-
maid says she has often done all the cooking; so we must
hope the best. XoNO.
If the British public does not become artistic in taste, does
not rejoice in properly decorated buildings and in correct
ornaments, it is not for want of teachers, nor, indeed, for
want of critics more or less withering. Amono; the most
withering may be counted the Eev. W. Pattison, the rector of
Lincoln CoUege, who, in a lecture delivered the other day at
Oxford, declared that the middle classes were actually degener¬
ating in taste; and, worse still, were injuring the beauty of
many foreign products, as Venetian glass and Eastern carpets,
by their preference for vulgar forms and tints. Worst of all,
he considered, is tlie self-satisfied conceit with which we
are for ever boasting of our progress. Nor do we get much
comfort from the Saturday Review, which agrees with much
that he says, adds some severe remarks of its own, and winds
up by hinting, that after all it does not signify: taste is
fashion, and fashion is folly. The old designers, whose
works some of us still presume to delight in, were pro¬
bably inspired by mere convenience, use and wont; and
would have been the first to have adopted the ugly patterns
of the present day, had they been brought into a Birming¬
ham or Glasgow designing-room. People buy articles of
virtu, not because they really admire them, but iDecause they
wish to be thought artistic; the wiser sell them to advantage,
not because their taste refines, but because they first scent a
change in the public fancy. Nothing is intrinsically much
better or worse than anything else; and the best that can
be said for the hobby of "art in the dwelling-house" is,
that it is not a vicious one. "Vanity of vanities—all is
vanity"—including perhaps the Saturday Revievj itself.
From this point of view, British Decorative Art might be
represented as a female clad in the tight pillow-case
garments of tlie day, crowned with the gigantic bows of the
modern bonnet, bearing in her hand the last trumpery
ornament out, say a twisted brass candlestick, seated on a
pictorial coal-box, and trampling underfoot a shattered
Etruscan vase.
24 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
If we venture to differ somewhat from the Eeviewer in his
conclusions, we must, I fear, however, allow that many of his
strictures are only too true. We must all have observed the
way in which a fashion, or rather a lage for some special
style in dress, decoration, or ornament arises, passes all
bounds of moderation, and runs with heedless unrestraint
into absurdity and ugliness. Take our present clinging
skirts : popular art, instead of checking, exaggerates the
extreme of the fashion. In the current number of Good
Words, the artist illustrates a tale called, "What she came
Through," by a heroine in draggled skirts, so gracelessly
clinging, that the picture at once suggests that she "came
through " a horse-pond. Again: a little while ago, pretty
ornaments in brass came into vogue, old, or good imitations
of the old. Now all the bric-a-bric shops are crammed with
brass, pretty, ugly, and absurd, and fashionable purists
must look out for something else. The chief causes of this
are, no doubt, great wealth, which makes it easy to follow
any caprice, and a great love of ornament, combined with a
curious want of real artistic instinct.
The Spectator newspaper, unlike the two before-men¬
tioned critics, bids us rejoice that we are improving in
taste, saying, that at anyrate good literary art was never
more appreciated than now. This may be true, and yet not
quite to the purpose; for if we measure our country by an
outside standard, do we not find that we have always had
the easy pre-eminence over other countries, in good diffused
literature, that some of them have over us in art ? Our
enjoyment of books may indeed have done much to distract
us from the ugly rooms in which we read them. Our private
libraries are the most numerous and the best in the world,
and the chief ornament of many of those large houses,
which have ]iot the doubtful advantages we express by the
term "show-houses."
And it should also be remembered that, owing to our
pleasure in out-of-door life, our taste for the beautiful has,
in the country at least, been chiefly gratified by our gardens.
But so much attention has of late been given to indoor decora¬
tion, at least in towns, that it would be hard indeed if there
were not true progress in it. Those of us who have been
livintj in saste-oreen rooms enlivened with shades of grav,
may surely console ourselves when in bad weather it looks
just a little gloomy, by the confideiice that we are moving
in the right direction. Better certainly is a harmonious gloom
than violent ill-assorted colours; and the low half-tints may
Domestic Art. 2$
train the eye towards something less timid and more
absolutely beautiful. For in Italy, which is the home of
mural and drapery decoration, we find, besides the half-
tints, splendid effects produced by rich colours, but a happy
instinct seems to know where to employ them. The
Germans may not be naturally safer colourists than we
are, but they carry out so thoroughly what they undertake,
that if they attempt art decoration at all, the results are
often beautiful, even as seen in small middle-class houses.
For instance, the stray bits of Gothic furniture which are
scattered about in our houses, are apt to look incongruous;
but there are some houses in INIunich where it can be
realized how beautiful such furniture is in its place. In
one little house, built on a mediaeval plan, the rooms
are wainscoted; the doors have massive outside hinges
and locks; the drawing-room is charming, for the dark
wooden background sets off aU the well-chosen bright
ornaments; and the bay-window, with crimson velvet seats,
and richly tinted draperies, gives both light and warmth of
colour to the room. It is also as comfortable as it is pretty
—a point which should l^e considered l)y the buyers of
quaint furniture. For instance, at an entertainment given
by a German artist in his studio, we sat round such a high
ancient table, on such low carved chairs, that we looked like
small children at dessert. All the guests had services of
beautiful but different devices, so that they rather rivalled
each other than helped any general effect; and we still
remember the spasm of anxiety which crossed the face of
the hostess, as the jovial host dashed tlie Mai-tranlc out of
a heavy gr4s dc Flandre jug into our tall delicate Venetian
glasses. The brass salvers too, and majolica dishes which
held our food, belonged rather to the category of orna¬
mental art, than of art decoration.
This convenient distinction, which is sometimes over¬
looked, is of great use when we try to find principles to
guide our taste in art at home. Ornamental art includes
those things which are made for ornament, and which yet
do not rise into creations of fine art. Art decoration refers
to those jjrimarily useful things which may receive
ornament. Thus a china vase belongs to ornamental art;
a painted tea-cup is, or ought to be, a useful thing—the
subject of art decoration. In art decoration, the art is
subordinate to utUity—to appropriateness, to convenience.
It does not exist for itself, and of course many useful things
are not capable of receiving it; and nowhere is taste more
No. 1.—January 1877. D
26 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
needed than to decide where it is admissible and where
not. There is no use in trying to make some things pretty,
for instance, a pair of tongs: it is enough that they should
be useful. The coal-boxes, which are the especial detesta¬
tion of Mr Pattison, are fine examples of misplaced
decoration; those squat japanned things with turned-up
chins, bearing on their lids highly coloured versions of
popular engravings. They violate a great rule of decorative
art, which is, that it should never be actually pictorial, but
that all painted ornaments should be more or less con¬
ventional. If we are to have a picture, let it hang on the
wall; let it not appear in a concave form, near the floor and
over the coals. Shall we then give up the coal-boxes, and
content ourselves, if we must have coals in the room, with
an ugly but convenient scuttle ? The word " box " shows
the way out of the difficulty; a real box is never incapable
of ornament; and those wooden coal-boxes, with a lid lilce
the japanned ones, but ornamented simply with good
metal mountings and hinges, are at once convenient in
shape, and inoffensive, nay, really pleasing to the eye.
But it is time to turn from our critics to our advisers in
matters of taste. Among the very latest, are the authors of
a set of dainty little lavender-coloured books, called the
Art at Home Series. The first treats of Art in the House,
chiefly ornamental art; and the second, by the Misses
Garrett, is a Guide to House Decoration, or, according to our
division of the subject. Decorative Art. May we venture
to remind our readers, before taking up the most tasteful
hand-books, that nothing is more dangerous to natural
taste than endeavouring to admire what we really do not
admire, because we are told we ought ? This is different
from supposing that there is, in such a case, probably some¬
thing admirable which we do not yet see, and suspending our
judgment till further acquaintance or study may decide
whether the thing in question really pleases us or not. The
want of appreciation may be from our own dulness, but
we should never affect a taste we have not got. Genuine¬
ness is a great guardian of good taste, and the best protec¬
tion against fashionable mistakes. The little hand-books
before us seem full of useful hints, and might well be con¬
sulted by people about to furnish. It is rather amusing to
find, that the style of furniture most recommended is not the
mediseval form which was extolled in former guide-books,
but the plain shapes and somewhat spindle-legged fashions
of the days of Queen Anne.    The  ideal dressing-table in
Domestic Art. 27
House Decoration is a well-known shape in oldish country
houses, where, as is the wont of old furniture, instead of
descending, it has generally ascended to the attics, and is
rather scorned by the maids. Probably, with other articles
of the same date, it may still be picked up cheap at out-of-
the-way broker's shops, and might prove a good investment
while the fashion lasts. We doubt whether that wiU be
long; it seems rather a reaction from badly applied orna¬
ment to no ornament at all, as far as regards chairs and
tables. The fine wood-carving which is often found in
houses of that date, and has real beauty both of form and
execution, we generally see as a fixture on mantelpieces or
architraves, and to our eye at least the contemporary-
furniture, if simple, is uninteresting, and not very convenient.
The mantelpieces are very pretty, with their double shelves
and little reflecting mirrors, and would look charming
sprinkled with some of the china which used to be the pride
of the readers of the Spectator. It may be observed, that
the great plate-glass mirror, which is the delight of
the modern upholsterer, is so far from being considered
handsome, that directions are given for dividing it into
little squares. In wall-decoration, the fashion seems still to
incline rather towards neutral colours intended for back¬
grounds, than towards the mural painting most in vogue a
few years ago; but good remarks are made about both styles,
and we are much recommended to stencil our walls with
diaper patterns ourselves. Formerly, when an ordinary
house needed painting and papering, the nearest house-painter
used to put on the most fashionable papers, grain the wood
of the best rooms, and give three coats of paint to the rest;
so surely real progi'ess is marked by its being considered
interesting amateur work. This progress dates probably
from the time of the Exhibition of 1851; and the opening
of Italy to the middle-classes by means of the railways has
done much to further it.
The first visit to Italy is a revelation in decorative art to
those who have eyes to see. Not only are the halls of
the great palaces splendid with frescoes and harmonious
colours, but on the walls of the rooms, in common villas and
roadside inns, we find free.-hand designs in distemper that,
however rough, are full of character and grace. For the
people there are surrounded by good models; they see the
rich forms of their vegetation translated into noble con¬
ventional art, in paintings, metal, and stone, on every side ;
any average Italian coun try town abounds in artistic work.
28 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
and the hand and eye of the workmen receive an uncon¬
scious education. You may buy designs for wall or ceiling
ornament, cut in paper so that they may be easily filled in
with paint, of quite remarkable quality in art. In France,
on the contrary, though there is much taste and beauty of
decoration in the best houses, the gaudy conventional
patterns that content the lower orders, show that they have
not by nature the artistic instinct of the Italians.
May we not also congratulate ourselves on our progress
in needlework? Contrast the monstrous renderino; of figures
from popular prints of 30 years ago with our modern em¬
broidery, full of the variety and vitality of design which
marks good and thoughtful work. Here, and also in tile-
painting, we find the revival of almost lost arts. Beautiful
work is done by amateurs in ornamental tiles. It should be
remembered always, though patterns drawn on walls, if the
intervals are correct, need not have all the pi'ecision of wall
papers, that the utmost purity of outline is necessary for
tiles. Figures, therefore, where the form is all-important,
had better be attempted only by correct draughtsmen. The
difficulty is, that the same incorrectness of eye that is the
cause of bad drawing, is also the cause of a want of percep¬
tion of the painful results. And, especially in this country,
where teaching is apt not to be thorough, a certain talent
for landscape and flower drawing may go with a disastrous
want of perception of figure drawing. In general, those who
find that after some practice they can neither draw a beauti¬
ful nor a cliaracteristic face from life or memory, had better
give up figure drawing; the root of the matter is not in
them.
Tiles combine beautifully with wood-work, or almost
any wall decoration; but may we be allowed to protest
against a kindred fashion, which we have always disliked,
and to which we never get reconciled by custom, and
that is, rows of plates hung upon the wall ? Plates were
never meant thus to expose themselves, they should be seen
in perspective,or handled and examined; the upright position
is only really suitable to metal salvers in relief It should
be remembered that, for those who are not special china
fanciers, they are round, unadaptable discs, suggestive of
food, and essentially ugly in form, as are cups and saucers.
Their beauty, and it may be great, is not that of form, so it is
not their form that should be chiefly shown off. And when
they have only that subtle, or we may call it historical
beauty, which is invisible to all but the expert in china.
Domestic Art. 29
they are enough like targets for a sinister longing to shy
something at them, to suggest itself to the ordinary beholder.
Ill cabinets, or china closets, or on shelves, they look in their
place, but we think that in the dairy only are they a suitable
lining for the walls.
An excellent idea is suggested in one of the hand-books,
that boys should be taught carving, if they show any apti¬
tude in handling tools. Then they might carve mantel¬
pieces, frames, and furniture. What a valuable direction to
give those restless, not to say mischievous energies that have
troubled many of us on wet days, or long evenings in the
holidays !
Let us not forget, however, that amateur decorative work
ought to be really good—ought, indeed, to be judged by the
same standard as professional work. It seems not always
gracious or easy to criticise amateur productions ; and cer¬
tainly, as regards the fine arts, a good painting or statue
demands so much, that few can hope to produce either who
do not follow art as a profession. But the subordinate
decorative arts of tile-painting, ornamental carving, pattern
drawing, with their far fewer requirements, needing far less
time, power, and study, must be thoroughly well done.
If we do not pay workmen, we must work well ourselves.
However, as these books assure us, a pleasant and a lovely
home need not be expensive; nor need even a taste for
collecting, which some think must cost at least as much as
six hunters. Collections may absolutely pay. You may
buy cheap and sell dear, if you have taste and good luck,
besides the pleasure, the cultivation, and the interest they
bring. But it seems more than a pleasure : it is a duty for
such of us as have means sufficient, and houses Avhich
are a centre of family life, to make our homes attractive
and beautiful. This is a " work for women," about wliich
there can hardly be a difference of opinion, and we hope
it may progress so well that Miss Garrett's melancholy
criticism may soon be inappropriate. "Little is known,
and still less is cared," she says, " about the principles of
decorative art. If, therefore, we take an ordinary London
drawing-room as a true index of the mind of its owner, we
can only reflect with dismay how little artistic knowledge
is yet to be found in our midst." And this among people
who travel hundreds of miles " to see the treasures of art
abroad." E. J. 0.
30 The Ladies Editiburgh Magazine.
The debates of the past year have been distinguished by great vigour
and interest.
In January, the question, " Does the study of physical science
tend to shake religious belief?" produced two able papers on
each side. The proj^oser of the negative maintained that there could
be no contradiction between true science and true religion ; that science
did not pretend to solve the mystery of the beginning of all things, nor,
in discovering the laws of nature, to disclose the maker of those laws ;
that the wave of scejsticisiu at present passing over Christendom was
really due to many and complex causes, and was not so universal as
often supposed, but that many phenomena showed great increase in
belief and earnestness in religion. The paper of the seconder well
followed up tliis argument by numerous apt quotations from able
scientific writers, showing that they maintained that there was nothing
in their studies which tended to shake their belief. The attirniative was,
however, forcibly maintained and illustrated l.iy quotations ; and it was
also seconded, though the seconder dwelt rather too much on savage
superstitions exploded by the light of science—a point undisputed
by all. An animated discussion took pilace, and the voting showed a
majority of eight for the negative, out of twenty-six votes.
A very amusing debate occupied the February meeting : " If a
woman wishes .to repair defects of early education, is it better for her
first to prepare herself for the local examinations, than to pass at once
to higher branches of study ?"—a topic particularly interesting to our
Society, from the number of candidates who were prej^aring for the
local examinations here. Most excellent papers were read, those in
the affirmative giving amusing instances of defects in knowledge of
ordinary subjects, wliich must have come home with great force to all
present. Those on the negative side took the groiind, that defects in
early education must be put uji with, as the period for repairing tliem
had passed away, and that the mind would be better employed on
higher branches more suitaUe to its maturer growth. In the subse¬
quent discussion each side was defended with such ability, that out of
twenty-three votes the majority was only one for the negative ; but the
affirmative may claim the best of all tests, namely, the jjractical one of
the number of ladies who came forward and j)assed the local examina¬
tions here last Jvme.
The question debated in March was, " Has belief in witchcraft,
sorcery, apparitions, and spiritualism any foundation in truth ? " The
affirmative was maintained in an interesting paper full of amusing
illustrations, well authenticated, arguing that the number of stories
of ajjparitions vouched for by people in noways credulous, or iinder
any expectation of seeing such sights—in fact, in most cases ignorant of
any story attached to the place where the api)arition appeared, and
devoid of any anxiety regarding the person they said they saw—must
be regarded as evidence of a substratum of truth in the reality of such
apparitions. This paper was chiefly confined to this one branch of the
subject, as was the very able and philosojdncal jxiper wliich followed
on the negative side, which put out of court as indefensilile  any
Debates of tJie Ladies Literary Society. 31
belief in witchcraft, sorcery, &c., and said that the belief in ghosts was
a lingering remnant of such superstitions, and ought to be relegated to
the same category of untenable opiaiions. The seconder of the affirm¬
ative maintained not only that there was some ground for belief in
apparitions, but that possession, as described in the New Testament,
and perhaps some cases of witchcraft and sorcery could not be ac¬
counted for ^vithout recourse to the supernatural ; but this branch of
the subject was not taken up ; and after a paper by tlie seconder of the
negative, a keen and long discussion followed, and the votes showed a
majority of one for the " ghosts," many members however declining to
vote either for or against them.
In April, the subject of animals having any moral responsibility gave
a large audience a most interesting paper in the affinnative, full of
anecdotes of the ways and habits of animals, many of them authenti¬
cated by the personal observation of the writer, evidently well versed
in the subject, and specially bearing on the point in question.
Arguments on the opposite side were ably advanced, and both sides
found seconders, and also much support in the subsecj^uent animated
discussion ; but preconceived opinions may have had some influence on
the voting, which showed a majority of six for the negative out of
eighteen votes; while a large number of members declining to vote may
be accounted for by the difficulty, to which attention was drawn by a
speaker, that to argue out the subject properly, would first require a
philosophical discussion on the origin and explanation of moral
responsibility.
The question," Is the mind conscious in sleep ?" which occupied the
Society in May, produced the unusual result of all present voting in
the affirmative, excepting the proposer and seconder of the negative,
who declined to vote ; but this unanimity did not jtrevent both the
papers, and the general discussion which followed, from being very
iaiteresting and well illustrated.
The meeting in June was large, and the subject debated was, " Has
scepticism had a worse effect on society than superstition ?" The
affirmative side was strongly supported in two papers of much alnlity,
but partly owing to the vague wording of the (question, they were
rather beside the point. One especially, full of learning, illustration,
and quotation, was very interesting, but it dealt more with the baneful
effects of scepticism in religion compared with hdief, than with super¬
stition. One observation in this paper was very true, namely, that
we have seen the harm of superstition, but that we have not yet seen
the worst effects of scepticism ; but here again, the question being
worded in the past tense, this point could scarcely be allowed its
proper weight. The negative side was ably argued, antl history appealed
to for evidence of the evils which have owed their origin to supersti¬
tion. A member, who is not so often present at these Debates as is
wished, then made a very able speech, pointing out the ambiguous
wording of the question, as scepticism philosophically does not bear the
po]^)ular meaHing attached to it, when the term is limited to matters of
religion ; and she truly said that, in the jjapers she had heard, the large
branch of the subject relating to philosophy had been entirely omitted,
and consequently the consideration of the benefits owing to those who
had revolutionized philosophic thought, by the great principle of taking
nothing for grantecl till it had been proved. A good many members
declined to vote, feeling that the subject had not been thoroughly
argued out, and only thirteen votes were recorded, with a majority of
three for the negative.
3^ Tlie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
In accordance with an arrangement made in June, a pleasing
variety was introduced in July, though only a small number assembled
to take part in it. Each member present chose a favourite character
in Shakespeare's plays. Cordelia, Hermoine, Imogen, Kent, and Shylock
eacli found a supporter, while Henry V. was chosen by two members.
A short analysis of each character, illustrated by passages read from the
]")lays, followed ; but no voting was required, and the Society adjourned
ibr the summer, to meet again in October.
" Are the works of Miss Terrier superior to those of Mrs Gaskell ? "
was the question taken up on the Society re-assembling, when Miss
Terrier's superiority was maintained in an excellent pajjer, which
dwelt upon the living individuality of her various portraits, on
her keen sense of the ridiculous, and admirable use of satire. The
extracts, read with such a charm of thorough appreciation, made the
audience wish them longer, and were happily chosen as specimens of
the author's wit and humour, and appreciation of simple homely good¬
ness as shown in the character of^ Molly Macarilay. A comparison
between this author and Miss Austin was made on the common
ground of their excellence in portraying the everyday life of the society
in which they severally lived, and of their power in casting the
charm of their own genius round commonplace characters and
incidents, owing nothing to the adventitious aids of romantic scenes,
perils, and adventures. Admitting all said in praise of Miss Terrier,
it was argued on the other side that this might be said with equal
truth" of Mrs Gaskell, and that more excellencies and powers were
exhibited in her works, giving therefore to her the palm of superiority.
In the humdrum life of Cranford, Mrs Gaskell meets Miss Terrier on
her own ground, and holds her own, there and elsewhere, in the keen
encounter of playful wit. Miss Matty and good old Alice are not out-
shown in simple goodness by Molly Macaulay ; while in her larger
works we dwell on characters and incidents wherein good and evil,
sorrow and suffering, tragic interest, tender pathos, human weakness
and strength, are portrayed with a power and beatity of style second
to none in the English language. The audience in general shared this
latter opinion, as out of seventeen votes, eleven awarded the palm to
Mrs Gaskell ; four declining to vote.
In November, the debate was upon the question, " Is German
literature superior to English '?" and was lively and brilliant, the papers
on both sides being excellent, and admitting of a good deal of anecdote
and repartee. The seconders both spoke instead of reading, one of them
being a newly admitted member, and therefore unprejjared. On the
German side, it was forcibly argued that there were certain departments
of mental culture, among them some of the most important to humanity,
in which English thinkers and \raters had not attained to any very great
degree of excellence ; and that, even in such branches as History and
Biography, many of the standard English works were so dull as to be
seldom thoroughly read. On the other side, the papers read displayed
much acquaintance with the best works of both countries, and main¬
tained that English literature covered a much larger area, and occuj)ied
a greater place, in the general history of the world, than German had
ever done. The seconder on the same side took up this statement,
and enlarged it by saying that, judging by the two ^japers before the
meeting, there was a slight confusion of ideas, neither side having
given any definition of literature. Presuming that by national
literature we mean the mind of a nation exjjressed in its books, it
certainly would seem that the literature was superior which covered
Double Acrostic. 33
most of the history of a great people, entering into every department,
public or private, of its life and thoughts, and leaving no sphere of its
life and activity unrepresented in its books. Another pleasant and
interesting speech was made, by a new member on the German side
specially defending German fiction, and giving anecdotes of German
domestic manners from personal experience. But after hearing
another short though striking paper on the English side read by a
good German scholar, who had the merit of thoroughly entering
into the beauty and nobleness of many German writers in their own
lines, the votes of the meeting showed a decided superiority on the
English side of the question, the members being three for the affirmative,
and fourteen for the negative, eight members declining to vote.
In December, the necessary business of the Society occupied so long
a time that the debate was adjourned to the next meeting; and it
only remains for us to repeat the hope expressed at the close of last
year, that more members will take part in future debates. The list
proposed is large and varied, and any new subject will be gladly
received. It has been mentioned that some of the foregoing debates
required a considerable amount of knowledge of philosophy ; and we
are certainly greatly indebted to those members who have given us
such able papers on subjects which could only be well handled by
those whose talents and reading in that line enable them to speak
on those subjects ; but variety is pleasing, and very lively and spirited
papers and speeches have proceeded from members whose talents lie
in other directions.
■ w ■• » '^ms^- » ■■ » •
DOUBLE   ACKOSTIC,   No.   1.
Round, brown, and steaming,
Behold me now appear,
With holly wreath and flaming crown.
To welcome in the year.
" This is a day, in days of yore,
Our fathers never saw before :
This is a day, 'tis one to ten.
Our sons will never see again."
1. "With spectacles on nose and pouch on side ;
His youthful hose well saved, a world too wide
For his shrunk shank ; and his big manly voice,
Turning again towards childish treble, pipes
And whistles in his sound."
2. " A mighty maze ! but not without a plan."
3. You, and your doubk, in union, you'U find
Are two letters we see very seldom combined.
4. " Not the king's crown, nor the deputed sword.
The marshal's truncheon, nor the judge's robe,
Become them with one-half so good a grace "—
No. 1.—January 1877.
34 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
5. It " rules the day, where reason rules the mind."
6. Trophy from a savage king
Which our army home did bring.
7. " Gome, let me clutch thee."
8. —" traitors,"
Which " make us lose the good we oft might win,
By fearing to attempt."
9. He's another—ditto—the same.
10. " It would seem
As if God poured thee from His ' hollow hand,'
And hung His bow upon thine awful front,
And spoke in that loud voice, which seemed to him
Who dwelt in Patmos for his Saviour's sake,
' The sound of many waters.'"
11. " Go where " it " waits thee."
F. M.
A Prize is offered at the close of the year to the solver of the greatest
number of acrostics. Solutions to be sent to the Editors, care of the
Publishers, 22 Hmm Street, Edinburgh, not later than the 15th of
each month, and to be written clearly on a sheet of paper con¬
taining only the solution, signature, and full name and addj-ess of the
sender. Correct solutions will be acknowledged in the following
number. The name and address of the winner only will be announced
at the close of the competition.
• D - 9» -^iH^. » - J> ■
OUR    LIBRAEY    TABLE.
Eecords of the Coinage op Scotland, from the Earliest Period
to the Union. Collected by R. W. Cochran Patrick, Esquire,
of Woodside, LL.B. Cantab., F.S.A. Scot., etc., etc. 2 vols.
Edinburgh : Edmonston & Douglas, 1876.
These beautiful volumes, although perhaps not calculated to arouse
the interest of the general reader, must attract the admiration of the
most casual observer. The subject is one possessing for every
educated Scotchman an interest of its own ; the book will form an
addition to his library which the antiquary must highly appreciate,
alike for the elaborate and exhaustive research evidenced by the Intro¬
duction, forming the bulk of the first volume, and for the historical
and other records which are embraced in the remainder of the work.
The 15 plates of engravings of Early Scottish Coins, placed at the end of
vol. ii., are executed in a manner in the highest degi'ee artistic and
admirable.
The volimies have the honour of dedication to the Queen, " by
special permission ;" this unusual favour being granted on a due repre¬
sentation to Her Majesty of the national character of their contents.
Our Library Table. 35
Joshua Haggart's Daughter.   By Miss Braddon.
London : Maxwell & Co., 1876.
In Joshua Haggart's Daughter, Miss Braddon depends for the
interest of the story more on the delineation of character, and less on
the commission of crime and its detection, than in many of her
previous works. The characters are more natural, and there is no
incarnate fiend to whom murder comes as second nature, as an easy
mode of disposing of inconvenient people.
Joshua Haggart is a methodist preacher in Devonshire, who follows
the example of the Apostles in labouring with his hands as well as
preaching the Gospel ; in so far, at least, that he keeps the grocer's
shop of the village, aided by his sister Judith. His shop is famed for
the goodness of the articles sold there. He is a man so scrupulously
true, that his wife, who, before marriage, worshipped him as a hero
and saint, does not find her illusions dispelled. He is resolute and
courageous. He is ascetic, thinking demonstrations of feeling wrong,
but a man of strong passions ; and in that he finds his ruin.
His daughter is formed after the mould of her father, but she is too
cold and self-possessed to be a lovable heroine. Her father stands
first in her heart. Her lover is a weak, dreamy youth, unworthy of
her ; Aunt Judith and Jem are natural well-drawn characters, and so
are the Miss Weblings, whose fronts and black velvet bands remind
us of ladies of a certain age whom we met in the days of our youth.
The stoiy is interesting, but unpleasant. Is it good to depict the
failure of a man who might have made a Bunyan ? Is it not better, as
it is more pleasant, to .study the characters of those who
" Rise on stepping-stones
Of their dead selves to higher things ?"
Nevertheless, if the secret of a good novel is to paint people as they
are, so that they become real personages to the reader, we must admit
that in this, in her last novel, Miss Braddon has been successful.
" Carrots :"   Just a Little Boy.    By Ennis Graham.
London :   Macmillan & Co., 1876.
We feel inclined to speak very enthusiastically of this little tale,
written ostensibly for childien, but possessing a true charm for those
who do not think it, as the motto suggests—
" A great mistake
That boys were ever made at all."
The little hero, however, is not more interesting than his motherly
little sister Floss ; and we think the character-painting of the other
children, however slight it be, both life-like and clever. The story
introduced of the " Two Funny Little Trots," is quite an idyll of child life.
Do our little Mends sometimes reason a little too logically'! yet we
must remember how startlingly clear the judgment of a child some¬
times is. The solitary railway journey is perhaps a somewhat improb¬
able incident.
The illustrations of the book are pretty and spirited ; and the aptly
chosen quotations heading each chapter are admirable. We think
" Carrots " would make a very good Christmas dinner for some little
people !
36 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
STEAYNOTES.
The Council of the University College, London, have awarded the
Joseph Hume Scholarship in Jurisprudence, of £20 a-year for three
years, to Miss Eliza Orme, who has already taken the first place in all
the classes that women are permitted to attend at this institution, and
who is now making hcr way in conveyancing and such other active
business at the law as is allowed to persons who are not called to the
Bar. It may be a long time, the A thenmum remarks, before the Benchers
of the Inns will grant the " caU " to women ; but if they prove them¬
selves worthy of it, it can only be a c[uestion of time. We in Edinbiu-gh
must feel a special interest and pride in this modem Portia, owing to
her being the sister-in-law of one of our most learned professors.
The Edinburgh University Local Examinations seem to be making
considerable stir this year among ladies in Scotland, and even in
some parts of England as well. In addition to the usual preparations
made in many of the public and in some of the private schools in
Edinburgh, we hear there is a large class of ladies preparing, under the
guidance of an able tutor, for these Examinations in June. Eather a
novel and interesting feature of this class is, that, l)y a system of teach¬
ing by corresjjondence, ladies at a distance from Edinburgh are en¬
abled to work in connection with it. We hear that upwards of thirty
ladies have availed themselves of this privilege.
An ardent lover of certain departments of Natural History has just
died at the advanced age of ninety years—Mrs Gray. To students of
conchology Mrs Gray was a real benefactor, having compiled a Mono¬
graph on Molluscous Animals, which was published in five volumes,
and having etched some thousands of plates. She has bequeathed
her extensive set of algae to the Museum of the University of Cambridge.
We hear that the story of Helen's Babies, written in ten days by
Mr John Habburton, to amuse an invalid wife, has already reached an
edition of 40,000 copies.
A JOURNAL, edited exclusively by women, has been brought out at
Lyons ; it is called The Volcano. Has the name any special significance,
we wonder ?
On Saturday, the 2nd December, the Bishop of London admitted two
ladies to the office of Deaconess, who have passed through a year's
training.
It is rumoured that a lady is about to be placed in the Vestry of one
of our Scottish Episcopal Churches in this city. There certainly
seems to be no reason against such an appointment, as the only legal
qualifications consist in being in communion with the Church, and
a regular seatholder.
Sir Julius Vogel, in his speech to his constituents at Wanganni,
stated that he was in favour of extending the franchise to women.
It is stated that Herr Wagner was so delighted with the Life of
Schopenhauer, lately published by an English lady, that he presented
her with a ticket for the performances at BeyTeuth.
The Empress of Austria has forwarded to Mrs Burton a magnificent
gold locket with Her Majesty's monogram and imperial crown in
(liamonds, as a mark of her appreciation of Mrs Burton's work. The
Inner Life of Syria.
Our Female Novelists. 37
Our   J;cm;ih  |Iobc(ists.
Mrs EADCLIFFE,
I. 17G4 ; il. 1823.
The great poets have almost all been men, but many women
may be coimted among the great novelists. In this de¬
partment of literatiu'e they have always held their own.
Naturally it is so. History and myth acknowledge it—women
are the first, and often the l)est tellers of stories. It is tlie old
nurse's tale which gives the children their first delicicjus
taste of fiction. It was Sclielierazade who beguiled her
Sultan night after night with those delicious entertainments,
where stories lie within stories, like nests of scented easftern
boxes. It was the Edda or great-grandmother who recomited
the traditions and myths of the Nortli. And every modern
European literature can show the name of some first-rate
female novelist.
When we think it over, what a curious thing is this almost
universal taste for fiction, in ancient times and modern,
among rude people and civilized!    It might have seemed as
if the  craving for the ideal which belongs   to humanity
would find its satisfaction in poetry and romantic drama,
in which ideal beauty expresses itself through language.
But no : we have, besides these, the endless stories Avhich aim
at being like real life and yet are not real, having sometimes
every quality of truth except that of being true;   crowds
upon crowds of personages invented by some people, whose
lives and fortunes are followed with the deepest interest by
others who are quite aware all the time of their non-existence.
We have the readers by the million, and the writers by the
thousand, of imitated lives and untrue adventures.    Fiction,
thus considered, falls easily into two great divisions—one
more or less poetical, aiming at the ideal and heroic ; the
other seeking to please rather by its resemblance to real life.
Mrs Radcliffe, the subject of our present paper, is not
perhaps to be counted among the great novelists, but we
would place her in the first or poetical division of writers of
fiction.    Her  stories are  thrilling, strange, and mysterious
beyond all ordinary possibilities; they are the legitimate
successors of the romances of chivalry, and her style also is
choice and elevated.    Sir Walter Scott calls her the " first
poetess of romantic fiction, if actual rhythm lie not counted
Xo. 2«.—FFBP,t;\r.Y 1S77. y
38 Tlie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
necessary to poetry," saying that those who wrote in that
style before her were decidedly prose writers.
She was indeed much tliouglit of in her day: it is strange,
almost pathetic, when we try to recall her memory from
the misty past, to realize how she and her books seem all
but forgotten now. Let us look back to the " nineties " of
the last century, and we see a little figure, fctiU, gracefully
formed, Mdth a rarely beautiful complexion, very pretty eyes,
eye-brows, and mouth, strait-laced both as to gown and
morals, amiable, and, above all, full of weird imaginations,
held in check by a quaint primness that would never venture
to violate any rule, however arbitrary, whether social or
literary.
She was born hi 1764, the only child of William and Ann
Ward, who were in trade of some sort. Their birth and
connections seem to have been rather above their calling,
and we are told how they had a female descent from the De
Witts of Holland, and also that Ann Ward, afterwards Mrs
Radcliffe, lived much with her aunt ]\Irs Bentley, of the firm
of Wedgwood & Bentley, meeting there good society, and
certainly, as we would now observe, seeing plenty of good
china, which may have refined her tastes for life. The family
seem to have been what was then approvmgly called very
genteel; they tliought the position of an authoress a little
doubtful, and Mrs Radcliife herself was sensitive on the point,
and shrank both from publicity and criticism. It is told of her
with some complacency,that lier education was old-fashioned,
and limited to strictly feminine accomplishments, wliich we
feel inclined to regret when we hear that she delighted in good
verbal sounds, and loved to hear passages from the Latin and
Greek classics in the original, and then exact idiomatic trans¬
lations. Evidently, she had not enough width of culture to
see beyond the rules of taste of the day; she was emphatically
what the French call de son si&cle, and her true genius
was so hampered by it, that lier books seem hardly likely to
live. In her twenty-third year she married Mr Radcliffe, an
Oxford graduate, in good circumstances, and editor of a news¬
paper. She began to write during his long evening
absences at his newspaper work; and after two or three un¬
important youthful attempts, she published, in 1791, the
Romcmce of the Forest, which made a considerable sensation.
It was followed, in 1794, by The Mysteries of Udolpho, which
was received with enthusiasm. Not less vigorous and
successful was Tlie Italian, published in 1797, and then she
stopped at the high tide of her reputation.    The little lady
Our Foiuilc Novelists. 39-
seems to have had no motive for writing more : she did not
need money, she rather disliked applause, and could not hear
criticism. Very likely she was annoyed hy the crowd of
inferior imitators who caricatured her style. She wrote
another story, merely for her own and her husband's
amusement, Gaston de Blondevillc, in which we think the
influence of Scott may he traced. It was only pul)lished
after her death, which took place in 1823. Her life seems
to have been singularly pleasant and uneventful; she had a
good husband, and no children. The Eadcliifes lived near
London, and often made little tours in England, of which
she has left very good descriptions. It is curious to observe
in these the old-fashioned views of distances; the Isle of
Wight had then the kind of remote interest that Ceylon has
now. The gTeat event of her life seems to have been a tour
in Holland and up the Eliine in 1793. No doubt, tlie old
Rhenish castles aided her imagination in conceiving that
unequalled ideal building, that abode of mystery and terror,
the Castle of Udolpho.
She was not a prolific author, but the three books v.diich
survTve are all highly finished, and all in the same key.
They belong to what has been called the Terrorist school,
working tlie emotion of fear by means of mysterious (hmgers
and artfully wrought descriptions. Probably Horace Walpole
gave the impetus in that direction by liis wild tale of the
Castle of Otranto.
The plots of Mrs Eadcliffe's novels are exciting and
artfully developed, and the word-painting of scenery, and
above all of " interiors," is admirable. So few take up these
old liooks now, that a slight sketch of the sort of materials
of which they are all composed may be interesting to some
of our readers. In the Romance of the Forest (period about
1650), Adeline, a lovely orphan whose uncle wishes to
murder her, finds a refuge in the family of the second villain,
who is outlawed. They take up their abode, without leave
asked, in a half-ruined, deserted, enormous abbey in tlie
depth of a French forest. They kill the surrounding game,
and have terrible adventures among the endless passages of
the abbey. They never can explore it all; but their
wanderings there remind one of the delightful game of hi-
sjvj, when you steal up every staircase and open every door
with the nervous expectation of something jumping out upon
you and giving cliase. The poor heroine is terribly over¬
matched ; many villains are against her, and no one is on
her side but the hero, early conveyed to a dungeon, and a
40 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
comic servant not wholly reliable. It is knight and pawn
against the board; however, white wins at last, virtue is
trium^jhant, black is check-mated, and they all go to
Chamonix! a hundred years before it was ever heard of,
and live happy in the neighbourhood ever after. Nothing
can be more prettily behaved and coy than the heroine.
AVhen the worst villain has caused his valet to carry her off'
l)y force, she speaks thus—" My first wish is to go hence.
I entreat you, my lord, no longer to detain me; I am a friend¬
less and wretched orphan exposed to many evils, and I fear
abandoned to misfortune: / do not ivish to he rude; hut
alloiu me to say, that no misery can exceed that I shall feel
in remaining here," &c. The italics are our own. The hero
is. also a very proper young man. This is the way in which
he makes an appointment with Adeline in the forest:
'"l*romise, therefore, to meet me in some part of the forest
at about this time to-morrow evening; you will then, I hope,
be convinced that my conduct is directed neither by com¬
mon circumstances nor common regard.' Adeline shuddered
at the idea of making an appointment," &c.
The abbey and forest are very well described, and what of
human interest there is in the book belongs to the villains,
who are drawn with some vigour. But after all, this story
yields in interest to the Mi/steries of Udolijho. The
description in it of the castle in the Apennines, whither the
heroine is conveyed witli her aunt, who imprudently married
the chief villain, and also the narrative of the gloom and
remoteness of tlie life of the helpless women, who find some
dreadful mystery closing roimd them more and more, are
really masterly. Here is the description of their arrival at
the castle:—
" Towards the close of tlie day, the road woiind into a dee]) YaHey.
Mountains, whose shaggy steeps appeared to be inaccessibk% almost
(surrounded it. To the east, a vista opened, and exhibited the
A])eiinine9 in their darkest horrors ; and the long jierspective of retiring
summits rising over each other, their ridges clothed with jiines, ex¬
hibited a stronger image of grandeur than any that Emily had yet seen.
The sun had just sunk below the top of the mountains she was
descending, whose long shadow stretched athwart the valley ; but his
sloping rays, shooting through an ojiening of the cliff, touched with a
yellow gleam the summits of the forest that hung ujjon the opposite
steeps, and streamed in full sjilendour upon the towers and battlements
of a castle that sj)read its extensive ramparts along the brow of a
precipice above. The splendour of these illumined objects was
heightened by the contrasted shade which involved the valley below.
" ' There,' said Montoni, sjieaking for the first time in several hours,
'isUdolpho.'
"As she gay.ed, the light died away on it-; walls, leaving a n\elancholy
Our Female Novelists. 41
purple tint, which spread deeper and deeper as the thin vapour crept up
the mountains, while the battlements above were still tip])ed with
splendour. From those, too, tlie rays soon faded, and the wliole edifice
was invested with the solemn duskiness of eveinng. Silent, lonely, and
sublime, it seemed to stand the sovereign of the scene, and to frown
defiance on all who dared t(j invade its solitary reign. ... At
length the carriages emei-ged upon a heathy rock, and soon after
reached the castle gates, where the deep tone of the portal bell, which
was struck upon to give notice of their arrival, increased the fearful
emotions which had assailed Emily. While they waited till the ser¬
vant within should come to open tlie gates, she anxiously surveyed the
edifice ; but the gloom that overspread it allowed lier to distinguish
little more than a i)art of its outline, with the many walls of tlie ram¬
parts, and to know that it was vast, ancient, and dreary. The gateway
before her, leading into the courts, was of gigantic size, and was
defended by two round towers, crowned by overhanging turrets,
embattled, where, instead of banners, now waved long grass and wild
plants that had taken root among the mouldering stones, and which
seemed to sigh as tlie breeze rolled past o^er the desolation around
them. The towers were united by a curtain, pierced and embattled
also, below which appeared the pointed arch of a huge portcullis ; I'rom
these the walls of the ramparts extended to other towers, overlooking
the precipice, whose shattered outline, appearing on a gleam that
lingered in the west, told of the ravages of war. Bejond these, all was
lost in the obscurity of evening."
Xot inferior, except perhaps as a Llunder in the general
composition of the story, is the other castle in the same book,
the haunted robljers' nest in the Pyrenees; and we can
rememl)er how travel both in the Pyrenees and the Apen¬
nines derived an extra interest and weird charm from the sort
of expectation raised of coming upon one of those wonderful
buildings. Sir Walter Scott considered it was no disad-
A'antage to him not to have seen some of the scenes which
he described ; that " any attempt to make such scenes more
exact, injured the effect without conveying a clearer image
to the mind of the reader—as the Utopian scenes and
manners in j\Irs Radcliffe's novels captivated tlie imagina¬
tion more than the most laboured descriptions or the greatest
historical accuracy." No doubt, Mrs Radcliffe casts a halo
over the Apennine passes, as Fouqu^ does over the Nor¬
wegian mountains v/hicli he never saw; Miss Yonge glori¬
fies the old city of Ulm in her story of The Dove in the
IJar/les NeM, and many more such instances might be quoted.
But our modern most fashionable novelists, in their eager
pursuit of the real, positively take an edge off tlie charm of
travel instead of enhancing it. Mr A. Trollope. for instance,
often transports you to some famed place abroad, only to
force you to remark the prosy details of travel, the amusing
,meaimess of the tourists, or the cuiminc; and greed of the
42 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
inhabitants ; and George Elliot, in her last book, brings you to
a (Jenoa depri^'ed of all its charm. The spirit of beauty
seems to have deserted those anxious copiers of things as
they are, who have forgotten, apparently, that beauty is also
a reality, but of a douljle nature, requiring not only an eye
for the real, but a mind which responds to that large ex¬
pression of loveliness which some places possess, and which
some writers can rejnoduce so strongly and clearly. " Never
drink coifee at Jerusalem," says one of Trollo])e's characters.
" Jerusalem is an English place, and the English spoil the
cotliee wherever they go." The remark is perfectly true, and
the English tourist is apt to spoil more than the cofi'ee—
romance and poetical associations are apt to be spoiled
wherever he abounds.
The Sicilian is probably the most powerful, certainly
the most dramatic, of the three novels, but we think it has
less charm than the others. It turns upon the adventures
of a pair who are persecuted by the Tiupiisition in Sicily,
and the dungeons of that society of villains need no ghost
to heighten their mysterious horrors. The thrilling scenes
are artfully interspersed with charming descriptions of
scenery and idyllic peasants—it is the Italy, not of the guide
books, but of Claude or Salvator Eosa's pictures ; as really
Italy, though from a diflerent point of view, as one of
Browning's most characteristic descriptions.
We may well ask why, wdth so much that is vigorous and
beautiful in them, ]\Irs Eadcliffe's novels seem destined to
be soon forgotten. The answer, we think, is, that for various
reasons few people would care to read them twice. She
never ventured to transgress the conventional rules of her
day, and she had the disadvantage of being a writer of
romances at a most unromantic period. Not only was the
supernatural treated with contemptuous incredulity, but it
seemed just then to have lost the power of thrilling the
nerves of even the incredulous, which it generally possesses
when well introduced; it was considered merely ridiculous,
of no interest unless to children, and a very improper
notion for them. It is always the silly or wicked nurse
who tells ghost stories in the books of the time; even
children were expected to be enlightened little philo¬
sophers ; the old fairy tales were thrown into the fire;
and the calm, if dullish reasonings of " Saudford and
Merton," or the sober sense of " Tutor" in Uvenings at
Home, were expected to supply the imaginative cravings of
youth.    So poor JNIrs Eadclift'e, who would no doubt ha^
e
Our Female Novelists. 43
liked a real inexplicaLle mystery, and a possibility of
haunting her castles and corridors with sc^mething uncanny,
is obliged to explain naturally all her most thrilling
mysteries. Adeline, in the Eomance of the Forest, is
in a chaml)er hung with tattered tapestry, in the ruined
abbey; it is night; she has just discovered a secret door
leading to passages wandering on and on, who can tell how
far, passing through rooms of which she has dreamt before
she saw them, as scenes of murder. She fears to glance at
the mirror lest she should see another face than her own in
it; and then, as a terrible climax, a sound takes form as a
whisper, some " airy nothing syllables her name;" and
afterwards—0 miserable bathos ! it proves to be Peter, the
comic servant, coming to speak to her! Again, in the
Mysteries of Uclolpho—what is behind that curtain—what
mystery to which we are led by every device, till we posi¬
tively shudder at the mention of the gallery which leads to
the room where liaiigs the terrific tapestry; every one faints
who withdraws it; and at last, when our turn is come—no,
we will not here tell what befalls us—but the spell is broken
for ever. We believe the Mysteries of Udolpho would be
one of the most effective romances ever invented, if only
there were a real ghost in it. And, by all the Muses, why
should there not be ? Would the ghost be a bit less natural
than the hero, or the heroine, or all the dramatis persona. ?
There never surely were people like any of them—they are
like pictures certainly, and you know by their dress and
deportment at once what they will hereafter do and say.
The villain with compunctions, always has them just so as
to tangle the plot; the villain without compunction is
always up to his higher mark ; the hero is never other than
perfect and sorely afflicted—his lute is always in tune. The
heroine, although she has often to faint on dusty floors or
damp earth, is always dressed in a clean white gown ; she is
too coy and timid to go through the ordinary affairs of life
with any equanimity, but is drawn by a strange curiosity
mto the most appalling explorations. All the heroines
might exchange tlieir lengthy, sentimental, pointless
reflections with each other, and no one would detect the
difference. And while the deficiencies of these novels were
evident, their excellences were easily burlesqued. A
clever little sarcastic novel, called The Heroine, played the
part of Don Quixote to the Eadcliffe romance. This
heroine aims at rivalling Mrs Eadcliffe's fascinating victims.
" Finding," she says, " that in emergencies they either faint
44 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
or evince energies almost superhuman," she, l^eing unable to
faint, accordingly "evinced energies almost superhuman."
She, too, takes up her abode in a ruined castle, which is,
naturally, some one else's property, liut she is not left in
undisturbed possession, like the family in the " abbey."
She finds a poet, and also a villain whom she implores not
to leave the neighbourliood, as " the plot cannot be carried
on without him." More delicately ironical is Miss Austin's
Nortkangcr Alibcy, where the joke is wittily turned against
the romantic young lady whose head was full of expectations
of mystery and adventure, founded on her favourite romances.
Very likely these sarcasms discouraged Mrs Eadcliffe from
further writing; we know she was very sensitive to criticism,
and quite took to heart a slighting remark made on her
works in "Waverley," though the author was one of her
great admirers.
To conclude: the want of development of character,
indeed of human nature at all, in her books, causes them to
depend for their interest wholly on her line descriptions, and
the mysterious plots she knew so well how to weave; and these
last suffered from the often forced explanations she felt lioimd
to give. Hence her short-lived popularity; and hence we feel,
while readmg the Mysteries of Udolpho, that its author might
have, and probably would have written something better, had
her natural genius received a wider culture. She wrote well
on every subject she touched, and has left many charming bits
of description of her travels, showing a true enjoyment of
natural beauty, music, and painting. We conclude this paper
with a few short extracts from these, wdiich seem to make us
more acquainted with the sweet and gifted little woman.
Speaking of a picture by Claud, she says—
" And here was the poet, as well as the painter, touching the
imagination, and making you see more than the picture ciHitained.
You saw the real light of the sun, you breathed the air of the country,
you felt all the circumstances of a luxui'ious climate on the most serene
and beautiful landscape ; and the mind being tlius softened, you
almost fancied you heard Italian music on the air—the music of
Paisiello ; and such, doubtless, were the scenes which inspired hiin."
Again, at Bonchurch—
" How sweet is the cadence of the distant surge ! Tt seemed,
as we sat in our inn, as if a faint j^eal of far-otf bells mingled
with the sounds on shore, sometimes lieard, sometimes lost : the
first note of the beginning and last of the falling peal seeming always
the most distant. . . . This chiming of the surge is when
the tide is among the rocks, and the wind, blowing from tlie sea,
Tuears and softens all the ditl'erent notes of the waves to a distance,
Our Female Novelists. 45
in one harmonious cadence ; as, in a concert, your distance from the
orchestra Llends the different instruments into a riclier and softer har¬
mony."
Here is a sunset at sea between Cowes and Southampton—
" What peculiarly struck me in the passage was, not only the sun
actually appearing to set in the sea, but the splendid amber light left
upon that long perspective of water, and the vessels upon it at various
distances, seeming dark on this side, and marking out its extent to the
eye. The grace and majesty of an anchored ship, too, at a less distance,
is indescribable, showing all her shrouds and yards lessening, like a
pyramid, as they rise upon the light. How tranquil and giand the
scene lay, beneath the gradually deepening shade ! How imjiressive
the silence, and then how according the solemn strain that died ni>on
the waves like unseen and distant bugles, like a song of peace to the
departing day I Another of those measured portions that make uj)
our span of life was gone; every one who gazed upon this scene, proud
or humble, was a step nearer to the grave—yet none seemed conscious
of it. The scene itself—great, benevolent, sublime—powerful, yet
silent in its power—progressive and certain in its end, steadfast and
full of a sublime repose : the scene itself spoke of its Creator."
In the last paper she ever wrote, there is an excellent
description of Rainsgate on a stormy day, from which we
give an extract—
" Many vessels with sails set, making for the port ; pilot boats rowed
out of the harbour to meet them ; the tide rolling in, leaving the
foaming waves at its entrance, where vessels of all kinds, from ships to
fishing-boats, appeared in succession, at short inteiTals, dashing down
among the foam and rushing into the harbour. . . . This harbour
was not now, as some hours since, Hooded with a silver light, but grey
and dull, in quiet contrast with the foaming sea at its entrance. The
horizon thickened, and the scene seemed to close in ; but the vessels,
as they approach, though darker, became more visible and distinct, the
sails half-set. They all kept away a little to the westward of the west
pier, the wind south-west ; then changed their course, and dashed
round the lighthouse pierhead, tossing the foam high about them, some
pitching head foremost, as if going to the bottom, and then, rolling
helplessly and reeling in, settled in still waters."
The date is October 19, 1822 ; she was then in failing
health; within fotir months she had passed from the rough
waves of this world into the (|uiet of the unknown harbour.
E. J. 0.
-S';.il-<^«f-
Xo. 26.-FEBncABY 1877. Cr
46 The Ladies EdiiiburglL Magazine.
lu tlj^ Sen sib c.
It was a wild, stormy day. Tlie equinoctial gales seemed
to have anticipated their proper season, and on the 1st of
September the wind was blowing strongly from the south¬
west over the town of Whitclift'e, sweeping in fierce gusts
along its streets and terraces, lashing the sea up into great
foaming breakers, that dashed over the pier and on to the
deserted parade, sending great black rain-clouds hurrying
across the sky, from the far distance, where they lay piled
up, purple-black against the yellow-green sea, as if waiting
their turn to be driven on overhead, and pour a fresh deluge
over the town. A dreary, melancholy day it was to look
upon; such a day as makes us feel, for the moment, even in
earliest autumn, as if summer was altogether gone; as if
there woidd be no more out-of-door pleasures, no more bask¬
ing in the sunshine, no more sitting on the grass, no more
walks by moonlight, but as if fireside comforts were all we
could now look forward to, for the rest of the year. Such
days, inland, are inexjiressibly dreary; the more so, perhaps,
for coming when we feel we have still a right to look for
summer weather; but at the seaside there is a wild, melan¬
choly grandeur aljout them, and we would hardly exchange
those black storm clouds, and those foaming breakers, for the
purest sky and calmest sea that ever slept in sunslime.
Perhaps Bertha Stanhope thought so. Jf not, why did
she sit in that bow-window, heedless of the merry laughing
children that were dancing round her, her book lying on
her lap, her hands resting idly upon it, with sad dreamy eyes
gazing on the stormy sea ? If the picture without was
grander in its gloom, that within was far prettier in its
cheerfulness. It was a large, pleasant, bow-windowed draw¬
ing-room, somewhat barely furnished, as seaside lodging-
houses usually ai'e; but its present occupiers had turned the
furniture about, covered the bare tables with books and
writing materials, filled the ugly vases that adorned the
c'limneypiece with flowers, and given to the whole room a
cheerful, habitable air. Moreover, on this rainy day, though
it was by no means cold, a fire had been lighted, for they
did not belong to that generation who adhere religiously to
the duty of keeping the grate bright and full of shavings
from April to October, who sit upright all day in" high-backed
chairs, and keep their drawing-rooms in apple-pie order; but
to the present self-indulgent generation, who love to lounge
J>y the Seaside. 47
in easy-chairs, who litter their tables with magazines and
photographic albums, who light fires whenever they feel cold,
and drink tea at all hours of the day. In a word, they were
young people, and there, at the piano, sat Mrs Stanhope, the
mistress of the house, a pretty, elegant little woman, scarcely
five-and-twenty, and looking far too young to be the mother
of the fine well-grown children, boy and girl, who were \w\\
dancing round the room while she played to them. She
thought, as she watched her children, that it was a pretty
picture, though unconscious how much she added to its
beauty, and wondered a little that Bertha, who usually took
such interest in all the children's games, should now be so
absorbed in looking out of the window, where there was
nothing to be seen but wind and rain, as to have neither
eyes nor ears for anything else.
But Bertha was not really so occupied with the storm as
she appeared to be. The scene was m harmony with her
feelings, which at that time were full of gloom and sadness ;
but her thoughts had travelled far away to smooth green
lawns, and spreading elm trees—a pleasant place in Hertford¬
shire, that had Ijeen her home for nearly eight-and-twenty
years. There are some ainiiversaries tliat can never be for¬
gotten, however painful it may be to keep them; and this
day, this 1st of September, had always been a great era in
her old liome, associated with pleasant parties and all sorts
of coimtry amusements. It had always been to her so much
the liveliest part of the year, that the contrast with her
present homeless and orphaned position was now more than
usually painful. There was one day in particular, which
she could not help now recalling, though she knew that
to do so miglit affect her peace of mind for days to come. A
brilliant, summer-like day, just eight years ago, when she and
her sister-in-law, then a Itride, had set out late in the after¬
noon to meet the returning sportsmen ; they had a long, toil¬
ing walk in the heat, and then stood waiting their appear¬
ance, leaning over the gate at the entrance to Friar's Co])se.
How well slie remembered the scene ! The clear, cloudless
sky, tlie far away Ijlue liills, the heath, the waving birch trees
on the little knoll in front of them, and the long shadows
on the emerald grass of the fields beyond. And how pretty
Sophy looked, as she leant over the gate in her shady hat,
and tapped her little foot on the ground with impatience,
because the sportsmen did not come, and she had not seen
Ed\vard for so many hours, the longest separation she had
known since their marriage !   At last tliey appeared, coming
48 Tlie Ladies Ediiiburgli Magazine.
across the heath, the three gentlemen and the keeper—four
dark figures clearly defined against the sky, already glowing
with the hues of sunset. She used always to think that her
father never looked better than in his rough shootin" dress ;
and at the end of the day he would walk home with as light
a step as if he had not had many hours' tramp over turnip
fields ; in those days she ne^•er thought of illness or death in
connection with him, he seemed so safe from either. Edward,
too, what a boy he was then, and how pleased he looked to see
his little wife come out to meet him, and how he quickened
his steps when he saw her hurried attempts to undo the
gates and come towards him ! Some one else had also
quickened his steps, but that was not to meet Sophy.
Bertha's heart beat faster, even after all these years, when
she thought of it; she remembered how her father had gone
home to rest, and the younger men, who declared they had
had nothing of a walk, had proposed a further stroll to the
fir-trees at the other side of the heath, and she and Soi^hy
were nothing loth ; so they went, Edward and Sophy walk¬
ing together, as was natural, it being their honeymoon, and
the two others following them at a little distance. What a
beautiful walk it was' the heather still purjile, the gorse
rich with yellow flowers, the brake fern just changing from
green to gold ; and the ring of grand old firs that crowned
the knoll at the end of the heath, their rough stems warmed
to scarlet by the slanting rays, and their gnarled boughs
and dark massy foliage standing out in clear relief against
the gold and crimson clouds behind them, Avliile the soft
wind sighed gently through their branches. How long they
stayed there! The moon had risen before they came
home, and Friar's Copse looked ghostly in the uncertain
light. What a race they had to get dressed for dinner, and
how huiTiedly Bertha had to arrange the hare-bells that had
been gathered for her on the heath, and which she had
promised to wear in lier hair that evening ; they would look
so well, she had been told, in her fair hair, and with her
white gown. There was no one now. Bertha thought, to
gather hare-bells for her, and she was wearing a black gown,
and not a white one. But she would not stop now to con¬
sider the contrast; once started in her train of pleasant
memories, she must go on, and put off the evil hour when
the reaction must come. What a delightful evening it was
—the music and the conversation! and then the next
day, wlien the gentlemen did not go out shooting, but
they all wandered about togetlier, or rather in two coujiles.
By the Seaside. 49
for Edward and Sophy were of course inseparahle ; and
they gathered nuts and sat down to eat them, and talked
nonsense, and laughed till they were tired. These were
happy days, but now—how all was changed; the dear old
place let to strangers, strangers taking the familiar walks,
calling the rooms, the furniture, and the books their own ;
laughing perhaps at the old-fashioned, shal)by furniture ;
at the very miscellaneous collection of l)ooks ; at the faded
old family portraits, and altering everything, and thinking
what improvements they had made; when everything in
the house, old-fashioned, shabby or inconvenient as it might
1 le, was so far dearer to her, so far more beautiful in her eyes,
than the most perfect substitutes that could have been
bought for money. She felt an almost savage exultation in
the thought that the present proprietor could not have had
a very pleasant day's shooting; how the rain must now be
driving across the heath, and how the wind must be moan¬
ing through the fir-trees!
The reaction was come now. The happy recollections
were over, and Bertha sighed. A little hand was laid on her
shoulder, and Sopliy's voice said, " My dear girl, what is the
matter with you this afternoon ? "
" Oh, nothing; only I have been indulging some recollec¬
tions of old days, and it has brought on a fit of low spirits."
" Then  why  do you think of such things, yoii stupid
old thing ?    But now I'll tell you what to do; just go up
to your room and have a good crj', and then it will be over,
and you will be cheerful again.    Tliat's what 1 always do."
" I'm afraid it would not do for me," said Bertha, smiling
a little at the proposal.    " In the first place, it is not my
way to cry; and if I ever do such a thing, it is not all over
directly, as I dare say it is with you, but I feel ill all day
afterwards.    I'll go out; that will be the best thing for me."
'■ Go out in this weather 1    Impossible."
" Oh, no, not at all impossible.    I don't mind the wind,
and it has done raining, I think; yes, look there," she said,
as the heavy clouds parted for a moment, and shed fortli a
ray of sunlight, making a path of glory across the distant
sea.    " I really believe it is going to clear up into a bright
evening after all," she added, jumping up; and the event
justified her expectations, for l)y the  time slie came down¬
stairs again, booted and cloaked, as if prepared to brave the
worst of weathers, the dark veil of clouds was lifted up, and
a flood   of yellow  light  had   poured   fortli,  changing the
dreary aspect of the scene to one of life and sunshine.    In
50 The Ladies Edinburgh Magar^iiie.
the drawing-room she found her brother, a good-humoured,
pleasant-looking man of about thirty, tall and well-made,
with blue eyes, and fair hair and whiskers, good-looking on
the whole, though not handsome.
" That's right. Bertha," he said ; " come along, we'll go
down to the parade; there's the most splendid sea you ever
saw. I want Sophy to come, but she seems to think she
would be blown away."
" Yes, I hate wind," said Sophy with a shiver, " and I
should never be ready for dinner. Now mind, Bertha, that
you don't keep Edward out too long; remember we must be
at the Wallaces at seven."
"All right, come along, Bertha; don't take your umbrella,
it isn't gomg to rain any more; and you couldn't hold it up
if it did/'
After a sharp struggle with the wind, as they turned the
corner of the house, a sudden gust taking Bertha nearly off
her feet, and obliging her to hold on to the area railings for
support, while Sophy from the window laughed at her
discomfiture, they got safely on to the parade. It was
jiist high tide, and in many places the wa^s^es were dashing
quite on to the walk. Edward led his sister to a phxce
where the ground seemed quite dry, and said, "This is a
good place to stand, I think; you can see it all without the sea
coming over you. Isn't it splendid ? Look at that great big
wave,—it seems as if it was in a rage at not being able
to break down the sea-wall, and it goes tumbling iip against
the other one that's coming in, and then they have such a
row together, just like the bears at the Zoological Gardens,
that go backing against each other, and when they meet in
the mitldle, turn round and growd." Edward's description was
not very poetical, but perhaps he really enjoyed the scene
quite as much as Bertha, who stood by him silent, watching,
with a delighted expression, the waves that came rolling
in so grandly, and often expending their strength in vain
ayainst the solid stone mass of the sea-wall, retreating
with what sounded like a sullen roar of defiance into
the arms of tlie next advancing wave, battling with it,
and sending the white spray high up into the air, which
glittered in the sunshine. And then the same process was
repeated many times over, and Bertha stood watching, alto¬
gether forgetful of her own troubles, which had so absorbed her
a few minutes before, and entirely fascinated by the waves;
only called off occasionally by Edward, who, pulling her
arm  to save  his luno-s, wdiich  had to be   exerted  to tlie
o
o
By tlic Seaside. 51
utmost, in order to make her hear amid the roar of the sea,
pointed out to her an unfortunate lady, frantically struggling
with her cloak, which the wind had blown over her head;
or a wretched man chasing his hat, which skimmed lightly
down the paraile before hiin, in detiance of his pursuit, and
threatening every moment to blow over the edge into the
sea; or an adventurous little boy, who hail run too near
the edge, and had l)een caught by the waves.
" Why, what a lull there is now !" said Bertlia, suddenly.
" Yes, the wind is going down; it often do&s at sunset.
Look at the sky, isn't it beautiful ?"
The dark clouds, wliich had been slowly rising for some
time, were now pushed away, as it were, in grey folds, each
fold edged with crimson Ijy the rays of the setting sun,
leaving an arch of clear sky of the most transparent blue,
shading into delicate green towards tlie horizon, and
forming a beautiful contrast with tlie black mass of waters,
black again now as the sun had disappeared behind
tlie clitis, except wliere they were crested with white
breakers.
" It isn't time to go in yet," said Edward ; " let us take a
turn along tlie parade, now tliat the wind is no more than we
can stand against. I like these sort of days tremendously;
there's a mixture of the sublime and the comic about them
that's very pleasant."
" Yes," said Bertha ; " the effect of the wind on the people
is certainly not so sublime as its effects on the sea."
" No," said Edward, " but it's great fun to see. I wish
Sopliy had been here, she would have laughed so heartily at
that fellow running after his hat, he looking miserable, with
his hair blowing about. I wish I could draw ; I would make
a sketch of it for Punch:'
" It is a better day to look at the waves than to shoot
partridges," said Bertha.
" Yes ; what an awful soaking that fellow Hall must have
got, if he has been walking over our turnip fields to-day. I'm
airaid old Wenham must have used some rather bad language
this morning, he wouldn't take kindly to a new master ; and
indeed, though it's very uiu'easonable to have any spite
against poor Hall for living in my house, I think I'm rather
glad he should have had such a bad day."
" So am I," said Bertha.
" No ; are you really ? I didn't think you would have felt
tliat; though 1 think you care more for the old place than 1 do."
" You see, I never left it till now," said Bertlia. " It
hadn't been your home tlie last few years."
52 Tlie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
" No; but I never missed being there for the 1st of
September," said Edward. " M'ell, it certainly is an awful
bore, having to let the place ; but I hope it won't be for long;
seven years are soon gone, though they seem long to look for¬
ward to, and before then—there's Soplw's uncle, you know,
he's sure to leave his fortune between her and her sisters."
" It's ill waiting for dead men's shoon," said liertha.
"So it is; but then I'm getting on very well with my profes¬
sion. Last circuit I made double what I did the year before.
In a few years more I shall be making a very good income, and
shall be able to afford a country house for the summer, until
I get rich enough to retire altogether. Oh, yes, Bertha ! we
shall find ourselves back at Woodcote before we are many
years older."
Bertha smiled, but rather sadly. Woodcote could never
again be the same to her that it had been in old times,
when it was her own home; living there with Edward woidd
be quite a difterent thing. She must always feel that she
was only a visitor, or a sort of lodger in the house.
Tliey walked up and down till a few stars appeared in tlie
clear sunset sky; then the moon rose, and shed a path of
rippling light over the dark sea, whose surface was growing
calm as the wind went down. Then Edward said he must
go in, or he should lie late; so they turned homewards,
Itertha feeling herself a tlifterent person from what she had
been when she came oiit, refreshed and invigorated by the
salt breeze and the glorious sea, soothed and comforted by
the clear sky and calm moonlight.
Sophy was standing at the top of the stair with a candle
in her hand as they came up, looking xqvj pretty in her
evening dress of black lace, with pearls upon her fair neck,
and Avhite roses in her wavy brown hair. She scolded
Edward playfully for being so late, and then called Bertha
into the tlrawing-room.
" I want you to look at me, Bertha," she said, setting
down the candle, and dropping her shawl from her shoulders;
" I want to know what you tliink of my dress ? "
" It's very pretty," said Bertha, " and you look very nice."
" Then you don't think it is too slight mourning ?" said
Sophy. " You see it is the Wallaces' last ball before the
regiment goes to Canada, so one must go to it, and one can't
go to a ball in crape; and you know. Bertha, it's all very
well for you to wear such deep mourning, and it becomes
you very well, with your fair hair, but it doesn't suit me.
Edward doesn't like me in it; and you know it's now five
months since,—and so I thought I might make a change."
By the Seaside. 53
" It makes no difference to me," said Bertha, interrupting
her hastily, " what sort of mourning you Avear, Sophy. If
you liked to leave it off to-morrow, I should not mind; so
don't be afraid of hurting my feelings. I Avear deep mourn¬
ing myself because it is the custom, not because I think it
becoming. I don't feel my father's loss more because I
Avear a black gown; nor should I be at all more likely to
forget him if I Avore a rose-coloured one."
She walked to the windoAV, and stood gazing out into the
gathering darkness. The moon Avas half shrouded by thin
clouds, and cast a faint, uncertain glimmer over the sea.
Sophy stood by the fire, one little foot resting on the fender,
and one round Avhite arm leaning on the chimney-piece,
looking at herself from time to time in the glass, altering
the arrangement of her hair Avitli her hand, and moving her
little satm-shod foot restlessly up and doAvn on the bar of
the fender, as the time Avent by and EdAvard Avas not ready.
At last he appeared.
" Come along, Sophy," he said. "Well, Bertha, Avhat are you
going to do Avith yourself ? You don't mind dining alone, I
hope ?"
" I am not going to dine," said Bertha; " I am going to
have some tea up here by the fire."
"And no dinner?" said EdAA'ard. "AVhat creatures you
Avomen are! I don't believe you Avould CA'er have any dinner
at all, if it were not for the pleasure of keeping us company."
" Well, don't stop to argue Avith Bertha now," cried Sophy ;
" we shall be keeping them all Avaiting, if Ave don't go."
The officers of the —tli Avere to give a ball that evening
at the barracks, and Colonel Wallace, Avho Avas a friend of
Edward's, had asked him and his Avife and sister to dine Avith
them first, and go Avith them to the ball. Bertha had excused
herself on account of her dee]) mourning; and she now pre¬
pared to spend a solitary evening, a thing she had not enjoyed
for so long that it seemed quite a treat to her. In another
half-hour she A\'as seated on an easy chair, near the fire,
Avhich Avas stirred to a bright blaze, the shutters shut, all but
one fold in the window, next the sea, left open by Bertha's
orders, that she might not lose the moonlight. The tea-tray
Avas set on a table in front of her; on a chair by her side
stood a little oak box. She drank her tea slowly, reading a
novel at the same time ; she Avished to spin out her meal as
long as possible; there seemed a sort of companionship in the
hissing tea-urn and all the other appendages, Avhich she Avas
unwilling to lose ; for though she had wished for a quiet even-
Xo. 26.—FtBRfARY 1377. H
54 TJie Ladies EdinbiirgJi Magazhie.
ing, she felt rather lonely now that her brother and sister
were gone, the children in bed, and every part of the house
silent except the kitchen, where the servants seemed to be
taking advantage of their master's absence to make unusually
merry. But she was not allowed to enjoy this companion¬
ship long, for the servant, who was impatient to have done with
his work, and get away to some friends who had been invited
for the evening, looked in under pretence that he had thought
she rang, and she was obliged to let hiur take away the tea.
The book did not last her much longer; she flung it down
on the table, with an expression of disgust at the stupidity
of the (Unouement; and turning roxnid her chair, sat for some
minutes moodily gazing at the glowing embers. All at once
she roused herself, took a key from her pocket, and opened
the little oak box that stood by her side. It was a roughly-
made box, one of Edward's early attempts at carpenter¬
ing in his school-l)oy days, made from the wood of an
old oak-tree that had been blown down in the park—oh !
how many years ago ! Bertha was very fond of it, both
for the sake of Edward and of the oak-tree, and because
it was the first box with a lock and key that she had ever
possessed. It was full of old letters, the accumulation of
years, and Bertha Avas determined that this evening she
would look them all over, and burn what was not worth
keeping. It is generally a sad task, looking over a collec¬
tion of old letters; there is a sort of vividness of the present
in them which often startles us with a painful sense of its
being past for ever; perhaps the writer and all those men¬
tioned in the letters are dead ; or great changes have taken
jilace—changes which come so gradually that we were all
hardly aware of them, till we read over an old letter, and
so are reminded of what used to be. Bertha, however, was
in the mood for such a task this evening; she wanted " to
muse upon the old familiar faces,"—to return in fancy,
for a few hours, to the old life that had once been so
familiar to her, and now was gone for ever. She started a
little as she opened the box; a letter Avas lying at the top
which she had forgotten she had placed there; she took it
up and examined the envelope; it was directed, in a man's
handwriting, to "James Stanhope, Esq., Woodcote, Hertford."
Siie turned it over, muttering to herself, " How strange that
papa should have kept this note all these years, and that I
should have happened to look over the drawer where it was,
when Edward looked over all the other drawers, and would
certainly have burnt it if he had come across it!    And yet,
Birthday Wishes. 55
what a fool I am to keep it! I've a great miud to burn it
now." But even while she said this to herself, she took it
out of the en\elope and read it. It contained merely these
words:—
" Dear Mr Stanhope.—It will give me great pleasure to try my skill
upon your partridges on the 1st of September. I hope to be 'vvith you
on the 31st, some time before your dinner-hour.—I remain, yours
truly, John Leslie."
Short and commonplace as this note was, Bertha sat gazing
at it, as if she were learning it by heart; then, in a sudden
fit of disgust with herself, she crumpled it up in her hand
and threw it into the fire. It fell uj^on the liob, and did not
catch fire; she picked it up again, smoothed it out, and put
it back in the box. It might be foolish—she felt it was—
but she could not bear to part with it. There seemed a sort
of fate against her to-day tliat would not let her forget this
subject, however much she tried to drive it from her thoughts.
She made a great effort, and took out some more letters;
the first she read were uninteresting, and slie burnt them;
she was just going to burn one from Edward, which seemed
an unimportant note, when a name caught her eye, and she
read,—" Sophy and I hope to spend Christmas with you;
and teU my father that I have asked John Leslie to come
down with us, and he seems very anxious to come, if he
can get away."
" How well I remember giving papa that message,"
thought Bertha, " and he didn't seem quite pleased, and I
was surprised, because he used to like Mr Leslie so much
when he was at Woodcote in the autumn; how little I
thought "—
That note had roused a fresh train of memories.
SUBURBANA.
(To be continued.)
L-»—tf---
A BIRTHDAY wish for Health and Happiness
And fair Prosperity, still granted you.
And that these may a len gtliy future bless,
Well may combine to form " good wishes " true.
56 TJie Ladies EdiiibitrgJi Magazine.
But what is Health, if sadness fills the heart ?
And how stands Ha]i])iness aloof from cares ?
What were Prosperity, if Health depart.
And tidal ever creeps in unawares ?
For no such fleeting forms I give my voice.
To-day they come, to-inorrow they may go;
On what endures for ever stands my choice.
Good, which all other loss doth brightly show.
A Health of soul, by nature sick to death,
A Happiness, which purely springs from Heaven,
Prosperity, whicli shrinks not at a breath ;
Good gifts are these, whicli Earth hath never given.
But these are gifts we earn not, but receive.
The Lord of Love, who died and rose again,
Alone, with pierced hands, these things can give;
For these a prayerful wish aspireth then.
That Christ Himself, in His redeeming love,
May sanctify and keep, till Time shall end,
And then increase with blessedness above;
These are the Birthday Wishes of a Friend.
Lydia W. Melland.
%\t l^ig^cr drbutatioit 0f Ptcrntm hi Sirotlaiit)-.
Part II.
THE  MOVEMENT  IN   GLASGOW.
While I was attacking St Andrews on the one side, I
directed my efforts to Glasgow on the other. Nothing can
be done without trying, and it is better to risk failure than
to sit still; for the failure of one person is often the seed of
the success of another. I therefore took counsel with Mrs
Daniell, but neither of us knew anybody in Glasgow, except
one person, whom we did not wish to trouble at first. We
had considerable correspondence before we discovered any
ladies likely to take an mterest in the subject. Strangely
enougli,from several sources we received the names of four, but
always of the same four ladies, as if these were all that could
The Higher Education of Women in Scotland.      57
boast of local enthusiasm.    But pleasantly as these ladies
wrote, they discouraged us considerably,pointing out the gene¬
ral apathy in Glasgow, and the particular difficulty of doing
anything at a season when everybody was out of town, and
likely to remain absent for months.     (We had unfortunately
only begun operations in May.)  Principal Caird was written to,
and he answered kindly, but said that of course nothing
could be done by the Senatus until its next meeting in
November; so we resolved to use the interval to the best
advantage.     As  was   said   last   month,   Scotland  needs,
1st, a certificate attainable by private study; 2nd, a system
of higher education of exactly the same standard as the
University; and 3rd, a higli-class school or college, which
should  lead up  future  students  directly  to this,  sparing
them the difficulties that many of the j^resent generation
have experienced in plunging, imperfectly prepared, into
higher studies.     Mrs William Grey, the secretary of the
National Union for Promoting the Education of Women, in
answer to a letter asking for suggestions, said she did not see
how she could help us in the first two points; that as to a
scliool, she had hitherto had no communication with any
town in   Scotland,   Gateshead   beiug   the most   northerly
locality  that  was  in  connection  wdth  the  Girls'   Public
Day-School Company; but that aid might be given whenever
a strong requisition was made, backed by a due proportion
of funds.    She said, further, that she was willing to read a
paper for us on the subject at the approaching meeting of
the British Association in Glasgow.    Though I strongly felt
the need of a school such as I had planned, still it was the
higher education that I had most at heart, feeling convinced
that it would more surely work downwards, than tlie lower
work upwards.   This was then lier most important suggestion;
and we saw that we also must go to Glasgow, if we wislied to
form a Ladies' Educational Association liefore the meeting of
Senatus in November.    We procured a considerable number
of introductions,  but found  that  unfortunately  very  few
of the inhabitants were to be present  at the Association.
The meeting began on Wednesday, September 14th, but for a
day or two  there was nothing but discouragement.    The
people we called on were mostly from home, or out; and
those  we  did  see  were  not  encouraging.    On Thursday,
however, one  lady  whom we had  missed the day before
called on us with  her daughter, and  with her  we had a
most interesting conversation.    She said she would ask some
friends to tea on the following Monday afternoon, if we could
58 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
come and meet them, and she gave us several introductions
to people Avho were likely to give their aid. An amusing
but fortunate mistake took place in connection with one of
these. Our friend had given us her card with a message
written on it to the Secretary of Association, Dr Blackie, who,
she said, had daughters interested in education. On Friday,
we asked for him at the reception-room, and were ushered into
the Secretary's office, where, seeing only one gentleman, we
presented the card, and briefly stated our object. He said,
l)leasantly, " It is a subject I am so much interested in, that I
am sorry I am too busy this morning to talk of it. Can you
meet me here on Monday morning, at 10 o'clock?" Coming
out with us, he introduced us to Dr Dickson, the Professor of
Theology, to whom Professor Charteris had kindly written on
our behalf. He was much interested in what we had to say,
and asked many questions about our work in Edinburgh, and
what branches of Biblical Criticism Professor Charteris
taught the ladies there.    Our spirits began to rise.
On Saturday, we went with the geological excursion to
the Ballagan Beds, and the wonderful Fiunich Glen, so
tmnatural in its grand ruddy colouring. The party was
under tlie guidance of Mr Young, the curator of the Uni¬
versity Museum, and he assured us that he knew many
ladies in Glasgow desirous to have fidler opportunities of
extending their studies. Before starting, it had struck me
that it would save a good deal of the kind secretary's time,
and prepare him for meeting us on Monday, if I wrote him
a sliort letter explaining our views. This I did ; but in the
evening it was returned to me, with a line saying that there
must have been some mistake, as Dr Blackie had never heard
of us. We apostrophised the overworked man, but kept our
appointment, and again asked for Dr Blackie. He was not
in his office, and a clerk conducted us to him in the recep¬
tion-room. He was a total stranger. We all stared, and
then I attempted to apologise, saying," We must have made
a mistake, as we had an appointment with another Dr
Blackie." He said there was not another person of the
same name on the books of the Association. " Then you
must have written this note ?" said I, producing my
unlucky epistle. He acknowledged it, and then we began to
tell about the visit of our mutual friend, and how she had
sent her card to him. He was much interested in the sub¬
ject, and as we talked it over, there appeared the gentleman
with whom we had made the appointment. It was Mr
Grahame, the honorary secretary of the Association; thus we
Our Scotch Cousin. 281
dressmaker's, where a large order was given, under my
directions, which would let Janet appear, in her dress at
least, a lady. After a few more shops had been visited, we
came home, Janet full of wonder and admiration at all she
had seen while she was out, and ready to listen to all we
told her about London.
By the end of a week Janet was regularly at home with
us, and thoucrh I confess I did not like her, I was civil and
attentive,  and  slie   seemed   quite   happy  with  us.    Her
manners did not improve, and I tliought her more suitable
for the kitchen than for the drawing-room.    She seemed from
the first to take a great liking to Jack, and after she had
been with us for about a month I suddenly discovered that
she was deeply in love with him.    Slie soon  afterwards
confessed this to me, with many hysterical sobs and tears,
declaring she could not live with us any longer unless he
loved her in return, and concluding by begging me to tell
him so !    I was horrified, but declined as quietly as possible
to do any such thing, and all day she remained inconsolable,
shutting herself up in her bedroom, and refusing to be com¬
forted.    Next morning she looked pale and miserable, and I
felt that this state of things wouldn't do.  I told Janet so, pretty
decidedly, and to my surprise she agreed with me, expressing
her intention of leaving us for a while tUl she got over it.
I was far from sorry, and she gave out that she was going
away to visit a friend in Yorkshire, as the sudden change to
London from the country had made her ratlier unwell.    So
one morning she set oft', and I must say I did not miss her.
But a few days after she was gone I did miss something else.
We were uoim; out to dinner, and when I was dressing I
found that  aU my jewelry had been stolen.    The box in
which it lay had been broken open, and everything was gone.
While I was lamenting my loss a maid came in to announce
that a quantity of plate was also missing.    I was amazed
and vexed.   It was so unaccountable.   Both our servants were
strictly honest—one  of them had been with   us  since we
were children—it was out of the question to suspect them.
We were sure no thief could have entered the house ; there
remained only to  suspect Janet, and this I confess I did,
though it seemed preposterous.    We gave information to the
police, but in vain; a week passed, and we heard notliing of
our lost property.    We heard nothing of Janet either, which
confirmed my secret suspicions.
I was meditating a conversation with Jack about her,
when   I  heard the door-bell rinu,', and a minute afterwards
6o Tlie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
of the matter. Just then Mrs Daniell appeared, having
found Principal Caird from home, and Sir W. Thomson
afraid that the charge of his Section mioht interfere with
his taking the chair in another room. Slie fortunately
took up the broken thread of my discourse; and then
Miss Tod of Belfast told us how she and other ladies
there had formed their Educational Association, and how
kind the Professors had been about it. Altogether, I think,
the ladies present agreed in the necessity of forming an
Association, and most of them put down their names as
members. One girl came up to me and said, " You do not
know how we have been longing here to have all these things
you have been talking about." " Then it depends on your¬
selves not to let them drop, if they are started," was my reply.
" Ah, we won't let the thing go down now !" she rejoined,
emphatically. After in^'iting all the ladies to come to the
public meeting on Wednesday, and to bring their friends
with them, we went home to meditate on our responsibilities,
for the awful thought had just dawned upon us, that we
should require to set the meeting agoing, although we had
not even secured a chairman. We concocted a paper which
would take exactly five minutes to read, feeling sure that
there would be after discussion enough to keep people lively;
and then we wrote to Professor T. M. Lindsay, asking him
not to fail us, in order to make some remarks from his large
experience of the Ladies' Edinburgh Association.
We used the hours of IMonday night and Tuesday to the
best possible advantage in trying to interest people in the
subject, and bring them to the meeting; and on the event¬
ful morning, trusting in Providence and Mr Grahame, we
repaired to the room appointed in the University. Ten
minutes before the hour the room was half-full, but no chair¬
man and no Mr Grahame were there; and as all the sec¬
tions had been advertised for 10 o'clock that day, we began
to fear that our prospective supporters woidd be drafted off'.
Just three minutes before 10 o'clock our friend appeared.
" Let us vote somebody into the chair," said he ; and darting
ofl", caught hold of the Eev. James Dodds, of St George's,
Glasgow, who was just entering the room as a listener. Mrs
Daniell and he urged this gentlejrian to preside. At first
he declined, until my excitement and honesty got the
better of my politeness, and I said, " Do, if you please, if
only to save time, for it is 10 o'clock already." He
yielded to our wishes, and IMr Grahame mai-shalled him
in, proposing him as chairman, and the meeting commenced
Tlie Higher Educaticm of Women in Scotland.       6r
by his announcing its purport, and asking Mrs Daniell to
read her paper. The room was nearly full, but there was
such a continuous stream pouring in until every spare
corner was filled, that I fear very few heard the whole
of it. It was short, but very much to the point. She said :
" Mrs Grey, the Secretary of the National Association for
promoting the Higher Education of Women, promised to
read a paper at the British Association, but ill-health has
prevented her coming here.
" In the great impetus given of late years to the higher
education of women, Scotland has not fully shared.
The solitary Association to promote it exists in Edinburgh,
where there are classes to educate the students, with certifi¬
cates and bursaries to encourage them. But as yet nothing
national has Ijeen done with us, as in England. There is no
Girton, no Newnham Hall; no London, Caml)ridge, or
Oxford examinations, open to all. The most suitable centre
of a national effort would seem to be Glasgow, the largest
and richest of the Scottish cities that have the neces¬
sary element of a University and its professors. People
have said that there is little interest in education to
be found among Glasgow ladies, but we differ from
them. Many have given a practical proof of it, in
the eager way in which they have taken advantage
of the desultory opportunities afforded them; while the
taste of others may not be discovered until circumstances
aid in developing it. To find means to place all these
desultory and irregular efforts on a permanent and syste¬
matic footing, is the object of the present meeting. The
hrst tiling to be done is to form an Educational Association
to undertake the practical management. To this Association
Ave would suggest, that a tlioroughly good understanding
with the University must be striven after, so that it may be
induced to provide a succession of lectures, up to University
standard, and, if possible. University certificates of capability
m connection with these. The need of the education every
one must see. The advantages of the certificate we must
carefully point out. Not only does the prospect of it guide
and steady the studies, but it acts, first, as a test to the
mdividual student herself; for a good examination, with a
high ])e.rcentage required, besides lieing a practical exercise
of the highest value, must give her a tolerable idea of her own
state of advancement or need of revision; second, as a proof
to others of her attainments. We see how thoroughly
fashionable the higher education, as well as its certificate,
Xii. 2fi.—Fr:mirAr,v 1877. I
62 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
has become in England. It seems almost about to become a
mark of position, as the lighter accomplishments formerly
were. But besides this, it has acquired a very definite
money value. The great number of public day-schools
M-liich have been opened in England require a large supply of
capable teachers, and those who have University certificates
are always preferred. The assistant-teachers in these
schools have salaries from £100 to £200; the head-mistresses
from £300 to £700. Nothing of the kind has as yet been
started in Scotland, but these positions are open to Scotch¬
women, if they have the necessary qualifications; and the
advantage of giving them an opportunity may be easily
seen. There is, further, in process of signature for presenta¬
tion to Parliament, a petition to the effect that no one be
allowed to start a new school without a recognised certificate;
that, in short, these matters be arranged in some sucli way
as they are in France. In the event of such a petition taking
effect, we may see the great disadvantage to Scotland, if it has
only then to be awakened to the necessity of keeping up
with the times. It is not long since we saw tlie (question
gravely asked in the newspapers, if Scotchwomen were really
mentally inferior to Englishwomen ? We think this may
be answered by a strong negative; but we must remind them
that, in the stream of time, they must not rest on their oars,
content with past labour, and a relative position once attained.
For relativity is a changeable element on both sides, and the
country once famous for its thorough training and sound
students may awake to find itself drifted down by its neglect
from the place we cannot but think natural to it." By tlie
time these remarks were concluded, the room was so crowded
that no more could get in, and no one seemed inclined to go
out, as is the too frequent habit of the peripatetic philosophers
of the Britisli Association. A gentleniaii rose to say that it
was quite true that women had spent too much time on
accomplishments they did not accomi)lish, and that it Avould
be better for society if tliey were taught to make tliemselves
more practically useful. He was amusing enough; but I
turned in alarm to Mr Grahame and whispered, "Tliis is not
what we wanted to-day!" "Never mind," answered he; "he
is putting them into good humour; the others will strike into
the current," Mr Fitch went over thoroughly what had
been done for women in England; and just at the right mo¬
ment. Professor Lindsay appeared to speak of what advance¬
ment Scotland had made—as yet, however, only in Edinburgh.
He explained the working of the Edinl)urg]i Association,
Tlie Higher Education of ]Vo!iieu in Scotland.       62,
and said he thought such another could easily be formed in
Glasgow. Miss Flora Stevenson and some other ladies
made some interesting remarks; then Mr Johnstone Stoney,
of Queen's College, Duljlin, rose and said emjDhatically, that
it was not the higher education for women he desired, but
the highest. He could not allow that any pre-supposition
could take the place of experience as to what they were
adapted to, and what they ought to be taught. For instance,
iu the arts of painting, sculpture, poetry and music, one
might have been tempted to prophesy that from their educa^
tion and susceptibility, they would be most likely to excel
in the last, whereas it is only in the history of music that
there is no great female name as a composer. Fine
expressers they have been, but not originators. Let every¬
thing then lie opened to them, and time would show what
they are able to do or not to do. He would hope not only
that they should get what had been proposed that day, but
full University education and ordinary certificates. Professor
Foster told what had been done for women at the London
University; and then Dr IJickson arose, telling us that
lie was a little startled at such revolutionary theories.
However, he said that when the ladies were ready, he did
not think that they would find his colleagues or himself
backward in doing their sliare of the duty. He said this all
the more cheerfully, as he did not think they would want,
for some time, a full course of Dogmatic Theology.
Nobody was too long, nobody was tired; and when, at the
close, the chairman asked those to give in their names who
were inclined to join such an Association, quite a crowd
gathered around the papers. But we did not, at the time,
know the full success of the meeting until the evening papers
that day told us, " The meeting at 10 o'clock to form an
Association for promoting the higher education of women
completely cleared the reception-room and the quadrangle,,
and until it was dismissed, little or nothing of the business
proper of the Association Avas got througli. Ladies of all
ages, and a good many gentlemen, filled the room at the fixed
hour, and those who came late, found to their great disgust that
they could not get admission. Those turned away from
the doors could have filled two other rooms." Another paper
called it, " The chief meeting of the Association ;" and
some afterwards who had been present said, " We never saw
such a well-conducted meeting ! "
We were struck by the cordial interest and kindly ex¬
pressions of one gentleman who gave in his name after the
64 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
meeting, for it haid been arranged that the Association should
admit gentlemen as well as ladies. I heard afterwards that
he had said it was the best meeting he had gone to.
He had never before heard a lady speak in public, but his
admiration as well as his interest had been excited.
The next day we joined the excursion that visited Paisley
Abbey, Crookston Castle, and the neighbouring manufactories,
and then lunched with Sir Peter and ]\Ir Thomas Coats. We
found many there interested in our subject, and we only
hoped they would not too soon forget everything about it.
We paid a few more visits on Friday, and left Glasgow on
Saturday, after returning special thanks to our kind Mr
Grahame, who promised to do all he could to help us.
" Don't let them forget all about it," said I; telling him that
one of the ladies had said, " We will not let it go down."
He answered, " It cannot go down now!"
Our first difficulty was to find a secretary. Everybody
seemed willing to help, until they were asked definitely to
take office. At last a lady was found willing to take it
temporarily, if no one else could be found, though she had
neither time nor strength for permanent work. A gentle¬
man also oflered to assist her. But many a letter has been
written, and many a week has elapsed, and not as yet has
Glasgow fulfilled the hopes then aroused. However, it may
be about to do so. I had received so much encouragement
from some of the Professors, that T spoke openly among the
ladies I met, of having a regular meeting in the beginning of
November, to arrange tlie Association formally, and to draw
lip the plans that should be submitted to the University before
the meeting of Senatus. The project was not completed at
that date, the Association was not then formed, nor the
Senatus memorialized. But some of the teachers whom we
had met, and who had been present at the meeting, agToed
among themselves to sign and present a petition to the Uni¬
versity for the granting of Local Examinations. This was
presented by Professor Young, a committee was appointed to
consider the question, and a resolution was passed forthwith
for their institution. Not long since an assemblage, chiefly
of teachers, met for the purpose of hearing these explained.
They are to be on the same plan as Oxford, Cambridge, and
Edinburgh, and, in the case of boys, are to be accepted as
equivalent to the preliminary examination for medical
registration. There are to be two grades, as in Edinburgh;
and the age of the candidates is fixed at from 12 to 18 for
boys, and 14 to   20  for girls.    They are willuig  to  hold
Double Acrostic. 65
examinations in any of the following counties—Ayr, Argyll,
Bute, Dumbarton, Dumfries, Lanark, Kirkcudbright, llen-
frew, and Wigtown; and candidates for this year must
send in their names before April. The University Board
consists of the following members:—Principal Caird,
Professors W. P. Dickson, Blackburn, A. Thomson, Piamsay,
Jebb, Yeitch, Berry, Nicol, E. Caird, Young, Ferguson,
M'Kendrick, Stewart, and T. M. Lindsay.
Some of the higher schools, too, have already started
successfully advanced classes for ladies, in various branches,
that would suit the preparation for the Local Examinations,
though none of their students have yet thought of taking
these up. Professor Young also, who has done so much in
favour of the Local Examinations, has, on his own account, for
this year, opened a class of Zoology for ladies.
In the meantime the Association, still somewhat chaotic
and undefined, is gathering strength and members, and we
hear that it will be organized in a very few weeks, so as to
have everything arranged by next session. There is a great
deal of good-will towards it in the city; but the great
difficulty, beyond doubt, is to find ladies who are at once
able and wilhn" to take the lead. L. E.
DOUBLE ACKOSTIC.
No. 2.
Two titles, linked together, tlieir connection known by few
My first an anxious vigil for the morrow's billet-doux ;
I surely there have given for the whole too sure a clue.
My last, a lovely denizen, whose beauty once was seen
By dwellers in a Scottish town, whose glory now, I ween.
Is but the shadow of the past—the vision of a dream.
1. Father of the stage in a clime at present agitated by graver
interests.
2. One whom we would welcome here for her sweet sister's sake.
3. A proud crowned beauty, but supplanted.
4. Head of the fictitious " board."
5. A church dignitary whose power was opposed to the career of
Wycliile.
6. 0 Queen ! for thy deeds they rightly changed thy name.
7. May the culinary efforts of to-day cause to none the tragic fate
of this comic singer.
8. " A dexterous fellow," said Napoleon ; " he has seen through me."
9. The name given every Italian gives himself.
10.      A lihenish painter, some of whose talent descended to his son.
66 TJie Ladies Edinburgh Alagaziiie.
11. Can we call so sombre a personage one of our " lights ?"
12. One of seven sisters, who show from the heavens the season
most favourable to maiiners.
13. Surnamed " the Peaceable."
14. Garcia, musical and literary, drew this lawyer from his pro¬
fession.
15. An ancient troubadour of Thuringia, who, like his fellows, won
luore laurels by the lyre than by the sword.
F. M.
ANSWER TO DOUBLE ACROSTIC, No. 1.
1. The age man reacheth all too soon,
Of "lean and slippered Pantaloon."
2. Life is the maze.    This gives a clue
This ]3rol>lem's maze to guide us through.
3. Say the Alj^habet over, and missing out V,
U and JV standing together will be.
4. Ah, gentle Mercy, doubly blessed be
The man that gi\'es and he that taketh thee.
5. Peace, longed for in these troublous days ;
Our %'oices all shall sing thy praise,
6. King Coflee now doth sad complain
With no Umbrella in the rain.
7. The phantom Bagger that Macbeth
Saw ere he did his King to death.
8. Let us have " Iiouhts " in solving this,
Eor fear our sought for " good " we miss.
9. In Latin speech this meaning hid
Is not another, only Id.^
10. A roar and rushing far, its voice doth call,
Niagc(ra, the mighty waterfall.
11. The end and aim of knightly story.
When men would dare and die for Glory.
My first and last together say
Plum-Pudding comes with Nerv Year's Bay.
"B."
1 M. is accepted as alternative for Ibid.
Sixteen answers received ;—the following eight correct:—A 1, "B,"
Beta, Jane Brown, Lara, M. C. B., Message Girl, Nelly Bly.
A Prize is offered at the close of the year to the solver of the greatest
number of acrostics. Solutions to be addressed " Acrostic Editor,"
care of the Publishers, 22 Howe Street, Edinburgh ; to be sent not later
than the 15th of the month, -WTitten clearly on a sheet of paper
containing only the solution, pseudonym, and full name and address of
the sender. Solutions acknowledged in the following number. The
name and address of the winner only will be announced at the close of
the competition.
Our Library Table. Gj
OUR    LIBRARY    TABLE.
Madcap Violet.    By William Black.
London : Macmillan & Co., 1877.
Those novel readers who do not olyect to a book with a sad ending,
will find in Madcap Violet the history of a heroine who is as lovable
as the Princess of Thule. Those who agree with Thackeray tliat no
story should have a painful finish, had better not make the dark-haired
Violet's acquaintance. They will be first introduced to her as the
madcap ruler in a London schoolroom, and they soon fall in love with
her fair face, handsome figure, and daring ways. The greater part of the
scene is laid in ]\Ir Black's favourite highlands, where Atlantic
breezes play amongst the giant mountains, and the whole forms a
misty, dark background, with occasional gleams of sunshine to light
up his exquisite pen-and-ink sketches of glimmering waves, and
shrouded heathery hills. The " dark sea" that overwhelms poor
Violet when the mists that have crej)t over lier life seem to be ready to
melt away into sunshine, will make all readers close the book with a
sigh of regret. They will be apt to feel angry with the author for not
rolling away the shadowing clouds from his fair heroine's path, and
saving her from the black tide of grief which overwhelms her, and carries
her away to the " dark sea" she dreaded.
JoHNNTKix AND THE GoBLiNS.    By Charles G. Leland.
London : Macmillan &' Co., 1877.
This is a most ridiculous book ! There is certainly no paucity of
ludicrous ideas in the mind of tlie author, and we confess to having
laughed very heartily over them. The Spelling-Bee in goblin-land is
a capital idea—the Finger-men will be realized by every child—and
tlie " goblin committees on orange-peel and ti[icats " are hit off in a
way that will much amuse their elders.
The book may strike us as a leaf from the inimitable Alice in Wonder¬
land; yet many of the ideas are carried out in a vein of undeniable
originality. Critically, we would say that, although confessedly a
dream, the composition contains too many ideas too slightly carried
out ; had tliis tendency been avoided, the impression received from the
book would have been clearer and more defined. But we forget—it
is a dream ! Tlie illustrations, by the author, are very comical—some
extremely graceful. The verbal " quips and cranks " scattered through
the book are as clever as they are amusing.
Homely Words for Young Women and Girls.
London : Partridge & Co., 1877.
Such is the modest title of a pleasing little magazine, wliich
has with this New Year commenced its career in the world of literature
—a career which we trust will be prosperous, and the source of much
benefit to those for whose sake it has been begun. The need of a
suitable periodical for young women of the humbler classes was felt,
68 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
and thanks are due to the editors of Homely Words, who have so admir¬
ably supplied that need. The first issue contains, besides papers of a
religious character (including texts and scriptural questions), poetry,
stories, news, and recipes for cookery. The poetry is excellent, part
being some well-chosen verses from Tennyson's In Memoriam, and a
serial tale which promises to be very interesting. It is to be hoped that
heads of households will recommend it to their servants as wliole-
sonie literature; the price, one penny, puts it within the reach of all.
STEAY   NOTES.
The Rules and Regulations of the St Andrew's Certificates for Women
are now published, and may be had on application to Professor Roberts.
Besides the fact of their giving a new encouragement to private study
in our country, they offer the reassuring certitude of having the sccme
standard as the M. A. degree. Thus, if a woman passes in seven subjects,-
she knows that she has at least the e(£uivalent of a Degree Certificate.
To us the weak jiart of the St Andrew's Certificate seems to be, that it is
not guarded by any preliminary examinations, such as are furnished by
Group A. of the Cambridge Local, or by the Local Examination
attached as a condition to the Edinburgh Certificate. It is especially
rinsafe to dispense with a test of secondary education, where choice of
subjects for the Higher Certificate is left absolutely to the Candidate.
Another of the grants in aid of Local Bursaries has been claimed for
the Local Centre at Helensburgh, in aid of a bursary collected for the
district by the pupils of Glenfruin House School.
The Edinburgh Ladies' Educational A ssociation has been recently
reorganized, and now consists of gentlemen as well as of ladies.
A Council, composed of eighteen ladies, four gentlemen, and thirteen
professors of the University, elects its own Executive Committee and
Office-bearers. By these bodies the afl'airs of the Association will be
administered.
The Preparatory Class for the Edinburgh University Local Ex¬
aminations has been very prosperous during the session, and the new
classes for Latin and Logic have also afi'orded very satisftictory results
at recent examinations. The highest paper in Logic had the full
number of marks awarded to it, and those which stood next were so
good as to be virtually ec[ual in merit.
Ladies are invited to contribute to this Magazine.
A Prize is ofi'ered for the best article received by the Editors
(care of the Publishers, 22 Howe Street, Edinburgh), before March 31st,
on any one of our British Female Novelists born in the 18th century.
Subject op Deb.\te for the next meeting of the Ladies' Edinburgh
Literary Society, to be held on Saturday, 3rd February, at 2 St Colme
Street, at eleven o'clock :—" Would it be beneficial to Euro2)e if the
power of Russia wei'e extended over Turkey V'
For all information, apjily to the Secretary, 11 Carlton Street,
Edinburgh,
/;/ Menioriam. 6g
|it Iflemorram.
E. H. M.
On, graceful, gracious, courtly, gentle, kind,
Oh, warmly loved of all, and loving all
In thy large-heartedness, that ever twined
Around the lot of those whose t'was to call
Thee all their own, as motlier—sister—friend—
A restful joy that with their lives did blend.
Oh, deep soft eyes, now closed, alas, for aye ;
Oh, sweet calm smile so winning and so bright;
Oh, rich-toned voice, that still, or grave or gay,
Spake gentlest words, or thoughts that flashed as light,
Or, as each listener on its accents hung,
Eead olden lore from dreams of genius sprung!
Oh, stately lady—woman all, and sweet,
The graces of a rich historic past
With freshness of to-day in thee did meet.
And made thee what thou wast—one long to last
In our deep thoughts—thoughts that the longing gave
To lay this tribute song-wreath on thy grave.
January 25, 1877.
—  f>  -^'Sk-  >t  :  h •
(Bnx  itmnU  llobelists.
Miss   B U E N E Y.
b. 1752 ; d. 1840.
Exactly ninety-nine years ago, a young lady named
Evelina made her first appearance in the world. This
young lady belonged to the lealms of fiction; and nothing
could be more unassuming than her introduction to this
new sphere of existence. A nameless and imknown author,
a publisher who valued the MS. at £20, no friends to take
her by the hand in a preface, or to attract readers by a
review;    and   yet  in   a   very   short   time   Evelina   had
No. 27.—March 1877. K
70 2'lie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
taken the world by storm,—not merely the novel-reading
public, but the grave and reverend fathers of literature, men
whose verdict carries weight to this dav. Sir Joshua
lieynolds vowed he would give £50 to know the author;
Burke sat up all night to read it. " Why, madam, why,"
said I)r Johnson to Mrs Thrale, " what a charming book
you lent ine !" He could not praise it enough; its char¬
acters were for ever on his lips. He thought it equal to
Eichardson, and preferred it to Fielding.
By degrees it was whispered that tliis wonderful book
was the work of a young lady of six-and-tweiity, very sliy,
very unassuming, very much alarmed at her own success.
From the astonishment of everybody at tliis discovery, we
are not led to ibrm a very high idea of the ordinary young
ladies of the day; to take the pattern of a cap or apron, to
utter little platitudes witli a sweet smile, seems to have
been quite as much as was expected from them. But as
we look at the pretty arch features of Fanny Burney, in
the portrait prefixed to her memoirs, the bright eyes with
their delicately-marked eye-brows, the mobile mouth,
the charm and animation of the whole countenance, give
us such an impression of " little Burney's quick discerning,"
that we do not wonder she should have l)eeii the delight
and admiration of her contemporaries.
Frances Burney, second daughter of I)r Burney, author
of the Histoi'}! of Music, was born in 1752. As a child, she
was shy and backward; at eight years old slie did not know
her letters. I'robably her very talents kept her back; at
all events, we find her, wlien a little older, spending all her
spare time in writing ; and Evelina was begun as a sort
of continuation of one of her more juvenile performances.
She seems to have had all the gifts necessary to succeed as
a novelist: rare powers of observation, a quick insight into
character, and great cleverness in delineating it; besides
an appreciation of humour wliich rather degenerates into
low comedy in her imaginary scenes, but which sheds much
brightness and playfulness over her accounts of real life.
The first feeling of any one in taking up Evelina at the
present day, is astonishinent that such a state of manners
should have been possible. I do not speak now of the
actual dangers of society—the licence that seems to have
pre\'ailed everywhere, and as a matter of course ; but of the
boisterous mirth, the coarse jests, the utter want of con¬
sideration tor others, wliich were to be found even within
the charmed circle of " persons of quality," thinly veiled by
Our Fcjiiale Xovclists. 7 r
a superficial formality and strictness of etir|uette. Two
gentlemen of position make a bet to drive their phaetons
against each other for one thousand guineas. Their friends
interfere, very unnecessarily, it may be thought, and object
to the match as too dangerous. They cast about for some
other means of deciding the bet; and after many queer
proposals, it is settled that two old women, both of them up¬
wards of eightv, shall run a race against each other ; and
this brilliant idea is actually carried out. Captain Mirvan,
a captain in the navy, son-in-law to a Lady Howard, exceeds
in rudeness and violence all that we could have imagined
possible. His practical jokes are wonderful. An old
Frenchwoman, Madame Duval, is his butt; and it is thought
an exquisite jest to push this poor old creature down in the
gutter when coming from Eanelagh; or, another time, to
feign an attack on her by highwaymen, and to leave her
seated in a ditch with her feet tied together by a rope !
But assuming that the manners depicted were true to
the age, we can easily see why the book became so great a
favourite. Here was a description of every-day life, written in
letters from a young lady, Avho descrilied her adventures with
much liveliness and truth to nature (or to the caricature of
nature which then prevailed). We must make allowance for
much exaggerated 'feeling, for many anxieties and alarms
which now would seem like affectation, but which then were
carefully meted out in due proportions, to form that sensibility
which properly accompanied a refined and virtuous nature.
The book is thoroughly well-written, in pure and flowing
English; the sentiments and reflections are such as would
spring naturally from the events described ; the characters
are well-conceived, well-contrasted, and, in spite of the rouge
and the powder, they are full of life and movement; while
the conversations cannot be accused of want of vigour, though
the highest idea of wit formed by any of the company is a
broad tu qiwqv.e. That tlie picture is fairly correct in all
its parts, we may infer from the entire approbation with
which it was received. Every one was charmed with the
faithful descriptions of character ; and the greatest wits were
fain to exclaim "Ma foi! " with Madame Duval, and to quote
the vulgar cousin's speech, " Lord, Polly, only think ! JMiss
has danced with a lord ! " Here is a little specimen of a
conversation at the theatre, in which Captain Mirvan plays
off an atfected fine gentleman with S(jrae point.
" For my  part," said Mr Lovel, " I confess I seldom listen to tlie
players ; one has so miirh to do in looking; alioiit and finding ont one's
72 Tlie Ladies Edi/ibiirgk Magazin
acquaintance, that really one has no time to mind the stage. Pray,"
(most affectedly fixing his eyes upon a diamond ring upon his little
finger), " pray, what was the play to-night ?"
" Why, what the d—1," cried the cajotain, " do you come to the play
without knowing what it is '\ "
" Oh, yes, sir, yes, very frequently ; I have no time to read j^lay-
hills ; one merely comes to meet one's friends, and show that one's
alive."
" Ha ! ha I ha !—and so," cried the captain, " it costs you five shillings
a-niglit just to show you're alive ! well, faith, my friends should all
think me dead and underground before I'd be at that expense for 'em.
Howsomever—this here you may take from me—they'll find you out
fast enpugh if you have anything to give 'em. And so you've been
here all this time and don't know what the play was ?"
" Why, really, sir, a play requires so much attention,—it is
scarcely possible to keep awake if one listens ; for, indeed, by the
time it is evening, one has been so fatigued with dining, or wine, or
the house, or studying, that it is—it is perfectly an impossibility. ]3ut
now I think of it, I believe I have a bill in my pocket ; oh, ay, here
it is—' Love for Love,' ay, true; ha ! ha ! how could I be so stupid ! "
" Oh, easily enough as to that, I warrant you," said the cajitain; " but,
by my soul, this is one of the best jokes I ever heard ! come to a play,
and not know what it is ! why, I suppose you wouldn't have found it
out if they had fobbed you oft' with a scraping of fiddlers, or an opera ?
Ha ! ha 1 ha I—Why, now I should have thought you might have
taken some notice of one Mr Tattle that is in tliis play !"
The sarcasm, which caused a general smile, made him colour ; but
turning to the captain with a look of conceit, which implied that he
had a retort ready, he said, " Pray, sir, give me leave to ask—what do
you think of one Mr Ben, who is also in this play ? "
The captain, regarding him with the utmost contempt, answered in
a loud voice, " Think of him ! why, I think he is a man !" And then,
staring full in his face, he struck his cane on the ground with a
violence that made him start.
In 1782 appeared Cecilia, which was looked on by
the critics as superior to Evelina. To our judgment it
is altogether more tedious, and wants that sort of spontaneous
movement Avhich we find in the earlier work. The manners,
though less boisterous, are more depraved; and we are
painfully reminded of scenes in the Hake's Progress, and
Mariage a la mode. Camilla followed, "in six volumes
duodecimo" aftei' her marriage with M. D'Arblay; and there
was a still later work. The Wanderer. But tliough both
these were well received, tliey do not seem to have added
much to her reputation. We cannot help thinking that she
might have taken a high place as a \M'iter of comedies.
She did attempt both tragedy and comedy, but only one of
her pieces Avas performed on the stage ; and that, a tragedy
called Edwy and Elgiva, was withdrawn after the first re-
presentati m.
Besides these works, Miss Burney has left us her Memoirs;
Our Female Novelists. 73
and very attractive reading they are. She has a good deal
of the power of, as it were, photographing the society in
which she moved, that gives such a cliarm to French
memoirs; and as throughout her life she mixed with all
that was most illustrious both by birth and talent, her
Memoirs give us a vivid picture of the life, courtly, political,
and social, of the last five-and-twenty years of the 18th
century. It is well-known wliat a favourite " little Burney"
became with Dr Johnson ; and nowhere do M-e get a more
agreeable picture of the Doctor, than in her accounts of her
visits to Streatham. Many other celebrities we meet with
in her pages: Mrs Montagu, Sheridan, IJurke, Sir Joshua
Eeynolds, IVIadame de Stal'l—all speaking ibr themselves
with most life-like vivacity. Here is one little scene, wliich
is quite irresistible in its naJivcU. Miss Burney has been
introduced to Lady Say and Sele; and by her, with many
compliments, to her sister, Lady Hawke, " wlio has written
a novel herself, so you are sister authoresses! "
" Well," cried Lady Say, " hut do repeat that sweet part that I am
so fond of. You know what I mean ; Miss Buriiey must hear it, out of
your novel, you know."
Lady Hawke.—"No, I can't ; I have forgot it."
Lady Say.—" Oh no ! I am sure you have not ; I insist upon it."
Lady Hawke.—"But I know you can repeat it yovirself; you have
so fine a memory.    I am sure you can repeat it"
Lady Say.—" Oh, hut I should not do it justice—that's all, I should
not do it justice ! "
Lady Hawke then hent forward and repeated :—" If, when he
made the declaration of his love, the sensibility that beamed in his
eyes was felt in his heart, what pleasing sensations and soft alarms
miglit not that tender avowal awaken ! "
" And from what, ma'am," cried I, astonished, and imagining I had
mistaken them, "is this taken V
"From my sistei-'s novel!" answered the delighted Lady Say and
Sele, expecting my raptures to be equal to her own. " It's hi the
Mausoleum of Julia—did not you know that ? "
It is amusing to find, some years after, tliat this touching
romance, which an ungrateful world has suffered to die, is
solemnly presented to the Queen. " It is all of a piece,"
says Miss Burney, " all love, love, love, unmixed and un¬
adulterated with any more worldly materials."
Miss Burney's position in tlie household of Queen Char¬
lotte is well known. Her ostensible post was that of reader
to the Queen ; but she was a great deal more than this.
She was a sort of superior dresser, attending and assisting at
the Queen's toilette three times a-day ; besides performing
many other services of various kinds.    It must have been a
74 TJie Ladies Ediiiburgli Alagaziiie.
considerable slavery; during the five years for which she
held the post, from '86 to '91, she seems to have been always
on duty, and only as a favour, and on suiferance, did she
ever see her own friends. She was singularly unfortunate
in her coadjutor, a Madame Schwellenberg, one of the
Queen's German attendants. The coarseness and brutality
of this person exceed belief Nothing in the novels
can seem exaggerated when we meet with such speeches
as this from one in the position of a lady. They were
travelling from London to "Windsor in winter, and ]\Iiss
Burney suffered from tlie draught of the open window.
" 0, poor ;Miss Burney might bear it the same ! Put it
down, Mr de Luc ! Witliout, I will get out! Put it down
wlien I tell you! It is my coach! I will have it selfs !
I might go alone in it, or with one, or with A^'hat you
call nobody, when I please !"
One cannot help admiring the straiglitforward good
sense with which she steered through the intricacies of tliis
difficult position; though she sometimes provokes one by
her great self-consciousness, and the little vanities and
affectations with which she tells her tale. Her admiration
for the Queen, and indeed for all the royal family, was
quite unbounded, and we get many pleasing glimpses of their
domestic life. We also get very curious pictures of manners.
One of Miss Burney's first occupations was to mix the
Queen's snuff, and fill her snuff-box. When the court was
on a visit at Nuneham, tlie hairdresser from Oxford came to
dress her head at six in the morning, and she was barely
ready by eight. Well might she say that tlie first syllable
of the word toilette, was quite sufficient, without a needless
diminutive ! And, again, it is curious to find a friend bring¬
ing her " a decanter of barley-water, and a bright tin sauce¬
pan, under her hoop!"
After Miss Burney had given up lier appointment through
ill-health, she was thrown much into the society of a party of
French emigres; and this led, in 17.93, to her marriage with
one of the number, tlie Chevalier D'Arblay. He had been
on the staff of La Fayette, and seems to have been a fine
character. It was a very hap]>y marriage, though imprudent
enough in a worldly point of view, as tliey had no certain
income but £100 a-year allowed to Miss Burney by the
Queen. In her letters at this time we are continually re¬
minded of her own heroines ; just so Avould tiiose charm¬
ing young ladies have announced their marriage. There are
all   the  fine  sentiments, all  the  tours rle j^irase that  the
Our Fc7)iale Novelists. 75
situation demanded. M. D'Arbley is " lier mate," her
"partner," never her husband; her little son figures as
the " Bambino." For some years they lived quietly at a
little cottage in Surrey, M-here M. D'Arbley literally turned his
sword into a pruning-hook. The years" from 1802 to 1815
were spent in France; and Madame D'Arblay, wliose fate
it was to be ever associated with great events, was in Paris
when Xapoleon landed from Elba, and at Prussels when tlie
Battle of Waterloo was fought. The closing years of lier life
have the sadness inseparable from the liistmy of one whose
life is prolonged far beyond the allotted span. She survived
all that she most loved; she closed the eyes of both her
husband and son, and died in 1840, at the great age of 88.
Her long life bridges over in a remaikable way two periods
so remote from each other as the reign of George II.,
when she was born, to the days of Queen Victoria, "whose
marriage she lived to witness.
Miss Burney has herself well summed up the conditions
of lasting fame when she says : " Humour springing li'om
meie dress, or habits, or phraseology, is quickly obsolete;
when it sinks deeper, and dives into character,'it may live
for ever." This is most true of her own writino-s. Her
novels are probably the first which profess to depict life in
its every-day aspect. Eichardson, with his tragic pen, and
Fielding,^ from the vigorous strength of his own mind, had
written fiction, which, tliough set in a contemporary frame-
Avork, might have belonged to any age. But in Evelina and
Cecilia we meet the men and women of the time, with
all their fashionable follies, their extravagance, their masque¬
rades and tlieir duels, their affectations, and their " vapours."
It is an unlovely picture to gaze upon ; and as the traits of
character are too superficial, too melodramatic, to appeal
deeply to our feelings, it is not surprising that it should
now be forgotten.
A very fair parallel might be drawn between our present
writer and Miss Austin. Both took the subjects of their
fiction from wliat they saw around tliem; both have all the
merit of faithful and life-like portraiture, touching the little
foibles they describe with a kindly hand; both are perhaps
somewhat deficient in imagination. But Miss Austin is
incomparably the superior in the delicacy and finish of her
sketches. Miss Burney shows us, as it were, the types ; and
it was reserved for later writers to give a more subtle in¬
sight into the varieties of character, and to refine upon her
broad general lines.
'jQ The Ladies Edinburgh Magazi)ic.
We conclude with an extract wliicli cannot fail to give a
high idea of her powers. It was written when she had
attained the age of sixty-nine.
I have lost now, just lost, my once most dear, intimate, and admired
fiiend, Mrs Thrale Piozzi, who preserved her fine faculties, her
imagination, her intelligence, her powers of allusion and citation, her
extraordinary memory, and her almost unexampled vivacity, to the last
of her existence. She was in her eighty-second year, and yet owed not
her death to age nor to natural decay, but to the effects of a fall in a
journey from Penzance to Clifton. On her eightieth birthday she
gave a great ball, concert, and supper, in the public rooms at Bath, to
uj)wards of 200 persons, and the ball she opened herself. She was, in
truth, a most wonderful chai'acter for talents and eccentricity, for wit,
genius, generosity, spirit, and jjowers of entertainment. She had a
great deal both of good and not good, in common with Madame de
Stael Holstein. They had the same sort of highly superior intellect,
the same depth of learning, the same general ac([uaintance with science,
the same ardent love of literature, the same thirst for universal know¬
ledge, and the same buoyant animal spirits, such as neither sickness,
sorrow, nor even terror, could subdue. Their conversation was equally
luminous, from the sources of their own fertile minds, and from their
sjjlendid acquisitions from the works and acquirements of others.
Both were zealous to serve, liberal to bestow, and graceful to oblige ;
and both were truly liighminded in i)rizing and praising whatever
was admiral)le that came in their way. Neither of them was delicate
nor polished, though each was flattering and caressing ; but both had
a fund inexhaustible of good humour, and of sportive gaiety, that made
their intercourse with those they wished to please attractive, instructive,
and delightful; and though not either of them had the smallest real
malevolence in their compositions, neither of them could ever with¬
stand the pleasure of uttering a repartee, let it wound whom it might,
even tlioigh each would serve the very person they goaded with all
the means in their power. Both were kind, charitable, and munificent,
and therefore belo\'ed ; both were sarcastic, careless, and daring, and
therefore feared. The morality of Madame de Stael was by far the
most faulty, but so was the society to which she belonged ; so were
the general manners of those by whom she was encircled."
EXXA.
lir fbc Scasibt.
Qi ii
Bertha sat still, gazing at the fire, feeling as if she liad no
strength to struggle against the recollections aroused by look¬
ing at the old note; and so she sat, not attempting to look
over any more letters, but thinking of all the circumstances
of that Christmas visit,—what a hard frost it M^as, how she
and Sophy enjoyed the sledging, and how they learnt to
By the Seaside. JJ
skate. Then the prepai'ations for the theatricals they were
to have on New Year's Day; liow she enjoyed it all, trying
not to think of the day after, wlien lie must go hack to
town; and then that evening, the last of the year, when
they had sat up to see the old year out, and he had spoken
to her while they were standing liy the window, listening to
the church bells, and she had been so happy, and had thought
that the New Year was dawning on her so brightly ! And
then the next morning, what a change! when lier father
was told and was so angry, saying it was an impossiljility—
it was not to be thought of—a young man with only a
hundred and fifty pounds a year! He must go away
immediately. Aud he did go; and oh ! the wretchedness of
that day ! the dreary thaw, the snow lying about in patches,
the rain pouring dismally ; and worst of all, the thought of
the theatricals and of the party that was to come in the
evening. That she had got through that evening at all was
a wonder to her noAv, in looking back, and remembering the
di'eadful strain that it had been to try and seem in good
spirits when her heart was breaking; how umiatural her
own laugh had sounded ! And then the reaction, when she
went to bed, and the restraint was over; the floods of tears,
the agonized sobs of that night, she never could forget; and
the desperate effort she had made in the morning to seem
calm again, that her father might never know what it had
cost her to submit to his will. And he never had known;
she felt thankful for that now. During the remainder of his
life she had devoted herself entirely to him, feeling that she
had nothing else to live for. And now that duty was over,
what was there further to live for ? An orphan of eight-and-
twenty may not seem such an object of compassion as an
orphaned child, or a young girl just entering upon life; 1 )ut per¬
haps there is no age at which a Avoman feels the breaking up
of the home of her childhood, the removal of the barrier \vhich
the generations above us seem to make between us and old
age and the grave. It is an age when a woman is considered
too young to set up an establishment of her own, and yet is
too old to amalgamate herself easily with another family.
Bertha had thought that as she was possessed of a little
fortune of three hundred a year, left her by her god-mother
a short time before her father's death, she might live by her¬
self; but her brother would not hear of it; he was older
than she was, and to him she seemed still a girl. He told
her it would be the most unheard of proceeding; that the
proper place for her to live was with him; that Sophy quite
No. 27.—iURcnlS77 L
78 TJie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
agreed with him, and that while he lived she should never
want a home. Edward had always been very fond of Bertha,
and she loved him as sisters do love an only brother; both
he and Sophy had done their best to make her happy. The
tears came into her eyes while she thought of all their kind¬
ness and affection, and doubtless they thought that they
had succeeded in their intention. Truly the heart knoweth
its own bitterness, and a stranger intermeddleth not.
The fire had died down, and the moon, which was now in
front of the window, streamed in through the open shutter
and threw a line of cold light across the floor. Bertha
sliivered; it was still early, and she made up the fire afresh,
and resumed her meditations.
" Should she ever see liim again?" It was a question she
often asked herself, and always gave herself the same answer;
biit, as she very soon asked it again, it may be doubted
whether she Avas quite sincere in her hopelessness. She was
thankful that he had never married; it seemed to her that
she could not have borne it, though she often tried to say to
herself, "Perhaps he has forgotten me." She said so now,
but she did not think it; her heart rebelled against the
suggestion, and soon her thoughts were engaged in building
a bright castle for the future. She had a vision of his
reappearing, meeting her somewhere in London, telling her
that he had been faithful to her all these years, that he had
been working for her, that he had got promotion and an
increased income, and had saved money, so that, had her
father been alive, he would not have objected to their miion.
She had such trust in John Leslie that she believed that
this was what he would do; but then, supposmg that he
had tried, and failed; supposing that, in spite of all his
efforts to work his way upwards in the world, he had
advanced but little in these eight years. She knew that
promotion in the Government offices was slow, and that it
required years of toil to obtain anything like a competent
income. And then supposing that while still cherishing
her memory, he considered that all was for ever at an end
between them; supposing that he thought himself ill-used,
as indeed he might, and was angry with her for giving liim
up so readily, for so implicitly obeying her father; suppos¬
ing—Bertha was weary of conjecture, weary of reminiscences,
weary of thinking.
" I will go to bed," she said to herself; "perhaps a night's
rest will do me good, and I shall wake up brighter to-morrow."
She was right.    There are few of the minor troubles of
By the Seaside. 79
life that cannot be soothed by " care-charmer sleep," and
when we can scarcely account to ourselves for our low
spirits, they often will not sur\'ive the hoiu-s of darkness.
Wlien Bertha rose the next morning, and looked out
upon the calm sea, now sparkling in the sunshine, her first
thought was that it would be a lovely morning for bathing,
and life did not seem quite so dull and dreary as it had
done the evening before. She found Sophy at the breakfast-
table, bright and brisk in spite of her night's dissipation, fuU
of the pleasures of the ball; the best, she said, that she had
had for a long time; such a good room, such a first-rate
band, and Col. Wallace had been so kind in introducing all
the best partners in the room.
" It's a pity you were not there, Bertha," said Edward,
with an appearance of being entirely occupied with the
things on his plate ; " there was an old friend of yours
there."
" Friend of mine ! " said Bertha, her heart beating in spite
of herself.    " Who was it ?"
" Jack Leslie."
" Bertlia had schooled herself now for many years to hear
that name without showing any outward sign of agitation;
, she neither blushed nor turned pale, but to speak was for
the moment impossible.    After glancing at her from under
his eyelids, to see how she took it, Edward continued—
" He is a cousin of Mrs Wallace in some distant degree,
and came to see them on his way abroad, and, as there was
to be this ball last night, they persuaded him to stay for it.
I think he said he should cross by the mid-day boat, so
perhaps he may look in this morning. He asked where
you were."
" Did he know about— " began Bertha, forcing herself to
speak, but unable to finish her sentence.
" He knew of my father's death, but he didn't know
Woodcote was let, so he was very much surprised to see us
here.    Very much pleased though, I thought."
Bertha spent the whole morning in her own room, in a
state of feverish excitement that made it impossible to hei'
to employ hersellj or to attend to conversation. She desired
her maid to let her know if any visitors called; once she
heard a knocking, followed by a man's step on the stairs, and
sent her down to inquire, but it was only the doctor come
to see one of the children who was poorly.
" Hope deferred maketh the heart sick," said Bertha to
herself, with an intense  realization of the truth of that
8o The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
saying of the wisest of men. Just then, as slie stood by the
window, she saw the train come puffing down on to the pier,
bringing the passengers from London for the steamboat;
and she knew that those who were already in Whitcliffe
must have gone on board before. In a few minutes more the
boat had ceased letting off its steam, the wheels began to
move—it was out of the harbour. Bertha felt then that if
suspense was heart-sickening, disappointment was crushing.
For a few minutes she sat stiU, her face covered with her
hands; then she went downstairs, and behaved so entirely
as if nothing had happened, that Edward and Sophy, who
watched her narrowly, came to the conclusion that she did
not feel it much.
" You see she has quite got over it," Edward said to his
wife when they were quite alone ; " girls do forget very soon;
you would have forgotten me by this time if your father had
not let us marry."
Sophy shook her little fist at him, and told him he knew
nothing about women, though he ought to know them by
this time, as he had been married eight years.
" I am not much changed, am I, Ned ?" she said.
" No," he answered, " but then you see I never gave you
a chance of forgetting me. It's out of sight out of mind,
with all you women."
After luncheon, as Bertha was sitting alone in the draw¬
ing-room, Sophy • came in with a troubled face. " I don't
know what to do, Bertha," she said;" Mabel is so poorly that
I can't let nurse leave her, and Jane says she has got a bad
toothache, and can't take the children out; would you let
Emma take them for a walk ? "
" Oh," said Bertha, jumping up, " I will take them myself
with pleasure."
" No, will you really ?    How very good of you !"
" No, it is not good of me," said Bertha, " because I like
it so much. I like nothing better than a walk on the shore,
and I always like having the children with me. I shall
take my sketch-book and draw the shrimpers, or the rocks,
or the boats, and they can play about as much as they like."
The children were delighted with this arrangement, and
they set off, jumping and dancing along by her side, to a
lonely spot on the shore under the east cliff, where Bertha
sat down on a rock with her sketch-book in her lap, leaving
the children to pick up sea-weed and shells, and build a
castle on the narrow strip of sand which the tide had made
bare on the shingly shore.    She was not in a mood  for
By the Seaside. 8i
sketching, her energies seemed exhausted in the great effort
she had made for self-control, and now she could only sit
still waiting for her troubled spirit to be calmed Ijy the
soothing influence of the peaceful, sunny day. The scene
before her—tlie calm sea, the rocks, the sunshine, the
accompanying sounds, the ripple of the waves, the happy
voices of the children, the far off bugle call from the barracks
—remained deeply impressed on Bertha's mind, as the place
where any great event has happened to us often does ; for, as
she turned her head, she saw a man's figure approaching,
rounding the corner of the cliffs. She would liave known
those broad shoulders, that light free step, at any distance,
and among a thousand others. Her heart seemed for a
moment to stand still, and then gave one great throb that
turned her sick and faint; she sat still, for she had no power
to move. Did he know she was there ? Was he come on
purpose to seek her ? Did he see her? or would the shadow
of the rock hide her as he came near ? These thoughts
passed through her mind in one moment; the next, he was
standing Ijefore her, holding her hand in that well-remem¬
bered grasp.
Xeither of them spoke directly; at last Bertha said :
" I thought you were gone abroad."
" Did you think I should go away without seeing you ?"
" I thought,—I didn't know," she said, confused ; then
looking up in his face, met his eye. He was looking at her
just as he used to look in old times; was it going to be the
same thing again ? Was he indeed unchanged in all these
years ?
" I called at your house, and saw Mrs Stanhope, and she
told me you had walked along the shore," said Mr Leslie;
" so I came in search of you."
"And you are going to cross this evening?" asked Bertha.
" No, I think not. I have an old college friend who lives
somewhere in this part of the world; I may perhaps go and
look him up before I go abroad.    Switzerland will keep.'
"Will it?" said Bertha. "I should have thought it
must be already rather late for Switzerland ? "
" Well then, I'll go somewhere else; it makes no differ¬
ence to me. T promised to meet my brother at Brussels, anrl
he is staying out among the Belgian towns till I come; so I
must go abroad sooner or later, and I ha\e only a month's
leave."
" Don't they give you any longer holidays than they used
to do ?"  said Bertha, remembering the difficulty that he
82 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
used to have in getting away for a few days to come down
to Woodcote.
"Not yet; but I hope to get a longer time next year.
I have now got a very good situation in the Foreign Office,
with better pay and longer holidays than I used to have at
my old place in the Admiralty, and I have hopes of getting
on to something better still, in time."
" I am very glad to hear that," said Bertha;" you used to
say that you had no hope of promotion."
" N"o, I never should have got it by my own efforts, but
I am fortunate in having a friend at court now, an old friend
of my father, who has lent me a helping hand."
There was a pause after this. Bertha was thinking what
a difference it would have made in her life if ]\Ir Leslie had
had any such prospect as this eight years ago, and wondering
whether he had any particular reason for telling her of his
improved fortunes. It seemed a strange realization of her
dreams of the evening before; so exactly the retiirn she had
planned in her own mind, that it was difficult to believe that
it was really happening. She felt as if she were in a dream,
iind his voice sounded to her as if it came from a long way
off. She tried to rouse herself now, as he sat down by her
side, and began to talk of old days—the days she had been
thinldng of so sadly, of "VVoodcote, and of her father.
" I had no idea," he said, "that Edward had let the place;
1 fancied him living there now, and I was wondering
whether you were lining with him. I was so astonislied to
meet him yesterday at the ball, and to hear that you were
all staying down here. Is it only a temporary arrangement,
your living with them ?"
" I have nowhere else to live," she said in a low sad voice.
" They are very kind, and do all they can to make it a home
for me."
" But, I dare say, you miss the independence of your own
home ?" he said.
She did not answer; and at that moment the pattering
of little feet was heard upon the shingle, and the two
children came running round the corner of the rock, and
tumbled, both at once, into })ertha's lap.
" Oh, Aunt P)ertlia, we had built such a beautiful castle,
with ditches all round it, just like the castle here, and the
waves came up and spoilt it quite, and we were trying to build
it up again, and there came another wave and washed it all
away, and wetted our feet, too, and now there isn't any more
sand, nothing but nasty shingle; the sea has covered it all."
By the Seaside. 83
" Well, my dears, I am very sorry for you; but it is the
way with all the castles one builds, they always melt away."
" Do you ever build castles with the sand, aunt Bertha ? "
said the little girl, looking at her with large wondering eyes.
" Sometimes of sand, sometimes of air," answered Bertha,
" they are both alike."
And yet at this moment she was building a castle for
herself, as fair and sunlit as the clouds that were floating in
the sky, and as easily dissolved by a breath of wind, which
might perhaps send them falling in rain upon her head.
" It makes one feel old to see these cliildren," said Mr
Leslie, who have grown up since we met last. How old
are you, young man ?" he added, seizing hold of the little
boy who was still hanging on his aunt, looking up in her face
as if trying to find out what she meant.
" I shall be seven on the fourteenth of December," said
the child.
Well, you're a great boy," said Mr Leslie; " and what's
your name ?"
" Edward Stanhope."
" But we always call him Teddy," said his sister.
" And are you called I'ertha ? " said Mr Leslie, turning
to her.
" No ; my name is Edith Sophia Stanhope."
" And which do they call you, Edith or Sophia ?"
"Edith," answered the child; "I was called Sophia after
mama, but I think it is a very ugly name."
" I think you had much better have been called Bertha,"
said Mr Leslie; "you are exactly like your aunt; I have no
doubt she had just such curls as these," pulling Edith's
flaxen hair.
"Yes, I believe I had," said Bertha smiling, "for I remem¬
ber my greatest ambition was to have them cut off, that I
might be more like Edward. But look," she said suddenly,
" how fast the tide is coming in; we ought to be going."
She rose from her seat as she spoke, and took hold of
Edith's hand.
"We shall not have such a nice walk back as we had
in coming here," she said; " the sea has covered all the strip
of sand that we came along; there is nothing left now but
shingle."
" Even the shingle will fail us soon," said Mr Leslie ; "we
must keep as close to the cliffs as we can, in rounding this
last point, and I am afraid walking on these rocks will be
hard work for those little feet."
84 The Ladies EdinbiirgJi Magnrjiiie.
Just as he spoke, Edith's foot slipped upon the sea-weed
covered rock, and she fell. She was beginning to cry, but
]\Ir Leslie lifted her up tenderly, and his promise to carry
her all the way home consoled her, and stopped the fast
falling tears.
It was an uncomfortable walk for Bertha. Tt had seemed
but a little way that they had come along the sand two
hours before. Now, as they retraced their steps over
rough shingle and slippery rocks, the distance seemed twice
as great; the tide gaining upon them every minute, obliged
tliem to keep closer and closer to the cliffs, where the
walking was most difficult; in many places Bertha could
scarcely keep her feet, and conversation was of course
impossible. It was quite a relief to her when at last, just
as it was growing dusk, they turned the corner of the
terrace, and she found herself at her own door.
"Good-bye," said Mr Leslie, when he had set the tired
child down. " I am sorry I cannot come in and see Edward
now, but I shall be late for the Wallace's dinner."
" Are you staying there ?" asked Bertha.
" No; I am at the hotel. Their house is all in con¬
fusion; they are going away to-morrow; the regiment is
ordered out to Canada, and they sail on Satuixlay. That
ball was their farewell to Whitcliffe."
Bertha spent that evening in a sort of luxurious dream;
too much absorbed in her new-found happiness to care to
talk about other things. She sat silent thinking over the
strangeness of the meeting, after the long separation, wonder¬
ing, and half vexed with herself for having talked about
such commonplace things; so different from what she would
have imagined herself saymg, if she liad known beforehand
that she was to meet him, and planned many things that
she would say to him to-morrow, when she lioped tliat they
might meet again. Slie lay awake almost all night, too
excited to sleep; her maid was astonished to find her, when
she came to call her in the morning, already dressed, and sit¬
ting by the open wmdow. She was afraid to leave the house,
lest he sliould come while she was out; she made all sorts
of excuses for not going to bathe, while Sophy, who knew
her real motive quite well, biit was pleased to find an
opportunity of teasing her staid sober sister, went on
assuring her that it was the most delightful day possible,
that the sea was as calm as a looking-glass, and that the
water would be all the warmer because tliere was no sun.
But the morning went by, and no Mr LesUe.    Luncheon
A Song for tlie Times. 85
time came; Bertha sat at the table eating nothing, only
listening to every sound; still he did not come. They went
back to the drawing-room, and she forced herself to try and
work. She began to think he might liave gone to see the
friend he had spoken of, and perhaps he might have been
kept tliere. He might come to dinner; but meanwhile the
disappointment was hard to bear. Suburbaxa.
{To be continued.)
tf •■ tc 'il'lt-^ti-
^ Song for tijc  ^rmcs.
1.
In these our davs when judgment passes
On " Woman's Eights," and " AVoman's Classes,"
And what's her "proper sphere,"
When w^e are told we must not use
Our minds, nor hold " peculiar views,"
Before the unthinking world accuse.
In justice let it hear !
II.
We are " inferior beings."    Granted.
It is not much to be so vaunted
To be a man,
Tf being so, he dare not meet
His Aveaker sisters to compete,
Xor yield the palm with grace when beat
By silly woman.
HI.
Granted our skulls are somewhat thicker.
And men may be a trifle quicker
At classical quotation ;
Of languages yclept " the dead "
The less, perhaps, the better said.
If all be true that we have read
Of school-boy education.
IV.
One thhig, at Jcfii^t,, our lihx can try in,
And win the prize, there's no denyin',
If truth were wortli the telling ;
2;.-MAr.(H 1877. M
86 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
A branch which College life disdains,
As if it were not worth the pains
While Greek and Latin hold the reins,
And that is—English spelling !
V.
If God has given a woman mind
Of average above her kind.
It is her talent duly ;
And hers the choice to lay it by.
Or wear it with humility.
All in a manner womanly.
If she will wear it truly.
VI.
If homely duties were neglected.
That sciences might be perfected.
Or human bodies be dissected.
We scarce could take her part;
But employing hours of leisure
In Avisdom's paths of pleasure.
And storing endless treasure
From History and Art,
VII.
What but censorious, jealous voice.
And smaller nature, would rejoice
Some fault to find ?
In petty judgment sitting.
And secret, cowardly hitting.
That, sooth, is but befitting
A little mind.
VIII.
There needeth no aj^ology
For studying any " ology,"
Except perhaps theology,
Which lies not in her way;
But if she have the patience
To work out dull equations.
And pass examinations,
Wlio dares to say her nay ?
TJie Higher Education of ]]'o!neH in Scotland.       87
IX.
And should dark days arise at length.
Calling out every power and strength.
She'll arm her for the strife
With all the varied talents given
For use—not rust—by gracious heaven ;
She by their exercise will leaven
The hard won bread of life !
Maetyn Hay.
£.»--«-
e pig^tr ^bututioiv of Momett in Stothmi).
Part III.
WHAT HAS BEEN DONE IN EDINBURGH.
Everybody knows how, in the winter of 1868, at the request
of a newly formed Association, Professor Masson lectured on
English literature, and how no fewer than 265 ladies went
to hear him. It is also well known that, in succeeding
winters, other professors followed his example, and that,
although the class-rooms liaAClong since ceased to be a place
of fashionable resort, yet they still continue to be the centre
of attraction to a tolerably large and studious set, who
work hard and attend examinations winter after winter.
Something, too, is vaguely known' concerning a University
certificate, said to be given to certain of these students;
but society generally confuses it, on the one hand, with the
parchment certificate given by each professor to his students
along with their prizes, and, on the other, with the certificate
of the University Local Examinations. Beyond this, we
Ijelieve, very little of the past or present of the lecture system
is known even in Edinburgh, and still less in the rest of Scot¬
land. A short sketch of its history may therefore not be
uninteresting. Abundant materials for the task lie ready to
our hand in the series of Annual Eeports from 1868 to 1876,
in the class-registers, and in the note-books and reminiscences
of old students. Administrative details are so tedious to all
who are not directly concerned in their invention or in their
conduct, that we shall say as little as possible about them,
and keep strictly to what has taken place in the class-rooms.
On the whole, this Association may be said to have done
its work fairly well, if, perhaps, with less of sustained energy
88 The Ladies Edinbiivgh Magazine.
than might have been looked for by those who remembered
the zeal and enterprise of its first promoters. Yet, albeit it
seems probable that the first decade of its existence will
come to an end before their anticipations of success have
been fully realized, this may possibly be due not so much to
inaction on the part of the Society, as to the retarding influ¬
ence of circumstances beyond its control. For the most
serious charge brought against the Association is, that it
did not begin at the beginning, but that its leaders were
contented to assume that the secondary education of ladies
was all that coidd be desired, instead of being, as it is
now acknowledged to be, very imperfect indeed. Critics
say that a wiser course was followed in England, where
the University Local Examinations were not considered
beneath the care of Ladies' Educational Associations. But
in 1868 no one who had ventured to assert that the
secondary education of Scottish young ladies needed refor¬
mation, would have been listened to with patience, and
a deeply-rooted national self-satisfaction on the subject
made the task of beginning at the beginning a far harder
one here than in England, where things were so much
worse that it was impossible to take anything for granted,
except the general want of instruction in grammar and in
arithmetic, in history and in geography, of the greater
part of the young lady world.
The opening course of 1868 was necessarily far more
sketchy than those elaborate critical lectures on the history
of English literature which now occupy Professor Massou
and his class during two entire sessions. There was only
one tentative written examination, conducted without marks,
prizes, or division of the students into classes, in order of
merit. Still, the results amply satisfied the examiners that
the experiment of University instruction for women was
■worth trying, and that a majority of the class was sufiiciently
prepared for the work to be done. But when Professor
Masson's eight Annual Eeports are read one after the other as
a series, we cannot help noticing how often he speaks of the
" visible improvement, in the course of the session, of not a
few students,"—a result to be looked for in the case rather of
clever women who begin to study late in life, than of well-
trained girls fresh from school. Moreover, in 1872-73, he
plainly told his class that among them there was a deficiency
of previous training, and we read that in 1875-76, " there
was evidence in some cases of insufiicient early training and
practice in  English composition and pointing;"   and that
The Higher Education of Women in Scotland.       89
several students took lower rank on this account than they
seemed to merit by natural ability. This would suggest
that, like the other promoters of the scheme, Professor
Masson had expected the influence of these lectures to
re-act speedily and beneficially on the secondary education
of those who, in 1868, were young girls in the schoolroom,
and hence felt some disappointment, when, after eight years,
there was still much room left for improvement in rudimen¬
tary instruction. Further proofs of defective early education
will meet us as we go on.
In 1868-69, we find an approach made to a fully-equipped
University Faculty of Arts; for experimental physics, logic,
and metaphysics, were added to English literature. No
fewer than 335 ladies crowded to the class-rooms in this
prosperous winter. Of these, it is important for us to
notice, only 90 had been among Professor Masson's first
company of hearers since the time this proportion of old to
new students was said in the Eeport to afford "very satis¬
factory proof that a demand for higher culture really exists
in Edinburgh." But now, after nine sessions, and taken in
connection with the statistics furnished by the class-registers,
it would rather be looked upon as an ominous sign of the
contrary. In this one fact, indeed, lay foreshadowed the
coming experiences of many j^ears—i.e., that at least one-
half of those who throng a well-filled class-room, are dilettante
visitors, attracted by love of novelty to a pleasant intellec¬
tual pastime. On their stability it is useless to reckon, and
old members of the Association rarely expect more than this
proportion of a very large class to return in the following
year. Another rule, that you may count on those students
who come up for examination as being likely to re-appear,
is also curiously exemplified by the figures of this year; for
in the first session 94 out of 265 had been the working
proportion, and in the second, exactly 90 of these continued
their studies. Llay we commend these facts and figures to
the notice of the promoters of similar schemes elsewhere ?
Professor Tait writes that he was greatly pleased to find
that " the want of preliminary training did not, to any
serious extent, interfere with the working of his class."
The italics are ours, and the Report of Mr Kobertson Smith,
then Examiner to the University, explains to what extent,
and in what direction, defective training did affect the
results of the examinations. He first tells us that " there
were one or two very good students at the top of the
class, who were in every respect equal to the Ijest Univer-
QO TJie Ladies EdinbiirgJi Magazine.
sity men; but below them there was a rather rapid descent
to painstaking mediocrity." Then follows the gist of
his criticism. "To most of the class, not only physical
facts, but all physical and mathematical ideas were per¬
fectly new, and even a sound knowledge of arithmetic
in its theory was very far from well diffused." We would
fain ask whether in 1877 it can still be said, that girls
leave the schoolroom ignorant of elementary physical and
mathematical ideas, and without any sound knowledge of
the rational principles of arithmetic ? All we know is
that in 1874 there was no perceptible amendment, for
in that year the Professor of Chemistry reported, that
" the small number of marks obtained in the second
examination is accounted for by the fact that 20 per
cent, of the marks in that examination were assigned
to questions involving the numerical solution of parti¬
cular problems. These qiiestions were not, as a rule, well
answered. Want of precision was the most notable fault."
Professor Eraser, it is true, saw no reason to complain of
want of previous training; but it is not unlikely that his class
attracted studious women who had read a good deal of
philosophy. Yet this very class furnished Miss Menzies
with the following anecdote,^ which she gives as an instance
of imperfect knowledge of English grammar and analysis, on
the part of ladies who were able to learn metaphysics.
"We have heard of a class of ladies, tauglit by a learned
professor, having a paper set before them, full of profound
questions on the fundamental laws of thought; on logical
extent; on the analytic of Aristotle ; on the origin of know¬
ledge. But among these was one unobtrusive, innocent-
looking question:—' Give subject, and predicate, and
copula of—It rains; I exist; A word to the unse' &c.
Great was the surprise of the professor, greater still that of
the examiner, at the depths of ignorance revealed by tlie
answers to this question." From the note-book of an
old student we learn that, in criticising tliis very paper.
Professor Praser commended certain students for "originality
and power," and regretted that "want of exactness and
precision" in answering the easier questions deprived
them of many marks; while his comment on the best
paper of all was, " One of the best I ever received from
1 How we passed the Local Examination, p. 5. This paper was
reprinted from this Magazine, because it is full of useful directions to
ladies who wish to prepare for the Local Examinations. It may lie
had on aiJi^lication to the Editor.
The Higlier Education of Women in Scotland.       97
any student, scarcely one inaccuracy in it." The owner of
this note-book, a well-read and not very young lady,
added that her own paper was retiu-ned, with the famous
question decorated with a wliole series of marks in the
reddest of ink, betokening horror and surprise! We
have been favoured with a sight of this rare illuminated
MS., still treasured by its owner.
In 1869-70 a class for mathematics was added, and mim-
bered 35 students, of whom 26 were working ones. From some
unexplained cause, its like has not been seen again. Are
we wrong in attributing this practical failure to an ignorance
of arithmetic, which makes algebra seem formidable ?
In 1870-71 there was a total attendance of only 204
students. They were so equally distributed over four classes
that many thought we had seen the last of the dilettante
student, who is invariably gregarious in her habits. Need
we say that her loss was bewailed, for, without her kindly
presence, and when bereft of the income supplied by her
class tickets, the Association had to face serious financial
difficulties ? Into these matters, however, affecting as they do
the managers of the Association rather tlian the students,
Ave shall not enter. We may remark, however, the frec[uent
coincidence of a diminished attendance with a season of
commercial depression, Avitli calls for help to the sufferers in
foreign wars, or with the higli price of coal and the increase
in domestic expenses generally.
In 1871-72 the students of physical science had dwindled
from 129 to 43, while philosophy mustered 97 in its'
two departments of ethics and logic. This is a simply
inexplicable proportion between the two subjects, and we
can only conjecture that it arose partly from a reluc¬
tance on the part of learners to enter a class in any but
the first year of its existence, when, to use the words of a
very energetic student, " One can start fair, you know."
In this session moral philosophy had the attraction of
novelty, and I*rofessor Fraser's class was a large one,
because, at the request of some 30 of his old students, he
selected tlie new subject of the "History of Philosophy from
Bacon to Hume." Practically, he lectured to a class of senior
students, with their numbers reinforced by a handful of new
comers, who were assisted to do the work by a burst of
esprit-dc-corps, which led those who had been four years in
the class to act as volunteer tutors at a weekly meeting.
Those Saturday forenoons are still among the pleasant
memories of not a few old companions in study, who have
92 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
assisted us in the redaction of this notice. Not vmfrequently
they ended in a debate so warm that the point at issue had
to be referred to Professor Fraser. The^enms loci, too, of the
house where Ave met was suggestive of wide and free discus¬
sion, and authorities on whatever point were not far to seek,
whether a vellum-clad Spinoza, yellow and glossy with time,
or a brown cditio princeps of Locke, or some miique tractate
of Berkeley, too precious for use in the eyes of a book-
hinrter, were the text referred to by the disputants. We
rejoice to learn that the same plan of a " coaching Bee " is
tarried on this session among Professor Laurie's students.
Such meetings are quite invaluable, whether to those who
learn or to those who teach, for they help fellow-students to
become acquainted, and bind them together to help on the
common cause, while supplying a want which must
continue to be felt so long as it is impossible, from want of
funds, to teach senior and junior students separately.
The session of 1872-73 saw Latin and geology, two new
and important classes, added to the programme. Professor
Scllar was so " agreeably surprised by tlie goodness of the
work done in the class " that he encouraged his students to
aim at an examination equal to the standard for the M.A.
-degree. Professor Geikie led a zealous band of geologists,
not only through the work of the class-room, but out to
tield lectures yet more enjoyable, and on various distant
excursions, still well remembered by those who traced
glacier phenomena on the steep hillsides around Loch Skene,
and sought for marks of denudation in the glens of the
southern uplands. There are those of his followers who
remain to this day inconsolable, because a projected journey
to the Isle of Skye never took place.
In the following session, the Association was very prosper¬
ous, for not only did biblical criticism attract 141 students,
but nearly 200 were distributed over the classes for English
literature, ethics, geology, Latin, and chemistry. Except for
the alisence of mathematics, no programme could have been
better. But this success was followed in 1874-75 by a remark¬
able reverse of fortune. Professor Charteris was proved to
have been quite right when he warned his students tliat
academic lectures on " Biblical Criticism " were very unlike
those prelections of a hortatory and expository sort wliich
are frequently doliveit'd to thn ladies of a congi-egation by
their pastor, and Jdiited that the history of codices and
versions, and discussions concerning disputed authorship
and  doubtful  canonicity, might not  prove at  all  to  the
The Higher Education of Women in Scotland.       93
taste of the majority. The event verified his ])i'edic-
tions, for barely one-half the number of his first A'ear's
students returned in the second session, although the
subject chosen was the " Fourth Gos])el, and the contro¬
versies, critical, exegetical, and historical, connected with it."
Those who came worked with a will; "the results wei'e highly
satisfactory, and, on one occasion, where the questions
were identical with those in the University class, the percent¬
age of marks in the best paper and the average percentage
of all the papers were exactly the same as in the Univer¬
sity." Exclusive of the class of Inblical criticism, while there
were 194 students in 1873-74, in 1874-75 there were only
154. This falling off may fairly be attributed to the failure
of the connnittee to provide several attractive classes, such
as physiology, music, &c. But there was consolation
in the goodness of the work done throughout tliis session,
especially in a class intended exclusively for advanced
students in ethics, which was perhaps the ablest ever
brought together in any year. " They studied the ethics of
Plato, of Aristotle, and of Kant, and 10 students gained 90
per cent, of marks in at least one pa2:)er." There was much
satisfaction, too, in the presence of 16 Latin, and of 17
mathematical students.
Of the Latin students Professor Sellar again reports as
favourably as possible. He says, " I have never had a class
of students who seemed more thoroughly interested in their
work. The best of them made as rapid and intelligent
progress as the best students in the University. The same
lectures were delivered as to the senior class in the Uni¬
versity, and the same examination paper was set on the sub¬
ject. If the results of the two examinations had been com¬
bined, 4 at least,of the ladies would have ranked among the
first 10 or 12 of the united classes ; and this notwithstand¬
ing the fact that the senior Latin in the University was an un¬
usually good class." His concluding words are very import¬
ant, and miist be transcribed, because they point the moral
wliich we have endeavoured to keep steadily in view from
the beginning to the end of this paper : " The experience of
this year has convinced me more than ever, that this class can
only be worked to advantage if a junior or preparatory class
is taught each winter." It is impossible to say more plainly
that, if women are to enter upon academic studies, they
must begin, as men do, with sound elementary training.
Reference to his assistant's Eeport in 1876, shows what
Professor Sellar imderstands by the work of a junior class
No. 27.—Makch 1877. N
94 riie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
of Latin. Mr Strathairn says : " I wish to combat the
notion which seems to prevail, that a junior class neces¬
sarily implies mere elementary work.' This, of course,
■\\ould be the case ^^•ere students to come up without a
thorough knowledge of grammar, for without this no
real progress can be made." He adds that the work
ought to be compared with that of the junior class in the
University.
The Report of 1875-76 repeats an oft-told tale of fluctuation
and changefulness. The new class, physiology, was a great
success, for, although only 97 students were inscribed on the
class-registers, yet, if we include two or three lady-nurses
from the Eoyal Infirmary, who were welcomed as honorary
members, this class numbered over 100. The working
proportion also was very remarkable for so large a class.
Eight students gained from 86 to 94 per cent, of marks, and
were, in fact, practically equal, when the chances of examina¬
tion and accidents of attendance are taken into account in
a subject where to miss one lecture may be fatal to the full
tale of marks. This class met thrice a-week—an extra day
being devoted to the physiology of the senses; and Dr
M'Kendrick gave six additional lectures at the end of the
session. The class of Greek made a good beginning
with 18 ; but mathematics died a natural death, and there
were only 5 Latin students. Biblical criticism disappeared
entirely from the progi'amme, because Dr Charteris could
not lecture, although a knot of students professed them¬
selves altogether free from any preconceived bias as to the
authorship of the Epistle to the Hebrews, and eager for a
lull discussion of its canonicity and exegesis.
Again history has repeated itself in the current session.
Greek and physiology have disappeared together; the
former because there were no students, the latter because
there was no professor; wlule, on the other hand, three
brand-new special subjects—zoology, economic science, and
the theory and practice of education—have appeared. Logic
has been temporarily merged in ethics; there are but 10
mathematical and 8 Latin students; while English literature
continues to attract a steady class, if not quite so large
a one as usual. Political economy, one of these new subjects,
is very much in vogue at Cambridge and in London; but
here, in the very city of Adam Smith, it seems to be less
popular than the more speculative sciences. For, while
Dr Calderwood, after five continuous sessions, this year
lectures   to   no  fewer  than  46   students, only 34  attend
Tlie Higher Education of Women in Scotland.       95
Dr Hodgson's class, although his lectures not only
have the charm of novelty, but are also most enter¬
taining and full of every-day practical interest. In
Berlin such a course would be much appreciated Ijy tlie
ladies of the Victoria Lyceum, and, from its bearing on many
political and social questions, would be considered by them
to be a " salon-subject," suited rather to women of the world
than to school-girls.
General Table
OF Attendance in
THE Classes.
Classes.        |1867-68 68-69|69-70|70-71
71-72
72-73
73-74^74-75 75-76
76-77
English Lite-)rature, )
Experimental >Physics, ...)
Logic   and)Metaphysics,)
Mathematics, ...
Ethics, 
265    : 1:
...    Il'...
J9
tl
55
■■••
141
72
4435
84
70
4917
6443
52
45
55
35
173064
18
78
2943
"935
141
67
1729
16
85
:::
93
i'9
185
97...
70
1046
"s
1...
1934
25
Geology, 
Greek, 
Latin 
Chemistry,  
Physiology, 
; Biblical Criti-|
j      cism, 3
: Zoology, 
i Economics,  
Education 
'..
Total \   265
335    292 \ 220
204
219
335
239
252
212
The above table, borrowed from the Eeports of the Associa¬
tion, presents the results of ten sessions in a synoptic form.
Criticism is easy, for want of steadiness and an inadequate
representation of physical science are obvious faults. Were
these years to be lived over again, doubtless the Association
would do its work differently, but it is far from certain that
the change would consist in a more varied progi'amme. On
the contrary, the experience of these ten sessions points
rather towards greater caution in opening new classes, than
towards a wider choice of subjects.
Be this as it may, the arrangements of the Association
are no cause of the want of fixedness in the programme,
or of the remarkable fluctuations in the numbers of certain
classes. Both peculiarities are due, to a very considerable
extent, to the utter want of any rational plan of self-educa¬
tion in the case of many young students. For, in their
present stage of intellectual development, not a few clever
require a  George  Eliot  to  warn  them   against  the
girls
96 Tlie Ladies Edinbui'gli Magazine.
"acquisition of knowledge by random forgings," against
mistaking a " motley ignorance " for true culture, and, above
all, against the notion that to take up a new subject each
winter, Avithout any reference to previous studies, is educa¬
tion in any right sense of the word. It would seem to
be the usual course of the drawdng-rooni student to begin
at the end, so that, on leaving the sclioolroom, where
her M'hole time has been engrossed with the piano, taught
after a mechanical and mindless fashion, or with modern
languages taught empirically, she embarks at once in some
study which no man would attempt at the outset of his
University career. She will innocently take up physiology,
a study which presupposes a sufficient knowledge of physics,
of electricity, and of chemistry, and is most enjoyed by those
to whom the laws of inductive logic are already familiar.
Or, if she is metaphysically-niiiided and gifted with a ready
pen, nothing deters lier from beginning ethics Itefore
she has acquired any notions of logic or of psychology.
" It is a wrong method," said Dean Swift, " and an iU
choice of studies, that make learned women just so much
the worse for what they have read;" and we quote him the
more boldly, because it is well-known that professors and
examiners alike marvel at the continuance of these strange
inversions of the reasonable sequence of studies, even after
certain excellent counsels given by the Principal of the
I^niversity of Edinburgh, in his address to the students of
the Association in 1872. Wiser advice has seldom been
given since 1723, wdien Swift wrote his "Letter to a Young
Lady." The point of this address was to show that " the
present system of female education gives no proper prepara¬
tion of the mind for subsequent intellectual pursuits."
Now, bearing this well in mind, let us take up the class-
registers, and we shall find that the majority of ladies pass
over tlie disciijlinary subjects offered in the programme, and
rush through a long series of what Sir A. Grant terms
" special studies,"—each winter taking up the novelty of the
season, without any regard to rational order or connection in
their studies. Older ladies may say that it is too late for
them to lay the foundations anew ; but it is vexatious to
see quite young girls pursuing a plan which can only end
in disappointment, for, however Avell they may do their
work, it will not give them the reward they seek, if that
reward be the harmonious development of their faculties,
and an improved judgment, capable of discerning and of
balancing both sides of a question.
TJie HigJier Education of Women in Scotland.      97
But we must quote more of Sir Alex, (i rant's golden
words, they are so exactly to the point. "Now, the
experience, and at all events the practice, of all Europe
seems to indicate, that the foundations of higher educa¬
tion for a man should be laid in Latin and mathematics;
and so long as this method is acquiesced in, I do not see how
you can get out of the conclusion, that the foundations of
higher education for a woman, if she is to ha\'e anythmg like
a systematic higher education, should be laid in these sub¬
jects also." " But it seems that the last thing which ordinary
parents would think of demanding for their daughters would
be a scholarly and well-prepared mmd." So far concerning
things as tliey are, and the need of a solid preparation in early
years. His words on the choice of subjects from the pro¬
gramme of the lectures are quite as weighty. " It must
be remembered that there is a dift'erence between the
subjects themselves, in what I might call cardinality. The
subjects of language and philology, of mathematics and
experimental physics, of logic and philosophy, are more
cardinal than the rest, insomuch as they open the way to
wider views of knowledge, and are in their different ways
generally preparati\'e ; whereas, sciences like botany,
geology, and political economy, are more of the nature of
specialities, to be taken up for their own sakes, and not with
a view to other things beyond."
Archbishop Whately says almost the same thing:" Gram¬
mar, logic, rhetoric, and the philosophy of mind, are mani¬
festly studies of an elementary nature, being concerned
about the instruments which we employ in effecting our
purposes. Such knowledge is far from showy ; elements do
not come much into sight; they are like that part of a
bridge which is under water, and is therefore least admired,
though it is not the work of least difficulty. On this ground
these studies are suitable to women, as least leading to that
pedantry to which learned ladies are liable. A woman
miglit, in this way, be very learned without any one finding
it out."^ Again, in 1841, when the mothers of the girl
students of to-day were themselves young, Dr Arnold
wrote to Mr Justice Coleridge : ^ " I feel quite as strongly
as you do the extreme difficulty of giving to girls what
really deserves the name of education intellectually. Wlien
 was young, I used to teach her Latin with her brothers,.
1 Selections from the Wi-itiiigs of Archbishop Wliately, p. 44.
2 Stanley's Lifa of Dr Arnold, vol. ii. p. 24.5.
98 The Ladies EdinbitrgJi. Magazine.
and that has been, 1 think, of real use to her, and she feels it
now in reading German. But there is nothing for girls like
the degi-ee examination, which concentrates one's reading so
beautifully, and makes one master a certain number of books
perfectly. And unless we had a domestic examination for
young ladies to be passed before they came out, and another
like the great go, before they came of age, I do not see how
the thing can be effected."
One word, however, must be said in behalf of our real
students. They might reply: our teachers bid us begin at
the beginning, but, so long as Latin and mathematics, logic
and physics, are not regid.arly taught, each session, with a
full equipment of preparatory and tutorial classes, when
these are required, how is it possible for us to lay a solid
foundation ? Perfectly true; and, so long as the Association
is without an Endowment Fund, it is difficult to see how it
can be otherwise. Still, even when these disciplinary classes
are provided for, they are always badly attended, so that the
ultimate cause of the evil is in the mass of the students.
In the meantime, we can offer one practical suggestion
to steady workers, and that is, to follow the line indicated
by the University Board in the conditions attached to the
Higher Certificate for women, and to prepare for the Local
Examinations first of all, as a preliminary to severer studies.
Further, we would urge all who are under 25 to select the
four pillars of all learning (Latin, Mathematics, Logic, and
Physics), for Honours at the Local Examinations. No
student who thus prepares herself for the after work of the
lecture-room will be likely to feel any want of previous
training, for to have done so is to have laid the foundations
O'
of higlier culture on the firm and solid ground of thorough
disciplinary instruction. An Old Student.
-1« •■ wr ••^St^- tf - w ■
DOUBLE ACROSTIC.
No. 3.
" The stormj- March is come at last,
With wind, and cloud, and changing skies ;
I hear the rushing of tlie blast,
That through the sno^vy valley flies.
But in thy reign of bhist and storm
Smiles many a long, bright, sunny day,
When the changed -winds are soft and warm,
And Heaven puts on the blue of May."
Onr Library Table. 99
1. " Tliis dark and stormy water."
2. '•' 0 sacred dome, and my beloved abode,
Whose walls now echo to the praise of God,
The time shall come when landing monks shall cease,
And lowing herds here occupy their place ;
But better ages shall thereafter come,
And praise re-echo in this sacred dome."
3. Ancient pifj; a " cotton " town.
4. " Read, mark, learn, and inwardly digest!"
F. M.
No correct answers having been received to Acrostic No. 2, in which
difficulties seem to have been looked for where they do not exist, the
contest will remain open this month.
A Prize is offered at the close of the year to the solver of the greatest
number of acrostics. Solutions to be addressed, " Acrostic Editor,"
care of Publishers, 22 Hoive Street, Edinburgh ; to be sent not later than
the 15th of the month, written clearly on a sheet of paper containing
only the solution, pseudonym, and full name and address of the sender.
Solutions will be acknowledged in the following number. The
name and address of the winner only -will be announced at the close of
the competition.
0 U E    LI E 1; A E y    T ABLE.
Edinburgh Past and Present : Its Associations and Surroundings.
By William Ballingall.    Edinburgli, 1877.
This is a volume which is best described by the words of dedica¬
tion : " To the citizens of Edinburgh, and to all who love its beauties
and its memories, this volume is inscribed." It is specially designed
to preserve the recollection of the many memorials of lesser interest,
to a great extent unknown, which are still in existence, ere the march of
so-called improvement shall have caused all trace of them to disappear.
The eight divisions of the book are contributed by different writers,
among whom we may mention the Rev. George Gilfillan, Professor
Geikie, Flora Masson, and the author of "The Hotel du Petit St
Jean," &c. All the ^VTiter.s have discharged their office in a spirit of
due tenderness and reverence for what the traditions of the past make
almost " hallowed ground " to every loyal Scotchman. In the chapter
of " Historical and Descriptive Notes," contributed by the editor himself,
there are many matters which doubtless have been known till now to
a very limited circle.
The illustrations of the book, which appear in great profusion, are
furnished by many of our best Scotch draughtsmen, and are engraved, in
most cases with great success, by the editor. The letterpress is also
closely interspersed with smaller cuts, the result being, in conjunction
with the admirable printing and finish of Messrs Constable, an
extremely elegant and interesting volume.
lOO TJie Ladies Edinbiiygh Magazine.
S TRAY    NOTE S.
The Prosj)ectns has been issued of a Higli-Class School for Ciirls,
which is to be established in St Andrews, and opened towards the
end of September. The highest teaching power has been secured for
the school. Miss Louisa Innes Lumsden, who is a certificated student
<if Girtoii College, is to be Head Mistress, and other certificated students
of Girton will be appointed Assistant Mistresses. The Head ^Mistress
will receive boarders, with the view of rendering the school accessible
to girls in all parts of the countrv, as well as to those resident in St
Andrews. Pupils, whether day-scholars or boarders, will be admitted
on the nomination of a shareholder, with the sanction of the council.
It appears from the communications of correspondents, that some
confusion of ideas is still prevalent as to the connection of the Local
Examinations with those for the Edinburgh LTniversity Certificate for
Women, instituted in 1874. The following statement will, we hope,
(dear up tlie dithculty :—
The University of Edinburgh otters a Local Examination, with Pass
and Honour Certificates, open to w^omen. These Examinations take
place in June, and are held in any place where six candidates join to
form a Local Centre. The Report, price 6d., published by James
Thin, 5") South Bridge, contains full information, and also gives the
Papers of the last Examination. The Preparatory Class, advertised on
our cover, has special reference to this Examination.
Since 1874, the Edinburgh University has ottered a Higher Certifi¬
cate to women only. Candidates must have jiassed the Local Examin¬
ations of some University, and must also have studied in the Classes
of the Ladies' Edinburgh Educational Association.
The Report of this Association, and the LTniversity Calendar, supply
the llegulatioiis for both Examinations.
We hear that the Executive Committee of the Ladies' Edinburgh
Educational Association, by authority of the Council of Management,
have applied to the Home Office, with a view of ascertaining whether
it is ]>ossible to bring the concerns of the Association within the
limits of the LTniversities Commission.
Applications for the rules and conditions on which loans are
granted by the Teachers' Educational Loan Committee, should be
made by letter to the Hon. Sec, ]Miss Ewart, 3 Morpeth Terrace,
Victoria Street, London, W. The Report of the Committee announces
their readiness now to consider apijlications for loans for the Easter
Tern;. We observe that no applications seem to have been made from
Edinburgh, or indeed from Scotland !
Ladies are invited to contribute to this Magazine.
A prize is ottered for the best article received by the Editors and
accepted for insertion during the current year, on any one of our
British Female Novelists born in the 18th century.
Subject of Debate for the next meeting of the Ladies' Edinburgh
Literary Society, to be held on Saturday, March 3d, at 2 St Colme
Stleet, at 11 o'clock :—" Does Daniel Deronda sustain the reputation of
i ts author ? "
For all information, apply to the Secretary, 11 Carlton Street,
Edinburgh.
Our Female Novelists. lor
III.
Mrs    HAXXAH   MOEE.
h. 1745 ; A. 1833.
It is interesting to the explorers of a new country, as they
penetrate onwards and upwards into its recesses, to come
upon the distant mountain springs, which have condensed
into rivulets, and these into the streams and rivers of miglity
continents. So when, in the history of the past, we care to
trace the origin of the currents of human thought, which go
to make up what is called "the spirit of the age," it is
iuteresting to find ourselves m company with those who
were the well-springs of the rivers ; who inaugurated the
ways of planning and working, which their successors took
up and improved upon. And to carry our simile further—
while in some cases so many springs combine to form the
brook, and so many brooks to swell the stream, that we
scarce can tell the real head-waters, other rivers, like the
infant Klione, leap full and strong, with the voice of waters,
from their glacier cave, and from that source to the ocean
bear no other name but one. So, in the stream of time,
there will ever be some minds in advance of their century,
to whom we can turn at once, as the originators of move¬
ments which change the state of society, and whose influence
is visible in the tendency and flow of the stream, long after
they have passed away. When women, feeling all the ad¬
vantages of their present, as compared with their past posi¬
tion, seek distinction, academic or literary, or enter upon
any of the careers, of honour and usefulness now open to
them, and ask, who first advocated a better training for their
sex ? we question whether, among such honoured names as
Carter, Chapone, Montague, we shall find one to whom we
owe a larger debt of gratitude, than to her who forms the
subject of this paper. Her efforts extended literally from
the palace to the cottage, and fiction was one of the means
she used to disseminate her own ideas upon the subject.
Some may consider her as wrongly placed in tlie present
series. It is true that, of her many works, one only, by any
stretch of the imagination, can l^e called a novel; as an
essayist and dramatist she occupies higher, though not the
highest ground.    But not to linger over definitions, or try to
No. 28.—APRIL187T. /rf^'' "i'X O
102 Tlie Ladies Edinburgli Magazine.
draw hard and fast lines between " novelist" and " writer of
fiction," we will concede that it was only once, and for a
particular purpose, that she wrote a novel, hoping that our
readers will look upon her life as one of singular interest to
ourselves, and will, in this connection of thought, dwell
more upon what she was, and what she did, than upon
what she wrote; regarding her as a fellow-worker with
ourselves, to whose influence on her own generation we are
indebted for many of our privileges and powers at the
present day. On the double ground of her being the writer
of one novel, and the earliest promoter of the higher educa¬
tion of women, we shall, with their perndssion, claim a
place in these pages for Hannah JMore.
Her father was well-born and well-connected in the county
of Norfolk, but, losing his property through a disputed
succession and a lawsuit, he settled in Gloucestershire as a
schoolmaster, and married a small farmer's daughter. We
hear little of her except by the affectionate notices in her
children's letters, but she used to collect and preserve
Hannah's childish scribbles, thinking thein unusually clever.
Of the five daughters, Hannah was the youngest but one.
The father educated them himself as governesses, and must
have been aware of her superior talents, from the advanced
classical training he gave to her only. Before the eldest
sister was twenty, she opened a school in Bristol, which
became fashionable, and afterwards famous, in all the west
of England. Partly as teacher, partly as pupil, Hannah
lived and studied there, and soon began to write. The
beauty of her classic translations and little English poems,
and a series of plays intended for performance in her
sister's school, drew the notice of her friends; and various
odes, on public occasions of political interest, attracted such
men as Burke and Sheridan to the youthful authoress. For
Garrick, too, she wrote prologues and epilogues, and they
were soon fast friends ; he jilayfully called her his dramatic
pupil, and gave her valuable hints as to stage effect and
management of her plays. Three of these, Percy, the Inflex¬
ible Cajjtive, and the Fatal Falsehood, were on the stage
before she was five-and-twenty, Garrick often taking the
principal parts. She had a perfect enthusiasm for him, and
so had he for his " dear Nine," his favourite soubriquet for
her. Perhaps it was in allusion to this name, that the
undergraduate compliment was paid, during her first visit to
Oxford, as the guest of Dr and Mrs Kennicott—
" Muses nine we had before ;
Kennicott lias given iis—More."
Our Female Novelists. 103
It was at this period, too, that she formed the strong friend¬
ship with Dr Johnson, Avhich lasted till the day of his death.
He liked the otlier sisters, Lut had almost a veneration for
Hannah. To the hospitality of Mr and Mrs Garrick she was
indebted for the brilliancy of her London visits, where
either at their house at the Adelphi, or at their Hampton
Court villa, slie was always welcome, paying them long and
frequent visits, till Garrick's death. London society must
have been very attractive at this time. Yet this must have
been owing to the numbers who dared to break through the
trammels of fashion, for, as a general rule, female culture can
never have been in a worse state. Pope, who died the
year before Hannah was born, had stigmatized the fashion¬
able female life of his day, as " a youth of folly, an old age
of cards ;" but even he might have owned that it was better
to leave women wholly untaught, and trust them to mother-
wit, and the sharp lessons of life for mental training, than to
cram them with superficial knowledge and showy accom¬
plishments, taught in such a way as to preclude all real
refinement or elevation of character. And a few years
later, when the morals and costume of revolutionary France
exercised an evil influence over the tone of English society
for a time, we possibly owe it to Hannah More, and a few
like her, that the pernicious contagion did not spread farther.
Those to whom her name suggests only a prim, staid old
lady, in a mop cap, lecturing and sermonizing against the
world and its snares, should read, in her letters of this period,
how thoroughly this young and winning woman enjoyed the
semi-theatrical society of the Garricks' house, and the notice
and attentions, from distinguished persons, which were
proffered to herself Wliile always rising to the level of the
highest minds among whom she was thrown, she was not
al)ove drawing amusement from the gayest scenes and most
trivial characters. Some of her notices of her engagements
make us feel envious.
" We dined to-nig]it in Hill Street, at Mrs Montague's, a name not
unknown. We had Mrs Chapone, Mrs Boscawen, Dr and Mrs
Kenijjcott, Dr Johnson, Dr Solander, Miss Reynolds, and her brother
the painter—all mighty pleasant people."
In another letter she claims, wdtli comic pathos, sympathy
for her sufferings of mind and body, while preparing for a
peculiarly brilliant assembly where some royal guests were
expected, on whose account it was deemed fitting that a
fashionable hairdresser should be called in:—
" Vainly did I entreat him to stay his hand, and to regard fashion, if
he must needs regard her at all, at the most respectful distance possible
I04 TJie Ladies EdinburgJi Magazine.
in the arrangement of my head. Alas ! on rising from a two hours'
endurance, and going to the glass, I could only feel as a vain beauty
might do on first consulting her mirror after an attack of smallpox."
Poor Hannah 1 we feel for her; but luckily the hairdresser
could only interfere with the outside: we have no doubt
that the inside of the head remained as pleasant as ever to
her friends. These were valuable years to her ; she was
learning to use her own powers of observation on the realities
of London life, and attaining full knowledge of the mischief
done by its fashionable follies; she was awakened to the
pernicious influence of an education wdiich turned out female
spendthrifts, gamblers, givers of Sunday concerts and card-
parties; she was acquiring the tact best learnt in general
society, so truly necessary for all who enunciate disagreeable
truths, failing to acquire which, we had better refrain both
tongue and pen from uttermg, be they ever so true; and
above all, she was practising the self-control which enabled
her, Avhen the world was literally at her feet, to draw
resolutely back from every pleasure that would have entailed
the sacrifice of her own principles. We all know the pretty
little trait recorded of Garrick, not over-scrupulous himself,
but respecting her consistency, when card tables were being
placed in his house on Sunday afternoon. He, observing the
covert smiles of some less well-bred guests, watching to see
whether Hannah would play, would leave the room, or
remain in a painful minority, drew her arm within his,
saying,"Now then,my dear Nine, you're &.Sundaytcoman ; you
and I will take a walk in the gallery." Mrs Garrick, though
a Eoman Catholic, used to call Miss More her domestic
chaplain, to seek her counsel on all occasions; and while in
her first widowed grief, beside lier husband's coffin, this of
all others was the friend she called to her side.
Soon after Garrick's death, in 1782, the way was opened
to her life-work. She had long been interested in the state
of the downs and valleys lying upwards from the Axe to
the Mendip Hills. This, and her love of country life, made
her resolve, on her sisters giving up their school and going
to live in Bath, to take up her own abode at the village of
Wrington, near the Cheddar Cliffs. She named her cottage
Cowslip Green, and lived there for some years, till she
built the pretty house of Barley Wood, nearer the hills, with
a beautiful view of the Bristol Channel. Her plans for
doing good grew in extent, when she saw the destitution,
spiritual and mental, which lay around her at Wrington.
The lovely vales and heaths were peopled with a race of
Our Female Novelists. 105
poachers, gipsies, and thieves, with few opportunities of
public worship, and none of education; with a set of
farmers and petty squires as ignorant, and parsons
scarcely more sober or moral, than themselves. Thirteen
hamlets were under the care of one curate, who thought
twice a-year was enough Sunday service for them. The Bible
had never been seen in some of the villages, one good
reason being, that nobody could have read it had it been
there. Worse than all, the rich, godless farmers strenuously
opposed any idea of bettering the people, and stirred up the
indolent clergy to oppose Mrs Hannah More's benevolent
plans, on the grounds of Popery, Methodism, Jacobinism,
and every conceivable absurdity. It is difficult to realize
such a state of matters in our own day, when every scheme
for the good of our fellow-creatures, however chimerical, is
sure to meet with some support. In one hamlet, where
the clergyman had cordially assented to the projected
reforms, he desired his clerk to read a notice in church,
that at ten o'clock on the following Sunday morning the
school would be opened by himself and ]\Irs Hannah More.
The man, on concluding this notice, proceeded to read a
second on his own authority, to the effect, that on Friday a
meeting would be held in the market-place by the farmers,
at seven in the evening, to consult what measures should be
taken to oppose the Sunday school! It was virgin soil, we
must own ! But by perseverance, kindliness, and strong
common-sense, tliis admirable wonian worked in a few years
a marvellous change. She built and supported eight schools,
which in time supported themselves; she provided the whole
district with Bibles and prayer-books, and won over all the
gentry and better-thmking farmers to her aid. Forty years
after, there w^ere found, in cottages on the Cherril Downs,
Bibles cherished as mementoes of Hannah More, by the
grandchildren of her Sunday scholars.
Practical hard work, however, only called out fresh literary
power. In these years we first see her as a writer of fiction,
urged by the representations of Wilbeiforce and Bishop
Porteous. They had lately aided in forming the Society for
Circulation of Pure Literature, hoping it might check the
flood-tide of atheistic and revolutionary publications now
beghming to deluge the country. The idea commended
itself to Hannah More's good sense, and she began at once
her series of Tales for the Cheap Repository Tracts, which
soon obtained an enormous circulation. "If we are to teach
the people to read, let us by all means give them something-
io6 TJie Ladies Edi7ibnfgh Magazine.
to read," she wrote to her sister Sarah at this time; and
they worked hard together at the Magazine, the first attempt,
we believe, at serial publications for the benefit of the poor.
The labour of editing and circulating it was soon too great
for Hannah and Sarah More, so they contented themselves
with contributions, to which Hannah, at least, sometimes
appended her name. Her stories are clear, spirited little
sketches of the scenes and characters which surrounded her
in daily life. They give us a faithful idea of English
country life, in shepherds' liuts, labourers' cottages, tliriving
farms, village fairs, and schools; and the reality of the
characters, and her power of truthful delineation of them,
strike us even now, though all is in the style of a generation
long past and gone. In such Tales as Hester Wilmot,Blach
Giles the Poacher, Tmvny Baehd the Gipsy, Mrs Jones Diffi¬
culties or a Cure for Melancholy, and many others, we recog¬
nize the real power of a writer of fiction; not the less
that the actors are in some cases drawn from the life. The
story of the Two Wealthy Farmers shows us some of
the hindrances which beset her early work, and gives a very
amusing though sad phase of Somersetshire farm-life at the
time. One wealthy farmer tells his neighbour of the
" fashionable ways" of two daughters, just returned from
boarding-school—"They've as much grease and fiour on their
heads as would keep a labourer in suet-pudding for a week !"
He goes on to describe "Miss Betsy's" demeanour at the barn-
ball, wliere, disdaining the sports of milkmaids and jilough-
boys, when asked by her young farmer partner and lover
what country dance he shall call: " j\Iiss liolds up her chin
and says in some French gibberish, slie'll not dance nothing
but a Menuet de la Cour," of which our readers must imagine
Farmer Bragwell's pronunciation! The poor young man
replies, she must both call it and dance it herself, as he can
do neither; whereupon—
" Mi.ss falls to swiimuiiiy, and sjjrawling, and curtseying, for all the
world like a posture-mistress, till, seeing Wilson standing like a stuck
pig, and us all langliing at her, she falls in a rage, and bids him go
down country-humiikin,^ with the dairymaid, 'who will be a fitter
partner, as well as wife for him, than she can be.' ' I am quite of your
opinion, Miss,' says he, ' and will take my leave of you here.'" . .
Wiser folk than Betsy Bragwell suffered from a bad
boarding-school in those days; and now was the time
to show where the remedy was to be applied, and how. Mrs
Hannali More knew that the farmer's daughter only aped
the squire's; she, again, the nobleman's, and so on.   lleform
' A country dance.
Our Female Novelists. 107
must begin in the palace, and, as water to its own level, it
would find its way to the cottage. Somewdiere about the
year 1789, she put forth the most remarkable perhaps of
her works, Thoiujhts on the Manners of the Great, an essay
weighted with thought and power. Full of delicate satire,
quiet and unexaggerated in tone, its arguments are less
based on religion than on common-sense. This essay,
attacked, criticised, abused, had all the success its author
desired—it was read. The first edition sold in a fortnight,
the second m a week, the third in seven hours! Being
on a visit to Mrs Garrick at the time, she was often asked
if she knew the author, as he seemed to be of her way
of thinking. " Whoever he may be, I am sure he is in
earnest," was the quiet reply. The greatest lady in the
land is said to have pierced the incognito at once; and from
Mrs Montague came the sly epigram to her old friend:
" Of .sense and discernment in this little Look
All agree there's a ■wonderful store,
But while for the Author some eagerly look,
I only am asking for—More 1"
And "More" was soon forthcoming in a sequel essay,
Estimcde of the Religion of the FashlonaUe World, hy one of
the Laity. This, too, was an undoubted success, and in spite
of the anonymous shield, she received warm thanks from
high quarters, some from bishops, who commended these
works to the attention and support of their clergy, in visita¬
tion sermons and charijes.
It was soon after this, that various letters on the state of
France after the Eevolution drew upon her the attacks of
Jacobin pamphleteers, for uncharitableness and intolerance !
This reproach, from those whose doctrines had just deluged
France in the blood of her noljlest children, sounded ludi¬
crous to English common-sense, and possibly helped to
antidote the poison of revolutionary atheism among our
working-classes. In one of her cheap Ilepository Tracts,
Hannah More has a striking little satire on the much-
abused word tolerance—in Mr Fantom, the Revolutionist;
and, in the same serial. Village Politics; a Dialogue luith
Will Chij)s, the Carpe7iter.
As a writer of fiction, she certainly has the power of
making her characters speak naturally. The shrewd sense
and humour of "Will Chips" are not beyond those of an
artizan of the day, and the circulation of such a tract must
have done good.
Mrs Hannah More moved to Barley Wood about 1801.
io8 The Ladies Ediiiburgli Magazine.
Her Strictures on Fenmlc Education had now appeared,
and in 1805 she published Hints for the Education of a
Young Princess, dedicating it to Fisher, Bishop of Exeter, the
tutor of the Princess Charlotte. The royal family warmly
thanked her ; and when in early womanhood she for whom
the book was written passed to a higher crown, it was the
last she read. iSTone of Hannah More's works are more dis¬
tinctly characteristic than this. It was widely circulated
in America, and translated into Oriental lani^uaffes.
Her health was breaking, and Bishop Porteous' death
came as a heavy trial. She was now busy, among various
lesser works, with her only novel. She took the first idea
from Wilberforce, who, in 1802, asked her to put forth her
educational theories in a story, which should contain plot
and character enough to attract the novel-reading public.
We give his words:
" My idea was and is, that you should write some religious and
moral novels, stories, tales—call them what you. will—illustrative of
character and jirinciples. The Cheap Repository Tales, a little raised
in their subjects, are the very things I want."
We hope this wiU answer the large class of Mrs Hannah
More's admirers, who maintain, that as she thoroughly dis¬
approved of novels, she never could have written one.
We beg to differ, first, on the ground that human beings
never are perfectly consistent, even on their own showing.
We grant that in many of her later letters Hannah More
expresses strong disapproval of novel-reading, but generally
this is on the ground of wasted time. In one passage, too
long to cpiote, she includes Walter Scott in this vote of
censure, lamenting the thousands of liours .spent, or wasted,
" over the thirty volumes of Walter Scott alone." But we
must in fairness look from her stand-point, not ours; we
need not assume that she_^would say the same now. Where
we read a hundred books, our great-grandmothers read one.
Could any one seriously wish that a succession of novels,
even Scott's, should be the sole study of a life-time ? And
again—we are in a position to estimate what Walter Scott
did for the literature of his day, but it could not be so
then. AVe may admire Mont Blanc at Chamounix; but to
view the monarch of mountains, in his magnificent propor¬
tions to lesser heights, we are better twenty miles off.
Lydia Languish, while preparing for a ceremonious recep¬
tion of Sir Anthony Absolute, affords a type of the "reading
yomig lady of the day," when she bids her maid put Pere¬
grine Pickle out of sight, and lay Pordyce's Sermons open on
Our Female Novelists. 109
the table.    " 0 la, yes, Miss," replies Lucy; " but the hair¬
dresser has torn out as far as Proper Pride!"    For the
benefit,  then, of the Lydia Languish-es, who had but one
serious   book,   which   the   hairdresser   tore   up—though
Fordyce  scarce  deserved higher preferment—and on the
princijjle  that  " a  verse  may catch liim who  a   sermon
flies," we think even Mrs Hannah More might be excused
for becommg "a novelist" for once.    The result is, Ccelebs
in  Search  of a   Wife,  a very quaint, pretty, and to us
amusing book.    It is in the stiff form of a soliloquy, like
the Vicar of Wakeficld, to which it is nearest in type, but
the interest  is well sustained, and the   many  characters
life-like.    The hero, who details his search and its issue, is a
young gentleman of fortune and estate in Westmoreland.
His parents, at their death, cliarged him never to marry till
he  had  consulted  their best friend,   Mr Stanley.     Easy
enough in the present day, although ]\Ir Stanley lives in
Hampshire, for so important a business would warrant a
special train.    But not having that resource, Ccelebs orders
his curricle, which we regard with great respect, for it is to
play an  important part in bringing about the final crisis.
On reacliing London, he is received into the house of another
old friend, Sir John Belfield, with a charming wife; they
introduce  him  to   London   society.    Of course  there are
long monologues, and plenty of moral reflecti-ons, yet these
help on a story which depends on delineation of character,
having little or no incident; how unlike the sensation novel,
with its automaton hero and heroine, its stage-puppets, and
shocliing events ! Here each specimen of young ladyhood
is drawn with quaint humour.    Ccelebs having heard or read
that classical learning made ladies neglect their household
duties, goes to dine with a widower and his two daughters.
The slovenliness, not to say nastiness, of the cookery so re¬
pels him, that—
" I jumped to a conclusion, and was in an instant persuaded that
my young hostesses must not only be perfect mistresses ot Latin, hut
the tout ensemble was so ill arranged as to induce me so give them full
credit for Greek also."
On seeking, after this unsuccessful meal, to get up a feast
of reason with these fair savantes, he tries them first with
Virgil. They have never read any book by this gentleman,
but they've read a great deal—Rosa Matilda, Tears of Sensi¬
bility, &c.:—
" Yes, Sir, and we've read Perfidy Puninhed, and J&mmy and Jenny
Jessamy, and the Fortunate Fooiman, and the Illustrious Chamber maid.
No. 28.—April 1S77. P
no The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
Here the conversation, through the impossibility of our being intelligible
to each other, dropped ; I sunk lower in their esteem for not knowing
their favourite authors, than they in mine for not having heard of
Virgil."
Once at Stanley Hall, Eros finds Psyche, and all is well.
Lucilla Stanley is a true picture of a quiet, elegant, English
girl. By the time tlie Belfields arrive on a visit, all is in
train. The country neiglibours, the old rector, the younger
children, all play their parts in the simple story, and there
is a troublesome Lord Staunton,to make love to Lucilla and
teaze poor Coelebs, just enough to save true love from
running too smooth. The catastrophe is hastened by an
enfant terrible, a five-year-old sister, who begs she may go
back in his curricle to the north, adding, that she knows
Lucilla wants to go too. Her running off to "ask papa," leaves
him alone with his fair Eve, whom he at once asks to
confirm Celia's words, when the child rushes in with,
"papa thinks the curricle won't hold us all, but I'm sure
Lucilla w^on't mind being crushed." However that may
be, the journey is duly settled, and Calebs becomes
Benedick, Lucilla leaving a pretty Phcebe to succeed her as
Miss Stanley, with a young baronet in perspective, and
doubtless a well-appointed curricle. AVe hope the descen¬
dants still flourish on the shores of UUswater, and should
any modern Coelebs be in search of a wife, we can only
recommend a minute exploration of its lovely recesses, where
if he should discover Lucilla's great-grand-daughter, all the
better for him. This was Hannah More's last very notice¬
able work. The sisters all died off, leaving her to an old
age of increasing bodily suffering, but of ever brightening
peace and hope. Some time before her death, she was per¬
suaded to sell Barley Wood, as the lonely life was a great
strain on such an invalid. She died at Clifton, aged
eighty-eight, and was laid to rest in the village chtirch of
Wrington, where, with her large heart and liberal hand, she
lived so long and worked so well.
Each generation will choose its own books, and its own
time for reading them. Mrs Hannah More is now generally
abandoned to tlie mice, spiders, and venerable dust of our
highest top shelves, and perhaps even there she is in good
company. Our "book-box" now supersedes our "library,"our
books are pleasant, but rapidly changing acquaintances,
seldom intimate friends. Old-fashioned novels and essays
should still interest those who care to know of tlie ways and
thoughts, the work and play of bye-gone generations. But
Mrs Hannah More's writings can rest on their own literary
By the Seaside. Ill
merits, and should at least convince us of the great work she
did, in improving the standards of her sex's training;
that not only in the strife and turmoil of public, but in
the quiet of domestic life, women might be so trained as to
" Do noble things, not dream them, all day long,
And so, make life, death, and tlie vast forever
One grand, sweet song."
L.   DUNDAS.
■ » "■ j» -<K(j». m ■■ h'
" COMMIT THY WAY UNTO THE LORD."
He gives thee great things, will He then forget
To give the less /
He gives the body, will He fail to give
A fitting dress ]
He gives the life ; will He not then supply
The needful food i
He is thy Father, and He gives to thee
All that is good.
He feeds the ravens, will He then unfed
His children see ?
He clothes the lilies, shall His hand withhold
Raiment from thee ?
Take, then, no thought for food or dress, but trust
To Him thy way.
He will take thought for thee, and banish all
Such cares away.
Seek first His kingdom and its righteousness
Leave Him the rest.
And safe in His providing thou shaft be
Most truly blest.
And through this dreary world He'll lead thee on
To light above ;
To dwell witli Him in everlasting joy,
Where all is love.
Crocus F. Leigh.
The afternoon crept on slowly, so slowly passing away.
Bertha sat quiet, while Mrs Stanhope went on repeating that
they really must go out, it was getting so late, when Edward,
who had been out since luncheon, came in; he walked up to
the table, fidgetted about, opened books and laid them down
112 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazijie.
again, and then said: "Leslie is gone, I just caught sight of
him on board the Ostend boat."
Bertha's boasted self-control forsook her now, a great pang
seemed to slioot through her heart; she turned deadly pale,
and sat staring at her brother without speaking. Sophy
said, "Gone! impossible. You must be mistaken. Did you
see his face ?"
"Yes, quite plainly, 1 couldn't mistake him, though he
didn't see me; the boat was just moving when I caught
sight of hiin."
Bertha got up from her seat, and walked out of the room.
"There!"   said Mrs Stanhope; "will you say now that,
she doesn't care about him ?"
"Well, I suppose she does, but why should she be so
awfully close ? How's a fellow to know what she's thinking
and feeling, if she keeps it all to herself ? I dare say Jack
doesn't know that she cares about him."
" If he doesn't care about her, he is not at all worthy of
her, and I shall tell her so," said Sophy.
" Do you think it will be much comfort to her, when she
is breaking her heart for him, to be told he isn't worthy of
her?" said Edward, half smiling. "But I say, Sophy,
can't you go and say something to her ? She is so awfully
cut up, poor girl, and you know, I shouldn't know what to
say."
At that moment the house door was heard to shut.
"What's that?" said Edward; "not Bertha gone out,
surely!"
"Yes, it is," said Sophy, " and she is half way down the
crescent already; what can we do ?"
" Do ? nothing, of course. She won't come to any harm;
she is very fond of wandering on the shore. I dare say it
will do her good."
Bertha felt that even the solitude of her own room was
not enough for her. The atmosphere of tlie house seemed to
oppress her; she must get out into the free air of the cliffs
in order to breathe. Slie hurried through the town, and up
the steep path to the cliffs. It was a dull, heavy, misty
day; nothing could be seen of the far-famed view from the
heights on the west of Whitcliffe, consequently this after¬
noon there were no sight-seers nor pic-nic parties. She found
a hollow place near the edge of the cliff, where she could sit
unseen by the passers by; this was the solitude she wanted,
and here she sat down on the grass. It was an intensely
oppressive day; even on this height not a breath of air was
By the Seaside. 113
stirring ; heavy clouds hung overhead, looking ready at
any moment to fall in rain ; the sea lay before her, dark
and still, the distance all shrouded in thick mist; only
one object was visible on its surface, the steamboat,
so small now, it would have been scarcely discern¬
ible but for the line of smoke that followed it. As
Bertha watched it lessening, it seemed to her to be typical of
her vanishing hopes; she hid her face in her hands and
groaned. Could it be ? she thought. Had the liglit of
her life been rekindled for a moment only to die out, and
leave her in deeper darkness ? And why had he come to
see her ? Why had he not gone abroad at once, as he at
first intended ? She had been comparatively contented before,
even in her loneliness; why should he have revived hopes he
did not mean to fulfil ? Perhaps he had come to see her
only as a friend, having long given up all thought of any¬
thing else ; and then finding her feelings unchanged, had
thought it best to avoid her for the future. Or perhaps he
thought her changed; perhaps he had interpreted her
constrained manner to be indifference, when her whole
frame was so throbbing with the tumult of her feelings,
that she had scarcely found words to answer him. Oh,
if that were the cause, it was hard to bear indeed.
But then why leave her so ? Why go away without a
word? Irrespective of herself, it seemed unfriendly towards
her brother. Surely he could not have intended it yesterday;
he had spoken then of not going abroad for some time.
This change of plan must have had some cause, and what
cause could there have been,except that which was connected
with herself ?
She looked up now, to take a last look at the boat that
was bearing him away. It w^as gone; not even a speck was
to be seen upon the water, the dense mist shrouding every¬
thing. She felt then that the last link was broken, and mur¬
mured half aloud some words that had been running in her
head for the last half-hour :—
" And from that time to this, I am alone,
And 1 shall be alone until I die."
Alone! yes, there ia-a sense in which we are all alone in
this world; whether married or unmarried, solitary or one
of a large family, we live our single individual lives un¬
known, even misunderstood, sometimes, it may be, by tliose
nearest and dearest to us; and every one of us shall give
account of himself alone, at the last day.
114 TJie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
And yet there is a sense, too, in which none of us liveth
to himself, for we have duties towards each other which no
reserve, no feeling of want of comprehension or of sympathy,
can excuse us from. And as Bertha sat here alone,
thinking of all her past life, and of the life that was before
her, it occurred to her for the first time that perhaps there
was a certain amount of selfishness in her reserve, in her
utter rejection of sympathy. She remembered how uni¬
formly kind her brother and sister had been to her, how
much they had tried to make their house a happy home to
her, when she liad no claim upon them, when her presence
must often be a restraint upon them, though they had
never let her feel that it was so. And it seemed to her
that she had been ungrateful to have so repelled their
sympathy, shutting herself up, and thinking always that
they could not understand her, nor enter into her feelings.
Since it seemed to be her lot to live with them, where her
home was there must be duties for her; and if there was
work for her to do, in that she might find at least content, if
not happiness. The sunshine of her life seemed to have
passed away; but she remembered some German lines she
had somewhere read :—
" Klage nicht, es hat die Naclit
Eiueii Himiuel auch, und Sterne."
Night may seem dreary, if we think of it while we are
still enjoying the brightness of unclouded noon ; but when
evening comes, there is a peacefulness, a sense of repose, in
the quiet moonlight, in the silence of the starlit heavens,
which the brightest sunshine on earth cannot give. The
brief dream was over, the scarcely tasted cup of iiappiness
dashed away from her lips; and yet she felt that the life
before her might not be all cheerless, not altogether desolate.
The afternoon wore on, and still Bertha sat there on the
cliff listening to the surging waves, and thinking over
her life, past, present, and future, till it began to grow dark ;
and the clouds, which had grown darker and heavier, fell in
a misty, drizzling rain. Then she rose, cold and stiff with
sitting so long in the damp, and went slowly down the hill
and througli the town. On her way she passed the church ;
the door was open, and an involuntary impulse prompted her
to go in. It was already dusk, and inside the church it was
quite dark, the pillars alone showing white and ghostly.
The silence and gloom seemed awful, and yet, at the same
time, soothing to Bertha's troubled mind. She knelt down
behind one of the many columns, and bent her head in
By the Seaside. 115
prayer, uttering no words, but striving for entire submission
to the Divine will. All at once a burst of music thrilled
through the church ; the organ pealed forth, and along the
empty aisles sounded in soft melodious tones the beautiful
opening recitative of Handel's "Messiah." The familiar notes
suggested to Bertha's mind the yet more beautiful words
that are set to them; words spoken centuries ago, by the
mouth of the Hebrew prophet, to the wandering, rebellious,
but chosen people, and written for all tlie weary, all the
heavy-hearted, throughout all time:—
" Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, saitli your God."
As the last notes died away, the sound of footsteps hurrying
up the stairs, and lights flashing in the organ-gallery, warned
Bertha that the choir were come to practise. She rose and
left the church, feeling thankful for the little delay that
had occasioned the organist to spend his spare moments in
playing in the darkness the beautiful air that had brought
such comfort to her heavy heart. Little had he thought of
doing service to any one. We may be thankful to think
that perhaps we are sometimes permitted to do some little
good unconsciously to ourselves ; for the good deeds done,
the kind words intentionally spoken, are few enough,
compared with the mass of human misery that needs
relieving.
The rain was falling fast when Bertha left the cliurch; but
she went on unheeding, too entirely at peace in herself to
care for any outward things. When she reached home, she
found Sophy on the stairs, waiting for her.
"Why, my dear," she exclaimed, running down to meet
her, " where have you been? and it's raining so; and you're
so wet! come in here." And she led her into the drawing-
room, where the tire was lighted; dragged her down on
the rug in front of it, pulled off her dripping cloak and hat,
smoothed back the damp disordered hair from her forehead,
and chafed her chill liands in her own soft warm ones.
" Sophy," said Bertha, humbly, while these tender little
ministrations were going on, "I am afraid T have often
been very cross, and selfisli, and disagreeable. I am very
sorry; you must forgive me, because I have been so very
miserable, and I'll try to do better."
"Dear Bertha, dear old girl!" cried Sophy, the ready
tears, that with her were always as near at hand as smiles,
falling fast on Bertha's shoulder as she bent over her, "don't
say so; you are the best,—the dearest,—and don't despair;
116 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
he will come back, I know he will. Do you know, tliat once
before we were engaged, I was so silly T thought Edward
didn't care for me, and I cried all the evening."
From that day the sisters became friends in quite a dif¬
ferent sense from what they had ever been before. There
had always been kindness, but now there was confidence
between them.
Days passed on, but nothing was seen or heard of John
Leslie; and Sophy's hopes of liis return, which had at first
been strongly and confidently expressed, grew less and le«s.
Her only consolation was in abusing him heartily, and
declaring that a man who could treat Bertha so was not
worth thinking about. This, of course, was only said to
her husband, for she felt the truth of what he had before
said to her, that to say so to Bertha woiild not be quite the
right way of consoling her. Very little ever passed between
them on the subject; though Bertha had in part broken
through her extreme reserve, she scarcely ever spoke of her
trouble. She went about her usual occupations, doing,
indeed, more than before; and, excepting that she was a
little paler, and her step a little less elastic, there was no
outward change. She devoted a great deal of time to the
children, both teaching tliem, and playing with them, or
telling them stories. She took long wallas witli her brother,
made a great many sketches, and read hard books; for novels,
which she used to be fond of, had become distasteful to her,
and poetry was a luxury which she did not indulge in much.
It brought on a dreamy mood which she used to like, but
had now learnt to dread, for it made such shipwreck of her
hardly acquired peace of mind. One walk she never took;
she never went to the shore under the east cliff. The chil¬
dren used to ask her to go there, their favourite place for
playing, because it was the only part of the shore where
there was any sand to be found, but she always refused; it
seemed to her that it would break her heart to see that
place again. Sometimes she would sit a whole afternoon
without speaking, stitching away at her work as if her life
depended on it, but looking quite calm and composed, till a
low faint moan, involuntarily and almost unconsciously
uttered, would betray to the sympathizing Sophy the dull
pain that was weighing on her heart. And then Sophy
would get up from her seat, and standing by lier sister's side
would pass her hand caressingly over her shining hair; and
Bertha would just touch the soft hand, and accept the
unspoken sympathy in thankful silence.    Again, there were
By the Seaside. 117
times when sUence was intolerable, when she felt that she
must pour forth her burdened heart to some one—to Sophy,
if she were with her; and if she were alone, she would walk
up and down the room with her hands clasped upon her
forehead, giving utterance to the bitterness of her feelings
in broken words and smothered sighs.
Bertha was by no means a weak-minded person, but her
feelings were very intense; she had cherished her love in
secret for years, for, while entirely submitting to her father's
will, she had never lost sight of the possibility that circum¬
stances miglit so change that he might give his consent, and
she had liardly known how entirely she had built upon this
till now, when all her hopes were shipwrecked,—when he,
whose fidelity slie had so implicitly trusted in, had failed
her. She did struggle hard to get over her trouble, but her
efforts did not seem to be very successful; time alone can
heal such a wound as hers—or rather the gradual influence of
outward things, to which we give the name of time. It has
been well said, by a French writer, " Ce n'est guere par force
d'esprit qu'on sort d'une grande affliction ... on est si
faible, ou si leger, qu'on se console." This is a liumiliating
consideration, but it is true ; not pride, nor strength of will,
nor tlie resignation that religion teaches, will go far towards
mastering a great grief; it is through our weakness, our
readiness to be impressed by outward and present things,
that we are first consoled. If it were not so, we could
hardly live in this troublesome world—our life would be
one long mourning over lost friends, bliglited hopes,
disappomted affections ; and therefore it has been mercifully
ordered for us that we can in a measure forget; and we
consider a long-indulged grief to be the sign of a morbid
state of mind. So Bertha lived on, content to float quietly
down the stream, and trusting that time would heal her
sorrows.
Days passed on. October came and went; November was
at hand—November, to the Londoner associated with damp
fogs, raw, chilly days, a pavement slippery witli the greasiest
mud, a yellow atmosphere even on the finest days, while in
rainy and cloudy weather, breakfast, and perhaps even
luncheon, must be eaten by candlelight. How different it
is in the country ! What more delightful than those last
autumn days, with their brilliant mornings, the transient
glory of their sunset; at night the meteor-lighted sky!
Or those still, grey cloudy days, when not a breath of air
is stirring, and the last golden leaves fall down sUently;
No. 28,—March 1877 Q
Il8 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
when red coats ride past our windows, and we hear the dis¬
tant cry of the hounds ; when pleasant parties assemble in
country houses for cover-shooting; when the long evenings
and fireside comforts are a novelty to be enjoyed. There is
certainly no time of year when country people think with
more dislike of London, and London people more regret
returning home, than in the month of November. Edward
Stanhope was as fond of the country as any one, and had
no wish to return to London unnecessarily; so, though the
beginning of term obliged him to be at his post, he easily
consented to the request of his wife and sister that they
might be left behind at Whitcliffe a little longer, and pro¬
mised to sj^end every Sunday with them, and to come down
as olten as he could on other days, that he might get a little
hunting.
" Bertha," said Sophy, coming into the drawing-room, one
afternoon soon after Edward's return to town, " could you
give me now that sketch of Woodcote that you promised
me ? I am going out to some shops, and I could take it to
be mounted."
Bertha took a sketch-book from a side table, and tore out
a page. " How faded it looks ' " she said; " this paper
absorbs the colour so much ; all the sketches in this l)ook
are the same.    I must touch them up a little."
And, taking out her colour-box, she sat down at the table
in the window, and began turning over the pages of her
book.
" Then you won't come out with me ? " said Sophy. " If
you once get to your drawing, I know it will be no use for
me to wait for you. You won't leave it till it is too dark to
see."
" No, I think not," said Bertha. " I will go out by myself
a little later; it is so fascinating touching up my old sketches.
I must have all the daylight for it that I can." Then she
hesitated ; there were associations connected with that book
of Woodcote sketches, which she knew were more dangerous
to her peace of mind than poetry or novels, but the tempta¬
tion seemed irresistible, and, after a moment of irresolution
she yielded to it.
At that moment the door bell rang.
" How tiresome ! " said Sophy, coming back into the room,
and laying down Bertha's sketch on the table. " Now,
I am just caught, and I shall not get out till it is quite
late, and all the beauty of the day is over. I daresay
it is some of those stupid men that Edward asked to dinner
By the Seaside. 119
the other day.    I wish they would he content with leaving
their cards."
Bertlia laid her brush down on the top of her glass of
water and sighed, not because tlie arrival of visitors would
disturb her absorbing occupation, but l)ecause all society
was a weariness to her, everybody tliat she spoke to seemed
so utterly uninteresting. The next moment Mr Leslie was
announced, and before she knew anything but that the
room seemed to be going round, he was there, speaking first
to Sophy and then to herself.
The first thing she was conscious of was that he looked
much altered, grown thin and pale, tlie hair worn away on
his temples, his step weak and slow ; he must certainly
have been ill. She longed to ask him, but could find no
words.    Sophy was the first to speak.
" Have you been abroad ever since we saw you, Mr
Leslie ?"
" Yes," he said, " I only came back yesterday; I was afraid
I might not still find you here ; I thought Edward would have
written to me."
" Written to you, Mr Leslie ! " exclaimed Sophy in a tone
of great surprise. " Why, how could he ' We didn't know
where you were."
" Then yoii did not get my letter ? "
"No, indeed; we have never heard anything of you since
jou called here last September."
" W^hat must you liave thought of me then ! I wrote from
Ostend the moment that I landed, to tell you that I had
had a telegram from Brussels, saying that my brother was
very ill there, and I had only just had time to catch the
boat. I remember distinctly carrying my letter down to the
bureau of the hotel myself, and laying the money upon it;
the waiter took it from me, and said he would put the
stamps upon it; and as the omnibus was waiting at the
door to take me to the train, I could not stay to see wliat
became of it. I wish I had put it into the box myself.
W^hat must you have thought of me !"
" We did not know in the least how soon you had in¬
tended to go abroad when you were here last," said Mrs
Stanhope. " That you were gone, we knew, because my
husband saw you on board the Ostend boat, just as it was
starting. But that was by accident, and we have never
known anything more of your movements ; so perhaps
you will now tell us what has happened to you since."
" For the first fortnight or so 1 was nursing my brother,"
I20 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
he said, " and just as he was getting well I caught the fever
myself, and was ill for a long time."
All this time Bertha had not spoken.
Mr Leslie looked round at her, but she made no
movement, and he could not see her face distinctly;
she was sitting with her back to the window, and the
sunsliine lighted up her golden hair, but left her face in
shadow.
Sopliy was more ready with the expression of her sym¬
pathy.
"Were you very ill? " she said ; " you look as if you had
been."
" Yes," he said, " I believe they quite gave me over. I
knew nothing about it at the time, and I can't remember
anything about it now."
Bertha shivered. He could see that, though while he
spoke lie was looking at Sophy.
" I had great difficulty," he said, " in getting out of my
doctor's hands at all, he was so possessed with the idea that
the fogs of England would quite kill me; but I managed at
last to give him the slip, and yesterday, as it was so fine, I
to ok the opportunity to cross at once."
" Are you staying at Whitcliffe ?" asked Mrs Stanhope.
" I am at present," he said; "whether I stay here or not
will depend upon circumstances. It seems to me a very
pleasant place for this time of year; one gets away entirely
from the fall of the leaf, and all the damp and fog, which I
have been recommended to avoid."
Bertha said a few words about the bright clear weatlier
they had been enjoying for some weeks past, and its con¬
trast with logs and darkness they had heard of in London;
a few commonplace words, but her speaking at all was a sign
to Mrs Stanhope that she had recovered her composure, and
that this would be a favourable opportunity for her to go
away, and leave Bertha long enough with Mr Leslie to
admit of tlieir coming to an explanation. A loud cry from
the nursery gave her an excuse for leaving the room; and,
saying she must go to see what was the matter, she hurried
out of the room, regardless of a half-imploring look, which
she felt rather than saw, from Bertha, who, feeling that the
crisis of her fate was come, was inclined to shrink back in
a sort of terror.
" 1 am afraid I interrupted your drawing," said Mr Leslie,
glancing at the table, Avhere lay the sketch-book and paint¬
box.
By tlie Seaside. 121
" Oh, no' " said Bertha ; " I was not doing much—only
looking over some old sketches, intending to touch up some
that seemed faded."
" May I see what you are doing ? " said Mr Leslie. " If
they are Woodcote sketches I shall like very much to look
at them."
She took up the book to give it him; as she did so, some¬
thing fell out.   He picked it up—it was a dried harebell.
" I am sure this is a Woodcote harebell," he said, looking
at her; " I never saw any grow to such a size as they did
on the heath there. I remember your wearing some in your
hair, one evening; it was one day when I first came to
Woodcote. We had been out shooting, and you came out
to meet \is, and we walked over the heath. Do you re¬
member it ?"
" Yes, I remember it perfectly well," she answered.
" Why, here is a drawing of the very place ! " he cried,
as he turned over the leaves of the book ; " the gate you
were standing against when we came up, and the heath with
the birch trees and firs; and you have put us in, coming
up in the distance. Did you do it that very day ? Yes, 1
see there is the date in the corner—the first of September."
" No, I did not do it then," she said, colouring a little,
" but 1 tliought then it would make a pretty sketch; I drew
it afterwards, and put the figures in from memory; aiid I
put that date to it because—because you were all there on
that day."
" I see," he said ; " but if you did the figures only from
memory, you have got some wonderfully good lii'cenesses.
Old Wenham is very good indeed; I sliould have known
him anywhere. What a jolly old fellow^ he was ! It is
very nice to see these sketches of Woodcote," he continued,
turning over the pages. " It was the nicest place I ever saw,
and the time I spent there was the happiest time of my life."
Bertha gave a half sigh.
" I thought then," he said, looking at her fixedly, " that
my life was going to be very happy alwfiys ; but it has been
very dull and lonely since then.    Must it be so always ? "
She looked at him, as if she was afraid to understand
what she felt must be his meaning. He went on. "Do
you remember New Year's eve, when we were listening to
the church bells ?"
" Do you think I could ever forget it ?" she said in a
trembling voice.
" You listened to me then," he said ; " will you listen to
122 TJie Ladies EdinburgJi Magazine.
me now ? All these years I have never ceased to think of
you. I have never ceased to look forward to the time when
I might venture to speak to you again, when the objection
your father made so justly would no longer hold good. Let
me think it is so now. Don't let the recollection of your
father's former decision come between us now. I know he
was right then, and I had no right to Iiave spoken to you at
all, but circumstances are changed now. I am still poor, but
not so poor as I was then. You would not be afraid of
poverty, Bertha?"
She tried to speak, to answer him ; but no sound came.
She raised her eyes to his. The unspoken answer was enough
for him—she was unchanged ; the vision that had been be¬
fore him through years of separation was realised.
SUBUKBAXA.
{Concluded))
% MliJittb in C^riiniiirjt.
I. THE ALHAMBRA.
Malaga stands but little chance of pleasing the traveller
who arrives by the bridle road from Ronda, fresh from the
breezy mountain air. It strikes him as close, dusty, and
barren, though in reality the hills are clothed with vme-
yards. A visit to the gardens of La Concepcion, and San
Jos4, prove beyond a doubt the mildness of the climate,
the fertility of the soil, and the good taste and courtesy
of their possessors. We longed to reach Granada, and de¬
cided on going by diligence. A great mistake. For those
who ride—and there are few even of the most inexperienced,
wdio would be afraid on the safe, easy, Spanish saddles,
from which it requires some art to be thrown oft^—it is far
better to take horses to Loja, sleep there, and go on by train
to Granada. Another route is to drive to Velez Malaga,
and ride to Alhama, stop the night, and on to Granada next
day. We started about six o'clock in the evening, having
secured the interior, which was so small that it was a matter
of mathematical calculation, and some good temper, to decide
what to do with eight legs in the space allowed. Cramped,
smothered with dtist, on hard seats, and unable to sleep
from the incessant screaming of the drivers trying to urge the
mules along, we made up our mind to have a miserable
journey, and were not disappointed in the enjoyment of a
A Month in Granada. 123
A half-naked, wild-looking man rushed inces¬
santly from side to side in aid of the coachman and postillion;
belabouring, it seemed to us, the particular animals that were
doing their duty properly.    It was only when fairly started
on a desperate gallop down hill, that he enjoyed a few
moments rest.    This he passed fuming and panting on the
doorstep of our compartment; a mute, incarnate appeal for
backsheesh, or in Spain, cuartitos. The heavy vehicle groaned
and swayed from side to side, close to precipices just visible
in the moonlight.    P'rom these, had a wheel come off, or
the  niules  shied, there  was  very  insufficient  protection.
Fearful, inexplicable jolts, or the grating of the drag, were
the only diversions to the ordeal;   none  the  less   trying
for being borne in silence.    To most minds there is some¬
thing far less repulsive in the idea of a sudden cessation
of life, in the midst of feelings heightened l)y a pure en¬
joyment of nature, by being thrown singly down a breezy
hill-side, than  in meeting a stifled, bruised, ig-nominious
collective death, in a toppling omniljus.    Malaga appeared
from time to time, sparkling like a jew^el beside the IMediter-
ranean, as we climbed up the gradients that scaled the moiui-
tam barrier we had to surmount.    Further on in the night,
grand outlines rose against the deep star-lighted sky; adding
sorrow for losing the scenery to the poignancy of bodily incon¬
venience.   At Loja we saw dim forms flitting about the ram¬
bling posada; cheery voices of equestrians preparing for an
early start in the twilight of an April morning.    Tlie garish
day found us tearing over the far-famed Vega.    Half an hour
after we were dragged  out  into  the  streets  of Granada
almost unable to stand; a prey to beggars and custom-house
officers.    The latter, however, in justice be it said, let iis off
unsearched, and unquestioned, for a bribe of three pesetas,
or half-a-crown; and the beggars soon found we were too
cross for them to stand any chance either of a hearing, or of
cuartitos.    A commissionaire, with a carriage all ready to
take us to the Fonda Ortiz, within the  precincts of the
Alhambra, put us  in  a little better humour.    Tlie truth,
however, must be spoken : weary and dusty, hungry and
athirst, not even the grateful shade of its embowering elms
could rouse us to more than a faint appreciation of the fact
that we had reached the spot, so long the summit of our
aspirations, which was to be the acm^ of delight.    But a
good breakfast, a refreshing bath, a sound sleep, and the
possession of a dainty little sitting-room—where the war-
blings of the nightingales mingled by day and by nig] it with
124 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
the music of running, plashing water, and the thick foliage
of the early green taught " light to counterfeit a gloom "—
threw quite a new gleam on the aspect of affairs. The
prospect of a month's rest in such a spot, after the toil of
many months' travel, had in it something excessively attrac¬
tive. Next day, therefore, we started in a state of semi-
exaltation for our first visit to the Alhambra. A bargaining
with oficiales at the door of the sanctuary, as to the price
for which we were to be let in, which seemed by no means
fixed, but liable to be modified by prospective propinas,
a little prepared us for the disappointment of not being
allowed to wander alone, and at will, through the courts
and halls over which "Washington Irving has thrown the
glamour of his graceful imaginative fancy. It is the
penalty this generation has to pay for the newly awakened
appreciation of the edifice in the mind of its possessors,
and their tardy efforts for the preservation and restoration
of what remains of it. Like sheep we were driven from
one part to another, or penned up for half an hour in
one room, bolted in, till the guide returned from fetch¬
ing additional visitors, who had arrived too late to begin
the round with us". They were hurried through what
we had already seen. With increased numbers, crowding
and jostling one another, we took in all that it was pos¬
sible to glean from the united descriptions of Forbes and
the guide. In spite of all, it was most beautiful. If the
Hall oftheAbencerages, tlie Court of the Lions, with the bloody
stains on the stones of the slaughtered princes, the retired
patio de Lindaraja, with its elegant little fountain, meet
liiding-place for a dark-eyed houri, did not stir up our feeling
of romance to the pitch we had expected on this first visit, the
enchanting gem-like views of the Vega, from the arches in the
Hall of the Ambassadors, and of the valley of the Darro, from
the Tocad&r de la i2eina,made up for all. There was something
light and joyous in the very air. We seated ourselves, when
the show part was over, on a fragment of ruined wall below
the Torre de la Vela, and felt perfectly happy. In the Plaza
de los A Igibes are water carriers clustering round the IMoorish
wells, any one of whom might have been tlie identical little
af/uador of the " Tales of the Alhambra." We grew to love
every inch of this strangely interesting palace and fortress
of the Moor. To ramble, book in hand, through the tangled
boughs of vines, fig trees, and pomegranates, and read the
legend of the " TJwee Princesses," under the shadow of the
tower where the gentle Zorahaide, one of the sweetest of
A Month in Granada. 125
Arabian impersonations, wore out her solitary existence, after
the flight of her sisters, was a rare mental and physical
luxury. To trace the walls to the very gate where Boabdil
turned liis back on the restless scene of his * unhappy
reign; and to pass hours alone, or together, on the
platform of the Vermilion Towers, possessed a fascination
that defies description. In the latter spot, with the long
white Ime of the Sierra Xevada lying under the deep blue
sky on one side, the majestic mass of the Alhambra on
another, Granada below, every street and turret enriched
with historical associations, it required very little imagination
to call up the pomp of war, and people the glowuig Vega
with the sights and sounds of the two contending hosts of the
Christians and the Moors. It would require some effort in
the coldest, most unimpressionable person to still enthusiasm,
and make the heart beat slowly, under the spell of a scene like
that. A month seemed all too short, and so we found it. As
one lingers in the deep shadow of the avenues, wliere even the
unintellectual Sj)aniard may be seen with a book, the solem¬
nity of a monastery or of a churchyard comes over the
spirit.    Some one quoted aptly the lines of Horace Smith:—
" 'Neath cloister'd boughs each floral bell that swingetli,
And tolls its perfume on the passing air,
Makes Sabbath in the fields, and ever ringeth
A call to prayer.
There amidst solitude and shade I wander,
'Ne^th the green aisles or stretched upon the sod ;
Awed by the silence, reverently I ponder
The ways of God."
Alas! that such shade and such solitude should be
broken by beggars, and disturbed by crowds of unromantic
tourists, energetic Americans, and bored specimens of
young England, who profane its echoes with loud talk and
'boisterous laughter. A feeling of quiet acquiescence comes
over the mind, as when we look at the graves wliere
the dead rest; not the dead which have been dear to us,
but the general accumulation of past humanity, to whom we
ourselves shall one day be joined. There is no shrinking
dread of the fate we must meet.
" With a soft spring of holy,
Mild, delicious melancholy :
Not sunless gloom or unenlightened,
But by tender fancies brightened "—
do we look forward to our change, rather as a rest to the
worn out body and wearied spirit, than as a destiny to
be feared and  mourned  over.    Just such  a rest was the
No. 28.—April 1877. R
126 TJie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
Alhambra, in the feverish haste of a life of travel. It was
pleasant at night to leave the crowded tahlc d'hote, and find
our way up to the Torre tie la Vela, to watch the sunset
light up* the snow with rosy red, then leave it silent, and
cold, and gi'ey. Still would we linger till the stars came out,
the lights brightened and multiplied in the streets of Granada,
and on the distant Vega.    Or if the moon
" From cloudless etlier looking down,"
like " Hope," threw the while
" On darling spots remote her tempting smile ;"
or a guitar in the distance, like the " shepherd's pipe," was
playing,
"And with a deeper peace endued
The hour of moonlight solitude"—
we thanked the "gentle poet" who gave us words to
express the beauty ordinary soids can only feel.
But the charms of a sojourn in Granada (and it is a place
to tarry and tamper with time in), are not all clustered
round the wondrous pile of the Alhambra. Setting aside
the cathedral, with its services, and the tombs of Ferdi¬
nand and Isabella, there are the promenades, and quaint
streets, where Spanish beauty flirts the fan, and rolls glances
of liquid fire around. Every corner presents a pictm-e of
costume and character, the same now as Avlien Cervantes
and Le Sage painted them. We found infinite pleasure, also, in
roaming whole days along the bridle paths of the surrounding
country. We chartered the services of a water-carrier and
his four donkeys. Juan was a pattern arriero—small, rosy
faced, with twinkling- black eyes, good-tempered, slow,
patient, trmi and tight, from the crown of his round velvet
hat, to the soles of his tidy boots. Jacket, trousers, crimson
girdle, and elaborately tucked shirt-front, were always the
perfection of cleanliness and neatness; he was the purveyor
of the bread, wine, and oranges, which served for our at fresco
luncheons on these expeditions. We generally sat dowa.
under one tree, and he and his assistants (for the donkeys were
troublesome without their respective guides) under another,
when the noon sun was at the hottest. They would sleep
while we went in search of flowers to dry, or views to paint.
The task of saddling the donkeys before our start in the
morning, which generally lasted an hour, and went on in
front of the hotel, was the source of endless jokes among the
Contraband. 127
supernumeraries of the Fonda. Jealous of our not employ¬
ing their vehicles to jolt over roads ankle deep in dust,
they were unsparing in sarcastic remarks; a weapon the
Spaniard knows how to make use of When we returned
towards evening, however, full of glee and ready to praise
everything in and about their beautiful Clranada, a bouquet
of flowers was sure to be waitmg for us, and past animad¬
versions were forgotten and forgiven between us.
C. Eay.
In the first quarter of the present century smuggling was
still in its zenith in most countries, but nowhere was it more
winked at by the higher, and assisted by the lower classes, or
more thoroughly enjoyed by the perpetrators, than in Ireland.
The English smuggler pursued his trade from the desire of
riches, and became a desperado as the natural consequence
of his calling; feeling that however tolerated by the poorer
and more ignorant fishing-classes, he was an object of
terror and dislike to all " decent people." Not so his Irish
brother-in-trade. To out-wit the law and its myrmidons,
was an act of fun and adventure, with which the sympathies
of the people went; condemned by the few, enjoyed and
commended by the many. Were they not English laws
that were outraged, and, judged by a more liberal code of
justice, was it not all fair-play to do so ? A smuggler, if
successful, was a hero, not a blot upon society ; his hair¬
breadth escapes and deeds of daring were listened to, ap¬
plauded over the wine in the parlour, and the potatoe-pot
in the cabin.
The wild west coast was a very hot-bed of contraband
trade. Its rugged cliffs, rough sea, and dangerous rocks, so
unfavourable to legitimate mercantile pursuits, all assisted
the smuggler. He who had all to win, or all to lose, knew
that his chances of success in eluding pursuit by sea, were fifty
to one on land. The big cliffs, the sunken rocks, the sudden
storms, were all his friends, delaying and endangering his
pursuers.
I remember an old county Mayo man telling me how
he, the grandson of the district magistrate, and actually
living in his house, got into a smuggling scrape before he
knew what he was about. His grandfather's castle was built
close to the river Moy, a short distance above BalKna, in
12S The Ladies EdinburgJi ATagaaine.
the very centre of the contraband trade bet-\veen the coast
and the inland counties. He was a boy of about fourteen
years of age at the time, and his great amusement was boat¬
ing on the river.
One day while at dinner, the butler whispered that the
steward wanted to see him at once. Seeing by the man's
manner that something unusual was on foot, he contrived to
leave the table imnoticed, and ran down to the yard. Here he
found the steward impatiently awaiting him.
"Get the key of the boat-house, and come on, sir, quick!"
The key was in his pocket, and he ran to the river side.
There he found fourteen men waiting for him to get out the
boat. One glance sufficed to make known their calling.
Each man had a bale of goods, two feet square, strapped
across his shoulders, and they were evidently bound for a
long hard run across country. They were smugglers, and the
excisemen were after them. The boy knew well the risk he
ran in assisting their flight, but the love of adventure, and
the sympathy of his race with their trade, over-balanced his
prudence. The boat was ready in a moment, thirteen of the
men lying in her bottom, the fourteenth at the helm, and
our young friend busy with the sails. I forget all the
nautical jargon about how he managed it; but he contrived
to make the boat lie over, and turn up her side to the bank,
where the excisemen had now made their appearance, and
the men lying in her bottom were completely concealed.
His Majesty's officers hailed and gesticulated, but the boy
pretended not to see or suspect that they wanted anything
with him, and sailed steadily on. Some hundred yards
down the river there was a bend, and this rounded they were
out of sight of theii' pursuers, who were left far behind,
fruitlessly searching for a boat in which to follow up the
chase. Once past the bend, he put the boat against the
wind, and she flew up the river, and many miles away. He
unshipped his cargo, amidst thanks and protestations of
eternal gratitude, got a man to return with him, and sHpped
down the river, and into his grandfather's house as quietly
as if he had been for a pleasure sail. Every peasant for
miles round knew of the adventure, but as he said, " None
of them leaked on me, and it never was found out."
About a month afterwards, he met a man hanging about
the place, who produced several dozen of white silk handker¬
chiefs, and pieces for silk dresses, &c. This was the form
the smugglers' gratitude had taken.
" I daren't take them," he said ; " if my grandfather saw
Contraband. 129
me with them, he'd guess where they came from, and turn
me out." So he gave them to the steward, desiring him to
distribute them among the girls on the place, who "sported"
the silk handkerchiefs as neckties, and made themselves
gorgeous in the dresses. To this day my old friend
speaks regretfully of his loss, and whenever he tells the
story (often enough, in sooth !) ejaculates sadly,—
" The finest white silk handkerchiefs—and I was afraid
to take them !"
He tells another story of an adventure in the same
district. One of his uncles took him out to shoot, and as
they were getting over a fence, he jumped upon a sort of
mound in the wide dyke at the further side. It gave way
under him, and he went down feet foremost into an
illicit still! He had alighted on the mud roof of an
under-ground cabin. He was seized, and almost strangled,
in a moment. His uncle followed to the rescue, but
was soon overpowered by numbers. Half-a-dozen men
occupied the cabin, and had mistaken them for the guagers.
Young could speak Irish pretty weU, but his uncle
knew not a word of it, and the men spoke nothing
else. With difficulty they were made to understand that
their appearance upon the scene was quite accidental, and
not in any way inimical to the interests of the still; the
men threw discredit upon the story, and vowed they " had
not another minute to live."   Young besought them to
spare their lives, at least until they had sent for a certain
rent-warner, who would identify them; and at length the
distillers consented to do this. The rent-warner came, and
the " young master" and his uncle were released with
many protestations of regret for the indignity passed upon
them. " We were treated to some potheen on the spot,"
says my friend, "stuff that had been 'nm through three times,
and was as sweet as new milk, and afterwards escorted
home by the crowd of country people who had gathered
round the spot, amidst cheers and shouts." Times have
changed since then; cheating the law has still its fascina¬
tions for Paddy; but contraband trade has died out, and
potheen " stills " are discovered few and far between.
For some years past our neighbourhood has been
afforded some amusement, and our police a good deal of
trouble, by the " dodges " and escapes of an illicit distiller,
one of the last of his class. Not long ago, having finished
his term of imprisonment for a former offence, he took
lodgings in a house in the bog of Allen.    There he set up
130 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
a still without letting his landlady into the secret. The
police " got wind of it," as we say in Ireland, and proceeded
to search the house. As his landlady innocently ushered
them in at the front door, our law-breaker, who was at the
moment engaged at the still, made his exit at the back,
leaving the " lone widow" in for the penalty. He is not
likely to come back to receive lynch law at the hands of
her indignant male relatives, and has not been heard of
since.
Mrs E. 0. Leslie.
■ tj •■ t< -jp#&.-»g- - tf •
DOUBLE ACROSTIC.
No. 4.
" An apple cleft in two, is not more twin
" Than these two creatures."
Thongh of different speech and country, their services may yet be
taken advantage of once a-year by us all.
1. " Sport royal, I warrant you. . . .
I'll give thee leave t(j play till doomsday."
2. In Scotland nothivg will keep you as warm as I.
3. In the mouth of a Scottish Jehu, the usual "stopper."
4. The Scottish embryo of " our wooden walls."
F. M.
Acrostic No. 2 has proved too much for our correspondents. Of the
six answers received, not one is correct, though some are very nearly
so, " Hawthorn" being wrong in only one light. We append the
solution :—
1.
S
SUMAROKOFF.
F
2.
T
THYRA.
A
3.
V
VASHTI.
I
4.
A
ARTHUR.
R
5.
L
LANGHAM.l
M
6.
E
ELISSA.2
A
7.
N
NAIiDI.
I
8.
T
TALLEYRAND.
D
9.
I
ID.
0
10.
N
NEEF.
F
11.
E
ETHIOP.
P
.12.
S
STEROPE.
E
13.
E
EDGAR.
R
14.
V
VIARDOT.
T
15.
E
ESCHENBACH.
H
" St Valentine's Eve, or the Fair Maid of Perth," is tlie title of Sir Walter Scott's
novel.
J An Archbishop of Canterbury in the reign of Edward III.
2 Queen Elissa only received tlie name of Dido after her death.
Our L ibrary Table. 131
ANSWER TO DOUBLE ACROSTIC.
No. 3.
\. " Locli Goil," whose cruel " waters wild "
Went o'er " the hapless father's child."
2. " loyia " pilgrims visit still—
The sacred Lsle of Icolmkill.
3. Cheers in the House of Commons greet
The gain of " Uldham's " vacant seat.
4. Two useful letters here we see,
Ubiquitous and wise " N.B."
Wild March comes roaring in,
A Lion fierce and bold,
His voice a stormful wind.
His breath a bitter cold ;
Yet oft like playful Lamb,
Among the meadows green,
With breezes soft and sunny skies
His going out has been. " B."
Correct answers received from " B," Eleuthera, F. G., Hamlet, Haw¬
thorn, Lara, M. C. B., Message Girl, and Nelly Bly.
A Prize is offered at the close of the year to the solver of the
greatest number of acrostics. Solutions to be addressed " Acrostic
Editor," Publishers, 22 Howe Street, Edinburgh ; to be sent not
later than the 15th of the mouth, written clearly on a sheet of paper,
containing only the solution, pseudonym, and full name and address
of sender. Solutions acknowledged in the following number ; and
name and address of winner only announced at close of competition.
OUE    LIEEARY    TABLE.
Charles Kingsley :   His Letters and Memories of his Life.   By his
Wife.   London : H. King & Co., 1877.
By the many readers and admirers of the works of the late Charles
Kingsley, these volumes were looked for with expectation and
interest. Mrs Kingsley has done her task with a loving and at the
same time a delicate hand. Opinions may difi'er as to the relative im¬
portance and value of difl'erent portions of these letters and memories,
but all must be unanimous as to the care and literary taste which has
been used in their arrangement.
Bulky as the volumes are, the many-sidedness of the life they illustrate
made that almost a necessity. Here are materials for scA-eral ordinary
biographies, for we find Charles Kingsley to be poet, novelist, hard¬
working clergyman, chartist pampleteer, man of science, and Cambridge
professor. Into and through all his varied occupations he carried an
intense energy and vitality, that urged him whatsoever he did, to do
it with his might. All the successive (j^uestions of the day interested
him ; and in the subjects of sanitary improvement, and of education
in all its aspects, especially that of the education of women, he was
both eager and earnest.    A life of such ceaseless activity could not be
132 The Ladies Edinbiirgli Magazine.
a very long one. He never wished that it should he so. Underlying
his whole character, and along with a thorough appreciation of this
world as a place in which to do good work for God, was an unappeasahle
longing for death, as the welcome revealer of all mysteries, the opener
up of a fuller and better life. In the book itself, however, we find the
best exponent of his deeper religious life.
-^j)—4»;*-*-
STEAYXOTES.
Since the opening of the Edinburgh School of Cookery in
November 1875, the movement has spread rapidly through Scotland.
Permanent Schools have been established in Glasgow and in Dundee ;
and the system of conducting branch classes in other towns, which was
developed by the Edinburgh School, has been adopted by them.
Public classes in connection with the Edinburgh School have' already
been held in twenty-three towns in Scotland and in England, and four¬
teen other towns have app)lied for classes. Nine private classes in
Schools have been held in Edinburgh and its vicinity ; seven 2>ublic
•classes for cheap cookery, and three for higher-class cookery are
at present in progress. The demand for qualified teachers of cookery
in the various schools is at present in excess of the supply. Only
educated women sliould enter this profession. They must possess an
aptitude for cooking and for teaching, and have a clear and easy style
of speaking. The necessary training, with a diploma from the
Northern Union of Schools of Cookery, can be obtained in the
Edinburgh School, from the beginning of November 1876. The fee
for six months is .£8, Bs.
Miss Kennedy, of Manchester, who was last year the Classical
Teacher in Cheltenham Ladies' College, has this year started a large
School for girls in Leeds, with some variations from the usual pdans
for such Schools ; the most definite of which is, that no English
grammar is to be taught, except in the very highest class, the want
being supplied by Latin grammar, which is to be made the basis of all.
There can be few, if any, among our readers to whom the name of
Anne Mackenzie is an unknown, unhono\u-ed sound. Her value as a
worker in her o^^^l especial line—missions to heathen countries—will
long make her loss severely felt; but we must hope there are not want¬
ing those who will take up and carry on what she began so well, so
that her little " Net cast into many waters," may still bring its ac¬
customed freight to shore.
Ladies are invited to contribute to this Magazine.
A Prize is offered for the best article received by the Editors and
accepted for insertion during the current year, on any one of our
British Female Novelists born in the 18th centur}^
Subject of Debate for the next meeting of the Ladies' Edinburgh
Literary Society, to be held on Saturday, April 7th, at 4 Ainslie
Place, at 11 o'clock :—" Ls it desirable that our Government should
send out another Arctic Exj)edition ? "
For all information, apply to the Secretary, care of the Publishers,
22 Howe Street, Edinburgli^,
Our Female Novelists. 133
IV.
Mes  charlotte  smith.
6. 1749 ; d. 1806.
The works of almost every author have some quality
peculiar to themselves, by which we both recognise and
remember the authorship. Thus, we have characterised
Johnson as sententious; Goldsmith's style is transparent,
Defoe, graphic; in poetry, Milton is sublime; Spenser,
purely imaginative; Chaucer, vigorous and real. It is the
very presence of such peculiarities which endears an author
to us; it is this very exaggeration of a single quality that
constitutes genius. An ideal symmetry in character or
form of man, animal, or thing, we may admire from a dis¬
tance ; but it is the less perfect and the more characteristic to
which we cling : it is this that endears to us a friend, a poet,
a flower, or other object. Imagination had run wild in Mrs
Eadclifte's novels, and revelled in vivid descriptions of life
in Miss Burney's; it was the lot of Mrs Charlotte Smith to
possess that just equilibrium of powers by which she held
her heroes and heroines within the bounds of sober sense
and reason. It was for her to portray on the pages of fiction
human beiugs more like the rest of humanity, and hence
yjossibly more suited to exercise an influence over the many.
Only the very gi-eatest writers rise above the reproduction
of self in their writings ; thus, as Madame de Stael could not
but make herself the original of her Corinne, so Mrs Smith
reproduces herself in Emiudine and Ethdinda ; and Mrs
Inchbald, though she has done herself injustice by the
portrait, is the original of Miss Milner. Though inferior
in intensity of genius to many who had preceded her, Mrs
Charlotte Smith possessed a greater equilibrium of powers
than any of her contemporaries. By a certain subjectiveness
only, and want of intensity, or of immensity of any kind, as
Dr Johnson might have called it, does she forfeit the right
to rank as a woman of decided genius. After reading even
a few pages of one of her novels, we instinctively conclude
that she is a lady who would probably be always ready to
sit bolt upright on the extreme edge of her chair, with a
No. 29.—May 1877. S
134 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazifie.
piece of conventional embroidery in her hand, should such
an attitude and occupation prove expedient.
Mrs Smith was one of those—and there are many such—
who, though authors by nature, would have all their lives
remained mere dabblers in literature and lazy amateurs, had
not sorrow or necessity driven them to the task. To seek
a fair ideal world, and place it as a barrier between them¬
selves and dire reality, becomes to them not merely a
pleasure, but a requisite. And it is well if sorrow do not
flavour their works with bitterness, if necessity do not con¬
vert them into a task. A writer, forced to work by such
taskmasters, has need to beware lest his work betray the
secret of their agency in its production. If he do so too
plainly, he is no true artist, no worthy aspirant to the
highest guerdon of fame. The visions of angels which
Milton portrayed in his paradise, were all the brighter for
his blindness. The extravagances of Moses and his father
in the Vicar of Wakefield, were all the more reckless for the
author's penury. It remains to be seen whether the subject
of our remarks had the calmness and dignity so to subdue
her sorrows while writing, as to render her works opaque
to their gaunt image.
The lives of men were brought strongly to the surface at
the period when this lady flourished.    The American war,
the French revolution, called for vigorous action enough;
the stage was in a state of feverish activity; dramatists,
both men and women, were counted by the score; andthei'e
was withal such literary activity among ladies, that learned
men were astonished at it.    Mrs Montague had founded her
Blue Stocking Club ; Mrs Chapone, ]\Iiss Carter, and many
others, were givhig forth their strictures on female education;
and  novelists  too were rife, when Mrs Charlotte Smith
appeared on the scene, as one destined to form a link in the
chain of the British muses.    She was the eldest daughter of
Nicholas Turner, Esq., of Stoke House, in Surrey, and of
Bignor Park, in Sussex.    The 4th of May 1749 was the
day of her birth, and before she had completed lier fourth
year she lost her mother.     Her education was accordingly
entrusted to an aunt, who evidently thought the chief end
of woman was to excel in accomplishments.    To the clever
child, all learnmg was easy ; she could never recollect how
she learned to read.    When at school, she was remarked for
her elegant dancing; and her want of application to her
studies was readily atoned for by the remark that she was
too great a genius to study.    Her imagination was at this
Our Female Novelists. 135
period too vigorous to demand any outward aid ; she com¬
posed verses by the score ; her ideas were original, and her
conversation was full of wit and vivacity. But events were
in train which were to change all this, and to transform the
happy girl into a sorrowful woman, who earned her bread
in tears. In 1764, her father decided upon a second
marriage, and it was resolved by his sister-in-law that
Charlotte should be rescued from the position of a step¬
daughter in her fatlier's house, and placed in that of a wife.
Accordingly, she was introduced, while not yet fifteen, to
Mr Smith, a youth in his twenty-first year, the son of a West
India merchant. They were married in 1765, and now began
the troubles of life for poor Charlotte. The position of a
cliild-wife must always be a difficult one, and one which only
the most precocious talent can hold successfully. In
Mrs Smith's case it was peculiarly trying. She only
escaped from the Scylla of a step-mother to encounter the
Charybdis of a father and mother-in-law. The father, we
are told, had eyes so piercing, that she accustomed herself
daily to lay aside her literary labours on his approach, lest
his eyes should consume them. The mother, who was old,
tall, thin, and delicate, entertained her daily with querulous
remarks in a gruff voice, on the want of practical wisdom
generally to be found in young ladies ; and poor Charlotte
had her ears daily assailed by long recipes for picklmg
walnuts and cabbage, memoranda of the best way to sew on
buttons, the last new stitch for anti-macassars, or the most
effectual mixture for a troublesome cough. Probably her
thoughts fled during these tiresome counsels to her darling
fields of poetry, and revelled in them like uncaged birds. In
addition to these lively conversations, she also enjoyed
occasionally the society of four wild, ungovernable West
Indian boys, the sons of the correspondents of the house,
who came to spend their holidays under Mr Smith's roof.
Can we wonder that she, at this period, addressed the
following lines to the Muse ?
'to
" Who that has heard thy silver tones,
Who that the Muse's influence owns,
Can at my fond attachment wonder,
That still my heart should own thy pow'r ?
Thou ! who hast soothed each adverse hour,
So thou and I will never sunder."
The dreaded father-in-law afterwards became her greatest
friend, and it was from his death, in 1776, that all her mis-
136 The Ladies Edinbttrgh Magazine.
fortunes dated. Large sums of money were lost through
ambiguities in his will; the estate in Hampshire, which the
family had purchased, was sold. She accompanied her hus¬
band to France, where she spent a peculiarly trying winter
in country seclusion among utter strangers. Soon after
their return, finding her husband's temper incompatible with
her own, she withdrew from him, followed by all her chil¬
dren, who chose to attach themselves to her fortunes, and
removed to a cottage at Wyhe, where she redoubled her
literary labours. These were now a solace to her, and at the
same time a means of support. One novel succeeded
another with great rapidity. Previously to this, she had
only written poetry, and translated a novel, entitled Manon
I'Escaut, by the Abbe Prevost. Now her genius, as if
released from leading-strings, began to walk alone ; she was
fired too with tlie example of Miss Burney, wliose Cecilia
slie had read on its appearance a few years before. In 1788
she published Emmcline; or, the Ovjylmn of the Castle.
Ethclinda and Celcstina quickly followed. Desmond \\?iS,
less successful, owing to its political bias and spirit of pro¬
gress. Last of all appeared lier clief-d^ccuvre, The Old
Manor House.
In conversation Mrs Smith was full of wit and vivacity,
and could even make her woes a subject for pleasantry.
Though cold and distant among strangers, she was frank
and warm-hearted with those whom she could trust. She
died in 1806, broken down with sorrow at the loss of all lior
children.
An interesting and tolerably true sketch of the liistory of
some kinds of progress in culture since the beginning of
novel-writing, might be based on the characters of the
heroines depicted by successive authors. Prom the con¬
ventional lay figure of Mrs Eadcliffe, we pass to the much
more important Evelina. The beautiful pieces of moving
insipidity, destined to be frightened by robbers, to lose their
way in haunted chateaux, to be suddenly parted from their
incomparable adorers, the moment after they have met with
them; such is the primitive heroine. Prom this, only a
short space of time carries us, in Prench literature, to the
high-souled despiser of conventionality, Corinne; but the
English mind requires a medium between these, one who
neither palls upon it by her insij^idity, nor shocks it by her
regardlessness of social requirements; who, if she be un¬
womanly enough to have cultivated her mind, yet does not
blazon forth this cultivation on CA^ery possible opportunity.
Our Female Novelists. 16=
(Our   Jcmalc  ^lobelists.
V.
Mrs    inch bald.
h. 1753 ; il. 1821.
A Simple Story !—Thus runs the title of tlie greatest work
of the authoress whose life we have now to consider. And
truly the title may as appropriately he applied to her own
history. Full of candour, transparent as the day, she records
her most trivial actions witli as much faithfulness as her
greatest. Even her little foibles are confessed, and confessed
with such charming ingenuousness that we seem to see them
almost transformed into virtues. Possessed of many corre¬
spondents, she left none of their many letters unanswered, and
into tlie confidences imparted in these answers the world
has been received. It is with a pang of regret that we read of
the destruction, by her own liaud, of those four volumes of
autobiography, which would have revealed her life to us
as plainly as that of a Pepys, a Eussell, or, we had almost
said, a Henry Martyn. Yet far from her that pettiness of
detail which we find in the first, or that scrutiny of inner
vileness which characterises tlie diary of tlie last of these ;
so far as we can judge from her memoirs and letters, her
confessions have a refinement and nobility even in deal¬
ing with trifles, and an utter absence of that morljid
element which repels instead of attracting the reader. If
tlie heroine of A Simple Story is frivolous, vain, and fend of
applause, it is because the authoress has selected from her
own life those incidents in which, somewhat inconsistently
with her own character, she had committed slight indiscre¬
tions. If Miss Milner is contemptible in the latter part of
the book, it is because the author has departed utterly from
her counterpart, and, to add excitement to the events of her
story, painted in her heroine a deterioration of character,
of which the original was never guilty. Mrs Inchbald, in
the records we possess of her life, appears before us as she
really was. There is a genial frankness about lier, and a
certain independence peculiarly her own. Her life is as
interesting as either of her novels. More than one novel,
in  fact, might be  constructed  out  of it.     We have the
No. 30.—June 1S77, Y
138 TJie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
Monimia, the daughter of tlie housekeeper at Eaylands; and
for the sake of this beautiful girl, who is given to weeping,
fainting at odd moments, and screaming at the fancied sight
of ghosts, he refuses an extremely well-brought up young
lady, whose intellect is highly cultivated; and whom
certainly any sensible young gentleman of the present day,
who knew anything about the true sphere of woman, would
have infinitely preferred to the trembling, feeble-minded
Monimia. " Miss Ann Jane Eliza HoUybourn, who equally
resembled her father and mother, was the pride and delight
of both. Possessing something of each of their personal
perfections, she was considered by her parents a model of
loveliness; and her mmd was adorned with all that money
could purchase. Slie had the long waist of her mother, fine
sugar-loaf shoulders that were pronounced to be extremely
genteel, and a head which looked as if the back of it liad
by some accident been flattened, since it formed a perpen¬
dicular line with her back. To dignify witli mental
acquirements this epitome of human loveliness, all that
education could do had been lavished—masters for drawing,
painting, music, French, and dancing liad been assembled
around her as soon as she could speak; she learned Latin
from her father at a very early period, and could read any
easy sentence in Greek; was learned in astronomy, knew
sometliing of the mathematics, and, in relief of these more
abstruse studies, read Italian and Spanish. Having never
heard anything but her own praises, she really believed
herself a miracle of knowledge and accomplishments."
Mrs Eayland rejoices at Orlando's refusal of this young
lady. He joins the side of the rebels in the American
war of 1776, and, after many calamities, returns penniless
to his native coimtry. Mrs Eayland is dead, and Dr
Hollybourn is in possession of the estate. In due time,
however, the real will in favour of Orlando is discovered,
and he, along with the charming Monimia, whom he marries,
falls heir to the old manor house.
In description of scenery, Mrs Smith preserves the truth
of a painter. Tliat subtle personification of nature, hitherto
confined to poetry, which makes outward objects share in
and sympathise with the emotions of man, is first of all
by this authoress introduced into the domain of novel-
writing. Who that reads the following description does
not see the whole scene rise before his eyes ?
" Just as he arrived at the water, from the deep gloom of
the tall firs through which he passed, the moon appeared
. A New Poem and an Old Story. 139
behind the opposite coppices, and threw her long line of
trembling radiance on the water. It was a cold but clear
evening, and, though early in November, the trees were not
yet entirely stripped of their discoloured leaves; a low
wind sounded hollow through the firs and stone-pines over
Ins head, and then faintly sighed among the reeds that
crowded into the water; no other sound was heard, but, at
distant intervals, the cry of the wild fowl concealed among
them, or the dull murmur of the current, which was now
low. . . . Nature appeared to pause, and to ask the
turbulent and troubled heart of man whether his silly pur¬
suits were worth the toil he undertook for them ? Peace
and tranquillity seemed here to have retired to a transient
abode; and Orlando, as slowly he traversed the narrow
path, over ground made hollow by the roots of these old
trees, stepped as lightly as if he feared to disturb them."
One of Mrs Smith's chief excellences as a writer is her
truthfulness. Where others would have exaggerated or
caricatured, she paints to the life. It seems almost as if
she had, with an excess of laisser oiler, carried the under¬
current of her soul into her books; and this it is which
forbids her to occupy the highest pedestal devoted to genius.
That mood of bitter despondency which the events of her
own life had occasioned, runs into her w^orks with all too
full a stream, unchecked Ijy regard for others, uncalmed
by dignified abstraction from the outer world. She is too
sensitive to be broadly genial; few women, and those only
the sti'ongest, are so. The unkind world drives them to sad
introspection; and this in time draws forth echoes laden
with their own complainings. That weakness which cannot
master its own woes sufficiently to minister to those of
the world, must form a barrier between such writers and
the highest fame. Still, she fills an honourable niche in the
gallery of British novelists, and is a true exponent both of
her own life and her own time.
Jane Menzies.
% %t'm '%zm\ aiTir an ^Itr Storg.'
When Boiardo invented a good name for one of the heroes
of his poem, he set all the bells a-ringing. A poem was
something important then, but now there "is not the least
* Si'jiml the Volsunq and the Fall of the Nihlumjs.    By W. Morris.
Ellis & White.
140 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
little carillon, or any stir in the world, although a new
long poem has appeared in it. It has been more or less
briefly noticed in some of the newspapers, and not unfavour¬
ably received by the critics, but not so mucli noticed as the
tolerably successful novels of the season; and, as far as we
have seen, it has stirred no critic to enthusiasm. And yet
what thought and work and research it represents ! It is, to
the ordinary good novel, as a symphony to a song. Like a
symphony, however, some thought and attention are required
for its enjoyment; but we believe it will amply reward those
readers who give it both.
The  story  of Sigurd  the   Volsung and the Fall of the
Nihlunys, by ]\Iorris, is a new poem on an old and perhaps
not widely popular subject, in tliis country at least, where
the legend is not at home.    Besides, numbers of people care
only for the sort of poetry which is the ornament and blos¬
soming of our ordinary modern life; plenty of verses are
written for them; they need not trouble themselves to go far
a-field, nor share our attempts to enter into the ideas of our
ancestors.     But there are others who are quick to recognise
in the heroic stories which belonged to the childhood of their
race, the undying foundations of national character which
form the essence of race, and which must have a perpetual
interest.    What made the Teuton ?    Whence did he draw
his strength; what were, and perhaps still are, the sources
of his failures ?   How and where did he differ from the Celt
or the Eoman ? and why did he triumph over them ?  Much
light is thrown on these questions by this  study of the
Teuton ideal,—an ideal which still wakes a responsive echo
in the alien nationalities into which the great people, the
Theod, is now divided.    For the legend of Sigurd and the
Niblungs is veiy old, almost out of space and out of time;
it certainly belongs to a period before the Teuton ideal had
been touched by the civilisation, the subtlety, the slippery
nature  of the conquered  races.     In the second cycle of
Eomance proper, we find all these qualities giving quite
another heroic type ; better in some ways, and in some ways
worse, but above all things widely different.    In England
the poetical glamour of the conquered Celts, crossed by the
martial fire of the conquering Anglo-Normans, and softened
by Christianity, gave us the Eomances of Arthur.    These
belonged also to Norman and Armorican France; but in the
rest of France, as in Germany, romantic literature was built
from the adventures of another set of heroes, Charlemagne
and his peers, morally an inferior type to the Knights of
A New Poem and an Old Story. 141
Arthur, though the stories relating to them are more varied
and amusing, and also more civilised. The German roll of
heroes has, besides Dietrich of Bern, probably the vast
shadow of the Theoderic of history, Parcival and others, who
were popular heroes when the story of Sigfried was chiefly
remembered in the dwarfed and degraded form' of popular
fairy tales. Still, in Germany and Burgundy, the legend was
never, as here and in France, quite forgotten. In Scandi¬
navia only, which was the home of the purest and most
unmixed division of the Teutons, no foreign influence ever
introduced a new race of heroes to supersede the earliest.
The Norsemen most fortunately took to recording the lives
and deeds of living people, or of their immediate ancestors.
So they have left us, not only the ideals embodied in ficti¬
tious Sagas, but the real lives of the real men and women
who venerated those ideals. It is therefore to the old Norse
literature that we must turn, if we wish to understand these
ancient legends, and their relations to the people. There we
find in the Volsung Saga, and m several of the poems of the
Elder Edda, as also m the prose of the Younger Edda, the
oldest existing form of the Teuton myth of the Niblung. The
great German poem of the Nibdungen Lied, though it is said
to date from the 13 th century, gives the story much altered
and modernized. Time and place have been imposed on the
legend. Nifelheim, or the mist world, becomes the Nether¬
lands ; the scene of the story lies chiefly at Worms ; and the
fatal quarrel of the two heroines, though in both versions it
is on a question of precedence, is not, as in the old story,
which shall bathe in the upper waters of the river, but which
shall first enter the Cathedral of Worms. Dietrich of Bern
is introduced into the story, and the real Burgundian Prin¬
cess, Brunehault, probably a namesake of Brynhild's, has by
some writers been confused with her. Our readers may re¬
member some interesting papers on the Nihelungen Lied in
this Magazine in 1874. The German of the long poem has
been sufliciently modernized by Simrock to be understood
by ordinary readers; we confess to have only read portions
of it here and there, in a most artistically illustrated edition,
but we believe it does not possess much poetical merit
beyond that of clear narrative verse. Far otherwise is it
with the fiery Eddiac poetry, which is brief, passionate, and
incisive, and touched with wild beauty; and we think the
poem before us, chiefly original, but in some places a free
translation from the Edda, is full of kindred inspiration and
fire.
No. ■l'^.~yLk.Y 1877. T
142 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
One of the most striking characteristics of the story is
the extraordinary recklessness of human life shown on all
sides ; and as gi'eat men generally perished in battle, and a
son's first duty was to avenge his father, the blood feuds
were   apt to   become   interminable, and, from the   poetic
point of view, monotonous.    We find also a strong feeling of
personal honour and dignity, shown among other things by
the most scrupulous fidfilment of promises, however fatal
the   consequences  were   seen  to  be;   an   uncomplaining
endurance of all the woes of life ; faithfulness in friendship,
love,  and marriage;   open-handed   generosity,  ardour in
work, and, above all, courage and truth.    The women hold a
position quite unknown among either the ancient or the
Eomance nations.    It was only in actual battle that they
were considered less powerful than the men; in wit and
wisdom  they were held  superior; they were as faithful,
and nearly as fierce, as their lords ; their honour was as dear
to them, their endurance was as great.    Wagner has been
justly blamed  for working up the story of Signy into a
lawless   love  scene;   in  the   Saga,  followed   by  Morris,
when, under the pressure of a terrible necessity to avenge
her father, her honour is stained, there is no more life or joy
possible for her; and she goes back into the blazing hall of
her wicked husband, and shares his fate.    Hard as the rocks
of the north, and pure as its icicles, were the typical women
of its legends.
Tribal attachment was strong, and internal laws were
observed; but those who were not of the tribe were counted
as enemies ; there was no hesitation as to plundering their
coasts, and killing or enslaving them. Labour was honour¬
able, and was not left to slaves, as among the Eomans.
Men were free, but far from equal; the person, the property,
the honour of the freeman, were sacred ; but he was led and
commanded by the first man (fiirst), the duke or dux, the
rider or knight. Any freeman might become a leader; and
the thralls, usually captives taken in war, and churls, or
tillers of the ground, might Avin their freedom ; no brand of
inferiority divided them for ever from their working masters,
the earls or well-born men. Thus we find in the descrip¬
tion of the dwelling of King Volsung, with which the poem
of Morris begins, how—
" There was a dwelling of kings ere the world was waxen old ;
Dukes were the door-wards there, and the roofs were thatched with
gold;
A N'eii' Poem and an Old Story. 143
Earls were the wriglits that wrought it, and silver nailed its doors ;
Earls' wives were the weaving women, queens' daughters strewed its
floors ;
And the masters of its song-craft were the mightiest men that cast
The sails of the storm of battle adown the bickering blast."
In this measure the poem lilts on through 390 pages.
We may observe, besides the rhyme, the ringing echo of
the alliteration that gives the poem something of the joyous
clang of the Icelandic original. Of course, it does not
follow that the rules for Norse alliterative verse are observed
throughout the poem; they are complex and absolute, varying
%\ath different metres, but generally to be described as one
slight and one strong responsive echo of a syllable in each
line, each beginning with the same consonant. But both in
form and language this poem is saturated with the spirit of the
Edda. Now and then we may wish for more of the brevity
with which the ideas flash out in the old model, and yet Morris
has only clothed the ancient story in a more ornamental
dress—often rich and beautiful—always, we think, charac¬
teristic. The metaphors are simple, and free from all
mixture of modern thought; now and then perhaps they
may appear obscure, but only because they pre-suppose
more acquaintance with the old literature than is generally
to be found.
The first book tells of the fall of the Volsungs; and here
is the first boding of evil from the lips of a wise woman :—
" She spake, and the feast sped on, and the speech, and the song, and
the laughter
Went over the words of boding, as the tide of the Norland main
Sweeps over the hidden skerry, the home of the .shipman's bane."
Volsung, though fully warned that he was betrayed,
would not go back from his plighted word, and insisted on
travelling, as he had promised, to his enemies' country.
" But he said : My word is given, it is gone like the spring-tide ships.
To death or to life must I journey, when the months are come to an
end.
Yet my sons my words shall harken, and shall nowise with me wend."
Finely illustrative of the Tentonic idea of vengeance for
the death of a father are the following lines. It is Siggier,
the murderer of Volsung, who speaks, and Volsung's sons
answer him.
" Who lit the fire I burn in, and what shall buy me peace 1
Will  ye take  my hcaped-np treasures, or ten years of my field's
increase,
Or half of my father's kingdom 1    0 toilers at the oar,
O wasters of the sea-plain, now labour ye no more !
144 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
But take the gifts I bid you, and lie upon the gold,
And clothe your limbs in purple, and the silken women hold."
But a great voice cried o'er the fire :   " Nay, no such men are we,
No tuggers at the hawser, no wasters of the sea :
We will have the gold and the purple, when we list such things to
win:
But now we think of our fathers, and avenging of our kin.
Not all King Siggier's kingdom, and not all the world's increase,
For ever and for ever, shall buy thee life and peace."
The calm, conscious, dignified resignation to fate and the
inevitable, which was one of the finest traits of the Norse
character, is well expressed in the last words of Sigmund
Volsung's son to his wife, as he dies on the battle-field:—
" Our valour and wisdom have met, and thou knowest they shall not
die:
Sweet and good were the days, nor yet to the Fates did we cry
For a little longer yet, and a little longer to live :
But we took we twain in our meeting, all gifts that they had to give :
Grieve not for me; for thou weejsest that thou canst not see my face,
How its beauty is not departed, nor the hope of mine eyes grown
base.
Indeed I am waxen weary ; but who heedeth weariness
That liath been day-long on the mountain in the winter weather's
stress,
And now stands in the lighted doorway, and seeth the king draw
nigh.
And heareth men dighting the banquet, and the bed wherein he
shall lie ?"
In the next book Sigurd appears, and Eegin the dwarf, his
wise master. The gods of Asgard cross the stage with the
mixture of naive childishness and grandeur which belongs
to that mythology. Here they do not play a very dignified
part. Loki having mischievously killed a giant disguised
as an otter, has to pay a blood-fine to the giant's father. So
he rends the hoarded treasure from Andvari, a dwarf who
haunted the Ehine, snatching it from him to its last remnant,
a ring, and on this treasure the dwarf lays a curse which
clings to the Rhine gold for ever. So Tafner, the giant's
son, kills his father to obtain the treasure, and broods over
it for long years in the form of a dragon. So Regin his
brother, weak, yet strong in wisdom, lives for generations
among men seeking to train a hero who shall win it for
him. At last, when he has trained Sigurd for the purpose,
and Sigurd has slain the dragon, a new wisdom falls on the
hero, and he becomes aware that Eegin means to slay him,
and he kills at once the evil dwarf, " abhorred of gods and
men," and gains for himself the Ehine gold, and with it the
A New Poem aftd an Old Story. 145
curse. So, though he wakes the peerless Brynhild from her
magic sleep, and wins her love, all goes wrong : Grimhild,
the witch-queen, causes him by a magic draught to forget his
love, and to marry her daughter Gudrun the Niblung; and
he rides the magic fire, and wins Brynhild only to bestow
her on his brotlier-in-law Gunnar, and wakes from the spell
too late. And when he and his love have perished, the
curse still clings to the unhallowed gold, till the Niblung
race is destroyed, and the hoard is cast back into the Ehine,
never more to be seen by mortal eyes. We are inclined to
believe that a faint echo of tribal wars is to be heard all
through the story; but there seems no special reason for
connecting it, as some have done, with myths of the sun,
and spring, and winter. The myths have already in it
taken concrete form; we find the summer gods presiding,
but checked by the frost giants and the elfin races; or, in
other words, the untamed and clashing forces of Nature.
The gods are not indeed yet far away; and the giants,
though they are
" Folk that are seen no more,
Yet whiles, as ye ride some fell-road across the heath, there comes
The voice of their lone lamenting o'er their changed and conquered
homes."
The tale of the curse on the ill-gotten treasure seems,
however, one of those ideas that are true for all time, never
truer than when the spoils of Eome had just been seized by
the Teutons. Never was there a period in history more
terrible in its records of violence, rapine, and slaughter; and
it says much for the nobility and strength of the Teutonic
race, that their great qualities—their fidelity, honour, and
respect for women—survived those evil days.
It is rather a serious omission in the new poem, that the
author forgets apparently to mention how Sigurd avenged
his father. It is told in tlie Edda how he would not be
egged on by Eegin to the conquest of the dragon, till that
his first feat of arms was accomplished; and any man would
have been held contemptible or niddering in the north, who
did not thus honour a murdered father's memory. In tlie
last book of the poem, Mr Morris, we think unsatisfactorily,
follows the German instead of the Norse version of the
story. The later story jars on the veneration for family
ties, then so strong; and seems therefore a less natural,
if a more terrible tragedy than the oldest version, in
which Gudrun, the widow of Sigurd, and the unwiUi;ig wife
of Atli, is obliged to see the treacherous destruction of her
146 The Ladies Edinbtcrgh Magazine.
brothers by her husband, on whom she avenges their death.
These brothers liad caused the death of Sigurd; and the
German version followed by Morris makes her lure them to
her husband's court, and gloat over their defeat, torture, and
death. Still, from the merely poetical point of view, Morris
may have done wisely in sacrificing Gudrun's character to
the necessity of variety in the catastrophes, otherwise the
fall of tlie Niblungs might have been almost a repetition of
the fall of the Volsungs in the first book. If he has made
"the white-armed Gudrun" into an aven<dno- fiend, he has
given us a noble type of womanhood in the splendid Bryn-
hild, the noble warrior-maiden of the Volsun" Saga, vulgar-
ized in the Nibelungcn Lied into a hoydenish virago. Her
forethought and wisdom are only at fault through her reli¬
ance on the fidelity and honour of others, which she thought
equal to her own. The ardour of her love for Sigurd, and
the noble self-restraint with which she sets it and all per¬
sonal happiness aside, at the call of honour and the gods,
her uncomplaining endurance, and queenly courtesy, are
beautiful for all time. When at last she discovers that she
has been tricked, deceived, and dishonoured, she is clearly
aware that no remedy is left but death—her death and
Sigurd's; and she desires Gunnar to lay her corpse on his
funeral pile; " nor shall the door swing to at the heel of
him as I go behind him," she says, in tlie Volsung Saga; and
the Edda runs thus :—
" Ah ! for unrest
All too long
Are men and women
Made alive !
Yet we twain together
Shall wear through the ages,
Sigurd and I."
We think the book declines in interest after Sigurd and
Brynhild are gone;   the horrors thicken, though they are
most gracefully related.    For instance, Gunnar's death in
the pit of snakes gives occasion for fine descriptions—
" But the worms were beholding their prej^, and they drew around, and
nigher,
Smooth coil, and flickering tongue, and eyes as gold in the fire ;
And he looked, and beheld them, and spake, nor stilled his harp
meanwhile ;
What will ye, 0 thralls of Atli, 0 images of guile."
The tender, clinging wife of Sigurd is hardly recognisable
in Gudrun the avenger; and perhaps we are rather glad
when we have waded after her through blood and fire to the •
Severed—Not Lost. 147
edge of the quiet sea, where at last she finds rest. So the
sea flows over her, and the river Ehine over the accursed
treasure; the fire has devoured the rest; it ends like the
fated day of doom, the Eagnarok of the Norse mythology,
when fire and water, the natural forces, break all the bonds
imposed by gods and men, and overwhelm the world, the
realms of death, and even Asgard, the abode of the gods, in
one dreadful destruction. The old Teuton was always
looking forward to that crash of all things in universal
fight, and was therefore ready to meet his own fate with
fortitude, and keen to encounter war and slaughter. Beyond
that day a faint far hope flickered on the dim horizon of
his beliefs; the hope of a brighter, purer, quieter time, when
Balder, Heimdal, and Freya, the best of gods and the best of
men, should begin to reconstruct a new order of things, and
a new world with blissful inhabitants, fresh with the dew of
the morning. These myths, with all their wildness and
childishness, have their roots deep in human nature. And
so it is also with this beautiful legendary poem; a true
humanity shows through all the confused surroundings of
giants and elves, witch drinks, and magic spells. It is in its
essence a tale of tender love, and bitter jealousy, and utter
sacrifice, such as may in any age befall real men and women,
and therefore its charm can never pass away.
We have no space left to draw attention to some of its
finest parts, but we can easily sum up this short notice in two
words—read it.
E. J. 0.
SEVERED—NOT LOST.
Oh ! leave them, leave in slumber
Those dirges of the soul,
Whose chords we cease to number
As blighting seasons roll,
Lest we, our calm forsaking,
Deepen the undertone,
Until the wordless aching
Enslave us as its own.
Serene of mood, and smiUng,
Calm nature goes her way,
The common hour beguiling
With sun, or starry ray.
'Tis true, the tempest's passion
Leaps into lawless life,
Yet she, in her sweet fashion,
Knoweth to lull the strife.
148 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
Thus we, surcharged with feeling,
May need the storm's relief ;
'Tis o'er—now let us, kneeling,
Hymn farewell to our grief,
While in our thought enshrining
(To light the darkened way)
A thousand memories, sliming
From the departed day.
DuM*.
OR,
FIVE AND TWENTY YEARS AGO AT THE ACHEN SEE.i
Chapter I.
It was on a beautiful June afternoon, the westering sun
streaming down through soft mists, which enveloped the
conical peaks, standing up in curious groups along the side
valley behind Pertis Au, that a boat, with a young girl as
its sole occupant, was loosed by her from its moorings at
the southern end of the Aclien see, or, as its name implies,
the lake of the brooks. Besides its uncommon beauty,
lying six thousand feet above the level of the sea, in its
setting of pine woods and green alps, or alnrtis, the lake of
the brooks has other points of interest. This pass of the
Achen-thal was one of the earliest Eoman pathways to the
far-lying northern provinces of their vast empire, where
lay the home of the dying gladiator ;—
" There were his young barbarians all at play,
There was their Dacian mother ;—he, their sire,
Butcher'd to make a Roman holiday ;"
and here, probably, some of the Gothic hordes also chronicled
in " Cliilde Harold," passed along in after years, to avenge the
blood of such slaughtered ancestors on the degenerate
victors. The valley is also the watershed of the district,
and the Achen see offers one of the rare instances of a
lake forming an outlet to a stream at either extremity; one
rivulet flowing from it northward, towards the confines of
Bavaria, through the tract of country so often fiercely con¬
tested between the neighbour nations ; the other taking a
1 The Edelraute, not the Edehveiss, the author was informed by
" Jorgle," is the plant sought for by the Tyrolese men, at the peril of
their lives, for their unrelenting lovers. It grows in far more inac¬
cessible places and altitudes than the Edehoeiss.
Edelratite. 149
southerly direction, through the Achen pass, to the valley
of the Inn, turning more than one picturesque saw-mill in
its rapid descent thither.
This June afternoon, unruffled by a single breath of wind,
or the storms which rise suddenly, and in a few minutes
curl its surface into angry breakers, the water lay tinted
with lines of delicate green, purple, and rose-colour, that
might have been taken for the reflection of the fields of
Alpine roses, which dipped their blossoms into the trans¬
parent blue of the lake below, leaning over as if charmed
with their own loveliness.
Marie, the girl who was rowing, had been waiting vainly
an hour or more, for the chance of meeting with a weary
foot-traveller from Innsbruck, who might feel anxious to be
spared the extra two miles tramp aloirg the road bordering
the lake. This road, following the windings of the shore
where it was possible, had once or twice been cut, at the
expense of much laljour, right through the solid mountain-
spurs, jutting out into the water. Its darkness there told
of the immense depths to which the shelving precipices
descended below the surface. Marie rested on her oars for
some minutes as she came opposite Pertis Au;—perhaps the
mazy beauty of the vaUey spoke to the heart of the moun¬
tain maid ;—a vague sentiment of the sublimity of God in
nature stirred the latent echoes in the soul of this member
of a race ever attuned to religious feeling.
Certain it is, she did not hear the shouts of a wayfarer,
who was striving to attract her attention in one of the pine
plantations, which hid the way at intervals, until he had
repeated his signals many times ; indeed it was his frantic
gesticulations with a handkerchief that made her at last
alter her course, and turn the boat's head landward. As it
dashed in among some bushes, Marie saw at once the
stranger was in evU case. Limping, with his face drawn
into horrible contortions, he tried to reach the edge of the
boat; but overcome by pain, he sank on a log, and looked
helplessly up at the girl, who stood with one spring on the
turf before him.
" What is the matter, sir ?" she asked kindly, her face all
concern in a moment.
"Not much," answered the young man, unwilling to
impose too far on her feelings of compassion; " I have
sprained my ankle, climbing up the rocks after some of
your beautiful flowers, and it refuses to go any farther.
Can you get me assistance, in order to reach the Inn, wluch,
I am told, stands at the other end of the lake ?"
Xo. 2n.--M\Yl877. U
I5D The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
" What more do you need ?" replied Marie ; " I can take
you there."
" But how am I to get into the boat, maiden ? Even with
your help ?    The pain is past endurance."
"Trust yourself to me, sir; I can carry you," replied
Marie quietly.
"You lift me!" exclaimed the youth, relapsing into his
native Berlin dialect, in his astonishment.
" Yes, easily," replied Marie, with a blush that mounted
up to her forehead, yet still regarding hmi composedly.
He looked at her; there was indeed strength written in
every outline of the well-knit figure planted on the soil
before him ; it was almost broader in the shoulder than
was compatible with the uncommon beauty of her face.
" I cannot let you try," he said at length ; " not that I fear
you might drop me into another world, through the untold
depths of this black water, but for very shame of accepting
such service from a woman."
" That's nothing !" replied the girl: " Do I not carry loads
of hay, twelve times as big as you are : and long distances
—not for a mere step like this ? Do not delay, sir," she
added more earnestly, as a pang .passed again over the
traveller's face; " an extra hour will only add so much
more difficulty to Lena's task of curing you." As she spoke,
she advanced close beside the stranger, and helped him to
rise. He groaned in agony. Without another word, Marie
took him up in her arms ; and in a minute he was lying in
the stern of the boat, with his knapsack beside him. As
she resumed the oars, and steered out again into the lake,
the young traveller, while recovering from the sensation of
bashfuluess, silently took her portrait with furtive glances.
Tall, full in figure; exquisitely fair, where the white ker¬
chief, forsaking its modest line for a moment, allowed the
smallest suspicion of shoulder to be seen, as she bent for¬
ward on the oars; rippling golden hair crowning her like
a glory, although braided and kept as close as pins and ties
could do it—the traveller speculated how like a mantle it
would be, if left unbound to flow out its natural length—
blue eyes, and a mouth where sweetness lay, tempered by
the firmness of resolve. Marie Zingerle deserved the fiat
that declared her the beaiity of the Achen-thal, and of
many other valleys besides. With the grace of movement,
so often indicative of strength, she sent the boat through
the water at the pace rather of an outrigger on the Thames,
than of the heavy flat-bottomed craft then in use among
the lakes of all the German mountain districts.
I
Edelraiite. 151
. " I might have lain some time, if chance had not brought
you to me, maiden ; " began the young man after a pause.
" There are not many travellers along your shelf of a road."
" Not yet; there will be plenty later," she replied;
" when the students begin their walking-tours, then we
have merry times in the Inn. They are a joyous folk those
students!"
" Not over polite always, are they ? " asked the stranger.
" The' hostess knows how to keep them in order," replied
Marie ; " no one dares take a liberty in Agatha's house."
" I wish she would keep your cows in better training,"
said the youth : " I had hard trouljle to prevent one from
being decidedly uncivil, as I lay in my helplessness down
yonder."
" They are good creatures," said Marie ; " she meant no
harm ; slie was but askmg what your business was ? They
have not learnt yet to take off their horns when a stranger
goes by, as their master does his hat"—she added smiling.
" No; their prominent idea seems to be to take the
stranger on to their horns," replied her companion ; " but I
convinced her ladyship at last, that I would rather put up
with neglect than such obsequious attentions, so she led on
her company, and left me alone."
" Ah ! that was Mai-blume" replied Marie; " she is as
good as a cowherd;—she leads all the others out to pasture
by herself every morning, and brings them home again at
night.    She is the queen ; and not one dares go before her."
" She appeared a determined character," said the traveller;
" as strong as you, maiden, but—by no means so beautiful."
The last words were spoken in a low voice ; they did not
reach the girl's ear.
Standing up as they approached the cluster of white,
broad-eaved buildings, at the northern end of the lake,
Marie gave a jodel, that brought out two or three people at
once to meet them. The foremost was a splendid specimen
of the mountaineer, who, as Marie greeted him with the
name of " Jorgle," answered, " What, for a fish, have you
brought us here, little sister ?" in the broad patois of the
Tyrol, almost as unintelligible to the traveller as Chinese;
but when Marie explained matters, he raised his hat with
a sort of kingly dignity, which made the young stranger
feel almost his inferior.
" I am very sorry, sir," he said, jumping into the boat;
'■' let me carry you indoors, and good Lena will soon see
after the sprain; she has wondrous luck in doctoring."
152 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
"Yes, when God gives his blessing," said a low voice
behind them; and when the stranger turned his head over
the shoulder of the stalwart Jorgie, he encountered a pair
of calm, grey eyes, looking at him from a face, whose peace¬
ful stillness seemed like a foretaste of relief and rest at
once.
" Bring the gentleman upstairs," she added ; " I will tell
the hostess."
But before they reached the door of the hostel across the
road, it was already tilled with the comely, stately person in
question. The countenance of Wirthin Agatha might have
frightened any 'one who felt guilty in soul, it was so strong
in its lines, and so serious in its expression; but her voice
was gentle, and her smile full of goodness, as she said, " Poor
gentleman! Is he much hurt ? How did it happen ? Take
him to the big chamber, Lena; it has a cheerful outlook on
to the lake, and is near the balcony, which will be pleasant
for him till he is able to get about again."
Very grateful the traveller felt when Jorgie, carrying him
like a baby across his two arms, laid him full length on the
bed, in a clean room, with white-washed walls, and snowy
curtains, and very little extra carpeting. Lena soon
followed, laden with herbs, and cold-water bandages ; for a
few minutes she made soothing passes with tliat gentle hand
of hers, after the boot had been cut from the swollen ankle;
this, with the help of a sleeping-draught, after tlie cold
bandages had been applied, soon sent him into a refreshing
slumber. He was a\\'akened next morning at four o'clock
by a noise that seemed to shake the house to its foundation.
Before he could form a conjecture as to what it was, it
ceased; and then he lieard the voice of Jorgie leading the
rosenkranz, or morning prayers of the household, in which all
joined Avith a fervour which allowed little doubt of its
sincerity, and left the guest ample food for reflection, after
they had dispersed to their several occupations.
Wilhelm Stein was the only son of a second-class
government official in Berlin, whose small salary had been
so well eked out by his careful Hausfrmi, that they had
been enabled to give this their well-beloved child the
benefit of a liberal education; and to allow him to follow
the bent of his inclination, by devoting himself to the
fascinating, but unproductive career of a painter. The
family resources had been even stretched to the extent of
giving him the means for a year's sojourn in Italy. It was
on his return from Eome, when this leave of absence had
Edelraute. I53
expired, and after spending a few weeks at Venice, that he
fouud his way from the glories of Titian on canvas, to the
splendours of natural scenery and beauty, that cluster round
the great painter's birth-place at Ficve di Gadorc. There
he lingered all the late spring, among the fascinations of the
then little-known Dolomite region; until, warned by the
fact that a full portfolio, however useful prospectively,
did not at the time add to the bulk or prosperity
of his porte-momucie, he hastened over the Brenner, and
was pushing forward to Munich, when he met with the
accident that begins the story. Wilhelm's parents were
good, moral people ; true to the manifest duties of kindness
and charity in almsgiving; but except as connected with
the rare occasional solemnities of the Lutheran church's
calendar, religion, as it is understood to be a thing of daily
life, entwined in every thought and action, was something
perfectly unknown to him. A feeling akin to shame came
over him, as he listened to the low monotone whicli
followed tlie summons of the bell outside his door on the
landing, devoted by hostess Agatha to this daily gathering
of her household:—shame for the misguided, ignorant
peasants, who could be bound by this mummery. He looked
down on them well-nigh with contempt, from the height of
his intellectual and philosophic freedom. It was with a
smile bordering on cynicism, that he took his breakfast, two
hours later, from gentle Lena's hands, and said, " You
are early and noisy in your devotions, Lena. Can't- you
get through the day witliout such a ceremonial ?"
" Asking the Lord our Father to bless his children is not
a mere form, sir. If our chapel here were built, as we hope
it soon will be, and we had a priest to lead us, we should
worship there : till then, is He to be forgotten, as if we were
receiving no mercies, and incurring no dangers ? "
There was something in the steadfast calm of the grey
eyes that checked the flippant answer rising to Wilhelm's
lips, and he said, as he bent over the tray where the good
coffee, and rich milk, and new kuchen tempted him to eat—
" At least you have both time and will to let your Chris¬
tian charity pour itself out abundantly on unlucky ones like
myself, good Lena."
He was prevented saying more by a call outside his door;
it opened a little way, and a bouquet and hand appeared in
his chamber. Lena went forward to receive the flowers; a
few words passed between her and the owner of the hand,
all in  that  wonderful  conglomerate  language  ending  in
154 The Ladies EdinbttrgJi Magazme.
engerhjfi, ungcrhj!^, and isserlys; so that the message, " Marie
thinks that as the Herr Reisender is so fond of wild-flowers
that he sprained his ankle getting them, he might like a few
just freshly gathered," came like a perfect sur]n'ise to him.
Fresh indeed they were, the morning dew still wet on the
dainty forget-me-nots, the delicate Mai-Uiimen, the elegant
lady's slippers, and Grass of Parnassus, all standing up from
a wreath of the brilliant Alpine-roses. Wilhelm gazed in
utter astonishment. If he had searched through the most
costly flower-stalls of the Gendarmen mar'kt, in his native
city of Berlin, he could not have picked out a nosegay
blended with a truer eye for colour, or a more keen sense of
beauty, in both form and arrangement. Putting the bouquet
to his face, it served to hide the blush, half of sensitive,
artistic appreciation of intrinsic loveliness, half of shame at
the thought of the ignorant peasants he had contemned
shortly before.
" Tell her, Lena," he stammered at length, as the thought
of the golden-haired girl standing behind the door quickened
his pulse, " tell her I will keep tliem all my life."
" No need for you to do that, sir," replied Lena, quietly;
" Marie will keep you well supplied till you can hunt for
them yourself on our hills, and in our pine woods. Her hands
are apt in the work; a day seldom passes without her
making up a bunch for some of the travellers who tarry on
our shores beside the lake."
This intimation a little took off the poetry of the gift for
Wilhelm, who was a thorough Berliner in the ultra romantic
turn of his excitable nature ; but sufficient romance, after
Lena's explanation, lingered to help him through the
examination of his lamed limb; the state of which was
declared most satisfactory by his village doctress.
Chapter II.
It was full three months later, when the evenings were
perceptibly creeping over the days, but giving their soi't
dreamy beauty as an equivalent for the long twilight of
summer, that Wilhelm and Marie once more sat in the boat
together. Slie waited for him this time, knowing that he
was coining from Innsbruck, whither he had gone for money
to take him back to Berlin. It was a pleasant walk enough
down the rugged pass to the Chrdfin Brauerei at Jenhach,
Edelraute. 15 5
where the traveller now can rest half-way on a balcony
shadowed by the American creeper, with a glass of good
Bavarian beer, and a whole stretch of the glorious Inn-thai
and the mouth of the Ziller-thal before him : the valley
below green and pink, with fields of ripening tobacco. It
is quite another story coming back ; and though his ankle
did not afford Wilhelm a shadow of excuse for such an
indulgence, having — thanks to Lena's rubbing — become
quite as strong as the other, it seemed only natural to ask
that the boat should meet him at the farther end of the
lake, and that Marie should be there with it as usual. She
looked much more serious tlian when we first saw her in the
glow of the June afternoon. It is doubtful if she noticed
the colours on the lake at all, though they were more
gorgeous than in the height of summer. There was a new
softness in her eyes, and the cheek was paler that lay on her
clasped hands, as she murmured, " 0 ! mein Vater ! can it
ever be wrong to love ? "
It was very plain that, right or wrong, poor Marie did
so. Love spoke out of her whole mien and bearing, as
she started up at the sound of a now familiar voice, stealing
on her suddenly in the middle of her half-spoken thoughts.
It mantled up in the blush that dyed cheeks and throat.
Wilhelm had approached by a path she did not expect him
to come.
" So ! you are here, beloved," he said, in the simple, Scrij)-
tural phraseology, at once genuine and affectionate, which
lovers use towards each other in Germany. It is impossible
for us to render the I)w, that sweetest, tenderest, word of aU.
" Nay, nay," he continued, taking the oars from her hand;
" I shall bear the burthen to-day, as I would I might ever
bear it, Marie, all through life for thee, in shadow and in
sunshine, now and for all time, dear maiden."
He had placed her opposite to him, and sat with both her
hands in his; looking at her with an earnestness, that made
the white kerchief rise and fall rapidly, with the wild beat¬
ing of her heart. She looked at him, too, piteously, when
the kind grave voice was silent. They were pleasant, manly,
honest eyes to meet; true as lier own, but of a deeper blue ;
the light brown hair also was some shades darker than hers.
His forehead was broad and fuU, the mouth ever chan"inp'
yet firm and joyous in its curves. He might not be hand¬
some, that long-legged, raw-boned young German painter;
yet he was a goodly youth to behold, and Marie acknow¬
ledged it to herself, as, pained by her silence, he shook the
156 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
long flakes of hair hack from his forehead, as if to get rid
of a great weight, and still sat looking at her.
" Go on," she said at length,-" it will he dark in half-an-
houi'."
" No hurry, if this is to he our last row together," he an¬
swered.
" You will come again," she said, keeping her lower lip
from quivering with an effort.
" Not unless it be to claim you as my wife, Marie;—my
good parents write most kindly, they are quite willing to
receive you as a daughter : nothing but your own unaccount¬
able obstinacy stands in the way of our both being happy.
You love me, Marie; I know it though you will not say so."
He looked passionately moved; nothing but the strong
will of the Tyrolean kept her impassive under his appeal.
" It is my last night here, Marie. Farewell to our pleasant
rambles with Jorgle, up the hills where you found me the
. flowers; to the readings of an evening on the lake;
and the sweet talks beside the brook, while your brother
was fishing for trout; to our early walks up to the Semiliutte,
on the pastures, where we drank milk and helped to make
the cheese, and wandered home again in the cool afternoon
breeze.    Ah ! dear Marie, are they all to be a dream ?"
"Yes! yes!" exclaimed she hurriedly. "It is best so,
Herr Wilhelm. You will go away, and some one else will
drive Marie out of your head. You will marry, and be
happy; and come back here perhaps with your wife."
" And you ?" he asked. " Will you marry fat Peterle;
with the farm, and the many cows, and be envied by half
the girls in the valley? "
" God forbid !" said Marie, with a shudder.
" Yes, God forbid ! " reiterated Wilhelm : " You will do it
at the peril of your happiness here, and hereafter. With a
soul full of thought and love, pure as the snow that will
wrap you in when I am gone, and winter comes, and as high
above your coimtry-women, good though they be, as these
mountains are above the plain, yoii will wither and die, not
live, in the company of poor Peterle."
" I know it," said Marie, very quietly; " but I shall not
marry:—I shall go into a cloister; and tend the sick, and
lead a holy life; where sinful thoughts cannot come to
tempt me."
" Will bars and bolts keep them out, dearest ?" he
answered: " with your clear understanding, and love of
truth, does not your heart tell you these wily priests are
Edelraute. 157
willing to keep you ignorant, that they may still hold over
you the sway of their pitiless superstition ? Nay, Marie,
hear me; do not be angry. Worship as much as you lite,
and how you like: you have taught me the beauty and
reality of a glowing, fervent, religious faith. I honour it,
and you that practise it; but why submit every thought and
act to the dictation of these Jesuit fathers ? Your own
clergy are many shades better; they acknowledge human
weaknesses, and honour human feelings; but these out¬
siders of all earthly joys "    He seized the oars, and
pulled a few vigorous strokes, to get rid of his irritation.
" We must be humble, and obedient," answered Marie
with some spirit. "What has not freethmking among
Lutherans led to ? "
" What did not the bigotry of your priesthood tend to
ten years ago ?" he asked in replj''. " Have you forgotten
the sorrowful caravans of weary people out of the Ziller-thal,
whom the wicked mockery of zeal for God, and for
Holy Church, turned out, suppliants to Prussia, for the
shelter denied them in the land of their birth ? Do you
suppose their country was less dear to them than to others ?
That it was not as hard to them to bury their dead like
dogs, in the open fields; to be denied the sacred blessing of
holy rites on marriage, and on their new-born babes, for years;
and to be torn out at last, root and branch, old man and
suckling, from the homes as closely twined around their
affections, as those of other Tyrolese ? This cannot meet
with justification, much less approval, from a tender con¬
science like yours!"
Marie hid her face; she remembered but too well the
agonising scenes of that exodus of the persecuted Lutherans
of the Ziller-thal into Silesia, though but a child when it
happened; and the dull murmurs of disapprobation, also,
which rose in nooks and corners, from bolder spirits against
the cruelty with which, at the instigation of the Jesuits, the
decree for their banishment had been carried out; and whose
influence rendered a personal appeal even, on the part of
the sufferers, to good Kaiser Franz, in Vienna, of no avail.
" Such a departure from Christian love can never be
justified, maiden," went on Wilhelm, warmly. " Keep your
own faith, and serve God as your fathers did before you, if
you wiU; but let the men and women of keener suscepti¬
bilities, and more restless longings, have their thoughts and
ways of worship also, without holding over them what is as
bad as the halter and the rack; you do not condemn us to
No. 29.-Mav 1877. X
158 TJie Ladies! Editibtirg/i Magazine.
perdition, Marie;  you  cannot do it at  the  dictate of a
priest."
" It is dreadful to hear how they speak of the Holy
Mass, of the Mother of God, of subverting our Holy Church,"
said Marie, eagerly; " why can they not be happy like our¬
selves ?"
"Eh! well, my own beloved one," said Wilhelm, tenderly ;
"it is worse than useless spending our last moments
togetlier in controversy, over things wherein we shall
both think the same when we leave off as when we
began. Let us talk of happier subjects. By this time, I
hope, Jorgie has oljtained the wardenship of the parish.
Good, fine-hearted Jorgie !—he would make a king."
Marie blushed again painfully; not even the hearty
praise bestowed on her brother, could win a smile.
" You are so sad to-night, Marie," said Wilhelm : " let us
land for a few minutes, and you will find the pyrola for me
which you said grows in that pine wood."
"No, we had better go on," urged Marie, with a voice
and manner so anxious, that Wilhelm felt provoked, and
ran the boat aground on the fine, white, pebble beach, with
a jerk. Then he jumped out, and held a hand to Marie.
With a look of fear, she glanced back over the lake towards
the inn, which m'RS just near enough for a beholder to have
seen them from the balcony.
" You do not fear to trust me, Marie," said her lover, re¬
proachfully.
" Oh! no, no," she answered, springing to his side in a
moment. He caught her to him, and kissed her passionately
on brow and lips. For a moment Marie yielded ; then
holding him away from her, almost with a look of horror,
she burst from his arms, rushed back to the boat, and
pushed it off, before Wilhelm could guess what she was
about. He looked after her, too surprised to speak;—the
girl crossed her hands on her bosom, and said, " I cannot
help it! Jorgie shall come for you directly. Farewell;" and
the yearning tenderness of the face, how full of love, and
womanly pity, and sorrow, no words could tell, faded out
into the distance. Wilhelm «tood some minutes motionless,
listening to the plash of the receding oars; then he threw
up his arms, and his face grew dark and stern. Flinging
back his hair with a gesture of despair and grief, that
could only struggle out in a low, wild cry, he stood by the
water's brink, irresolute. C. Eay.
{To be continued.)
Musical Notes. 159
We have had some good music this season in Edinburgh.
The Eeid Festival was, as usual, a brilliant success; the
previous series of orchestral concerts was better than last
year, and tlie University Musical Society gave the best and
brightest concert they liave yet acliieved.    Besides these
orchestral concerts, we had some good chamber music, and
various clioral societies have sung very creditably.    Then
Carl  Eosa's company gave us some very pleasant operas,
fairly complete though on a small scale, making us the less
regret the absence of the great stars of the Italian Opera,
who generally come here with a too small band and cliorus.
And we have heard Eubinstein.    Tliose of us who survive
to old age, will probably be thought interesting people by
the next generation but one, if for no other reason but that
we have heard Rubinstein.    Seldom in this imperfect world
can minutes and hours of complete and perfect satisfaction,
joy, and delight be hoped for such as he gives to his hearers
by the mighty genius of his interpretations.    It is well to
know something of the music that he plays, to realize the
better how he irradiates it by his wonderful powers, and
what secrets he reveals in it.    What depth of feeling and
thought there was in the steady calm of his reading of Bach—
how Chopin's Sonata seemed all on fire, seemed to have a
splendour of whicli one was before unaware, and how each
number seemed as if it must be the best while he played it,
and yet the next appeared more magnificent still.    Words
fail to convey the feelings probably of a great number of the
audience, though Edinburgh did not "rise" at him as London
does now.    There he has won his way at last, in spite of the
unworthy criticism of some leading papers, which for long
prevented many people from believing their own ears.
Certainly music, as an art, is attaining a prominence and
a power in Edinburgh that could hardly have been tliought
possible twenty years ago; however (and now we approach
a " ({uestion hrixlantc "), there are not wanting those who
hint we have musically wandered into a wrong path, where
the further we go tlie worse for our patriotism if not for our
music. It is little to the purpose, for instance, that the
audience enjoyed the University concert thoroughly, for
'■ there was not in the programme one Scotch song ;" nor, as
far as our memory serves us, was one included in any of
l6o The Ladies EdinbnrgJi Magazine.
the high-class concerts we have mentioned. Therefore a
local paper bristles with thistles, and the yell of the Celtic
Slogan is heard; on the other hand, the southerners begin
to laugh at us again, and to remind us that we alone of all
European nations have produced no musical composer.
They tell us how Dr HuUah mentions in his report,
which is based, perhaps, on a larger and more practical
experience of the teaching of vocal music than any other
man among us possesses, that as, on an average, the Welsh
have the truest ear for music in the United Kingdom, so
the Scotch have the worst—probably owing to the damage
done to that sensitive organ by the defects inherent in
the national instrument. Only the other day the English
wind bands took all the open prizes, even in the rough type
of music heard at the "Waverley Market. These are strange
facts, if, as some ardent patriots say, we possess in our
national melodies "some of the noblest music in the world;"
indeed, one enthusiast went so far as to declare that all
Schubert's songs were to Scotch songs as a muddy pond to
a clear mountain stream. Such fiery patriots are not open
to musical arguments, and probably have not a glimmer¬
ing of what music as an art is;—leaving them, then, to
shout their war-cries, let us turn our attention to the dear
old Scotch airs themselves, and inquire what is their real
character and value.
These belong probably to a remote antiquity, and are
the heritage of the sad, poetical, dreaming Celt. They
are written in the antiquated and imperfect Scotch,
Oriental, or Chinese scale, and mostly consist of one strain
only ; they are seldom improved by the addition of modern
second parts which are however very common. Numbers
are essentially alike; the lament, the love-song, and the
reel—are often nearly the same air, played slower or faster,
and with a different accent; the plaintive wildness of the
song underlies the dance music, whose gaiety is not gene¬
rally owing to the tune itself, as is the case with many
Irish airs, but caused by the marked and sprightly rhythm
— the so-called " snap" — so characteristic and dance-
inspiring wherever it is heard. Eeels and strathspeys seem
to be the spirited and merry interpretation, by the civilized
violin, of the wailing old Celtic airs. We are inclined to
agree with those antiquaries who consider the melodies to
be of Celtic origin, often modified by the Teutonic violin.
They are the accompaniments to a ballad literature, of
which our country has reason to be proud, or else they are
Musical Notes. i g i
the dance music to which our ancestors have footed it for
many generations.    They are not, indeed, cultivated music,
nor does it appear that they admit of development; but they
have their own merits and their own character, a historical
and artless value, which we believe will endure.    To quote
a Scotch author of fifty years   ago, who had studied the
subject thoroughly,!—" Old Caledonia has much to boast of.
The style of her music, it is true, is such that it allows not
of that extension or improvement which is inherent in tlie
musical systems of the modern school.    It is long since com¬
pleted, and we can only add to its specimens; scarcely, perliaps,
that.    But it is full of beauty, though of a pecular cast.    It
forms part of the history of our former manners and feelings,
and is peculiarly associated with our early poetical litera¬
ture."    He says further, and we think truly : "Our national
airs have suffered by the vulgar practice of ' harmonizing'
them for voices.    The ballad is an air for one voice, and
whatever harmony it admits, is instrumental.      It is not
designed for the   harmony of voices, and   the effect is to
encumber it with a dull, heavy, psalmodic accompaniment;
independently of the nonsensical effect which the poetry
sometimes acquires from the same cause.    The Italian duet,
the dramatic trio, the   chorus, the   English glee, and   the
ecclesiastical composition in parts, are harmonies designed for
voices by the composer, and tlie melodies are constructed
accordmgly.    But in the ballad glee it would be better, nine
times out of ten, if all the under parts were silent."    In
illustration of one of these remarks, there was a letter in the
papers the other day from Aberdeen, announcing, with much
self-congratulation, that the Aberdeen students had sunf^ in
chorus " The   Land   o'   the   Leal," to   the   delight   of" an
audience, whose sense of the ludicrous and the incongruous
must have been slow, if that sense was not stirrecf by a
hundred lusty young men shouting together,
" I'm wearin' awa', John,
Like snaw-wreaths in thaw," &c.
Our Edinburgh students, who at the University concert
two years ago, sang the air, harmonized by their I'rofessor of
Music, to " Scots wha hae wi' Wallace bled," showed more
taste in their selection of words. Probably, however, but few
of our old airs harmonize well, and even as solos they do not
generally appear to the best advantage in a concert hall,
1 Dr MacCulloch, " On the Highlands and Islands of Scotland, in
Letters to Sir Walter Scott."
162 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
and are very seldom well sung by foreign professional
singers. They are essentially best suited for " chamber
music." We once heard a lady, who in her day was re¬
nowned for her excellent singing of Scotch songs, say of
them, " they are as easy as speaking." Very likely, but
what an incommunicable gift is that of speaking thoroughly
well; faults in elocution may be corrected, but charm can
hardly be imparted; and so of reciting Scotch songs. Some
people have the knack of singing them, others cannot
acquire it; we never heard them better sung or recited tlian
by a young Highland nurse-girl, with a very sweet voice. It
has been asserted, also, that they are very difficult to sing,
probably because many of them require a voice of good
compass, as from important notes occurring at the extremi¬
ties of the scales, they are often neither treljle nor alto,
neither tenor nor bass songs.
Many of them, therefore, which are manageable enough in
a draWing-room, are ungrateful and difficult, not from
musical reasons, but from those given above, to sing in a
large hall. From this peculiarity some of the ohlest and
best airs are quite free. The song, " 0 a' the airts the wind
can blaw," wliich has been lately often quoted as especially
beautiful, is one of many instances of a fine old air (" The
Lowlands o' Holland ") to which another and very inferior
second part has been loosely tacked, which wanders far up
and down tlie scale, and thus causes the song to be considered
" difficult." But it is in the ingle-nook or in the fresh air,
where they grew up, that Scottish songs sound best, asso¬
ciated as they are with the beautiful lyrics of the poet-
ploughman and the poetess-peeress; and if the music is not
capable of further development itself, it may offer hints and
suggestions to musicians. Of this we have already a grand
example; though Mendelssohn has not introduced into the
" Scotch " Symphony any known Scotch air, he has in the
Scherzo given us a kind of glorified suggestion of the
national music of the country which inspired him to write
some of his finest compositions. National characteristics
may form subjects for art—but when we speak of art in the
abstract, we would do so in the telling words of Goethe:
" tliere is no patriotic art, and ]io patriotic science—&oi/i are
universal." Cailleach.
Our Library Table. 163
DOUBLE ACROSTIC.
No. 5.
" Hail, thou, the fleet year's pride and prime !
Hail! day which Fame should bid to bloom !"
1. "A wise physician, skill'd our wounds to heal,
Is more than armies to the public weal"—
Can we to this a woman's entrance seal ?
2. As sentinel to every tongue we stand,—
If we except the Ethiopic land.
3. I come to-day, I live but till the night.
And die at advent of the next day's light.
Pro Tempore.
SOLUTION OF ACROSTIC
No. 4.
G GOLF F
0 00 0
W wo O
K KOBIL L
Six answers received ;—that of " Hawthorn " the only correct one.
A Prize is offered at the close of the year to the solver of the
greatest number of acrostics. Solutions to be addressed " Acrostic
Editor," Puljlishers, 22 Howe Street, Edinliurgh ; to be sent not later
than the 15th of the month, written clearly on a sheet of paj)er con¬
taining only the solution, pseudonym, and full name and address of
sender. Solutions acknowledged in the following number ; and name
and address of winner only announced at close of competition.
O U E    L I B E A E Y    TABLE.
Tripp's Buildings : London, King & Co., 1877.
This is a very simple and unpretending little story, yet it is not
written without a definite object. We need not enquire particularly
what hospital is meant by the " Midland :" yet, knowing that all the
facts mentioned are true, we must recognize the great need (which
exists everywhere) of trained nurses for the sick, of a somewhat
higher calibre than has hitherto been usual.
"Tripp's Buildings" is written -with a thorough knowledge of the
London poor : it is a pathetic picture, not without a dash of humour in
its pathos, of their troubles and their aspirations. The two friends, one
with strong individuality, that could not fail to leave its mark—the
other, so touching in her simple devotion—are drawn with a firm and
loving hand ; and the story makes an impression on us, such as we do
not always gain from books of more pretension.
164 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
STEAY    NOTES.
We are glad to learn that Miss Clark and Miss Smith, who were
this session at the head of the classes of Latin and Mathematics in the
Edinburgh Ladies' Educational Association, have also passed with
distinction the University Certificate Examination in Latin. We learn
further, that Miss Clark and Jliss Middleton have passed in Mathe¬
matics ; Miss Hislop and Miss Stalker in Moral Pliilosophy; and Miss
Hislop and Miss Middleton in English Literature. All these ladies,
we understand, gave in excellent papers.
The new Preparatory Class of Conimon Subjects for the Edinburgh
University Local Examinations, opened early in April, numbers, in¬
cluding correspondents, thirty students. The advanced class for the
honour subjects numbers twenty-one students resident, in Edin¬
burgh, and thirty-nine correspondents.
It is with much pleasure that we are able to state that this year
Aberdeen will once more have a centre for the Edinburgh University
Local Examinations. Several of the candidates have been studying
by Correspondence with the Edinburgh PrejDaratory Classes.
A Member of the Edinburgh Ladies' Educational Association has
kindly presented a Bursary of ^25, tenable for two years, for competi¬
tion at the Local Examinations in June 1878. There is some talk of
Latin being an indispensable condition for this Bursary.
A Student's Bursary, collected in the classes of the Edinburgh
Ladies' Educational Association during the last two sessions, now
amounts to £20, and will be offered at the Local Examinations of 1878
on the usual conditions.
We are tempted to ask why we do not see Edinburgh following the
example of Cambridge, and offering in addition to these l^ursaries prizes
of £10 or £15 for distinguished excellence in classics and mathematics.
The Glasgow Ladies' Educational Association held a very successful
public meeting on April 3d. Principal Caird presided, and several
other professors were present and took jjart in the proceedings ; there¬
fore we have every reason to hope that the University intends to do
something definite towards supplying the long-felt want of Higher
Education for Women in Glasgow. For though there have been
frequently courses of lectures for women, and this year some really
hard work was done in Professor Young's class, the want of system and
of a certificate has hitherto prevented anything like scholarly training.
Miss Menzies has been invited to Dundee to deliver a course of
lectures on early German literature. We \\o^q in a futm-e number to
give some account of the success of these lectures.
Ladies are invited to contribute to this Magazine.
A Prize is offered for the best article received by the Editors and
accepted for insertion during the current year, on any one of our
British Female Novelists born in the iSth century.
Subject of Debate for the next meeting of the Ladies' Edinburgh
Literary Society, to be held on Saturday, May 5th, at 6 Chester
Street, at 11 o'clock :—" Is it desirable that our Government should
send out another Arctic Exjjedition ?" being a continuation of the
Debate held at the meeting on April 7th.
Our Female Novelists. 16=
(Our   Jcmalc  ^lobelists.
V.
Mrs    inch bald.
h. 1753 ; il. 1821.
A Simple Story !—Thus runs the title of tlie greatest work
of the authoress whose life we have now to consider. And
truly the title may as appropriately he applied to her own
history. Full of candour, transparent as the day, she records
her most trivial actions witli as much faithfulness as her
greatest. Even her little foibles are confessed, and confessed
with such charming ingenuousness that we seem to see them
almost transformed into virtues. Possessed of many corre¬
spondents, she left none of their many letters unanswered, and
into tlie confidences imparted in these answers the world
has been received. It is with a pang of regret that we read of
the destruction, by her own liaud, of those four volumes of
autobiography, which would have revealed her life to us
as plainly as that of a Pepys, a Eussell, or, we had almost
said, a Henry Martyn. Yet far from her that pettiness of
detail which we find in the first, or that scrutiny of inner
vileness which characterises tlie diary of tlie last of these ;
so far as we can judge from her memoirs and letters, her
confessions have a refinement and nobility even in deal¬
ing with trifles, and an utter absence of that morljid
element which repels instead of attracting the reader. If
tlie heroine of A Simple Story is frivolous, vain, and fend of
applause, it is because the authoress has selected from her
own life those incidents in which, somewhat inconsistently
with her own character, she had committed slight indiscre¬
tions. If Miss Milner is contemptible in the latter part of
the book, it is because the author has departed utterly from
her counterpart, and, to add excitement to the events of her
story, painted in her heroine a deterioration of character,
of which the original was never guilty. Mrs Inchbald, in
the records we possess of her life, appears before us as she
really was. There is a genial frankness about lier, and a
certain independence peculiarly her own. Her life is as
interesting as either of her novels. More than one novel,
in  fact, might be  constructed  out  of it.     We have the
No. 30.—June 1S77, Y
166 TJie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
youthful spirit of adventure, hreaking through the bonds
of conventionality; the efforts and disappointments of
struggling ambition; the admiration of the many, marriage,
widowhood, intense literary activity, and then a quiet
evening of life, and a happy departure at its close. Let us
now proceed to look a little more closely at tliis strangely
varied life.
There was nothing in Mrs Inchbald's birth or station to
hint at the position she was destined to hold. Tlie child
of John and Mary Simpson, who were farmers and Catholics
at Standing-field, near Bury St Edmunds, Elizabeth Simpson
was born on the 15th October 1753. She had three sisters,
who, like herself, were all remarkable for great beauty.
Elizabeth was of an ardent and romantic nature, and was
early seized with a longing to see the world; at the age of
thirteen, this desire seems to have reached its climax, for
she then declared that " she would rather die than live any
longer without seeing the world." A visit to the theatre at
Bury St Edmunds only increased this longing, and when
about sixteen she applied by letter to the manager of the
Norwicli theatre for an engagement. When we remember
that she was not only quite untrained, but laboured under
a defect in her utterance, it is not surprising that these
overtures were rejected. She seems, however, to have had
a romantic and girlish tendre for this manager, as his name,
Eichard Griffith, printed in large letters at the end of her
year's pocket-book, may testify.
Education in tlie Simpson family appears to have been
confined to evening readings, and those chiefly of a theatri¬
cal nature. Elizabeth, both at this period and later, was
almost entirely self-educated. In her voluminous diaries, we
often find the records of her readings during a whole year.
These, in the year 1783, when she was twenty years of age,
comprised Rollin's Ancient History, those of Greece and
Eome, England and Ireland; The Pantheon, as a guide to
tlie translation of Homer's Odyssey; Tasso, Paradise Lost
and Regained, Junius' Letters, Hume's Essays, Letters of
Voltaire, and Essays upon Shakspere; besides many of
the classics in the best translations. At a later period, we
find her reading Gibbon's Life, Lord ChesterfleMs Letters,
Phctarch's Lives, &c. In 1782, she made careful researches
in the History of England, " studied a work on the globes,
and entered carefully in her common - place book the
distances, bulk, and other characteristics of the heavenly
bodies."   She also applied herself to natural philosophy, and
Our Female Novelists. 167
by degrees she acquired such a ready command over her
stores of information, that tliey seemed to be rather " the
result of regular education, than the elements only gleaned
by industrious maturity."
Knowing her to be of such energy, and also of a
romantic turn of mind, we are the less surprised at the
bold step she took when eighteen years of age. The
desire to go on the stage had become unconquerable.
Eegardless of the impediment in her speecli, she daily
indulged in visions of herself, tieadiug tlie stage in
queenly attire, acting heroic parts witli inimitable grace.
Every-day life became irksome to her ; her brother had
become an actor, and she yearned after a similar career.
Strange that tlie path in life she so thirsted after was not
that in which she was destined to excel. Genius was there,
only mistaken; it was the intensity of life that longed
passionately for an outlet, and could not understand itself
nor its destiny, until " she had seen the world." Failing
all encouragement, then, from without, she took the duty
of guardian upon herself, and ushered herself into public
life. She thus records this resolute step: "On the 11th of
April 1772, early in the morning, with much fear and
difficulty, I left my mother's house unknown to any one,
came to London in the Norwich Fly, and got lodgings at
the Eose and Crown, in St John's Street."
She was just eighteen, very tall and slender, with auburn
hair and lovely hazel eyes. The mother of the enthusiastic
girl was consoled, as is usual under such circumstances, by
a letter left on the dressing-table of the fugitive. It began
thus : " By the time you receive this I shall have left
Standingfield, and perhaps for ever;" and concluded with
the hope that in time she might regain her mother's regard.
On her arrival in London, she found that tlie friends in
whose house she had hoped to be received had gone to
Wales. Going from one lodging to another, she finally
settled at the White Swan, on Holborn Bridge, where she
lived for ten days, pretending to dine out, and living on
penny rolls and water. At last she went to the house of
one of her sisters, and negotiated with a Mr Dodd, the
manager of a theatre, for an engagement. As Mr Dodd
seemed too acutely sensitive to the charms of her beauty,
she put an obstacle to his admiration in the shape of a basin
of hot water thrown in his face. This sounds startling; but
it must be remembered that Elizabeth had to act the part
of guardian to herself.    On a former visit to London, slie
o
168 Tlie Ladles Edinburgli Magazine.
had met with Mr Inchbald, a second-rate actor, and a
dabbler in painting, wlio had ah-eady made her an offer of
marriage. But this Kihneny of dramatic visions had other
aims than those of ordinary young ladies, and had addressed
her lover in some such terms as these : " You see, Mr Incli-
bald, I liave complied witli your request by answering your
letter immediately. In spite of your eloquent pen, matri¬
mony still appears to me with less charms than terrors;
the bliss arising from it, I doubt not, is superior to any
other, but l)est not to be ventured for (in my opinion) till
some little time have proved the emptiness of all other,
which it seldom fails to do." Having now, by her indiscreet
flight, proved the emptiness of one kind of bliss, she agreed
to bestow her hand on Mr Inclibald, and was married to him
within two months of her flight, 9th June 1772. In the
September following slie made her first appearance as
Cordelia. After this, she and her husband accepted an
engagement in Edinburgli, during which they were accus¬
tomed to walk together on the hills and by the sea-side,
reciting aloud, and thus learning their parts. Tliey also
indulged in non-professional reading on these occasions,—a
practice recommended by Garrick, the actor, to Henderson.
A dispute with the Edinburgli audience, however, put an
end to their residence in that city, and they went to Paris,
where Mr Inchbald hoped to achieve success as an artist.
This delusive hope, however, was soon ended, and they re¬
turned to Brighton, so poor that, instead of dining, they more
than once went into the fields to eat turnips.
Mrs Inchbald's married life was of short duration. Her
husband died very suddenly at Leeds in 1776; and we
find in her note-book for that year: " Began this year a
happy wife—finished it a wretched widow." In 1780, she
made an engagement with the Covent Garden Company,
which lasted for eight years, after which she retired alto¬
gether I'rom the stage. During the period of this engage¬
ment at Covent Garden, she produced a number of plays,
most of which were successful. On her retirement from
the stage she lived in lodgings, chosen because they
were " cheap and silent," spending little on herself, that
she might have the more to bestow on her sisters, and
suffering many hardships, to which a more self-indulgent
nature would not have submitted. Of one of these charming
abodes she thus writes: "^ly present apartment is so small
that I am all over black and blue with thumping my body and
limbs ao'ainst mv furniture on everv side ; but then I have not
Our Fannie Novelists. 169
far to loallc to reach anything I want, for I can kindle my fire
as I lie in bed, and put on my cap as 1 dine, for the looking-
glass is obliged to stand on the same table with my dinner."
About tlie year 1810, she retired from the world, and her
remaining years w-ere, as she calls them, years of repentance.
She died at Kensington House, a more comfortable dwelling,
in 1821, and was buried in Kensington Churcliyard.
As an actress, Mrs Inchbald shone but faintly; as a play-
writer, she was more brilliant; but it was as a novelist that
she achieved her greatest success. Her two novels, A
Simph Utory, and Nature and Art, were published re¬
spectively in 1791 and 1796. The story of the former is
briefly as follows:—Dorriforth is a Iioniish priest of lofty
mind and keen sensibilities. He is a stern moralist, and
unmerciful to the failings of others. He succeeds to a
peerage, and becomes guardian to a Protestant young lady,
Miss Milner, who is fVjnd of pleasure, and in every respect a
contrast to himself. Yet the two have a strange fascination
for each other. Dorrilbrth, to escape from his absorbing
passion, decides on a foreign tour. At the last moment lie
is unable to tear himself away from his beloved Miss Milner,
and liis tutor Sandford, a Jesuit, steps between them, saying,
" Separate this moment, or resolve to be separated only by
death." He then " steps to a book-case, takes down the
Ojfic-es of the Church, opens the marriage ceremonies, and
they are on their knees before him." With rapture the
bride sees the empty carriage drive away which was to have
borne her lover for ever from her sight. But a tragic chord
is at once struck. She sees the ring which has been placed
on her finger to be a mourning ring. We now pass over
seventeen years ; and, oh ! luckless and unnatural change !
Dorriforth has become a heartless tyrant, and the fair Miss
Milner is no longer beautiful! alas ! no longer beloved ! In
passing over this long interval, the authoress has evidently
taken as a precedent the Winter's Tale, in which she had
herself acted the part of Hermione. Duels, heartrending
scenes, the death-bed of the heroine, and the marriage of
her daughter, form the chief substance of tlie remainder of
her narrative.
In this work the predominance of dialogue is very notice¬
able. The author scarcely addresses the reader in person at
all,—a fact mainly attributable to Mrs Inclibald's familiarity
with the stage. This was also the style of Eichardson. The
Simple Story made its way to every heart, and the author
Avas declared to be " one of the greatest ornaments of her
I/O The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
sex." While the printing was going on, she frequently sat
up correcting the press till three o'clock on cold January
mornings; and during the production of a second edition,
she passed nearly all her time at the printer's,—so slow was
such machinery in those days. The father of Maria Edge-
worth wrote in enthusiastic terms to her about The Simple
Story. He says: " TJie Simple Story, two-thirds of it at
least, is superior, in truth of delineation and strength of
character, to Maria's, or to anv other writing. Dorriforth
is a perfectly new character upon paper, and very few
such minds and bodies (for I have always embodied him)
are to be met with in any country." Miss Edgeworth
herself thus writes to Mrs Inchbald: " I have just been
reading—I believe for the fourth time—The Simple Story.
Its effect upon my feelings was as powerful as at the first
reading. I never read any novel that affected me so strongly,
or that so completely possessed me with the belief in the
real existence of all the people it represents." The writer
of this epistle then concludes, that it is by leaving more to
the imagination than most authors do that our novelist
succeeds in so powerfully affecting the feelings.
Mrs Inchbald's style is clear and vigorous, and her expres¬
sions have a certain charm which speaks of a thoroughly
transparent nature, and reveals to us that she is writing from
the life, and from her own heart. Humour there is occasion¬
ally, tliough it generally takes an epigrammatic turn. The
story of Nature and Art, though painful from its too literal
dealing with crime, is interesting, from the many touches
which recall Mrs Inchbald's own experience, and express her
sentiments on religion and other topics. Thus she was doubt¬
less remembering her own flight from her early home when
she penned the following, as the experience of two boys
setting out as adventurers in life :—" They pursued their jour¬
ney till they arrived at that metropolis which has received for
centuries past, from the provincial towns, the bold adventurer
of every denomination; has stamped his character with ex¬
perience and example; and, while it has bestowed on some
coronets and mitres—on some the lasting fame of genius—
to others has dealt beggary, infamy, and untimely death."
To show her disregard of outward marks of distinction,
expressed in a humorous way, we may quote the following
dialogue between a nephew of twelve, just arrived from
Zocotora Island, where all his life had been spent, and his
uncle, a deau of the Church of England; the question is
Our Female Novelists. 171
apropos  of   the  uncle's  wig:   " Why  do  you wear  such
things?"
" As a distinction between us and inferior people; they
are worn to give an importance to the wearer."
" That," says the ingenuous youth, " is just as the savages
do; they stick brass nails, wire, buttons, and entrails of
beasts all over them, to give them importance."
We can easily credit with this a waiter whose dress is
described by a decided admirer, as being " always becoming;
and very seldom worth so much as eight-pence!'
To give some idea of the earnestness of her religious
feeling, we quote the following. The same boy has for the
first time been taught to pray, and his rapturous devotion
in addressing a Being whose existence has but now been
revealed to him, gives rise to the following soliloquy on the
part of his uncle :—
"This is the true education on which to found the
principles of religion,—the favour conferred by Heaven
in granting the freedom of petitions to its throne, can never
be conceived with proper force, but by those whose most
tedious moments during their infancy were not passed in
prayer. Unthinking governors of childhood! to insult the
Deity with a form of worship, in which the mind has no
shave; nay, worse, has repugnance ; and by the thoughtless
habits of youth, prevent even in age—devotion."
So writes the authoress who sought the advice of father
Jerningham concerning her doubts of revealed religion,
who, in a letter to another clergyman, ably defended tlie
stage against the condemnation of it by the pulpit, and to
whom an Edinburgh minister wrote, in reply to an appeal
from her, an expression of his opinion, that not only was it
" possible for an actress to be a virtuous woman, but that a
well-regulated theatre might become, if not al)Solutely a
school of virtue, at least a source of rational entertainment,
and a harmless pastime for all."
Nature and Art, thougli not so widely popular as her
other novel, passed through two editions in a very short
time. Mr Edgeworth writes in raptures about it, and
mentions a friend of his as liaving the whole story indelibly
impressed on his mind. The contrast between the characters
of the two brothers, tlie one all nature, the other all art, is
inimitably brought out; the sallies of humour and truthful
touches of character are from the hand of a true artist.
Mrs Inchbald does not excel in descriptions of nature, for
a very good reason; she rarely looked at the originals of these.
1/2 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
A garret in London, with a view of the windings of the
Thames, the masts of ships, mingled with the domes and
roofs of houses,—tliis was her earthly paradise. She had
her wish, to see the world, and she remained in this, the
scene of busiest action, all her days, even after she liad
virtually retired into seclusion. The manners portrayed
in her novels form a striking contrast to those chosen by
novelists now-a-days; and we cannot but regret that so
exquisite a genius as her's should have condescended to
such minute delineations of vice. "We cannot but picture
to ourselves what excellent works, full of fresh simplicity,
she would liave produced in the nineteenth century. No
amount of cultivation would ever have imparted to her muse
the slightest shade of pedantry; while the infinite varieties
of human character, produced by the intense and varied
activities of tlie age, would have presented her with loftier
and more congenial themes than those her own age afforded.
As it is, her various excellences as a writer ought to be
sufficient to keep her memory from being lost in oblivion.
As a companion and friend, she possessed the rarest
powei's of attraction. Her society was sought by men
and women of all ranks. The artist, the author, the
noble, flocked to her door, and were received in her humble
lodging. Conventionalities were of light importance in her
eyes, and possibly at tliat day tliey were less exacting than
they now are. She never condescended to be ashamed of her
family and relations, but persevered in her rigid economy to
tlie last, in order tliat she might help her sisters. To one of
these she gave £100 a-year, much more than she allowed her¬
self. She retained her beauty longer than is usually the case,
and even after her fiftieth year the heart of a very young
man paid the warmest homage to her charms. Her Imnd
was frequently sought during her widowhood, but she eitlier
liad not, or resisted, any decided preference. Among her
friends was the celebrated Mrs Siddons, in whose welfare
she took, throughout life, the deepest interest. Kemble also
was a frequent visitor; she corresponded with, and after¬
wards made the acquaintance of, the Edgeworths, father
and daughter. Godwin, Madame de Staiil, Talma the actor,
Lawrence the painter, all sought her society. We read of
her visiting the Marquis of Abercorn at Stanmore, where
slie met Lord and Lady George Seymour, Mrs Kemble, and
her musical niece Miss Sharp. The party amused them¬
selves after dinner by talking on religion and politics, and
after supper   tliey played  at crcunho.     She  passed Good
" IV/mtis a Word?" 173
Friday in this elegant retirement, but by seven o'clock the
next morning was on her way home to recommence her
labours. She took a deep interest in politics, and frequently
revolved in her own mind the destinies, not only of Britain,
but of all Europe. The fall of Napoleon was bitter to her,
and she could not bring hei'self into sympathy with the
military triumph in Hyde Park, which took place on that
occasion.
When we reflect on vanished greatness, there are not a
few, distinguislied greatly in their day as statesmen, soldiers,
authors, or artists, whose names we can hear almost without
emotion. But when we are told of a being full of truth,
simplicity, and feeling, whose life was marked throughout
by charity and benevolence, whose society was sought by
men and women of all ranks, and who was so exquisitely
charming and lovely, that she needs must break many hearts
because she could bless but one—then we cannot but stop
short, and shed a tear, as if we had lost a dear friend; and
at the moment when our heart beats quicker at the thought
of her wide and intensely human character, a feeling of
dismay steals over us while we remember that she has passed
away. The high-souled, the true, the generous Mrs Inch-
bald ; noble she was on earth, so she is peaceful now.
Jane Menzies.
Note.—It had laeen intended tliat Mrs IncliLald and Mrs Charlotte
Smith, who formed the subject of a paper last month, should have
heen noticed together, but on consideration it was found by the writer
that their claims could not be done justice to in one article.—Ed.
-^?i—K<»—>>>^-
"WHAT IS A WORD?"
What is a word ? a moment's breath
Cast forth u])on the winds of heaven,
More fleeting than the fragile wreath
By Autumn's fading flowerets given.
A mingling drop in life's dark ocean,
A bubble on the rushing stream ;
A moment's flash of some emotion
Felt and forgotten like a dream.
Yet oh! beware; the sword's bright steel
Is not more sharj) and not more keen,
Than oft, to hearts that quickly feel,
That " little thing "—a word—has been.
The careless hand that strikes the chord
With one fell sweep the strings may sever,
And love and peace by one light word
Be crushed and shattered down for ever.
Annibal.
No. 30,-JrKi- 1ST7. Z
1/4 J^^'^ Ladies Ediubiirgh Magazine.
Few of us but have breathed freer, and walked gladlier, in
the pure air of the Western Highlands and Islands, feeling
thankful that, even in this utilitarian age, such ozone has
been left unpoisoned for the thirstj^ lungs of the weary and
the weak, and such scenery left untrinnned for the painter
and the poet, and the far larger class that delightedly
receives nature's impressions without a thought of re-
expressing them. AVhat pleasant fellow-travellers we meet
there! Or is it only that they have grown pleasanter than
their wont, as we feel that we ourselves have done, away
from the wear and tear of common e\ery-day life ? All
nature seems
" Apparelled in celestial \iyi\\t,
The glory and the freshness of a dream."
And we feel as if we had somehow or other got back into the
youth of the world. Yet how is it that, across this mere sensu¬
ous enjoyment, there floats so oft a haze of doubt and ques¬
tioning that sometimes gathers to a mist, hiding the very beau¬
ties lying round ? And such a little thing may suggest it.
A lonely hut, a little child, the very solitude itself. Is it
only because the soil is poor and sterile that so many dis¬
tricts in Scotland are left desolate ? Yet we know from
chance allusions in old records, that dense forests once
covered many a stretch now unbroken by a tree; but that
was in days too remote to leave a trace to us. Many a
valley that is now utterly desolate was, in comparatively
modern times, thriving and well-peopled. Since the time
when the stern Glencoe first cowered under its shadow of
haunting tragedy, many another glen has passed voicelessly
into like desolation. This is touchingly witnessed to by
many a furrow yet to be traced on lonely sunny banks; by
many a pile of mossy stones where once stood cottage
walls beside the uubridged stream that flows by with its
song of—
" Man may come, and man may go,
But I go on for ever."
Is it an effect of that worship of wild animals that seems so
peculiar to our country ? For many an owner here leaves
leagues to the red deer and the grouse, and grudges a rood
to an eager tenant, lest he may interfere with the most
cherished " shooting," regardless that thereby strong willing
A uiong the Western Islands. 17 5
hands and brave hearts are often sent sadly to a new world,
where, though they rear themselves a new home, they look
back yearningly eastward for
" The path across the sea,"
that should bear
" The weary hame to their ain countrie."
We cannot now discuss this question, nor its relative effects
of emigration and centralisation, we wish to speak only of
one consequence of things as they are. The inhabitants of
these lonely spots are very poor—poorer than they need be,
one would think; and yet that the fault hardly lies in them¬
selves, is shown by the way in which they succeed, when¬
ever they are transplanted into more favourable circum¬
stances. What the old Celtic triad says of genius may be
said more truly of success—it is, "the gift of God, the
exertion of man, and events to suit." We all know how
God's gifts and man's labour may he paralysed by untoward
circumstances; and we see that whatever may be the for¬
tunes of centripetal individuals, those left stranded on this
outer rim of things are sadly at the mercy of "events."
There cannot but enter into hearts that have any power of
sympathy with others, the desire to find if there be no way
to induce these " events to suit."
I well remember my first visit to Skye, and my dreams of
its general improvement. My hrst thought was, how pleasant
it would be to build strong healthy cottages to replace the
huts that can hardly be said to cover so many of the people !
But houses could not of themselves support their inmates;
and how could these inmates be helped better to support
themselves ? JNIeditations arose as to whether lessons from
Lothian farming, aided by all the new discoveries of science
and art, could not somewhat change the face of things.
These were much discouraged by a conversation overheard
at the table d'hote, regarding " a farmer who had tried to
farm in Mull upon tlie new systems, and had lost largely by
it every year, until he had to give it up." Had he not
enough money, or not enougli wisdom, patience, and determi¬
nation to carry out his schemes, or were circumstances really
set too strongly against him ? Perhaps he wanted to make
money too quickly, not working to increase the value of the
laud, and provide his dependents with honest labour mean¬
while. But surely drainage would of itself do much for the
island ; surely some products thrive on peaty land well-
drained ; and surely even some are content to grow on damp
176 The Ladies Ediiibiirgh Magazine.
soil ? Even without the cost of drainage and farming, could
there be no more of that economy of little things, which
often takes the place of making money, by rendering it un¬
necessary. One sees so much more of it upon the Continent
than in the poorer ranks of our own country; but then,
abroad, the peasants often possess, or at least mary possess,
the soil on which their cottage is built. And whatever may
be the issue of the dispute, as to whether large farms or
peasant proprietors can bring the most out of the soil, cer¬
tain it is that there is great food for reflection in the
phrase of one well-known political economist, " Give a man
the title-deeds of a barren rock, and in ten years it will be
a smiling garden." Could they not even plant trees in the
hollow of every streamlet, as they do in the immediate
neighbourhood of Portree ? Trees grow while men are
sleeping, and yet remain a product as of labour. Can no¬
thing be done with the cotton-grass that grows so luxuri¬
antly on hills and marshes in the north and west of Scot¬
land ? Several years ago, I tried to find out if no use could
be made of it, but everybody said, " If there was any good
in it, somebody would have found it out before now." I
thought this answer neither argument nor proof. I wonder
if some wise person cannot find it out yet ? It is sometimes
used to stuff pillows by thrifty housewives who live near its
habitat, but not nearly to such an extent as one would
expect, from the poverty of the country and the abundance
of the article in question. White and soft, it is a favourite
simile of Ossian and other bards, when tliey are describing
lovely maids " white as the Cana." Could not its tufts be
sewed together for a soft fur, something after the manner
of " swandown ?" Or could its delicate soft fibres not be
woven into cloth or Lice of some kind ? Supposing tliey
are brittle, still " union is strength;" and perhaps a kind
of cotton felting, or a very fine white paper, could be made
somehow from these indigenous cotton plants of ours.
The thriving manufactory of the famous " Skye Tweed,"
just behind tlie town, is encouraging, and one cannot but
wish that its good might be extended, or even rivalled by a
sister manufacture. I once heard two gentlemen, travelling
in a railway carriage in Lancashire, discussing subjects of
local interest The one had been railing at the weather,
when the otlier startled him by boldly upholding the opinion,
" that it is to its moist climate that Lancashire greatly owes
its prosperity, because on it depends the success of the
eotton manufacture.    There is a twist in eotton that requires
Among the Western Islands. lyj
damp treatment in weaving, and even when this is artificially
introduced, at a considerable cost, it is not so efficient. A
dry east wind, even in Lancashire, necessitates this rectifica¬
tion of the atmosphere. In Manchester, they can spin
cotton a hundred degrees finer than in the eastern counties,
and so," he said, rising into enthusiasm, " this barren stretch
of land, so valueless in itself for purposes of cultivation, can
command the produce of all other soils, because, along with
its coal, its moist atmosphere has enabled it to become the
richest county in England, and to take the lead in the
cotton-spinning of the world." Is it possible that, to some
small extent, this manufacture might be introduced into
Skye ? Can peat be used as fuel for machinery ? Could
its damp climate even be thus economized ? Yet we our¬
selves did not find it too damp. We were there about a fort¬
night, and had only one rainy day, one wet morning, and
one or two sharp showers on another afternoon,—a fair
enough proportion for any place. But I believe, on the
whole, that the climate vjould prove damp enough for making
cotton. I wonder if there is any similar twist in the fibres
of the cotton grass ? A vision of Portree restored, with
spreading streets, M-ith trim grass and shrubs, replacing the
nettles that grow by the side of the winding ascent from
tlie harbour to the town; with nice rows of workmen's
houses leading back to more than one manufactory to the
west; flourisliing farms inland ; woods waving in every
hollow, and crops on every bank; perhaps with a famous
hydropathic establishment beside the bay, was being painted
in the workshop of my mind. Alas ! my Alnaschar's dreams
required capital, and I had not even his nucleus at my
feet, or I do not think my feelings would have induced me to
shatter it just then. A friend who has capital once seri¬
ously considered Oban in the light of a speculation, thinking
tliat much might be done for it by promoting a direct trade
with America. He spent some time there making investi¬
gations, until certain difficulties of harbourage, the imper¬
fect inland connection, and the present want of sufficient
material for export, prevented him from setting on foot his
brilliant scheme. "Ah!" thought I, "if he only had done
it, all these things could have worked so well together !"
But Skye was not the only island suggesting such ideas,
but
" All that group of islets grc-y,
Which guard famed Statl'a round."
In Staffa itself, there is certainly nothing to dim the
1/8 Tlie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
majesty of nature; and we can give ourselves wholly up to
the sway of our emotions. It is indeed the Temple, and
nothing comes between us and God. But when we go on
to lona, as Wordsworth says,—
" How sad a welcome ! to each voyager
Some ragged child holds up for sale a store
Of wave-worn peljbles, pleading on the shore,
Where once came monk and nun witli gentle stir,
Blessings to give, news ask, or suit prefer."
Though the children are not now ragged, nor over im¬
portunate in tlieir pleadings, they set one a-thinking. On
the way up to the ruins, one of our companions picked up
a tolerably square block of the beautiful granite from the
opposite coast of Mull. Unwilling either to lose it, or
burden himself ^^ith it, he gnve a boy twopence to carry it
down to the boat. He meant to take it to India, and have
it polished as a clock stand. But when we returned to the
boat, which was to transport us to the Pioneer, no granite
was there. Suspicious of the boy's faith, our friend regretted
he had paid him in advance; but a merry twinkle in the
boatman's eye, as he insisted there were plenty stones as
good to be had for the picking \\\), showed us who was the
guilty one. He lifted more than one piece off the pier to
replace the loss, but our friend was whimsical, and would
have no such compensation, so he went back grumbling to
tlie steamer. This suggested an idea. Could not the
inhabitants spend their winter months in tlieir lonely
recesses, in polishing little specimens of this stone, and then
the children might have something more tempting for sale
in summer than " wave-worn" pebbles. The men at the
Lizard during winter, polisli the beautiful vases and other
ornaments from the Serpentine and Steatite, that in summer
make their pretty little stalls so dangerously attractive to
the tourists, wliile they themselves are free to act as guides
or boatmen. Could we get one man from the Lizard to
spend one winter in lona ?
After leaving the Island of Cohimba's Cell, we entered
those wonderful straits, which hungry passengers who must
dine, must miss. I sat quite alone on the deck, while the
boat glided througli an archipelago of tiny rocky islets, pink
as the lining of southern shells, rising out of that niarvel-
ously clear water tliat only rolls in from the ojDen Atlantic.
But even, while ]:>assively letting the strange colours of the
landscape print themselves upon my memory, the scene was
A}no}ig the Western Islands. 179
haunted by incongruous ideas of polishing, of labour, and of
profit. Indeed, the great masses might well suggest splendid
monoliths for pediments of monuments and shafts of pillars,
and it almost seemed as if nughty cranes appeared upon the
shore, lifting them, all shapely and sparkling, into vessels
ready to bear them over the face of the earth. In one little
creek, what seemed like signs of disintegration suggested a
still more ambitious notion, a China manufactory, with one
foreman from St Anstells, for the preparation of the stone,
and two from Worcester China Works, to teach the natives
their wisdom. If only our imagined capital, which can be
so well laid out in day-dreams, could pass cun-ent in this
work-a-day world!
But last summer I heard that there is another and more
practicable scheme for helping the poorer inhabitants of these
islands, originated by the late Dr Alexander Fletcher. Hear¬
ing so much of the widespread sufferings of the inhabitants
of Skye, he went there in 1851, and made himself personally
acquainted with the distressing circumstances of the people.
He thought that if boats could be provided for the men,
obliging them to repay the cost by instalments, it would be
much better for them, than giving them any pecuniary relief,
which must, from its very nature, be temporary. In aid of
this patriotic scheme he formed " The Society for the relief
and encouragement of Fishermen in the Highlands and
Islands of Scotland," and by every means in his power, from
the pulpit and in private life, he strove to advance it. Its
aims were "to supply poor fishermen, of good character and
industrious habits, with substantial boats—the original cost
of which, with interest on the money, to be repaid by them¬
selves in certain instalments, &c. The boats shall be con¬
sidered as belonging to the society, until the whole amount
of the instalments are fully paid up, when they shall become
the property of the party or crew. The bond is then fully
discharged, and they receive the title-deeds of their pro¬
perty." The first boat, " The Flying Fish," was at once
purchased, and the scheme set a-going. Until ]857, Dr
Fletcher confined his attention to Skye, but after that date
it was extended over all the islands. By 1859, about 100
boats had been provided, the crews of which had caught fish
to the amount of more than £2000. The boats might also
be insured ; aid was given in the improvement of cottages,
and Savings Banks were started. Not only did this give
physical aid, but it elevated and improved the moral posi¬
tion of the people.    Men, hitherto spiritless, because their
l8o Tlie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
energy had nothing to call it into play, began with the hope
of possessing a boat, to enter into a new phase of life.    Tliey
found that " Heaven helps those who help themselves ;" and
their self-dependence was a more precious gain than the
silver and gold they won from the apparently exhaustless
mine of wealth that lay in the sea around tliem.    Dr Fletcher
thus put the instruments into their hands, whereby they
might " win the bairnie's bread;" and no wonder is it that
that tender heart, so loving to children, has been specially
called " The Children's Friend."    Most noble and steadfast
help did he receive in his work from Mr Cook, the leader of
so many excursion parties to these districts, and through
him many were interested in the movement in all quarters
of  the land.     The list of the original society contains a
goodly  number  of names, many of them very valuable.
Each member paid 2s. 6d. annually at least, and a subscrip¬
tion of two guineas made him a member for life.    Clergymen
preaching in aid of the society were also made members.
Many of the names of the boats were suggestive—" The
Alexander Fletcher,"   " The Thomas Cook," " The City of
Edinburgh,"    "The   City  of Glasgow,"    "The   Children's
Friend," " The City of Exeter," " Tenax Exon."    The secre¬
tary and treasurer for Exeter, Mr Clapp, took an especial
interest in the scheme, and when, after the death of Dr
Fletcher, and the treasurer and secretary for Edinburgli, the
society died a natural, or unnatural death, he resuscitated it
on the 1st IMay 1865, under the name of " The lona Provi¬
dent Society.''    At present, I believe, the society consists
practically only of Mr Frederick Clapp, Mr Thomas Cook,
and the minister of lona.     Mr Clapp has been indefati¬
gable.    When the original " Tenax Exon " was wrecked, he
sent out circixlars among his friends, and procured sub¬
scriptions to restore it, providing also  " The Star of the
West " and " The Devonia."    Other boats are in prospect.
The cost has always greatly exceeded the receipts, and this
energetic treasurer has hitherto made up the deficit from
his own purse ; interesting himself not only in providing
boats, but also in improving the cottages, in  establishing
Penny Savings Banks, in forming a Library, and in aiding
a Mutual Improvement Society and Reading Room.     Mr
Frederick Clapp occasionally  brightens the  gloom of the
winter months by soirees and Christmas gifts, and sets of
" Isca prizes " for the best and most efficient scholars in
the day and Sunday schools.    He is anxious to provide a
profitable employment for the rainy season,  and  on  my
Among the Western Islands. i8i
suggesting the polishing of the granite, he sent some speci¬
mens to be polished and tested. The answer was that " it
took a good polish, but was too hard to be worked pro¬
fitably by hand, and steam-polishing would require consider¬
able outlay." So it seems as if even the most modest tower
of my granite " Chateau en Espagne " is at present imprac¬
ticable ; but other suggestions may be made by other people,
when the want becomes more generally known. In The
Hiijhlander for March 3d, we see that in the stormy
weather of the opening year, " one wild gust swept down
upon three boats, which were drawn up above high-water
mark on tlie shore of lona, raised them into the air, and
carried them bodily out to sea. What renders this the more
remarkable is the fact, that the boats were tied together, and
that two of them had in tliem a considerable quantity of
stones. The place where they were drawn up was a sheltered
hollow, apparently safe from danger. Fragments of two of
them were cast up a day or two after, on the shore, but of the
third no trace has been seen." So there are these three boats
to restore, as well as the other boats that Mr F. Clapp had
set his heart on providing; and surely there are some people
in Scotland able and willing to help our Southern friend
in his noble attempts to benefit our own coasts. We cannot
close better than by quoting one of the little poems written
by John Harris, the Cornish Miner Poet, in aid of the move¬
ment, and in encouragement of his friend.
THE DEVONIA.
" In the island of lona, ' Send a boat, Ah ! Tenax Exon,
Rife with legend-lore and lay. Send a boat, ye friends afar,
Dwelleth many an honest fisher, That I may pursue my calling
Sadly tried from day to day : Under sun, and moon, and star.
Sighing when the dusk increaseth. Then my little ones shall bless
Sighing when the skies are clear— As the curfew fills the glen,
' Sport the bright fish in the waters. Mingled with their sire's petition.
But I have no boat to steer.' When are hushed the sounds of men."
•Came the winds o'er heights romantic, Tenax heard, when day was waning.
Fierce and cruel from their caves. Heard as if an angel spoke;
And the skiff my father left me. Entered he upon his mission,
bank amidst the trembling waves. Laying on his Master's yoke.
Scarcely I escaped by swimming, And he prays his friends to rally
Dashed upon the boulders dread ; Round the hand outstretched to save.
How we talked, when tears were streaming.   Aiding him to launch ' Devonia/
When the evening meal was spread !' On Hebrides' lonely wave."
Note.—Small contributions of money, or books for the library, will
be gladly received by the minister of lona ; by Mr Fred. Clapp,
44 Magdalen Street, Exeter ; and by Messrs Thomas Cook & Son,
Ludgate Circus, London.
Charlotte Cakmichael.
Xo. 31).    JiNF, 1.S77, 2 k
l82 The Ladies Edinbnrgli Magazine.
(5EbcIraivtc;
OB,
FIVE AND TWENTY YEARS AGO AT THE ACHEN SEE.
Chapter III.
When Marie arrived, she found the inhabitants of the
inn in a state of too much excitement to take any heed
of her.
Hostess Agatha was standing in the front guest-room,
with her back to the stove, her lips set, and one hand
tapping the back of the other, in a way that betokened she
was annoyed and angry. Jorgle leaned on the window-
sil, looking vexed and humbled. Lena was as disturbed
as it was possible in her nature to be. On a chair in the
middle of the room sat an ecclesiastic, whose dress be¬
tokened that he was a professed member of the Jesuits.
He, Father Mathew by name, had been sent on a mission to
the districts bordering on Bavaria, and to the community of
Achen-hirch in particular, to stir up the flagging zeal of the
people: who, partly from their situation on the high road
of traffic from the northern countries, partly, it was more
than suspected, from the laxity of their parish priest, Herr
Pfarrer Horst, had, it was judged by the higher clergy, laid
themselves open to evil influences; and needed a little
extra care, from one of the ranks of the Jesuit order.
As Marie entered, she caught Father Mathew's words—
" So long as heretics and schismatics, are nursed and re¬
tained in your midst; allowed to poison the minds of the
young of both sexes; and to talk of iinholy union in marriage
with the daughters of our Holy Church ; is it any wonder
that I need to bear testimony of evil doings among you, and
before the community at large ? Be warned in time,
daughter," he said, turning to Agatha; " your zeal has
hitherto never flagged; of your substance have you contri¬
buted largely, and heartily;—continue to do so, and the
Church will account it as a balance to this want of circum¬
spection in harbouring a schismatic, and an alien ; but I say
once more, Beware !" Then rising to his full height, he cast
a piercing look on Jorgle. " To you, young man, let dis¬
appointment teach humility; and remember, he who listens
to a single word breathed against the Cliurch, is already
accounted her enemy, and one guilty of deadly sin."
Edelraute. 183
There was deep silence when he ceased speaking; as he
turned to go,Father Mathew's eyes fell on Marie, who shrank
back; but he signed to her to follow him, and she obeyed.
AVhat passed between them we must leave untold. Agatha,
Lena, and JiJrgie, were still talking earnestly when she
returned, her eyes swollen with weeping, and sobbing
convulsively.
" I have not promised to marry Herr Wilhelm," she said,
in broken, passionate sentences; " whatever Father Matliew
may say, and believe ; I have left him now, because I do not
wish to be disobedient, and bring down the curse he has
threatened me with. I will never see him again; though
my heart break."
Lena leaned over the distressed girl, whose head sank on
the table, and tried to comfort her.
" Where is Herr Wilhelm ? " asked Agatha suddenly.
jVIarie started up : " Go Jorgle. I forgot; I left him on
tlie Aljjenrosen Hohc; and promised you should fetch him ;
go ! it is getting dark." When he had departed, Marie turned
to Agatha. " Hide me somewhere tUl he goes to-morrow :
I will not see him again: he will seek me at my mother's
cottage. He is good, so good, dear Wirthin; it is hard
not to dare to love him." Agatha took the hand of the
bewildered girl, while tears stood in her own eyes, and led
her to the sanctuary of her bedroom. There she soothed
and comforted her, till she grew calmer. " Jorgle has lost
the wardenship !" she said, with a last sob; " and all
through me."
" He has," said Agatha getting up, pacing the room, and
tapping her hands again: " through Father Mathew you
ought to say. The Herr Pfarrer told me yesterday he was
sure of his getting it." She appeared more disturbed than
Marie had ever seen her. At length she reseated herself on
the bed beside Marie. " You are a good, brave maiden,
Marie ; I respect you more than I can tell; God will help
you my girl, and give you strength for this great sacrifice,
gone through for His sake."
" His mother was wUling to receive me," said Marie,
scarcely above a whisper.
" But you would not be happy among enemies to your
faith," said the hostess; " it would be a daily cross, and
perhaps end in perdition at last. There is little happiness
where man and wife are not one in heart with God and
Christ. I like Herr Wilhelm ; and do not marvel that your
fancy turns towards him.    He is a likely youth, that any
184 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
maiden might love; but you have done right. I say again,
you are better and braver than I could be in your place,
Marie."
There was a noise of hurried footsteps on the landing.
Lena opened the door with a frightened face, and Jorgle
peered over her shoulder. He was pale as death. Without
a word, he placed a letter scribbled in pencil, and a bundle
of bank notes, in Agatha's hands.
" Did you not find him ?" asked Marie, starting up, " oh !
Jorgle! where is he ?" Jorgle did not speak; the hostess
read aloud; " Farewell dear Wirthin—Lena—Marie. Fare¬
well true Jorgle. Thanks for all your kindness to your
unhappy Wilheim Stein."
Agatha looked at Jorgle; her eyes put a fearful question.
He shook his head sadly, and turned away ; a tear seemed
wrung out by that silent interrogatory; he brushed it
fiercely off his cheek. Marie grew white, and sank sense¬
less on the bed. AVhile Lena tended her, Jorgle said in a
low voice to Agatha, " I found the packet close beside the
water. If he did not do that, he must have climbed the path
by the ravine, where the grass is so slippery; he could not
have kept foothold for a moment. T shall search to-morrow;
either way there is little hope. If the other thing hap¬
pened," he said, avoiding the dreadful word, " we shall know
when the body floats."
The next fortnight was one of terrible anxiety to the
household at the inn. Jorgle found no other trace of the
young painter, on the path, or in the ravine; and no body
floated to the surface. There was general re^et in the
community; for young Stein's frank good-nature had
endeared him to many. Agatha did not know his parents'
address in Berlin, and no one thought of applying to the police
there. Gradually the weatlier broke; winter set in early,
and wrapped the mountains, the valley, and the mystery, in
its soft mantle of unbroken snow. The lake alone looked
black, and threatening; only on a chance day, could the sun,
and a cloudless sky, win it to give back a faint reflection of
more cheerful colouring, for a few short hours, and then it
was green, not blue. IMany an anxious eye surveyed its
dreaiy waste, the leaden skies, and then cast a sorrowful
glance on Marie. She went about like one in a dream. The
pride of the AcJien-thal was fading; and Father Mathew
found few sympathisers, when he expatiated on the way in
which speedy judgment always follows on transgression.
Edelratite. 185
Chapter IV.
The spring of 1848 was a stirring one throughout Europe.
Minds, men, and kingdoms, were all equally moved;
Austria as deeply as any. The echo of the uproar penetrated
even to the Tyi-ol, usually little disturbed either in its
loyalty, or its religious faith. The busy burghers of Inns¬
bruck, had dared the previous autumn to talk of making
a railway over the Brenner, through the very heart of the
mountain fastnesses. The clergy deprecated all this change
and unsettlement in unmeasured terms; while some of the
more conservative peasants thought with them, many boldly
spoke out words, such as freedom of the press, constitutional
government, and national guards, which had never before
appeared in the vocabulary of tlie Tyrol. From the six¬
teenth century—when almost every man who had attempted
to adopt the new opinions set afloat by Luther, and every
German Bible liad been hunted out of the Tyrol, uirtil the
unfortunate persecution of those Protestants who still
remained in the Zilkr-thul, which resulted in the exodus
to Silesia, before alluded to—not a single effort had been
made to undermine the Catholicity of this faithful child of
the Church. The devotion of the Tyrolese was sincere.
Their loyalty to the House of Hapsburg, resulted quite as
much from the position its members held, as the staunchest
defenders of orthodoxy among the distracted Protestant king¬
doms of northern Germany, as from personal attachment.
They would have sung now, as they did in the days of
Hofer :—
" In unsern Bergern wachst ein Bauiu,
Heisst Treu ; t'iir Gott tind Kaiser;
Dii Ijricht Tyrol zum Ehrenkraiiz,
Die immer griineu Reiser." '
They were just the race amongst whom religious fanaticism,
once rooted, would spread and prosper; like Presbyterianism
among the Scotch, or loyalty to the Stuarts in the High¬
lands. The wary Jesuit fathers early found congenial soil
among them. They steadily discountenanced all attempts
on the part of the Empress Maria Theresa, and of her son
Joseph the second, to introduce the shadow of religious
toleration.    One innovation, in the shape of a decrease in
1 " Upon our mountains grows a tree,
Called truth, for God and emperor ;
The Tyrol breaks its twigs, and weaves
A wreath of fame, as conqueror."
186 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
the term of military service, they did not oppose. The
Imperial Jager never retiii'iied to the spiritual flock as
innocent and inexperienced as he was when lie reluctantly
quitted his native valleys for service in the capital. The
schools both of medicine and law, as well as those of
general instruction, were under the control of the Jesuits; they
were looked on both with fear and jealousy, by the secular
clergy. Tor years Braudeis, the governor, had supported
their power right loyally; a disagreeable, free-spoken tourist,
or a bold newspaper writer, touching on forbidden topics,
was soon shown the way over the frontier, by means of a
secret intimation to Brandeis, from the affronted hierarchy.
It was early in March that Jorgle came to his mother's
cottage to say he was called away on business to Bavaria,
and should not be home, perhaps, for some days. Marie
raised her head, listlessly, as he entered ; she was spinning
the usual winters' task of linen and coarse woollen cloth,
but there seemed to be no joy in her work. The sound of
her rich voice, once the boast of the district, was hushed.
Marie had felt no heart for her mountain songs since that
fatal night.
" Is it business on Agatha's account ?" asked Ursel
Zingerle.
" Not exactly; but she knows I'm going," returned Jorgle
evasively. He looked anxiously at Marie, and then sat
down beside her. " Cheer up, schivesterchen, there's not time
in this life to waste its best years in useless regret. Keep heart,
Mdrichen. Have faith in God, and in better luck coming.
There are as good fish in the sea as ever came out of it."
Marie looked at him, but the expression of lier now im¬
mense blue eyes was so sorrowfid, that Jorgle rose hurriedly,
and with a few hasty words of parting to both, left the cottage
murmuring, " Poor little heart! poor thing ! It grieves my
soul to see her !"
Ever since the father's death, life had been a struggle
with the widow and daughter; but for Agatha's kindness
in various ways, the boats would have ceased to keep
them, as they did under the management of Ziugerle
himself. Many people wondered that Jorgle did not
take up the business; but accustomed from boyhood to be
all day long at the little inn, where he had begun life under
the auspices of Agatha's aunt, he had rendered himself indis¬
pensable ; and remained when she died, and the hostel, as
well as other goodly possessions in land and money, passed
to her adopted daughter, the grandchild of a brother, who
A Drive to Portobello. 187
had fallen under Spechbacher, in the brave fight in the
Inn-thai, against' the united forces of Bavaria and France,
in 1809. A large portion of her grandfather's noble qualities
had descended to Agatha. Her open-hearted charity
endeared her to her neighbours; while her liberality, and
devotion to the interests of the Church, secured her a high
degree of respect, commendation, and indefatigable attention,
from the clergy. There was no one superior to her in the
estimation of Father Mathew; who, until the affair of
Wilhelm Stein, had deservedly held her up as a pattern of
Catholic excellence. But although as courteous, humble, and
obedient to the new authority, under praise as under anim¬
adversion, her parish priest, Herr Pfarrer Horst, stood
paramount in Agatha's estimation and confidence. The late
breach with the Jesuit father had confirmed the preference.
It was his kindly face that greeted Jorgle, as the latter
passed out of the village, preferring, he said, to let the poste
overtake him, rather than wait for it.
" Good morning, young man," Pfarrer Horst said, as Jorgle
pulled off his hat, and looked straight into the face of the
worthy ecclesiastic, with bared head. " Whither away so
early in the year ? "
At that question, Jorgle ceased to look so honestly at him.
" Take care, my son," he continued ; " you are too good to
serve as a tool for bad men ;—there are plenty abroad just
now, who think they are screaming about justice for all, when
they are only on the hunt for some advantage to themselves.
Be wise, Jorgle, and think well before you are led to act."
The young Tyrolean twirled his hat, and plucked at the
wild cock's plume at the side of it. Those calm words had
more effect than all the diatribes of Father Mathew. A strong
fight seemed going on in him, as he watched the retreating
form of the good priest; but he remembered something,
apparently, and murmured, " I must go, for her sake it must
be ;" and strode on towards the confines of Bavaria.
{To he contimied). C. Eay.
There are few persons in Edinburgh who have not occasion
at times, either for purposes of business or pleasure, to visit
the thriving little town of Portobello.
On a fine Saturday afternoon in summer, half the popula-
188 The Ladies' EdhihirgJi Magazine.
tion of Edinburgh seems to pour down to its pleasant beach,
there to let the worries of the past week be blown away by
the fresh sea breezes, and to lay in a stock of health and
strength for coming labour. There one may see fathers and
motliers strolling along the parade, with troops of little ones
digging in the sands or " paddling" in the rippling waves ;
while others are thronging the pier, enjoying the inspiriting
strains of the band. These hundreds of holiday-makers have
all reached Portobello probably by one of the three follow¬
ing means of transit:—They have come on their feet, in the
train, or in the tramway cars.
Now, there are certain drawbacks to all these means of
travelling.   If the first is adopted by a family party, the little
ones ai'e wearied and drag behind, and all ariive at the sea¬
side more or less dusty and cross.     The second mode   is
better, though the riish for the train down the steep hill from
the Waverley Bridge, the crowding round the ticket box,
and finally the arriving at the Portobello station, with the
long hot road to be traversed before  the beach can be
reached, to say nothing of losing the pretty view over the
Forth on the journey, make this mode less agreeable than
might be.    There only remains the tramway car: this at
least is free from all the stated objections; but on a road
with so steep an incline as that which connects Edinburgh
with Portobello, few people can entirely forget that the
horses are somewhat overweighted.
It was our privilege lately to visit Portobello in a more
agreeable manner than any of these, namely, in a tramway
car drawn by steam. It was with considerable interest that
we awaited the arrival of the engine in Waterloo Place.
In case any of our readers have not had the opportunity of
inspecting a steam car, we shall endeavour, though we fear
very unscientifically, to tell them something of the ap¬
pearance and management of the one by which we travelled.
The car, or rather the engine attached to it, is constructed
by Messrs Hughes & Co., Loughborough. The car itself is
exactly such as is in use on our present tramways, to which,
instead of horses, is attached a neat-looking engine, boxed in
so as to conceal the machinery, the dimensions of which
seemed to us to be about half those of an ordinary car;
therefore the whole length, from the front of the engine to
the back of the car, does not exceed that from the horses'
heads to the conductor's platform of those in general use.
In front of the engine is a seat for the driver, who is the
onlv man needed for its management.    At the back of the
A Drive to Portobello. 189
car is the usual platform for the conductor. This was all
tliat we could observe before taking our seats, but it was
on starting that the chief interest began. Smoothly and
noiselessly the start was made. Xo need in this car to avoid
tlie seats at the upper end in case of being distressed by the
sight of horses straining every muscle in order to set in
motion the heavy weigiit to which they are yoked ; all goes
easily and lightly as a sledge on the hardened snow. I'erhaps
our readers may think that if the sight of strugolinu' horses
was spared us, there \vould be in their place a snorting
engine, emitting smoke and ashes to tlie discomfort alike of
passengers and wayfarers. Not at all. The Hughes' engine
condenses its own waste steam, after it has fulfilled its pur¬
pose, by means of a tank of cold water placed above tlie
engine, and an automatic vah-e lets into the condensing
chamber exactly the quantity of water required to condense
tlie steam present, the amount of steam, of course, varying
according to the work required of the engine, from steepness
of gi-adient, weight of car, or other cause. The condensed
steam being thus re-converted into water, can either be used
for watering the road—a great luxury on a dusty day—or
retained in a tank below tlie car, and emptied when the car
reaches its terminus.
There could not be a better road for testing the power of
a steam-car, than that leading from Edinburgh to Poitobello ;
the gradients are, at some places, such as to afford proof
positive of the efficacy of its traction-power. While descend¬
ing one of the s'teepest inclines, the engine-driver was
suddenly desii-ed to halt. He immediately applied the
brake, and pulled up within a very few yards, certainly
within a shorter distance than it is possible for a driver to
pull up a car drawn by horses. Not only can this brake
power be applied at a moment's notice, but it is so arranged
that, before starting, the brake can be set at a certain point,
preventing the possibility of the engine being worked at a
greater speed than has been directed. It is easy to under¬
stand what an advantage this \\'ould prove in a crowded
thoroughfare, where, if necessary, the speed could be fixed
at five, or even at four, miles an liour, after which it would
be impossiljle for the driver to give way to the temptation
of increasing the speed, though, of course, it would always
be in his power to slacken it, should he see reason for so
doing.
We passengers were much interested in watching the
effect of our engine on the many horses that we met on the
Xu, 30.—June 1877, '•*   [J
tgo The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
road. Most of them took no notice whatever, a few cocked
their ears and examined ns intelligently; and one pair of
horses, driven by a stupid old man, who, as soon as he saw
us approaching, lashed them up most unpleasantly, did
make a little attempt at shying. Indeed, we thouglit, that
the horses understood us better than their drivers.
After a pleasant drive of about twenty mhiutes, we reached
our destination, and made a short pause while the engine
took in a little more water, after which it was shunted, and
brought round to the other end of the car for the return
journey. As it Avas backing on us in order to be coupled to
the car, we involuntarily braced ourselves for the bang and
jolt apparently so indispensable in the coupling of a railway
engine to a train, but our preparation was quite su])erfluous,
the well-bred engine of Mr Hughes quietly stopt within two
feet of the car, and permitted itself to be once more put into
harness. On our return journey, the road being somewhat
dusty, the exhaust steam was utilized in watering the ground
we passed over. The line from Portobello to Edinburgh,
involving, as it does, a considerable amount of ascent, afforded
us the opportunity of testing how the engine would do its
up-hill work. To iis there appeared to be no slackening of
speed, easily and pleasantly we ascended the gradient of,
we were told, 1 in 20, between Norton Place and the High
School, and drove briskly into Waterloo Place, leaving the
car with the comfortable sensation of having wearied neither
man nor beast in our service.
The question naturally suggests itself, when will these
steam-propelled cars be in general use in our city ? It is
difhcult to say. An Act must be obtained from Parliament
empowering Local Authorities to sanction the use of steam-
locomotives on our tramway lines. Such an Act, we believe,
it would not be hard to obtain, for Parliament seldom objects
to any reasonable plan proposed by Local Authorities.
Where, then, is the hitch; who are the obstru.ctives ? We
fear we must lay the blame of the delay at the door of
two most respectable bodies of men—at that of the County
Eoad Trustees, and that of our own City Magistrates. Let
us examine briefly the objections made by these persons,
and some others, to the substitution of steam-traction for
horse-traction. The most usual objections seem to be three
in number. It is asserted, 1st. That the engine will frighten
horses. 2d. That it will endanger life and limb. 2>d. That
there is no demand for it on the part of the public.
The first of these objections we believe to be made in ignor-
A Drive to Portohello. 191
auce of the kind of steam-engine required for the jiropulsion
of cars. People think that it will go puffing and snorting
through our streets, as is the wont of railway engines, with
tlie glow of embers disclosed to the astonished gaze of our
equine population. This we have already shown not to lie
the case. The engine is noiseless and smokeless, and any
little surprise that horses may experience at the sight of a
vehicle moving as if of itself soon wears off, as is found to
be the case in Paris, Vienna, and other cities where steam-
cars are already permitted to run in the streets, and on the
roads.
The second objection, as to the endangering of life and
limb, is also groundless. This could only arise from its going
more quickly, or being stopped with more difficulty than
horses. Neither of these objections, however, apply. Tlie
speed can be positively controlled to the maximum desired,
and the engine is as completely under the control of the
driver as any horses could be. Some people are afraid that
the boiler may burst. This its construction renders im¬
possible. It, as was explained to us, consists of a bundle of
tubes; any one of these may give way—an accident not
attended with the slightest risk; but they cannot all burst
together, and cause an explosion as an ordinary stationary
boiler may do. "We are also informed that an American
" cowcatcher " can be put in front of a steam-car, and will
act efficiently upon it, as is not the case with a horse-drawn
car, owing to the up and down motion communicated to it
by the horses.
The third objection, that of their being no demand for
steam-traction on the part of the public was stated with
gTeat calmness and assiu-ance at a recent meeting of the
County Koad Trust. The account of that meeting, as
reported in the newspapers, reads most amusingly; the
gentlemen are evidently in utter darkness as to the wishes
of the middle-class in Edinburgh on the subject. Nor are
they apparently much better up in the other facts of the
case. One noble lord laid it down as law, that if steam-
traction is to be permitted, the present lines must be entirely
altered, and made larger and deeper, in order to bear the in¬
creased weight which will pass over them. This remark
was apparently allowed to pass unchallenged by his col-
leag-ues, though the assertion is unfounded on fact. It is
all very well for those who have private carriages to in¬
veigh against tramway-cars in general, and steam-cars in
particular, but does it ever strike such persons of what self-
19- TJie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
ishness they arc guilty in so doing ? Do they never think
of the thousands of hard-workin" men and women Avho for
twopence may by the help of these cars save strength and
time which to them are money ? Have they never been
pleased of a Saturday afternoon to see cars laden with
holiday makers, who are thus conveyed to the extreme out¬
skirts of the town, in all directions ? Our County Eoad
Trustees seem to be of this class, and speak with easy con¬
tempt of the uselessness of introducing steam-traction for
the purpose of extending the tramway system to villages
outside of Edinburgh. Surely we may trust the Tramway
Company not to lay down rails, or to introduce improve¬
ments for which there is no demand on the part of the
public.
Having answered to the best of our power the objections
usually raised to the introduction of steam-traction, we must
state more positively what are its advantages, and why it
claims the support of the public.
First. The introduction of steam-traction will put an end
to the suf!erings of many horses. We believe that the tram¬
way horses are as well cared for as is possible in the
circumstances ; they have good stables, plenty of food, and
work very short hours. Still in a city like Edinburgh, with
gradients of 1 in 20, and in some places of 1 in 16, it is im¬
possible but that horses weighted with cars and passengers
to the amount of four tons must suffer much. Xo one can
see them toiling u]i Leith Street, or even the upper part of
the iSTortli Bridge, without pity. The Select Committee of
the House of Commons, which has been examining carefully
into the whole matter, issued its report in April last, and on
the cruelty part of the subject speaks as follows :—" One of
the strongest arguments in favour of the use of mechanical
power upon tramways, is to be found in the fact that the
traction of the ordinary tram-car is a severe strain upon a
horse. Some remarkable evidence has been given upon this
point. . . . The London General Omnibus Company owns
nearly 8000 liorses, and, in addition to its own vehicles,
supplies horse-power to some of the tramways. The horses
are usually bought at about the age of five years, and the
average life of a horse after that time, if drawing an omnibus,
is four-and-a-half years; if dragging a tram-car, four years
only. It follows, then, that in the work of this Company
alone 1600 to 1700 horses are broken down every year." If
this frightful destruction takes place in the level streets of
London, what must it be in the steep gradients of Edin-
Double Acrostic. 193
burgh ? This argument should specially appeal to the
members of the Society for the Suppression of Cruelty to
Animals ; and it would be a fitting work for them to proclaim
annually, at their interesting meetings, the need of steam-
traction to be substituted for horse-power. Would it be too
much to hope that with their help a very few years might
see the last horse unyoked from its car, and sent to more
congenial work ?
Secondly, The demand for horses in Edinburgh is becoming
more than the district can possibly supply, and prices are
rising terribly. If the 500 horses needed for our tramway
system were set free, and no more ever required in their
place, prices must surely fall.
Thirdly, Steam-traction costs at least one-third less than
horse-traction. This would enable the Tramway Company
not only to extend their system to more distant stations,
but would allow of some reduction of fares. This reduction
would have direct effect on the overcrowding of the poorest
districts of our city. If for a halfpenny a working man
could be conveyed from his liome to his work, he would be
enabled to make that home on the outskirts, or even beyond
the limits, of the town. Cheap houses for working men
would spring up within easy distance of the tramway lines;
and in this way more might be done to reduce the over¬
crowding, and consequent sin and misery of oui" brethren in
the courts and closes of our old town, than can be effected
at present by hundreds of missionaries and district visitors.
These are some of the thoughts given rise to by our late
steam drive to Portobello. If any of the readers of the
Ladies' Edinhurgli Magazine are anxious for private discus¬
sion on the subject, the Editor Avill, we are sure, put them
and ourselves into communication with each other.
S. M.
DOUBLE ACROSTIC.
No. C.
My first the arena of luy last; where gaiety and sporting once ay ear unite.
1. This is always asked for.
2. Far o'er the ocean and tlie billows' foam,
A rugged prison, yet an island home.
3. Tlie Frenchwoman lias it even when in poverty.
4. Impersonal ; not egotistical.
5. " Women's weapons." F. M.
194 -TJi^^ Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
SOLUTION OF DOUBLE ACROSTIC
No. 5.
1. A closed door—all entrance is denied
To lady students seeking for the key;
No road this ircnj hangs written up outside,
To bar their passing to the prized M.V.
2. When first we step o'er Learning's floor,
A meets us smiling at the door.
With five-and-twenty friends or so.
Good fellows all, we ought to know.
3. To-day is sad, we fear and dread to-morrow.
But yesterday is dead, and done ■with sorrow.
Ah! gentle month, of poets loved and sung,
Ah! May Vay blossoming of summer snows,
Thou lingerest long the wintry chills among,
Thy hawthorn buds are tardy to unclose. " B."
Nine answers received ; the following eight correct :—" B," Crocus
Foster Leigh, F. G., Hamlet, Hawthorn, M. C. B., Message Girl, Narda.
A Prize is offered at the close of the year to the solver of the
greatest number of acrostics. Solutions to be addressed " Acrostic
Editor," Publishers, 22 Howe Street, Edinburgh ; to ,be sent not later
tlian the 15tli of the month, written clearly on a sheet of paper con¬
taining only the solution, pseudonym, and full name and address of
sender. Solutions acknowledged in the follo^\'ing number ; and name
and address of winner only announced at close of competition.
-»-jsafr- » •■ » '
OUR    LIBRARY    TABLE.
Great St Benedicts ; Scamp and I ; Our Boys ; and Lettie's
Last Home.    London : John F. Shaw & Co., Paternoster Row.
These stories are written, we believe, by a young Irishwoman, who
has boldly launched into the republic of letters in London, without
any introduction except her own merit. They are touchingly told,
and we feel something of the same charm in them, that has made
the author of Jessica's First Prayer so justly popular. Scamp and I, is
an account of the adventures of a little London waif -w-itli her dog,
such a waif as we hope and believe is nearly a thing of the past;
rescued and taught something of the love of God and man, before she
is taken to the home where alone love is com2Jletely understood.
We heartily recommend these stories for children, Sundaj'-schools,
mothers' meetings, &c., and feel assured that their healthy tone and
melting pathos, will make them liked and appreciated.
Sti-aj Azotes. 195
The Seat of War.    Edinburgh Publishing Company.
We hope that all our readers and their friends will possess them-
S(4ves of this wonderful " multuin in imrvo." It supplies a want which
is often felt by the uninitiated at the Ijeginning of such a period of
public excitement and interest as that which has now o]iened upon us.
We so constantly hear people say : " 0, if I could only understand
these military movements, and these details conveyed in the tele¬
grams ; I really have tried to follow the Avar movements for weeks
past, and can make nothing of them, even with a map." The little
shilling book now before us, gives, besides a capital map, and plans
of the Seat of War, a short account of each place involved in the
struggle, or likely to be so, so that the various localities referred to in
telegrams and newspaper reports are no longer mere names, but places
with whose situation and characteristics the reader is perfectly
familiar. Added to this, we have a short statement of the chief facts
which led to the actual declarati(jn of war ; the declaration itself, with
the Emperor's manifesto, and circular to the European powers, and the
reply of England. This forms the first part of the book ; the second is
an account of the Russian and Turkish armies and fleets, their numbers
and relative strength, their generals, and their present position. With
all this, and a useful appendix, and general index and table of contents,
it will easily be seen how really valuable a Handbook is ofl'ered to us,
who, occupying for the present the position of spectators, cannot but
feel with increasing anxiety, how soon our own homes may be filled,
if not with the horrors of warfare, yet with many of the sorrows and
desolations caused by a conflict which seems destined to involve the
greater part of Christendom.
i ■«—* •
S T E A Y    NOTES.
The Course of Lectures delivered by Miss Menzies to ladies in Dundee
has now been terminated. The earlier literature of Germany, with its
epic and lyric poetry, formed the groundwork of this course of lectures.
The epics, thougli legendary in themselves, were shown to be even
more valuable than history as exponents of the life of the nation, and
of a character which, thougli in some degree barbarous, was rich in the
sterner and nobler virtues. The period of the Minnesingers, which
was also that of the Crusades, brings this early literature to a close.
The chief agents in Mediaeval civilisation were then traced as they
express themselves in these legends and poems ; and after a rapid out¬
line of the state of poetry during the intervening centuries, the second
great outburst of Teutonic genius in the latter part of the eighteenth
century, was briefly sketched. The events which paved the way for
it, the causes which moulded it into form, and some of the greatest men
who gave it expression, were included in this short summary of the
period. In connection with the lectures, two subjects for essays were
given out ; one on the contrast between the Characters and Customs of
the Middle Ages, and those of the Present Day, as seen tlirough the
pages of legend and fiction ; the other, a Definition and an Example of
Epic Poetiy, with a few remarks on the example chosen.
196 TIic Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
The attendance was satisfactory, about sixty persons being jn-esent at
the opening lecture, and twenty-five ladies at the whole course, who
showed, by their earnest attention, how much enjoyment they derived
from the lectures. The defects at present existing in the early educa¬
tion of women were sj)oken of at some length at tlie outset, and the
means of remedying them pointed out. Special mention was made of
the University Local Examinations ; and at the concluding lecture.
Miss Menzies read a portion of a letter from a lady much occujiied witli
this subject. Tliese remarks appear to have been well received, for
the ladies afterwards expressed willingness to go more deeply into the
sul)ject, and showed a desire to set on foot some arrangements for
fnrtliering the Higher Education of Women in their city. We trust
tliat these endeavours will be successful, and that thus a great want
will be supplied in Dundee.
We liear that Lady Candidates are coming to Edinburgh from
York, Durham, Chester, and Penritli, as well as from various parts
of Scotland, to attend the University Examinations, which will be
held on the 19th, 20th, and 21st of this montli. These ladies have,
we believe, been stiulj-ing throughout the winter by correspondence
with the Preparatory Classes held in St George's Hall.
It is with great pleasure that news has reached us of Portree being
about to be added to the number of towns in which the Edinburgh
University will this year form a local centre. We trust that this will
do much towards stimulating secondary education in the Isle of Skye.
We are glad to be able to announce definitely that Professor Tait
will be among the lecturers of the Edinburgh Ladies' Educational
Association next session. May we advise intending students to read
during the summer Thomson and Tait's Elements; or should this seem
an alarming undertaking to beginners, may we remind them of the
Primer on Physics in Macmillan's series ?
Those of our readers who may have been interested in the account of
John Harris, the Cornish Miner Poet, which ai:)peared in our pages
last year, will be glad to learn that he has now received the Queen's
bounty, to the extent of £200.
Among the candidates examined last month by the Irish College of
Physicians were Dr Louisa Atkins, Dr Sophia Jex-Blake, and Dr
Edith Pechey, who all succeeded in satisfying the Examiners, and have
now received the double diploma of the college, which entitles them
to place their names on the Medical Register, as fully (|ualified
physicians.
Ladies are invited to contribute to this Magazine.
A Prize is offered for the best article received by the Editors and
accepted for insertion during the current year, on any one of our
British Female Novelists born in the iStli century.
Subject of Debate for the next meeting of the Ladies' Edinburgh
Literary Society, to be held on Saturday, June 2d, at 5 Chester
Street, at 11 o'clock :—" Is a life of frequent travelling a better means
of mental culture than a life spent at home ?"
to
Our Female Novelists. 197
VI.
THE    SISTERS    T 0 R T E E.
Jane, 6. 1776 ; d. 1850.    Anna Maria, 6. 1780 ; d. 1832.
It is interesting to trace the progressive history of the
novel, and of the siipply which gradually arose to meet the
growing need of fictitious literature, suitable to the youth
of each rising generation. Before Sir Walter Scott
had gilded with his magic wand every scene he pictured,
and every subject he touched, there were indeed worthy
writers to bridge over the gulf which separated such
novelists as Richardson, Fielding, Smollett, Miss Burney, and
all their numerous inferior imitators—with their long, high-
flown sentimental romances—from that later school which,
founded on Scott and his contemporaries, reaches down to
the present day. Novels, certainly, there were, but such as
exercised an enervating and injurious influence on society,
till this reform was accomplished ; a reform for which Miss
Porter helped to pave the way, with her semi-historical
r6mances, published, fortunately for her own fame, some
seven or eight years before those of the " Great Unknown."
Jane and her sister (whose genius, if less distinguished, was
much more prolific, having produced in all fifty volumes)
were the daughters of an Irish officer, who died when his
children were in mere infancy. Their widowed mother came
to reside in Edinburgh, renowned even at that j)eriod for
educational and scientific resources, as weU as for a brilliant
literary society. The quiet home life of the Porters, which
ever continued a model of what real family life ought to be,
was thus varied by the society of men of genius and learning.
Sir Walter Scott, then a young student, enjoyed passing his
evenings in their circle, often teasing the younger sister
Anna Maria, whose love of reading made her sit apart
buried in her books, till she was wiled away to sit on the
lad's knee, and listen bewitched to some weird fairy tale,
thus laying in a store of knowledge, which, quickened by a
keen olaservation and a warm fancy, brought forth fruits in
after years.
Anna Maria became an authoress at the age of twelve;
No. 31.—July 1877. 2 C
198 TJie Ladies EdinburgJi Magazine.
Jane did not publish her first work, Thaddeus of Warsaiv,
till she was twenty-seven.
It is natural to conclude that during her residence in
Scotland, Jane Porter acquired that romantic devotion to the
early historic interests attaching to that country, which she
has surrounded with a charm peculiarly her own. While
possessing a vivid appreciation of fine scenery, her forte lies
yet more in the detail of heroic endeavour and passionate
feeling; but her principal characters want individuality and
variety, and appear as if all cast in the same mould. Her
heroes walk, speak, look, act, fight, and make love exactly
in the same manner, are endowed with the same virtues,
and resist exactly the same temptations ; nevertheless, they
always command our respect, as acting up to the highest
principles.
Filled with an ardent admiration for chivalrous actions,
fired by patriotism, and recognising the necessity of those
virtues being kept alive in the hearts of the youth around
her, Miss Porter set herself to do in her day, though in
an inferior degree, what Sir Walter Scott did for all time
and every nation. To clothe dry historic facts in a fairy garb
of briglit changing scenery, interspersed with old castellated
towers and tiowery meads; to invest the somewhat rough, if
gallant heroes of an earlier day with the charms of a " very
perfect gentle knight," as much at home in a lady's bower as
in a battlefield; to rouse, in the heart of every youth and
maiden who reads her works, an enthusiasm for honour,
virtue, valour, fortitude, gentleness, constancy—all the old
chivalric graces which make a true man; nay, not only to rouse
their enthusiasm, but to stimulate them to a like example—
such were her aims. Not resting there, she was careful to pro¬
vide reading such as should not only impress on the pages of
her readers' memories, with her magic and fairy-like pencil,
the real, living images of dead-and-gone heroes, and hard
battles, nobly fought; but pure literature, which should never
call a blush to the cheek, nor suggest aught but good, noble
thoughts. So well did she fulfil her self-imposed task, that
not only did her works place her in an honourable position
among the literati of her time, but to this day Jane
Porter's books are read, when those of her contemporaries are
scarcely known, and Tlie Scottish Chiefs and Thaddcus of
Warsaiv are still included in the catalogue of many a school¬
room library.
Apart from the merits of the story of The Scottish Chiefs,
the work by which she is best known, she has endued with
Our Female Novelists. 199
a deeper interest the grey old tower of Cambuskenneth; has
made the tourist turn again to gaze, from the rocky rampart
of Stirling Castle, on the silvery, supple folds of the graceful
Forth; has deepened the shade on Stirling's old bridge, whose
once crimsoned stones tell the story of a fight fraught with
the destiny of two nations, and crowned with a glory
(somewhat dimmed, certainly, by the hideous erection lately
placed there), the wooded steeps of Abbey Craig. She still
may stir the sluggish spirit of the present day, when
patriotism is apt to be smothered by cosmopolitanism, and
remind every true Scottish heart that Caledonia has held
her own in the lists with other countries, be the tilt for
arms or poetry, history or fiction, brave deeds or lovely
women.
While Miss Porter is quite at home in the details of war
and its attendant horrors, one cannot fail to be amused at
some glaring mistakes she commits, such as that of putting in
the mouth of her hero Wallace such long-rounded moral senti¬
ments as are hardly in keeping with speech accompanying
action. It is not at all probable, that in the very heat and
front of Ijattle he would have stopped to harangue a trusty
if somewhat bloodthirsty follower thus :—
" I seek to make my subjects men, to T)e aware that they fight with
fellow-creatures, with whom they may one day he friends, and not, like
the furious savages of old Scandinavia, drink the Llood of eternal
enmity. I would neither have my chieftains set examples of cruelty,
nor degrade themselves by imitating the barbarities of our enemies.
That Scotland bleeds at every pore is true ; but let peace be our aim,
and we shall heal all her wounds."
In season, and more especially out of season, he is made
to utter short, epigrammatic sentences, like copy-book texts,
such as, " To connive at cruelty is to practise it;" or,
" Learn, brave earl, to discriminate between a warrior's glory
and his shame, between the defender of his country and
the unprovoked ravager of other lands." In these quotations
the sentiments are doubtless fine, but their delivery is
incongruous in conjunction with a bloody battlefield, and
all the heat and confusion of siege and rebellion.
Miss Porter's especial hero. Sir Wniiam Wallace, is made
more of an angel tlian a man; endowed with every grace of
person and mind, and every possible and impossible virtue,
forgiving, over and over again, his most treacherous enemies,
such as Lord Aymer de Valence, the villain of the story,
who twice tries to assassinate him. Admire him as we must,
especially in his self-sacrificing devotion to the interests
of his country, and the steadfast nobility which made him
200 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
refuse a crown which was almost forced on his acceptance,
we cannot but wish that Miss Porter had made liim more
manly and less sensitive. There is something almost
feminine m the description of the affection existing
between the boy Edwin Euthven and his general;
and pitiful beyond description as was the blow which
deprived him of his wife and child, it rather
detracts from the grandeur of his character to find him for
ever invoking the sainted spirit of his Marion, while at the
same time he offers Helen iNfar attentions which look to
outsiders something more than fraternal. There is a
ludicrous anachronism in one chapter—a regular nineteenth
century touch—which escaped the pen of the writer, when
Wallace, having disappeared either to the rescue of some fair
dame, or for the indulgence of one of those frequent mid¬
night soliloquies, it is mentioned that his attendants had
concluded he had gone to bed, " as they saio Ids bonnet was
left in the hall."
Thaddeus of Warsaw is perhajis a more interesting cha¬
racter. His country's wrongs so long and nobly contested,
his bravery, his trials, and the manly courage and patience
with which he endured contumely and insult in his lonely
exile, endear him to the hearts of the readers of his piteous
history, nearly as much as to the fair ladies who so openly
showed him a marked preference. With the exception of
one or two characters in the book. Miss Porter does not
draw a very charming picture of either the manners or morals
of London society about the year 1795; but never, like too
many writers of the present day, does she invest a lawless
passion with an interest tending to destroy the sense of sin,
nor, on the other hand, completely divest the sinner of every
good impulse and power of repentance.
If the conversation is somewhat stilted, it is a true picture
of that which marked the time; the interest of the story
never flags, though there is neither plot nor sensation, and
the d4no'Aement of the secret of Thaddeus' birth is most im¬
probable. The description of tlie hbrary of a would-be literary
lady of that jieriod may be interesting to those who are at
present engaged in similar studies, more thorough, however,
than those undertaken to please the passing whims of the
Misses Dundas; though we imagine tlie ladv students of our
day would be satisfied with less display and more reality
in the adornment of their sanctums.
" Tliaddeus was instantly let in, and witli much ceremony ushered into
a splendid library, where he was told the ladies would attend him.
Our Female Novelists. 201
Before they entered, they allowed him time to examine its costly
furniture, its glittering bookcases, bird-cages, globes, and reading-
stands, all shining with burnished gilding ; its plaster casts of the nine
muses, which stood in nine recesses about the room, draperied with
blue net, looped up with artificial roses ; and its fine cut-steel Grecian
stove, on each side of which was placed, on sandal-wood pedestals, two
five-feet statues of Apollo and Minerva."
The insulting rudeness with which he was received by the
"nouveau riche" Lady Dundas and her daughters, one of
whom fell sentimentally in love with him, makes one blush
for one's sex.
" While a servant was setting chairs round a table, on which was
painted the judgment of Hercules, Lady Dundas again opened her lips.
' Pray, Mr Thingumbob, have you brought any grammars, and primers,
and dictionaries, and syntaxes with you ?'"
Amongst her minor works, of which a series of Talcs
Round a Winters Hearth were written in conjunction with
her sister, Jane wrote The Pastor s Fireside, and Sir Edward
Seaward's Diary, a style of book which for some time after
had a host of imitators.
She went, in 1842, to St Petersburg with her brother.
Sir Eobert K. Porter, a man specially distinguished in more
than one walk of life. A talented artist, he was appointed
historical painter to the Emperor of Russia, and while at his
court, he wooed and married a Russian Princess; but as his
predilections were more for a military life, he accompanied
Sir John Moore to Spain, and went through a severe
campaign there. Subsequently he travelled through the
East, and gave to the world, on his return, various accounts
of the different scenes of his life, as soldier and traveller;
while his paintings still exist to show his skill as an artist.
Soon after his sister went to reside with him, his death
occurred. She returned to England, taking up her residence
in Bristol, where her death occui-red in May 1850.
It is not often one sees, except in isolated cases, such as
tlie Ik'ontes and Porters, the gift of composition so liberally
bestowed on the different members of one family; and it is
■a pleasant sight to find them rejoicing in each other's
talents, and happy in each other's fame, without a shadow
of the envious feeling wliich too often dims the glory of
genius.
Anna Maria Porter wrote many more novels than Jane, and
though widely known and read at the time, they had neither
the success which attended the writings of her elder sister,
nor do they retain the place which hers still occupy.    Their
202 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
style is so similar, both in manner and construction, that
the Hmvjarian Brothers is constantly ascril)ed to Jane's
authorship. Of fifty books, the best known are Tlic Lily of
Killarncy; Don Sebastian, or The House of Braganza ; The
Recluse of Norway; and the Hunyarian Brothers—a slight
description of which may serve as a sample of the style of
all.
We have here the history of two brothers, Charles and
Demetrius Leopolstal, their frequent and remarkable love
affairs; the startling vicissitudes of their several fortunes; the
stern rectitude of the one contrasts with the hot-blooded
passion of the other, but both in some degree modified by the
brotherly affection subsisting between them.    Certainly their
fraternal  conversation  is  rather  heavily interlarded with
interjections to suit modern taste, and the word "sensibility"
occurs somewhat too often; either one or the other brother
dissolves in tears on the smallest occasion, frequently when
the reader sees no occasion at all.    It would surprise us to
see two young men of our day falling on each other's necks,
and tearfully embracing, while pouring forth in broken and
ecstatic language the story of the non-success of a love-suit,
and fainting away at the end of the recital.    But it was
evidently quite en Hgle in those romantic days; or perhaps
Anna Maria Porter gives us the picture of the times, as seen
through the sentimental veil of her own consciousness.    At
least twenty times do we find Charles and Demetrius, from
various heart-rending emotions—whose experience must, we
think, have made them old before their time—"trembling,"—
" suffocating,"—" violently rushing into each other's arms,"—
" excess of tenderness overcomes them,"—" they heave pro¬
longed  sighs;" in every chapter, and in one in particular,
we find tlie entire dramatis personce in a mingled torrent of
weeping.
We can scarcely imagine a company of noble warriors
and high-born dames so conducting themselves, even under
the saddest circumstances; and we are informed that
Charles, whose unbridled passions had caused all the e'mcute,
" was at length possessed of a frantic wish to die," which,"
perhaps, would have been the best thing he could have done,
considering that he caused his friends a good deal more
trouble, even after his tardy but extremely tearful repent¬
ance. However, " all's well that ends well." At length he
is safely married; and though in the last pages there is a
renewal of general weeping, let us hope it is this time for
joy.   Demetrius, who still stands in need of his brother's
Edelraute. 203
advice and supervision, "answers liim with ardent sensiljility,"
and a mutual embrace seals the oblivion of his fault. The
last paragraph is as follows—and it is a consolation to find
that at length they have reached a high and dry spot,
where there is no more occasion for their too sensitive
spirits to faint and fail:—
" United inseparahly to the women they loved, bound to tlieir various
friends by the sweetest ties of obligation, and gifted with immense
wealth, the Hungarian brothers were deeply impressed with this con¬
viction, that sujjerior blessings demand superior virtues. They now
study how to combine magnificence with utility, and happiness with
religious awe ; their duties, and their enjoyments, and tlieir riclies,
' making to themselves wings, liourly fly away, as an eagle towards
heaven in their flights, beautiful and celestial in their end.'"
In exalting virtue and benevolence, and portraying the
charm of domestic affection, Anna Maria Porter wrote from
the fulness of her own heart; for her private life was dis¬
tinguished for its unassuming piety and active charity.
She died, much regretted, at the age of fifty-two, while on a
visit to her brother, Dr Porter of Bristol.
" Earth plays the step-dame to her poets ever;
They die—she gives them fame.
As if they cared to hear, by God's great river,
The echoes of their name."
Martyn Hay.
-'*-3«<»—*-
OR,
FIVE AND TWENTY YEARS AGO AT THE ACHEN SEE.
Chapter V.
The foste. overtook Jorgle, and he exchanged a few minutes'
talk with the driver, liandsome Toni; but he did not get up.
Turning short round to the left, he retraced his steps by a
path leading back along the hills overlooking the lake, till
lie directed his course to the right, beside tlie valley behind
Pertis Au. There he climbed by paths which only a skilful
hunter could have ventured on when thus covered with
snow, to a cowherd's hut, deserted for the winter months.
Before approaching, he stopped and gave a jodd, that made
the rocks ring. At the signal, a dark-bearded man appeared
instantly in the doorway, and swinging his hat round his head,
204 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
gave a feeble imitation in reply, and ran down to meet
Jorgle.
"I thought you were dead, if not buried, man," said Jorgie;
and the stranger, shaking his hand warmly, replied, " It has
been the longest night I ever passed; and the bed of the
hardest."
" The Herr Doctor has been used to luxuries in Vienna,"
said Jorgle, with a queer twinkle in his eye, and surveying
his companion with great curiosity. " Upon my word, you
are grown out of all knowledge; your own mother would
scarcely acknowledge you with a beard like that."
" The man is developed in a hurry, body and beard and
mind, such times as these," replied the stranger laughing:
" we have been doing serious work this -winter ; minds are
ripe for the changes that are coming ; and before long, there
will be an explosion, that will shake your mountains even
out of their propriety. Are you still willing to go with us,
old fellow ?"
" Heart and soul; if you do not upset too much," answered
Jorgle.
" Well, it will do little harm to get rid of those pestilent
Jesuits, at least," replied the Doctor. " Isn't Horst worth
ten of them ? "
" Ja wold, truly," said Jorgie, heartily. " I believe he has
a notion something is in the wind : he will not be sorry to
see the last of those interfering fathers."
" Just fancy," continued the Doctor, " the lengths to which
their jealousy of outward influence carried them last year,
when they refused to allow two poor, harmless, old maids
from Magdeburg to buy up a ruin they wished to Kve in
for a few months in summer, because they were Lutherans ;
the time is come to send them about their business, Jorgle.
You owe them one ill turn, and I another; we'll be even
with them yet. The manufacturers are furious; the pro¬
hibition against talvino; foreign Avorkmen, and the refusal to
let them settle in the country, or to enjoy their own worship,
ties the hands of the capitalists all ways. I was told by one
only the other day, that he was bound at the beginning of his
undertaking to employ only eight, and that tliey were to
be reduced to four as soon as natives could be found com¬
petent to talve their places. Isn't that tyranny of the first
water ? Without such restrictions, if you only knew your
own interests, and what belongs to you as men by right, the
land might be enriched by industry of every description. It
is not possible to seal  hermetically a portion of a great
Edelrmite. 205
state like this against all others, and to declare it in a state
of spiritual siege for all eternity. I defy Brandeis, and the
Jesuits, to make a rock fortress out of a land of eight
hundred thousand inhabitants, and five hundred and twenty-
six square German miles.    It isn't to be done !"
" I can't enter into all your fine reasonings. Doctor," said
Jorgle, taking off his hat, and scratching his head uneasily,
when the stranger stopped for want of breath, not of will to
go on. " But I know we should like a reduction in the price
of salt; and the stamp laAvs altered ; and a difference made
in the excise ; and these fathers got out of the country."
" Yes," said the Doctor laughing, though he looked half
vexed; "just to have the leather cut out where the corn
pinches; instead of altogether new shoes, made after a
pattern that would never gall. Why, man, education is your
children's right; let your sons be on a par with the rest of
the world, and superstition will pale, with the ignorance
that supports it."
" And we may expect all the wrangling and jangling, the
strife and the differences of you Protestants," said Jorgle
gravely. "Let religion alone," he added; "our schools are
good enough for all we want, and our clergy, too, if we only
get rid of the interlopers."
The two young men had been climbing up the face of the
mountain behind the hut, and now came to a fork of the
pathway.
"That leads over the Joe/;,"said Jorgie; "it's a splendid
place for chamois, and Eddraute, too," he added, looking
again curiously at his companion.
" The plant you used to tell me about, that grows on the
highest rocks?" said the Doctor, standing still; "that your
young men seek at the risk of life itself, when their maidens
will not have anything to say to them, and that never fails
to soften the hardest heart ? Where is it, Jorgle ? tell me.
I'll climb for it, if I perish!"
"Not now, Herr Doctor," said Jorgle, watching the excited
face of the stranger with infinite satisfaction ; " it is covered
eight or ten feet deep at least in snow. It would be worse
than folly to attempt to get it at this season of the year."
"Never mind!" replied his companion; "let me see exactly
where it is to be found. Let us go over the Jocli, Jorgle,"
he said, springing forward impetuously; "the bracing air
will give one more manhood for the coming fight; you
know the way, come on !"
Jorgle stopped, looked keenly round him like a hawk;
No. 31.—July 1877 2 D
2o6 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
up at the sky, in the wind's eye, and at the lake. " Per¬
haps we might venture," he said. " It's a glorious world
among God's fields of snow, up there. I always think, a
great deal more like my idea of heaven, than what most folk
picture heaven to be. You are sure-footed, strong-headed,
Herr Doctor ; we'll go to-morrow, if you don't mind another
night in the hut.    It is too late to start to-day."
" With the chance of seeing where the Edelraute grows,
I would wait for a week," was the answer.
"I've but a poor supply for our supper, bread and cheese,"
said Jorgle; " if we could see Hans the forester now, he
would help the larder, and keep, our counsel into the
bargain.    He was coming this way to-day."
In a few moments he had climbed a rock near, and sent
forth another jodd, that was even more piercing than the
last. While its echoes were dying away in the distance, a
faint reply came over the still fields of snow, untrodden
except by the denizens of the higher regions. At a second
signal from Jorgle, a figure appeared on an opposite ridge.
It was the forester. Nearly an hour elapsed before he
joined them; but his bag was not empty. Before long a
fire crackled, and the steam of roast meat made the air
of the hut pleasant to the noses of hungry men. As they
sat smoking after their meal, which had been washed down
by a couple of flasks of red wine, which Jorgle and the
forester carried with them, no one would have guessed, as the
joke and song went round, the Doctor taking his full share in
both, that weighty thoughts were busy in the brains of two
at least.
Chapter VI.
Some days after, news began to come of events, in quick
succession, calculated to astonish the minds of the peaceful
inhabitants of the Aclicn-thal. France was in the agonies
of a revolution. Vienna had caught the flame. Students
and malcontents were roaming about the city in formidable
numbers. Kind-hearted Kaiser Ferdinand was become the
most popular man in the capital, by declaring his willing¬
ness to liold a constitutional parliament, to obtain the
advice of his people in this crisis of political feeling. When
he drove out, it was the delight of the populace to take out
the horses and drag his carriage themselves.
From Innsbruck the news was equally astonishing.
There was a clamour for reform, that nearly sent Governor
Edelraute. 207
Brandeis out of his wits. The clamourers were too many to
put into prison, or send over the frontier. The Jesuit
fathers were Iceeping close ui tlieir quarters, for the
murmurs against them were loudest of all; and little
sympathy was expressed for them by any class, except by
the governor, and a few nobles brought up in their seminaries.
From Trent the tidings were even more exciting. Troops of
peasants from the neighbouring villages had come into the
town, and joining the rabble, ever ready for mischief, had
fallen upon the excise offices, thrown the accounts and
ordinances into the river Etsch; stormed the barracks of
the finance guard, and destroyed everytliing. The head
commissioner had lied ; resistance was not to be thought of;
and the populace here and at other places was not to be
stilled, until a deputation had been sent to Vienna, to con¬
vey their wishes to the government. Pio Nono came in for
ovations everywhere; his voluntary reformations filled every
one with enthusiasm, from Etna to the Alps ; a shout for the
Constitution was always followed by another for him.
Charles Albert of Savoy was marching over the Italian
frontier. The gallant old Eaddetzky, 83 years of age, was
defeated at all points. The Tyrolese were called out to
fight, and rallied willingly at the summons. Things were
managed much more quietly in Innsbruck ; yet even there
such a tumult had not been raised since the days of Hofer.
The land parliament was to be summoned : and what most
of all interested the little group gathered at Agatha's, was
the news that Jorgle was chosen deputy for his commune,
and that he was hand and glove with a learned Herr Doctor
Schmidt, who was to head a deputation to Vienna, bearing
a petition for the passing of reforms that seemed most urgent;
and especially, to insist on the dismissal of the Jesuits.
Opinions were divided in the little community, and there
was much stormy discussion at the inn. Agatha went about
graver and more silent than ever; but, nevertheless, with
a pleased expression on her lips. At Herr Pfarrer Horst's
suggestion, she gave orders for the materials of the little
chapel to be deposited ready for building as soon as the
weather permitted. She was oftener than before beside the
beds of the sick and dying, and ministering actively to
the destitute and poor; but when Father Mathew, anxious to
make the most of time now growing short for his order, urged
on her the duty and suitableness of giving up her possessions
to the Church; the beauty and holiness of a celi1)ate life,
with the rich reward prepared for self-sacrifice here in this
2o8 TJie Ladies Edinbnrgli Magazine.
world and in tliat which is to come, hostess Agatha listened
quietly reverently almost, but promised—only to consider.
As summer drew on, events thickened. In April the
Fathers had met circumstances half way, by offering to give
up their college in Innsbruck; many had already dispersed
to America and Australia. In May, the decree for their
dismissal was published at Vienna.
Brandeis tried to help them, by putting all sorts of obstacles
in the way of its being carried out. He even wrote to the
Archduke John, stating that the decree was unsuitable to
the times; and the love of the people to the order was such,
that dangerous disturbances might follow on its passing into
execution. But another occurrence put this topic in the
shade.
The Emperor and Empress of Austria appeared suddenly
in Innsbruck. They had fled from the disorders and
dangers of the capital, and committed themselves to the
keeping of the faithful Tyrolese. So suddenly had their
journey been undertaken, so great were the precautions
taken to keep it secret, so few preparations had they dared
to make, that not even the courtiers and ladies in waiting
knew what was their destination when they started, as they
imagined, for an ordinary drive. The Empress on her arrival
at the Schloss, in Innsbruck, had to borrow night linen of
the castellan's wife. The royal pair, and the younger
members of their house, were safe, and knew it, among the
loyal mountaineers. Deputations crowded in from all the
other provinces during May, offering them asylums else¬
where ; but the Emperor Ferdinand remained in Innsbruck
till August, and the capital of the Tyrol had seldom before
seen such an assemblage of royal and remarkable personages
within its boundaries. Though the cares of kingship in
such a crisis forced the words, "I wish I were not an
Emperor," from Ferdinand's lips, and led eventually to his
abdication at the end of the year, the tragedies going on
in other places made him thankful for his refuge in the
Tyrol. The Princess Windischgratz fell at her husband's
side, in his palace at Prague, killed by a shot fired from a
house opposite, intended for him. Count Lamberg was torn
from his carriage, and murdered by the mob, in I'estli; and
the court had not long returned to Vienna, when Count
Latour fell a victim to popular violence there. Biit the
very boldest of the reformers, with Herr Doctor Schmidt
amongst them, rallied round the fugitives in Innsbruck.
Jorgle made the hearts of his auditors warm as he told of
Edelrautc. 209
interviews with the Emperor and Empress, and discoursed
of the affability and virtues of them, and of the young
Archduke Franz Joseph, their nephew, and the future
Emperor. Even Marie's pale cheeks glowed with a tinge
caught from the general enthusiasm; while Agatha's eyes
dwelt on the face and form of the handsome deputy, no
longer the poor boatman Jorgle, with an ever-increasing
interest and pride.
It was just before the full burst of summer, when the
first buds of the alpine roses were coming into blossom ;
when the line of snow was daily creeping up the highest
mountains, and the brooks scampered down in their joy
through the pastures, where the cattle were browsing on the
gaily flowered turf, making sweet music with their rippling
waves over the stones, till with a last leap they were
buried, song and all, in the waters of the lake they seemed
to be hurrying to so eagerly; when the blue Gentian lifted
up its tiny cup to the bright sunshine; and the Edelweiss
stood beside it, wrapped in its white woollen gown, the two
reminding one of an old woman, preacliing of rheumatism
and damp shoes in the merry summer's evening to a gay
young girl. She might wag her hoary head in the yet keen
breeze off the snow ; Gentian looked up unheeding, drinking
in the blue of that wondrous sky overhead, and distilling
its colour in the alembic of her glistening petals, by the
magic help of the sun she loved to gaze at. A light footstep
well-nigh crushed them both, but the traveller leaped aside,
and after a moment's glance passed on.
" Only one flower will I gather to-day," he said, looking
up; " yonder stands the rock. Help me, kind Kohold of the
mountains ! Speak for me, sweet sprites of the dashing rills !
Breathe a prayer for me, little Gentian, as you stand stretch¬
ing upwards to the sun, that cherishes you even unto death!"
As he spoke he sprang upwards, strength, hope, youth in
every limb and muscle. It was a giddy height, but he did
not flinch. Step by step, steadily upward and onward;
sometimes on a ledge so narrow, lie had barely room to stand,
while the stones he sent rolling down told of the abysses
that yawned for him, if he should be unlucky enough to
follow: round sharp edges and awkward corners, clinging
on for the dear life with foot and hand; slipping over beds
of ice, lying unmelted in shady nooks and corners; still
onward and upward, nerved by the energy of some deep
resolve, he stood at last on the spot he wished to reach.
With a cry of joy, breathless, panting, he sunk on his knees.
2IO Tlie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
Just uncovered from the snow, the white mantle thrown
back round it, on the Irnre rock, in the brilliant sunshine
grew a tiny weed; it scarcely deserved the name of flower.
Insignificant as it was, he picked and kissed it tenderly,
laid it wrapped in paper close to his heart; and then prepared
to go down again. As the traveller pursued his fearful
descent, far more dangerous than the climb iip had been, an
anxious pair outside the cowherd's hut stood watching him
by turns through a glass.
"Jorgle! Look! that is dreadful!" exclaimed Marie, "can't
you go and help him ? Oh ! Jorgle ' " and the girl laid the
telescope down on a ledge of turf, and hid her face, turning
sick and dizzy with fear for that fellow-creature in peril.
Jorgle watched now, his face white, and his lips set. Once,
when the traveller slipped, he threw up his arms with a cry.
" He is gone! No ! He has recovered his footing again !
He is coming down like a cat! Pray, Marie, pray, girl, for
only God's help can brmg him over that next bit in safety!"
She had cast herself already on her knees, before the rude
wooden crucifix, fixed on a heap of moss-grown stones beside
the door. At length, with a shout of relief, Jorgie threw oft'
his hat, exclaiming, "All right! The worst is over, he is safe
now, safe !" And a jodd cleft the air, that must have caught
the stranger's ear, for he too stopped to wave his handkerchief,
and shout lustily in return.
" Who is it ?    Do you know him ?" asked Marie.
"Yes, it is my friend the Herr Doctor," said Jorgle.
"Come, maiden, let us go and meet him;" he added, dragging
her with him up the steep hill-side. " He is a brave man !
you must congratulate him, Marie ; get one of your prettiest
bouquets ready for him; only our bravest hunters climb that
clift"."
Marie followed rather reluctantly, as Jorgle plucked
a branch of the alpine roses, more forward than the rest. She
had heard much of the Doctor, and wished to see him; but
felt shy of meeting a stranger. Yet she began mechanically
weaving the fiowers together, with her innate taste and skill,
while she asked, " Why did he run such a risk ?"
" Who knows?" answered Jorgle, looking at her sideways;
"perhaps he has a lover, and has been climbing for the
Edelraute, that she may not say him nay." Marie sighed,
and murmured, " Happy lover!"
" Yes, truly happy she who gets the Herr poctor," said
her brother warmly; " of all the men I ever saw, JMarie, he
is the freest-hearted and the best."    They were now hasteii-
Edelraute. 211
ing on, the stranger coming towarc}^ them with long leaps
and strides.
Marie could only see he was tall and strong, and had a
long dark beard and moustache. He was getting nearer,
when he stopped and took something from his bosom. His
hat was pulled low over his brow. Not till they were quite
close could Marie catch sight of his eyes. That moment she
stopped, turned pale, and looked strangely bewildered ; but
he still came on—near, nearer : he had grasped her hand,
and held the Edelraute up before her ! With a wild cry of
joy, panting, sobbing, laughing, in her sudden happiness,
Marie sunk on her lover's shoulder with a cry, as he clasped
her to him, murmuring the words, "Oh Marie! my Marie!"
Jorgle turned his face to the rock ; tears blinded his eyes.
" McAii Gott, do Thou bless them !" he murmured; "and bless
all who love each other."
Chapter VII.
It was highday and holiday that June evening at the
little inn by the Achen See. Agatha sat at the head of the
long table, in the large guest-room, looking statelier than
ever. She had put on her black velvet bodice, with her
mother's silver shoulder knots and chains, and the silver
girdle, that had come down as an heir-loom through many
generations. Her snowy kerchief was crossed daintily over her
bosom, and at her right hand, on the board, stood a splendidly
cai-ved ivory cup. The room and table were filled with guests,
among whom appeared Father IVIathew, and the kindly
face of Herr Pfarrer Horst. Marie and Wilhelm sat side by
side at Agatha's right hand, next to Jorgle, and the parish
priest and Father Mathew on her left. Wilhelm Stein's dark
beard and moustache had mysteriously disappeared on tlie
way down the mountain, or in the cowherd's hut; and no
one who had seen him so disguised, could have failed to be
convinced that his soft light whiskers were much more
becoming. Marie had a bunch of forget-me-nots in her
golden braids, and a few in her bodice, with the Edelraute.
A sense almost of solemnity seemed brooding over the
room and the company, when, towards the end of the feast,
Agatha exchanged glances with the Herr Pfarrer, and
rising from her seat, said, "Dear friends and neighbours, a
very happy occasion induced me to bring you all here
together this evening, with the concurrence of our esteemed
pastor, and our spiritual helper. Father Mathew."
212 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
Here she bowed courteously to the Jesuit, who moved
uneasily in his chair, and looked as if he were not sure what
might be coming next.
"This occasion," resumed Agatha, "is the sudden reap¬
pearance amongst us of one whose amiability and long
residence last summer in our midst, endeared him to many;
and whose supposed death caused unfeigned sorrow and
anxiety to all during the winter. Some, I regret to say,
might have been spared us, but for the secret connivance
of our deputy, who it seems has known of Herr Wilhelm's
safety some months, and deserves general reprobation for
so cruelly keeping us in the dark."
Here she looked down severely on the miscreant Jorgle,
at her side; he could only hide liis face in confusion, while
murmurs of dissatisfaction were aimed at him.
"But," continued Agatha, "as he pleads good reasons for his
silence, and our fears have proved so happily unfounded, I
think we will forgive him. Herr Wilhelm, it seems, passed the
winter in Vienna, in frequent conference and correspondence
with the more progressive portion of our countrymen; and
together they have been planning reforms, which I trust may
be for the benefit of our beloved country. He has now
returned, to ask the hand of Marie Zingerle as his wife; and
our kind and indulgent pastor, considering how much she
has suffered, and how truly the young people love each
other, has consented to obtain from the Holy Father the dis¬
pensation necessary to allow of their union, as soon as
possible. The maiden will retain the faith of her forefathers,
and her future husband is willing that she should do so;
under these circumstances, friends and neighbours, you will,
I think, all pledge me in this cup (which, as you know, good
Kaiser Franz sent to my honoured grandfather), a toast to the
health and happiness of Herr Wilhelm Stein and his bride
Marie, the hdlc of the Achen-thal." The invitation was
responded to by all except Father Mathew, who pushed the
cup sternly from him, with a gesture of marked displeasure.
Then Agatha rose again, and with a perceptible shade of
pallor, but with firm voice and noble mien, she said; " If,
Eeverend Father, you will not pledge me in a toast to the
health of a young couple, whom I believe God has destined
for each other, I scarcely dare to hope you will do so in
another. Friends," she said, placing her hand on the table
for support, " I have to inform you that, with the advice
and hearty consent also of our pastor, Herr Pfarrer Horst, I
have come to the conclusion, that if it be not good for a man
Edelrnntc. 213
to live alone, it is still worse for a woman; and with his
approval, I have determined to endow a man yon all respect,
and whom I have knoM'n from boyhood, with the poor
possessions it has pleased God to give me; in the firm con¬
viction, that he as my husband will help me to spend them
aright, and to dedicate ourselves to a useful life, dwelling in
peace and comfort with you our true friends and neigh¬
bours."
As she ended, Jorgle rose to his full height, and taking
the hand she held out to him, looked for a moment into her
upraised eyes, and then bent down and kissed her forehead,
with all the warmth of a lover, and the courtesy of a gentle¬
man. After the toast was drunk, in a few telling words he
spoke of the undeserved blessing that had fallen upon him,
a poor peasant's son, in that free gift of a heart, whose good¬
ness had been proved to all there by the repeated acts
of love and kindness shown towards them and others. How
earnest his endeavours should be for the future, to show he
was not unworthy of it, time alone could manifest. In the
confusion of lioclis, and the clinking of glasses, it was not
noticed for some time, that Father Mathew had entirely dis¬
appeared.
If at the end of that eventful year the gallant, simple-
minded Tyrolese neglected to secure all the substantial
advantages Wilhehn Stein and his friends so earnestly en¬
deavoured to obtain for them, the Jesuits at least were dis¬
missed ; and though he, as a Protestant, was yet unable to
settle in the land of his adoption, or to own a foot of ground
in it, he still looked forward hopefully towards the measures
of toleration which did in reality follow in 1861. He and
Alarie assisted at the festivities which marked the inaugu¬
ration of the new emperor, Franz Joseph, in December; and
not a lovelier face than that of the beauty of Aclicn-tlial
appeared amid the noble groups that surrounded the young
monarch, setting sail in the frail bark of royalty, on those
troublous seas of politics, at that stormy period. It
was a countenance looked on even in the gay capital with
pleasure, and spoken of with respect; for her husband,
Wilhelni Stein, was making his mark on the annals of his
time, and Marie loved to work with him.
After five-and-twenty years, let me tell the reader (if he
or she care to know it), that Agatha and Marie are still
happy wives ; and the Edelraute grows on the same spot, if
any luckless lover may wish to go and find it.       C. Eay.
No, 31.—July 1877. 2 E
214 J"^^^ Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
THE MONK'S VISION.
AN  OLD  LEGEND.
Sunbeams in a brilliant glory
Fill the air with radiance bright,
Soften'd by the misty mantle
Of the early morning's light ;
And the golden glow is touching
Every vale and every height.
In the green and fertile valley
Stood the cloister old and grey ;
Richly sculptur'd was the chajiel
Where the brethren knelt to pray ;
Stately was the pillar'd portal
Where the poor came, day by day.
But the cells were small and simple,
Meet abodes for men of jjrayer ;
All contain'd the holy symbol.
All of luxuiies were bare ;—
Little wealth possess'd the brethren ;
Many needy claim'd their care.
O'er the richly painted vellum
Where the Holy Word was writ,
Bent the eldest of the brethren,
As at morn he used to sit ;
And the sunbeams, through the casement.
All the cell with radiance lit.
'Twas the early Christian ages,—
Not quite hid the unseen things ;
Still, at times, poor weary mortals
Glimpses caught of angels' wings.
Heard the antiphons celestial.
Which the choir eternal sings.
Now we wait the promised blessing
To the faith untaught by sight.
Looking for Christ's face, unveiled,
Only in the land of light ;
Then, at times, an open vision
Came His people to delight.
To the brother this was given,
As the Holy Word lie read ;
One was near him, human, tender,
With the thorns about His Head ;
Yet enslu-ined in utter glory.
And in majesty most dread.
Home. 215
In a beatific silence,
Kneeling liy the heavenly guest,
Long reniain'il the favonr'd brother.
All his soul liy peace possessM ;
Then a hell, unwelcome, sounding,
Came to break his perfect rest.
And he knew the poor were gather'd,
Waiting for their daily dole,
All such charity the chai')ter
Had decreed he .should control ;
Yet to leave His holy Presence
Seem'd a robbing of his soul.
But his duty surely call'd him.
And he sought the Savioui-'s face.
With an eloipient expression,
Silent, telling all his case ;
Then arose, and lowly bending,
Left the consecrated place.
He retum'd, and, joy amazing.
Met his Mastei-'s smile serene ;
And He said—"My presence fails not
Those who at My work have been ;
For among the poor beside thee,
All the while I stood unseen."
Lord, though ours no visions wondrous.
Many a duty, great or small,
Day by day, we miist be <loing,
Weary oft, on Thee we call :
Let Thy blessed, unseen Presence
Nerve our spirits through them all.
Jessie  P. Moncrieff.
-?*-«K«*-*-'
Few themes have stimulated the imagination of the poet
and the painter more than " home, sweet home." The haven
alike for the hopeful and despairing; the goal where the
triumphant hero receives his crowning joy, or the wounded
soldier lays his aching limbs—home is the magic word that
finds a response in every breast.
But although it is universally admitted that in home life
the conditions are found for spiritual and social pleasure,
there is not the same unanimity in conceding to it the
power of fostering mental growth. " Der Wanderstab " is
also viewed as a fairy wand, transforming, as in a panto-
2l6 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
mime, the clo\\n into the pantaloon—the fool into the wise¬
acre. An attempt to dispel this delusion may not be
altogether out of season, and if we can succeed in finding
a word of hope for those to whom destiny denies the pleasure
of travel, this paper will not be written altogether in vain.
In order to show that it is not only travel, but also home
life which favours growth of thought, it will be necessary
that we should clearly understand what we mean by mental
culture; and if, in a somewhat detailed examination of this
subject, we seem to wander over a w'ell-worn path, we only
do so tliat our argument may gain a firmer foundation.
It will be readily admitted that mental culture does not
consist in the exercise of observation and memory, but in
the acquired power of actively originating thought. The
force of this statement will be obvious if we contrast the
mental action of the primitive and of the cultured man.
Thus we find that the child or the savage is the passive
recipient of the external objects revealed to him by his
senses, while the cultured man recognises the relationship
between these objects. For instance, when man observes
that the hunger he feels can be appeased by the food he
eats, he generalises the relationship between two observed
facts; when he tills the earth to reap a harvest, he rises to a
still more complex thought; and wdien he stores the grain
and barters it for other commodities, he retreats still farther
from the savage state in which the existence of self and the
existence of the grain were the only recognised relations.
Mental culture, therefore, means, in logical pliraseology, to
emancipate the mind from particulars, and to move with
ease among generals.
But this does not yet exhaust the meaning of the words
mental culture. There is one particular fact which requires
a special struggle before it can be generalised. This fact is
the knowledge of self existence. Self is the pivot round
which the uncultured man's whole interest revolves; but as
soon as he learns that there are other existences in the
world whose importance equals his own, he has made a
step towards mental culture which is more difficult and
more necessary than all others. Thus the unlettered patriot
who dies for his country has reached a higher point in
mental culture than the learned pedant, all whose thoughts
circle round himself as the centre of his accumulated
knowledge. But the patriot has only made one step in
advance. He is still a specialist, and the man of culture
must be a universalist.     Perfect mental culture, therefore
Home. 217
(which lies within the ideal, but not within the reach of
man), may be described as the acquired power of generalising
to the uttermost all knowledges. Enlarging thought, thus
circling into thought of still wider compass, self will retreat
farther and farther into the background, until it becomes but
a unit in the infinite.
Bearing in mind, therefore, that mental culture does not
consist in an accumulation of knowledge, but in the power
of recognising the relationship Ijetween knowledges, let us
suppose a typical traveller starting on his first journey, and
try to imagine the influence which constant change of scene
will exercise over him. By taking an extreme view, both of
travel and of liome life, we shall arrive at a juster estimate
of the effect of these two states. But before we proceed, it
may be well to determine what type of mind is to be sub¬
jected to these tests.
The utterly indolent must naturally be excluded from our
consideration, for those who are listless at home will be
equally listless abroad; but there is also another form of
disposition which lies equally beyond the pale of our sub¬
ject.    An Alexander Von Humbolt, or a Kant—whether as
a traveller or a recluse—will remain a Humbolt or a Kant
still, because (and here we venture to classify them with the
obtuse and the inert) their minds will remain uncontrolled
by outward circumstances.    The type of mind, therefore, to
which we must limit ourselves is the average intelligence,
which, neither paralysed by indolence, nor propelled by
quenchless energy, can be moulded and fashioned by its
surroundings.    Let us, then, follow the mental state of such
an individual as he journeys forth to view the world.    Can
any pleasure equal his delight as one new object after an¬
other charms his observation ?    As yet the objects he meets
with are only recognised as particulars, but, full of enthu¬
siasm, he resolves that these shall all be generalised in turn.
He hears new theories broached, the old home-spun pre¬
judice is cast aside, and all these increasing materials for
thought are to be sifted and grappled with at leisure.    But
alas ! the wished-for leisure never comes.    Our subject pre¬
cludes us from allowing our helpless traveller time to pause
and think.    The trunk is packed, the train whizzes; more
new scenes, more new theories, more new acquaintances
crowd  upon him;   the  earlier impressions  are lost;   and
gradually, too, the novelty of novelty wears off.    The edge is
taken off his first enthusiasm.    His mind is overstocked with
materials which have vainly awaited the hour when they
to
2i8 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
were to lie ordered and generalised; but not only has the
accumulation of knowledge been too rapid, the power of
regulating it has grown feeble from disuse. The old house¬
hold gods have cruml)led to dust, and there is no energy left
to replace them by a newer faith. Innumerable acquaint¬
ances are formed; but, as one after another is forgotten, the
capacity for friendship is lost. The exercise of observation
has become second nature, l)ut to rise from particulars to
generals has become an unnatural task. It is found easier
to remember the hour when the nuns sing in tlie chapel on
the Piazza di Spagna, than to generalise the relationship
between different forms of worship. It is easier to note that
Pompeii has little shadow, and that the sun is scorcliing, than
to fonnulate the fragmentary details of its present history
into a completed thought of its past existence.
Let us now take the other side of the picture, and imagine
an individual living in the most secluded corner of the globe,
where the narrowest of prejudices circulate.    But as we have
pictured a traveller, whose enthusiasm, at the outset of life,
was great, so also we must imagine a recluse anxious to
gain a fuller mental life.    In his personal experience he
finds few materials for thoiight; custom has so benumbed his
interest in the common objects of his observation, that there
is no novelty in his surroundings to stimulate his mind into
action.    Books, therefore, are liis only recourse.    He opens a
volume and reads.    The subject is not so fascinating as the
open book of experience which the traveller peruses, and
some mental inertia has to be overcome before he can grasp
the author's meaning.    By this act he has not only acquired
new knowledge, he has tasted the joy of self-activity.    As
he proceeds, he energises more and more freely, and the
pleasures of thought (unlike the pleasures of observation),
instead of diminishing, increase.   It is true, what the traveller
saw^ and heard the recluse must picture to himself, and the
vision thus conjured up may be less vivid than the actual
experience; but while the powders of observation are left
partly in abeyance, the thinking powers are strengthened;
what is missed in knowledge is gained in culture.    Then,
again,   altliough   the  traveller   was   startled   out   of   his
equanimity by the new theories Avhich were revealed to him,
with all the vitality and charm M'hicli a living voice can
give, these same theories may have left the mind of the
recluse untouched as he read tliem on the lifeless page.    But,
granted such a case, is it not better so ?    Is it not more
conducive  to  mental   culture  to   cling  to one completed
o
Home. 219
thought, even if it be a prejudice, than to sutt'er a cold
iconoclasm to shatter a delicate structure which it does not
rebuild? On the other hand, let some unusual event stir tlie
mind of the recluse into a state of doubt; liow triumphantly
he emerges from the situation! The difficult prol^lem is
sifted to its depth, not only because a monotonous life leaves
leisure for thought, but because a mind accustomed to activity
holds all the thinking powers at command.
lieturning now to the traveller, we find that not only is the
thinking power weakened; the old primitive tliought of self
is forced into prominence upon Mm. Living in a civilized age,
he is transported out of his century into what is the savage
state, where to scramble for the bare necessaries of life be¬
comes paramount duty. If he does not jostle his fellow-tra¬
veller, liis fellow-traveller will jostle him. If he does not push
and hurry to secure all the advantages he can, he may lose his
train, or his bed, or his dinner. It is true this individual
struggle for precedence lies at the base of all man's activity;
but in settled communities, and with higher civilization, the
good of the whole means the good of the one, and, this truth
being recognised, all jiersonal disturbance of the universal
equilibrium is rendered unnecessary and unseemly. But this
thought of self-interest generalised is denied the traveller.
Thus, it not unfrequently happens that this aggressive
obtrusion of his own personality is consolidated, by custom,
into a characteristic trait. A different picture meets us in
home life, where as a hospitable host or as a welcomed guest
man is privileged to exercise all the graces of unselfishness
and courtesy.
Let us stiU farther follow the traveller to the close of his
career. We have seen that novelty has lost its charm; but,
sadder still, he is absolutely unfitted for the enjoyment of
domestic life. The monotony of routine wearies one whose
sole activity consists in observation. His mind craves for
change, and yet, with jaded indifference, he passes from
scene to scene. Enslaved by the tyranny of the external, to
whose influence he has submitted his nature, he passes a
grey existence, having missed that mental culture which is
gained by self activity.
It is far otherwise with the recluse. Every nook of his
cherished home is known and beloved. There is no monotony
for him in the secluded dell, quivering with melody; the
common routine and duties of daily life have their nameless
charm, nor is he oppressed with " the weight of too much
liberty."    Let him, however, travel.    He does not crave for
220 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
the excitement of novelty, as the traveller does, and then flit
coldly over the surface of things; but, be he at home or
abroad, his mind recognises life's deeper joys in whichever
state circumstance places him.
DUMiE.
TO A YOUNG GIRL.
From the German of Heine.
So gracious, beautiful, and pure,
Like to a flower tliou art,
I gaze on thee, and sadness steals
Into my inmost heart.
It seems as if upon thy head
Jfy hands I needs must lay,
And that the Lord would keep thee so
With all my heart must pray.
M. Reid.
—»e-«x»-<«-"-*-
A BEAUTIFUL infant lay, sleeping peacefully, in theloving
arms of a tender mother, who bent over her child with
looks of fondest solicitude ; her bright smile of pleasure
softly changing to an expression of pensive happiness
as her mind roved from the present to the future, and she
strove, with the pencil of love, to lay the colours of hope on
the fair canvas. Unseen and little suspected, three more
powerful operators were watching the innocent slumber of
the young child. They wore a varied aspect. The flowing
tresses, glowing cheek, and radiant eyes of one, con¬
trasted as strongly with the pallid face and anxious
expression of the second, as they did with the whitened and
drooping head of the third. Inrisihlc,t\ms theyappeared, and
inaudible, thus they spoke :—The bright and beautiful one
(whose name was Imagination), bending a moment over the
babe, exclaimed, in a voice that fell on it as softly as a
moonbeam, " Ah !   little   one,   in   my    hands    how
shall your mind outshine this fleeting loveliness of form !
I will open door after door of the clioicest treasure-houses;
there you shall revel; on whatever your eye rests dwells a
rich delight, whatever your heart desires you shall possess.
The TJiree Sculptors. 221
I am able to make you the happiest of the happy.'
How can you thus deceive the poor child?" answered the
second (whose name was Care); " it is not possible for you to
bestow any one of these things in a manner that will out¬
last one touch of my work ; I have my part to perform."
And Care sighed mournfully. " That is just like you,"
cried Imagination, petulantly; " whatever / touch is beauti¬
fied ; wherever yon work, it is marred. See what your
melancholy sigh has done!" pointing to the shade that
clouded the baby's brow. The young mother noticed it too,
and wondered. Had some mysterious sympathy conveyed
the thoughts of her own heavy heart to the half-couscious
mind of her innocent child ? Chiding herself, and for lack
of better remedy, she l^reathed a kiss on the perplexed little
forehead, and smoothed out the tiny Avrinkles.    Once more
Imagination  bent   forward. " How  noble  will  be  the
sculpture to which this marble-like shrine of theintelligence is
dedicated! " Care  smiled,  with  a  pitying   expression.
" How much of your lal:)oriously elaborated work will remain
when my turn comes ?" Imagination answered, " My hand¬
maid, Thought, will be well trained to preserve the precious
treasure; your disfigurement will be the worst apparent."
 " Nay," replied Care, " Time, here, will  do more in
that way than I, and I question whether his trusty servant,
Experience, will not do your work more sensibly." They
both drew back, and regarded old Time with suspicious
glances. Themselves above the sweep of his blade, they felt
keenly for those mortals in whose lives they were interested,
and who lay within his easy grasp. Observing this mode of
regarding him, Time withdrew his steady gaze from tlie
infant's face, and answered for himself with mild dignity.
 " I acknowledge that so long as my hand is bound
by the command of our one Great Master, I cannot blight
your workmanship, therefore your turn comes before mine.
But if yonder babe lives to submit to your several purposes, I
only ask you to wait, and you will hear me hailed as the
kindest of the Three Sculptors, who are ordained to try their
skill on this human marble-mind." " This cannot be,"
eagerly exclaimed the other two. " I make a proposal to
you," rejoined old Time ; " let Imagination furnish, from her
rich treasvires, the vision-form of this child, trace the fair
proportions she proposes, and then submit the model to Care,
who, on her part, shall chisel those lines she so dearly loves.
Then I will take my share, and illustrate my plan
to you;"  and as he spoke,  he set his great pendulum in
No. 31.—July 1877. . 2 F
222 Tlie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
motion. Impulsive Imagination, aspiring to triumph, waved
her fairy-lilie wand, and forthwith the lovely image of the
child stood before them. At each stroke on Time's bell, a
change passed over the form and features, and Imagination,
glowing with noble joy, plied her delicate task and subtle
art, until the rich wealth of mental treasure kindled the
ardour of the eyes, and lighted up the massive brow—now
with a dream-like beauty, now with commanding splendour.
Enrapt at the result of her labour. Imagination paused, and
waited a moment to contemplate, with exulting delight, the
glorious gifts slie had bestowed. She turned to lean on the
arm of the attendant, Thought; but Thought had left her
side, and now obeyed the orders of advancing Care. 
" How is this ?" cried Imagination, hot-hearted, with quick
indignation. " Have you forgotten ?" replied old Time.
" Childhood and youth have passed away. It is now Care's
turn to take the chisel, and see how she can direct the
matured Thought." With restless and jealous eyes, Imagina¬
tion watched her rival's fatal lingers, now clasping the chisel.
And yet the first effect made her eyes glisten. A resolution
of expression her art could not bestow, adorned the face.
The next line, a gentle melancholy, scarcely pleased her so
well; but when sorrow, anxiety, and trial, had cut long
scars on the lovely brow, she lifted her hands in passionate
deprecation. " Oh ! not so, not so!" she implored.    Time
sighed. " It must be," he answered, as every vibration of
his great pendulum brought into sterner relief the deepening
seams. Care paused, and poising her chisel for a moment,
turned her half-mocking, half-mournful eye on the drooping
Imaghiation. " Here is a deeper line of your own," she
said ; " see how well it has prepared the way for me !" It
was indeed the favourite form, Sensihility, rendered more
acute by Romance. Passion was the sharp edge which the
cruel hand of the stern sculptor impressed there. Imagina¬
tion wailed aloud as she beheld the distorting marks; she
veiled her face with her hands, that she might not be tor¬
tured by the sight of her beautiful image marred by agony.
It was the hand of Time, laid gently on her disordered
tresses, which caused her to look up. " It is now my
turn," he whispered. Care had dropt the instrument of her
fatal task, and stood apart, gazing intently, with profound
melancholy rather than satisfaction, on the havoc her hands
had made. Time now advanced. He took up the chisel,
and laid its sharp edge against the deeply scarred face.
Imagination sprang to her feet, and flung herself between
The Three Sculptors. 223
the sculptor and his marble. " It is enough," she said ;
" spare further blows, or with one Ijenevolent touch cause
this woeful existence to terminate."     But Time shook his
head. " Impede me not," he said sternly, and Imagination
shrank back. Care regarded the two with an expressive
gaze. She knew the trace was immovable, the scars were
sealed; her work had been sad, and its result tilled her
with gloom. Time slowly moved his fingers; their placid
task keeping measure with the ever resounding strokes on
the bell. There was something so quiet, so soothing in the
serene style of the great sculptor, that weary Imagination had
almost slumbered, when a sudden silence told lier that the
work was done. Then she looked, and wondered mutely at
the grand change Time had wrought. There were, indeed,
new and painful seams ; but the sharp lines left by the
unsparing hand of Care had been so softened, that even the
delicate pencillings of fair Imagination herself showed to
more advantage than when, without a single adverse touch,
they formed the sole decoration. Time still held the chisel,
but not another line was added, for a hitherto unnoticed
figure appeared in their midst—the movement of celestial
pinions making the silence more profound. Contemplating
the result of so much anxious labour, the angelic
visitant    began   in   gentle   and    authoritative   language.
 " This, then, is your toil ?     To what would you have
reduced the immortal being you designed to personify ?
But your hands liave been stayed. No false strokes can
occur in the original. Imagination, thou art but a servant;
where is thy pretended sway ? Bow down to the high will
thou art caUed to obey ! Lofty, indeed, is thy work ; but
sure malediction awaits thy touch if thou dost approach
and rule unsanctified and unrestrained. Far exceeding the
vainglory of the first triumph will be the reality of thy
labours, if all the affections and aspirations are chastened
and elevated to things purer tlian the natural mind can per¬
ceive. Care, thy solid work shall not be without its blessing;
only bend thou unto the command of Him who binds and
looses the forces of afHiction. Ye are not of necessity
divided, ye two. Imagination, smooth thou the lines of
Care: and do thou. Care, impress the fleeting influence of
Imagination. And thou Time, thou hast done well. But
there is a task that no created power can fulfil—one more
stroke, and Time would give way to Eternity. But no
labour of human Imagination, no toil of liuman Care, can
win a passage to the world of holiness and glory beyond."
224 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
A brief silence followed, when suddenly the young
mother, in whose arms the living child was sleeping, raising
her eyes to the soft blue sky, whispered simple words of
prayer to the Redeemer, that her babe might live to His
glory and praise, both here and hereafter. Then the bright
angel bowed his head, and with one touch of the chisel,
Time dissolved the visionary image; and at the same
moment, the mother woke her child with gentle kisses.
Lydia W. Melland.
DOUBLE ACROSTIC.
No. 7.
" Caledonia's Queen."       •
1. " Once liid from those who search the main."
2. When "good," it "bodes good end."
3. " The crown of life."
4. " Neither her outside forni'd so fair, nor aught
So much delights me, as those graceful acts,
Those thousand decencies that daily flow
From all her words and actions."
5. " One eye on death, and one full fix'd on Heaven."
6. " The manna of a day." F. M.
SOLUTION OF DOUBLE ACROSTIC
No. 6.
1. To every sort of asking, Acrostic, Question, Letter,
An answer is expected—the more correct the better.
2. In ^t Helena,' victress England gave
To her old foe, a prison and a grave.
3. " Holas, it is in vain they dress
In polonaise, or robe j^rincesse ;"
Ovu" neighbours mourn our island ways,
" They have no ' cliic' these blondes Anglaises."
4. His I, I, I, is out of place,
Mere egotistic chatter ;
What one might do in such a case
Were quite another matter.
5. "Tears," women's weapons; ugly weapons too ;
And to themselves most harm they often do.
The Oaks is over, the Derby is won.
And Ascot Races have also been run. " B."
Seven answers received ; the following four correct :—"B," Haw¬
thorn, M. C. B., and Message Girl.
A Prize is offered at the close of the year to the solver of the greatest
number of acrostics. Solutions to Ije addressed, "Acrostic Editor,"
Publishers, 22 Howe Street, Edinburgh ; to be sent not later than the
15th of the month, written clearly on a sheet of paper containing only
the solution, pseudonym, and full name and address of sender. Solu¬
tions acknowledged in the following nunil.)er ; and name and address
of winner only amiounced at close of competition.
1 St Helena is accepted as alternative for St Kilda.
Our Library Table. 225
OUE    LIBRAEY    TABLE.
Blue Roses.   By the Author of " The Hotel dn Petit Saint Jean," etc.
London : Henry S. King & Co., 1877.
It used to be the rule in old-fashioned stories that when the prince
won the princess, and the lovers were married, " they lived happily
ever afterwards." Now-a-days a good deal of research is sometimes
made into the lives of the hero and heroine, after they have attained
the highest earthly bliss—a research which does not alwaysjustify that
conclusion. In the book before us, the hero—an Englishman—wins
his love—a Polish princess ; everything prospers in their wooing, and
yet their married life is a tragedy. Is it a common case ? They were
passionately in love, bu.t only slightly acquainted with each other, and in
a year the dis-illusion is complete; the man's love is gone for ever, the
woman's love has turned to bitterness, and destroys her temper and her
health like some morbid disease. One of the chapters is headed by this
extract from Balzac :—
" II n'y a pas de marriage heureux possible si une connaissance parfaite des deax
epoux, coinme mceurs, habitudes, caracteres, ne precede leur union. Des presents, des
cadeaux, deux, trois, on quatre mois de cour ne font pas le bonheur. C'esl uno, Jieur
solitaire hUn difficile a trouver."
Surely this is but a half truth. In a nmrriaye de conmnance, pre¬
ceded by virtually no acquaintance at all, good sense and common
instinct frequently bring true love in their train. And in a love
match, it is in the nature of the idealizing passion to soften and beautify
all relations till the mutual characters are known, and people have
learnt how best to helj) and please each other, and a tender friendship
grows out of the romantic devotion of the lovers. Only, the search for
the jleur de bonheur must not be too absorbing, or it becomes that
dangerous " blue rose," the poison-ilower ideal, of which our story tells.
Not the ideal which infers a high standard of effort, but the ideal of a
joy not to be found in this mixed life, and which, under the different
forms of satisfying love, patriotic pride, or mere ease and comfort, is
sought for by diffeient characters. Such " blue roses " are the subject
of this story, which in form and matter rises high above the ordinary
run of novels, and deserves a different fate. This is a book to
remember and to buy. It is a real little work of art, like a picture by
Messonier, complete, finished, graceful, and with a certain precision and
restrained severity of taste characteristic of the books of this
author. The principal actors are verj' careful studies, and the heroine
is a most lovable creature in spite of her many imperfections. It is,
however, the slighter sketches which give in a few words excellent
portraits of the minor characters—the figures in the back-ground—
which seem to us to be especially happy. For instance, at a supper-
party at Carlsbad we have
" A Jewish financier, a bald-headed man, who believed, not in the Pentateuch, but in
music and in money. Then came three militarj' men, who believed in mirth and tobacco ;
then two atkicMs, who believed in themselves—a form of creed more widely spread than
even Buddliism. . . . Then Delfine, the fat blonde opera singer . . who would say
' Acli' and ' So,' and eat all the bonbons that he liked to give her ; for Delhne, besides
being what she called a 'friend of sugar,' had a prodigious appetite. Aged twenty-three,
poor and hard-worked, really very little in herself, and as nearly without qualities as it is
possible to be, she seemed just now to this feverish young musician, carefully brought up
in London, to be the ideal in person, simply because her voice prompted and suggested
all that was most intense in himself of sensibility and of passion."
Wlien the English husband takes his  Polish   Helen  to  the dull
country-house where " nothing ever happened," pre.sided over by his
226 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
mother—"a tall, lean, grey, angular woman, unlovely in person, shy
in manner, ignorant of literature, and without even any feminine
instinct in dress "—no wonder that the latter is rather scared even by
Helen's album.
" ' Who is that ?' asked Sarah, pointing to a most uneartlily-lookiug person.
' Oh, such a strange woman 1 She is an inconsolable widow, half paralysed now, who
has fitted up a room for herself in the vault where !ier husband is buried, and lived there
till she was quite perdue with rheumatism.'
' Heigho ! what wonderful devotion !' said Frank.
' Yes, and they were not at all happy while he lived. He tried poisons on every one,
and, they say, on her : and at last, by mistake, he poisoned himself. But even without
the ])oiiiOiiii,G'etaltitnmarlqutarait tons fcs torts.'
. . . . Now we come to the political characters. Mamma does not over-much like
my having all these in my book; but in England, of course, it does not matter. Voita
Konarski, who died on the scaftbld; the young Emilic Soplitza (none of that family ever
die in their beds) ; and Ladislans says, though it is thirty years since she died, let
Poland only have need of that house, and it will have again children to spare."
And so on, through a long list of doubtful or disreputable jjersonages.
No wonder that Helen, who came of the race, " and was ca2)able of
repeating in her own experience a dozen of those strange dramas which
she repeated to her mother-in-law," had as poor a chance of c^uiet
happiness as most of her nation.
" It is hard to say what quality was wanting in her, that all her good ones became not
only so useless, but so dangerous. Her ardent temper made her tear along the rails of
life at a pace that was certain to bring about collisions with her neighbours. She nnist
ultimately weary herself by her own eager paces, and in the meantime she expected far
too much from others, and made no secret of that delicate sensitiveness of the affections
which is our vulnerable spot—the point where people can make us suffer."
If the poor Helen had many of the faults of her people, she belongs
to a family, we are inclined to say, almost too delightful to be Poles,
who, indeed, have often great charm of manner ; but very seldom do
we hear of their showing such heroic qualities as those of the
Malinofska family. For, if ever political misfortunes were the direct
result of political crimes, they were so in the case of Poland, whose
distracted history, while she had a national existence, is sometimes
now forgotten in sympathy for her ruined condition.
Log Letters from the " Challenger."   By Lord George Campbell.
Fourth Edition.    London : Macmillan & Co., 1877.
Science is ra])idly becoming popular, and would be much more so
than at ju'esent were more liooks like Log Letters from the Challenger
written. That it has already reached a fourth edition, witnesses not
only to the interest of the su.bject, but also to the excellence of the execu¬
tion of the writer's task. With the charm of truth, added to glowing
descriptions and a racy style, resembling South Sea BulMes, but (juite
free from the dash of coarseness which mars that otherwise capital book.
Lord George Cami)bell carries us right round the world, introduces us
with equal ease to men and animals, birds, fish, amphibians, plants,
and insects—rare and strange ; to magnificent tropical scenery, to the
icy landscape of Kergueleu Land and its famous cabbage; to the gigantic
volcano of Mauna Loa, in Hawaii; to the little-known people and land
of the Japanese, and to the untamed natives of New Guinea. At the
same time, a clear idea is given us of the special work upon which
the " Challenger " was employed, of the scientific results obtained, and
of the means by which the work was accomplished ; whilst full opjior-
tunity is meanwhile aflbrded us for a hearty laugh over abortive
efforts, when, after hours of hard work, the dredge brought up nothing
but mud and a broken starfisli, or other unprofitable matter.    Even
Our Library Table. 227
mud, however, is not to be despised in these deep-sea dredgings ; for,
as is now well known, the character of the niud brought up by the
dredge in various parts of the ocean, and at different depths, has been
of the greatest value to geologists, enabling them to explain rock for¬
mations which have hitherto been a puzzle, and proving conclusively
that the forces in operation to rear, in remote geologic ages, the
stupendous limestone and coral rocks of our existing continents, are
still at work, forming, from countless myriads of minute decomposing
shells, a sediment at the bottom of the ocean, to be gradually elevated
and perhaps built upon by innumerable coral insects, till by degi-ees
raised and consolidated into future islands and continents, when the
solid ground upon which we tread shall have once more subsided into
the bosom of the restless deep. Most amusing are the sketches given
of the habits and manners of the penguins, and various other sea-
birds, who seem busy preparing a supply of guano to revive the
energies of the present virgin soil 01 the South Sea Islands and
Australia, when these lands, like some parts of Europe, shall have
become exhausted by excessive cultivation. Lord George Camjibell
re-echoes the praises bestowed by the " Earl and the Doctor " upon
the natives of the South Sea Islands ; and indeed, according to all
travellers, they would seem to be a most interesting and intelligent
race, although, alas ! gradually but surely decaying beneath civiliza¬
tion, with its attendant vices, diseases, and artificial wants. Of all the
islands visited, the Sandwich Islands seem to have been the least
attractive to the writer of Loy Letters. He says—" To me there is
nothing South Sea Islandish about the Sandwich Islands—nothing in
the scenery, vegetation, or birds—nothing in the natives, chiefly
because I fancy they are universally dressed and uglily dressed, the
men in trousers, and the women in shapeless sacks. To this dressing
is ascribed in great part the rapid decrease of the population—colds
and consumption following on intermittent nakedness one morning,
and heavy clothing the next." It seems a pity that our well-meant
efforts at civilization should thus tend to extermination ; and we
cannot help believing that the ends of morality and decency might be
equally attained by encouraging the manufacture and use of native
garments, as by importing calico and shoddy from England. Habits
of industry would thus be induced, which would be of incalculable
benefit to the people in helping them to develop the natural
resources of their lovely fertile islands ; whereas, at present, tlie
ingenious native manufacture of tajjpa cloth, made from the inner
bark of a species of mulberry, is given up, and there is no industry to
supply its place. Kava drinking has given place to the consumption
of the pernicious orange rum, and idleness and drunkenness are
decimating the population.
We may safely predict that whoever takes up this charming volume
will not put it aside before every word has been read. From the first
page to the last it is full of interest, both to the general reader and to
the scientist, and it is impossible to read it without both pleasure and
profit. Of the scientific results of the cruise we cannot here speak;
suffice it to say, that the system of ocean circulation has been
established, and that for the first time it has been possible to construct
a map of the risings and depressions in the ocean bed, which will add
greatly to our store of knowledge, alike of the past and of the present.
A. W. BUCKLAND,
228 TJie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
STEAY   NOTES.
The Edinburgh University Local Examinations have created con¬
siderable stir tlirougliout Scotland this year. There were no fewer
than twenty-four Centres needed to satisfy the demands of candidates
in various parts of the country, including two Centres in England,
viz. :—London and Peterborough. This is an advance of thirteen on
the number of Centres formed last year. Altogether, these Examina¬
tions seem to be taking a firm hold in Scotland, and to their power we
look for great improvement in the general education of the country.
In our May number, we asked why no one had followed the example
of Cambridge in offering a prize of .£10 or of £\h for excellence in
Special Subjects. We are happy to announce that this query has not
been in vain. A " constant reader" has been moved to offer i,'10 as a
prize for excellence in Latin at the Local Examinations of June 1878.
We learn with great pleasure that a Ladies' Educational Association
is now formed in Aberdeen. A public meeting, attended by many
influential citizens, was held on 11th Jvme, for the formation of this
Association. Its aims are sound, and are summed uj) under the three
following heads :—1. To establish Advanced Classes for young ladies,
to be conducted chiefly by Professors in the University of Aberdeen.
2. To promote the extension to this district of the system of Local
University Examinations. 3. To aid generally in promoting the
Higher Education of Women. We wish this new association very
great success.
We cannot allow the announcement of the death of Miss Mary
Carpenter to pass without notice. The life-labours of so earnest and so
indefatigable a worker can be but slightly comprehended by the many
who are ignorant of the extent of her zeal and efforts ; but even to such
her name will be ever associated with the benevolent reforms which
have been brought to bear iipon the young waifs and strays of this
land. While we honour her for the self-devotion with which she
carried out her great aims, let us not forget that as a woman her charac¬
ter showed other evidence of depth of feeling, and of culture ; and
assuredly her work among the neglected and erring lower classes of
society was such as must be carried out, if the higher education, now so
vigorously promoted, is to be more than a superficial toi:)-dressing.
Ladies are invited to contribute to this Magazine.
A Prize is offered for the best article received by the Editors and
accepted for insertion during the current year, on any one of our
British Female Novelists born in the 18th century.
At the next meeting of the Ladies' Edinburgh Literary Society, to
be held on Saturday, July 7th, at 5 Chester Street, at 11 o'clock,
instead of a formal debate, each member present will give a short
description and criticism, original or quoted, of any picture whicli she
has seen.
No meetings will be held in the months of August and September,
Our Female Novelists. 229
VII.
LADY MOEGAN (SYDNEY OWENSON).
6. 1782 ; d. 1859.
On the 16th of April 1859, there died at her house, 11 Wil¬
liam Street, Lowndes Square, London, a little old lady, who
had been—perhaps more than any woman of her day—the idol
at once of literature and of society, the flattered of wit and
wisdom, the courted of prince and peer—the brilliant Sydney
Owenson, Lady Morgan. Twenty years have not passed since
that day, and yet to how few is the name, once so full of
association with all that is piquant, fascinating, and famous,
more than the veriest shadow of a shade !
" What has a woman to do with dates ? " characteristically
exclaims our heroine in the first chapter of her Memoirs; and
accordingly it is only by rather uncertain comparison that
we can assign the birthday, which she thus proceeds graphi¬
cally to describe, to somewhere about the year 1782.
" I was born on Christmas-day, in that land where all
holy days are religiously celebrated as testimonials to faith,
and are excuses for festivity—in ' Ancient Ould Dublin.'
There was, on that joyous night, one round table distin¬
guished above most others by the wit and humour of
the convives. The master of the feast was as fine a type
of the Irish gentleman as Ireland ever sent forth—his name
was ' Eobert Owenson.' " Wlien, ere the company had dis¬
persed, or the feast ended, the same convivial host an¬
nounced to his guests that he was made the happy father of
" a dear little Irish girl, the very thing I have always wished
for," the intelligence, continues the interested narrator, " was
responded to by a half-suppressed cheer, mellow as a low
mass, and hearty wishes of long life to her." The news was
" a reason fair to fill their glass again." The father with diffi¬
culty dispersed the joUy crew by accepting Lysaght's pro¬
posal, that they should all meet that day month at the chris¬
tening of the little heathen; and that he, Ned Lysaght, should
be the sponsor, and " vow three things in her name; which
he had ne\'er been able to observe in his own." I have
quoted somewhat at length our heroine's description of her
No. 32.—AuODST 1877- 2 G
230 The Ladies Edinhirgli Magazine.
first entrance on any stage, because there is much in it that
is ahnost curiously in keeping with the future life and cha¬
racter of that night's ddhdante, " The Wild Irish Girl" of
our memoir.
Sydney Owenson's father, the above-mentioned host of the
jovial Christmas  supper, Eobert  Owenson, was  a  Celtic
Irishman, and an actor, the son of a young Irish farmer, by
name Walter MacOwen, whose prowess at a country hurling
match had won the admiration, and ultimately the hand, of
the Queen of Beauty of the day, the orphan granddaughter
of Sir Malby Crofton—a woman of genius, a poetess, and
musician, whose talents were so appreciated by her Irish
neighbours, that they gave her the sobriquet of Clasagh-na-
Valla, or the Harp of the Valley.    Talent and a love for art
were thus hereditary in the family, as well as the jollity and
conviviality which made the farmer-husband of Clasagh-na-
Valla the hero of every rustic frolic.   Eobert, the only child
of this   strangely-assorted  pair, seems   to  have  inherited
at once the athletic beauty of his father, and the artistic
instincts  of liis  mother.    While   still  a lad, his  magni¬
ficent musical voice attracted the attention of Mr Blake of
Ardfry, who adopted him;  and the young man's fortune
would have been made, but a passion for a prima-donna of His
Majesty's Theatre offended his patron, and led to his dis¬
missal.    The house of Oliver Goldsmith, his countryman
and relative, was his haven of refuge, who encouraged him
in the idea that acting was his forte, introduced him to
Garrick,   and   the  stage  became  his  profession.    In  the
course of a few years, this handsome, fascinating, harum-
scarum Irishman, in visiting an old class-fellow, met with
his pious, prudent sister, Miss Jane Hill, the daughter of
a substantial burgess of Shrewsbury, and wooed and won
her, in spite of the opposition of both father and brother, to
consent to a clandestine marriage.    Sydney Owenson thus
speaks  of   her   mother—" I   gratefully   acknowledge  the
memory of my mother's  worth ; and early as I lost her,
if there has ever come out in my poor nature a show of dis¬
cretion, and a scantling of that most uncommon quality,
common-sense, I owe it to her.    It is my inheritance from
my excellent English mother."
As miglit be expected, though there seems to have been
much afl'ection on both sides, the marriage was not a very
satisfactory one. Mrs Owenson " hated the stage, though slio
loved the actor," and there seems to liave been a continual
mental,  and  an occasionally audible, protest against   her
Our Female Novelists. 231
husband's profession. Of all this strangely-mingled lineage,
the subject of our notice was the first living descendant;
and she and her younger sister Olivia were brought up in the
hand-to-mouth manner, in the matter of education, which
resulted at once from the varying views and the uncertain
circumstances of their parents.
Their childhood was passed between Dublin, where the
old JMusic Hall had been converted into their house, and their
pretty villa at Drumcondra, where the family party consisted
of Mr Owenson, " who now always spent his Sundays at
home, and as much of his other days as his commercial, con¬
vivial, and dramatic avocations would allow;" Mrs Owen-
son, Sydney, Olivia, and the Welsh maid Molly, the faithful
factotum brought by her mistress across the channel at the
beginning of her married life, and who stuck by the family
through all its changing fortunes. Mrs Owenson's ideal of
education was supplied by a daughter "of the good Sir
Eowland Hill of Hawksley, who had read the Bible twice
through before she was five years old, and knitted all the
stockings worn by the coachmen ;" but, alas! Sydney wofully
disappointed her mother's ambition, for she could not " even
learn the few verses Avhich open the genealogy of the
patriarchs." But though she could not be taught to read,
the young brain was by no means idle ; she " wove all her
favourites among cats, dogs, and birds into stories, and
tagged doggrels together wliile lying awake half the night,
and, as soon as she could get a hearing in the mornint^, re¬
cited them to the kitchen," where " James undertook to
write it down, and Molly corrected the press."
"My father took me on one occasion," she relates, "to
^Moira House, and made me recite my poem, to which he had
taught me to add appropriate emphasis and action. The
Countess of Moira laughed heartily at the ' infant muse,' as
my father called me, and ordered the housekeeper to send up
a large plate of bread and jam—the earliest recompense of my
literary labours." The poem which met with this appropri¬
ate reward was as follows:—
" My dear pussy cat,
Were I a mouse or rat,
Sure 1 never would run off from ycni ;
You're so fiiiiiiy and gay.
With your tail when you play,
And no song is so sweet as your ' mew.'
But, pray, keep in your press,
And don't luake a mess
232 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
When you share with your kittens our posset;
For mamma can't abide you,
And I cannot hide you,
Except you keep close in your closet."
In spite of, or perhaps because of, " the education of the
children " being, as we are told, " a favourite theme of dis¬
cussion and disputation " between the parents, " it proceeded
in a desultory manner. The moment nature broke out into
any what noticeable act, discipline was brought in, and a
master was found for the time being, which always proved
to be a very short time indeed."
A pen-and-ink sketch of a pretty church by the road-side
made the fond father and mother prophecy a future Angelica
Kaufmann in the "infant muse," and a drawing-master
was summoned; but the threatened conversion of a cherub's
head into a negro's, in the inexperienced hands of the young
artist, dispelled their art visions. " Caligraphy and mathe¬
matics succeeded to the finer art," less apparently for the
sake of the scholar than to put something in the wallet of
" a poor fellow from Lough Eea, once a flourishing school¬
master, a great mathematician, and copperplate writer," now
a travelling pedlar, whose extempore instructions came also
to an abrupt termination, as Sydney thus narrates: " Paper
was got, lines were ruled, and Marcus TuUius Aufidius gave
me a line of strokes, and a line of A's and B's to copy. ' Now,
Miss, broad strokes down, hair strokes up.' I not only
copied these strokes, but I copied his most ridiculous mouth,
which he opened and shut to correspond with the ups and
downs of his pen. My little sister tittered ; my father and
mother, though angry, could not suppress their smiles; the
susceptible Marcus Tullius took offence, and rose in wrath,
saying, ' Och, then, Miss is too cliver for me entirely.' ' Well
then,' said my father, ' to ease your burden, we will for the
present take your Connemare stockings, and by-and-by your
instructions.'" And so ended the attempt at caligraphy
and mathematics!
" Synods " held twice a week for " religious disputation,"
at which Mrs Owenson was "the Protestant Pope among
them all," alternated with "musical rehearsals in the
morning or the evening, or whenever they could be held,
and a regular rehearsal every Sunday evening" of the
company of Signior Geordani's Italian Opera, in the
Owenson's house, the old Music Hall in Dublin; and at each of
them there was a highly interested auditor in the person of
the little Sydney.    Of regular education she seems to have
Our Female Novelists. 233
had none. A young poet-proteg6 of her father's, Thomas
Dermody by name, who for a time had a home in their house,
at last succeeded in teaching Sydney and her sister to read
and write—a feat which she tells us he accomplished through
their fondness for his society and fun! But this easy, happy,
desultory home-life was not to go on forever. Sydney was
still a child when, early one June, the "Eiding of the Fringes,"
a popular Irish festival, took place in the village of Glas
Nevin, near their house at Drumcondra. Mrs Owenson, who
had been for some time an invalid, was confined to bed, and Mr
Owenson was absent. " The servants, taking advantage of
the reldche from all authority," resolved " just to run down to
Glas Nevin to catch a peep at the Fringes," taking the little
Olivia with them, and leaving only a drunken gardener
asleep in the kitchen, and Sydney reading and watching at
the open window of her mother's bedroom. During their
absence the dark Messenger came to Mrs Owenson; and
almost before the frightened solitary child could summon
their assistance, or the returned husband reprove their con¬
duct, he was a widower, and his children motherless. " My
father," writes Sydney, " unconscious of the event at the
moment, was walking in restless agony up and down the
drawing-room, with a child in either hand. The doctors
arrived—feathers were burned and musk scattered about the
bedroom—the atmosphere was that of death; but we knew
it not till Molly entered and presented my father with my
mother's wedding ring, the Irish mode of announcing the
death of an Irish wife and mother."
Even at this early stage the strong character and warm
affections of the little Sydney showed themselves. The
children were sent to the house of a kind neighbour till the
funeral should be over, but Sydney was not to be kept from
her father. Twice arrested on the point of escape, at last
she succeeded by forcing herself through a hole cut in the
coach-house door to let the dog in and out, and at once fled
to her father's arms, where " the embrace and tears that
followed were a relief to both." He cliid her for coming.
" But papa," she said, " I promised dear mamma that I
would take care of you, and I must."
Mr Owenson was sincerely anxious for the well-being of
the two little girls thus left to his sole care and tender¬
ness, and at no small cost of privation to himself placed
them, as soon as possible, according to their dead mother's
earnest desire, at the best school in Ireland—" I may add,"
says   Sydney, "in  the  whole Ignited Kingdom,"  Madame
234 The Ladies Edinburgh Magaf:ine.
Terson's, in Portarlington. Here Sydney, had her first
experience of anything like systematic training; and
spirited, and doubtless spoiled, as the little Irish girl was,
she seems thoroughly to have appreciated the wise and
wholesome regime to which she was subjected. We find her
writing of her life during this period as follows:—"The
pure air, well-regulated habits, and frugal biit wholesome
diet, must have a beneficial influence, in after life, on the
mental and physical condition of those who were subject
to it, and which no home education could have given."
Her talent for story-writing made its first appearance in
a History of poor Hagar and her Desolate Boy, in wliich
she painted "her horrors at such injustice;" but Madame
Terson naturally did not approve of the paraphrase, and
threw the MS. in the fire, with a mild warning to the
young authoress not to meddle with such sacred subjects
till she could understand them.
Other less hazardous attempts at authorship, however,
followed, among which was an imitation of Goldsmith's
Retaliation, the names of the original being converted into
those of her school-fellows: a performance which won for
her an immense poj)ularity among the yoimg ladies so
honoured.
Nearly three happy years passed at Clontarf House,
where, among the best things they had acquired, Sydney tells
us, "was a respect for punctuality, and a fear of doing wrong,
the disgrace of which was substituted for punishment," when
unfortunately Madame Terson's health gave way, and she
retired into private life. Another school was chosen, Mrs
Anderson's, in Dublin; but it seems to have been a school of
lower tone, and to have exercised by no means tlie same
beneficial influence on its pupUs. Before the close of their
first year there, their father took them with him to spend
their summer holidays at Kilkenny; and on their return to
Dublin before the holidays were ended, they were left under
the care of their faithful Molly, in lodgings in St Andrew's
Street; wliUe their father set off hastily for the south of
Ireland, leaving an injunction to write to him every day.
Several of Sydney's letters of this period are preserved—
gay, light-hearted, frank, and aftectionate, with much graphic
power in describing persons and incidents, and not a little
of Irish wit. P>ut the clouds were gathering thickly round
poor Mr Owenson's fortunes, and his sudden journey to the
south proved to be in consequence of a statute of bankruptcy
which was in process against him, and ere long the news
Our Female Novelists. 235
reached the little party in St Andrew's Street. Instantly
Sydney's high spirit rose to the emergency. Her letter to
her father, on first hearing of his position, gives perhaps the
noblest view of the "Wild Irish Girl," then a cliild just
entering her teens, to be found in the whole Memoir, who,
whatever her faults in after life, never failed to exhibit
unfaltering courage, unfailing energy, and devoted affection.
"Dearest papa," she writes, "you see I have let two days
pass since I wrote last; but Olivia sent you, I know, a very
funny letter, with a caricature of Molly answering to her call,
"Tis I, my lord, the early village cock !' I have nothing so
amusing, dear papa, but I have made up my mind on a subject
which I trust you will not oppose, for there is no use in op¬
posing it.   Mr O'F has been here; he has told me all, and
I have seen your name on the list of statutes of bankruptcy.
Now for all this, dear Sir, we must relieve you from the
terrible expense you have been at for our education. Of this
I am resolved to relieve you, and to earn money for you, in¬
stead of spending the little you will have, for some time to
come. / ivill not go to any school where they can teach me no¬
thing I did not know before! I was at the head of my classes
at Madame Terson's; and as for Mrs Anderson, the vulgar
creature! she is not worth mentioning. Now, dear papa, I
have two novels nearly finished—the first is St Clair, I think
I wrote it in imitation of Werter, which I read in school-
holidays last Christmas; the second is a French novel, sug¬
gested by my reading the Memoirs of the Duke de Lidly,
and falling very much in love with Henri IV. Now, if I
had time and quiet to finish them, I am sure I could sell
them; and observe. Sir, Miss Burney got three thousand
pounds for Camilla, and brought out Evelina unknown to
her father; but all this will take time. Meanwhile, I want an
asylum both for myself and Olivia."
The young authoress, with all her hopes of ultimately
finding an Eldorado in authorship—hopes destined to be
better realized in her case than in that of most who have
entertained them—was prepared with a scheme for immediate
provision for their necessities, as practical and sagacious as
could have emanated from the brain of any woman of the
world,—a home and education for Olivia, and an asylum
for the faithful Molly, as children's maid, in the newly
founded private school of Madame Dacier, the late head
governess at Mrs Anderson's, at the extremely reasonable rate
of £25 a-year; and for herself a situation as "instructress or
companion to young ladies;" and already she has two situa-
2^6 The Ladies Edinburgh Magnrdne.
tions in view—"The one, Mr Sheridan's, the secretary of war;
the other, Dr Dickson's, the bishop of Limerick. Should the
latter answer,"she continues,"! should prefer, as it would take
me out of Dublin and all former acquaintances. Not that I
am ashamed of what I am about to do, but then, I think, you
will be, with your Irish pride; and as for Olivia and Molly,
I am afraid to break it to them. But I am resolved. I know
I shall go through my appointed task right well; and, as
Shakespeare says, 'All my corporal faculties are bound up
to the purpose.' I will not say more, dear papa, at present;
but I hope to have everything settled by the end of next
week, when we must give up these expensive apartments,
happen what may.—Your own old Sydney,"
In a small way Sydney was already an authoress, for her
father's "parental vanity" had led him, she tells us, to print
a small volume of her verses by the name of Poems hy a
Young Lady, hetween the age of twelve and fourteen. And
though, by her own account, " they had all the faults of
tiresome precocity," they seem to have been of some assist¬
ance in interesting friends in her behalf at this juncture in
her life.
Very soon after the former letter comes another to her
father, dated Castletown, Delvin, Westmeath, with the
information that she had already entered on her duties as
governess and companion to the two daughters of Mrs
reatherstonehaugh, of Bracklin Castle. The mode of arrival
at her future home is singularly amusing and characteristic.
All arrangements made for her journey; on the following
day she " accepted a farewell dinner, and a little dance after,
which Mr Fortaine called a fetit hal d'adieu; for the night
of my departure he said, ' The mail goes from the head of
this street; it will blow its horn when it is ready for you,
and we will all conduct you to your carriage.' Well, papa,
this was all very nice, for I wanted to be cheered; so I
dressed myself in my school dancing dress, a muslin frock,
and pink silk stockings and shoes. Molly had my warm
things to change in time for the mail. Well, dear papa,
we did not exactly mind our time; and the fatal result was,
that I was dancing down, ' money in both pockets,' with a
very nice young man, Mr Buck, the nephew to Miss Buck,
when the horn blew at the end of the street! Oh, Sir,
if you knew the panic! All that could be done was
for Molly to throw her warm cloak over me, with my own
bonnet, and my little bundle of things, so that I might dress
when I got to  Kinigad."    But the bundle  went astray
Onr Female Novelists. 237
during the night journey, and she had to appear in the
presence of her new employers in her " white muslin
frock and pink silk stockings," surmounted with Molly's
warm cloak and her own bonnet! Luckily, the Featherstone-
haughs were kind and genial people, who " screamed at the
fun " of her disaster between mutterings of " Dear little
thing—poor little thing;" and her relations with them, so
oddly begun, continued for several happy years. During
her residence with them she made a first attempt to publish
her novel, St Glair. Taking advantage of a visit to Dublin,
and disguised in the cook's market bonnet and cloak, she
sallied forth one morning before breakfast in search of a
publisher, intending " to take her chance of finding one iu
the streets of Dublin !" Chance led her to the shop of T.
Smith," printer and bookseller, who, as good luck would
have it, had known her father, and sent her on with a note
of introduction to a Mr Brown, on whose counter she was
allowed to deposit her MS.; but leaving town next day,
and having left no address with Mr Brown, she heard
nothing of her book, till long after she picked it up in print!
After leaving the Featherstonehaughs, Sydney went for a
time to live with her father and sister at Coleraine; but, as
her biographer remarks, " Sydney's virtues were not of the
patient, home-staying household kind. She was capable
of working hard in her own way, and she worked from the
honest stimulus of wishing to earn money to help her
father out of his diificulties; but she could not endure dulness
or discomfort;" and so, in spite of her love for both father
and sister, in a few months she quitted them to take another
situation in the family of Mr Crawford, at Fort-William, in
the north of Ireland.
Another novel, also called St Glair, or First Love, but
apparently different from the story of the name which had
been so unceremoniously published by Mr Brown, was pub¬
lished by her in Dublin, in 1802.
Again quitting the Crawfords, she joined her father and
sister at Inniskillen, and there finished her novel in six vol¬
umes. The Novice of St Dominic. " Without one friend to
recommend, when I wished to publish The Novice," she writes,
" I looked in a newspaper for a bookseller's name—I saw E.
Phillip's, and wrote to him." He answers, "That though
charmed with the ingenuousness of her letter, he must see
and read before engaging for her new work." And Sydney
resolves to take The Novice to London herself. " When the
coach drove into the yard of the Swan with two necks, in
No. 32.—August 1877. 2  II
238 T!ie Ladies Edinhnrgli Magazine.
Lad Lane, she had not a notion where to go, or what to do next,
and sat down upon her small trunk in the yard to wait until
the bustle of arrival should have a little subsided. Overcome
with fatigue and anxiety, slie fell fast asleep !" Next morn¬
ing, however, " with unabated spirit, she proceeded to seek
her publisher, taking her MS. with her." The novel was
accepted, on condition of the six volumes being reduced to
four; and Phillips, "fascinated into aliberality almost beyond
his judgment," paid her at once ; and though " this first
fruit of her success could do but little towards rescuing
Eobert Owenson from his embarrassments, the fact that she
could earn money by her pen was more than relief to both
father-and daughter : it was hope and fortune."
Her first purchases for herself out of her literary earnings
were an Irish harp, and a black mode cloak. The Novice of
St Bominic was published in 1805,and proved a great success;
and henceforth Sydney Owenson was a successful writer.
The Lay of the Lrish LLarp, a collection of poems and
melodies, appeared the next year; and shortly after The
Wild Lrish Girl. For this book she got three hundred
pounds from Phillips, and from henceforth her literary repu¬
tation was made. " The great secret of the success of The
Wild Lrish Girl," says her biographer, "was, that it conveyed,
in a vivid and romantic story, curious information about the
social condition, the manners, customs, literature, and anti¬
quities of Ireland."
Ever after Sydney Owenson's literary career was a
triumphal progress; publishers competed for her books, and
peeresses for her company, but she never relaxed her labour.
" To the end of her days she always thought of her position in
life as a conquest; the titles and equipages of her great ac¬
quaintance were to her what scalps are to an Indian ' brave,'
outward and visible signs of conquest, not inheritance." Lda
of Athens,her next novel, was published by Messrs Longmans,
in 1809. It is described as written under many distractions,
and containing much " perilous stuff." It procured for her
" the thorny honour" of a review in the Quarterly. It was less
successful than her previous works; and Lady Morgan her¬
self seems to have been rather ashamed of it, and speaks of it
as " a bad book."
Brilliant and fascinating, it was not to be expected that
Sydney Owenson could escape her fair share of lovers,
and we find traces of sundry flirtations. One only, that
witli Sir Charles Ormsby, who is described as " the
ugliest fellow, and the most accomplished gentleman,  in
Our Female Novelists. 239
Dublin," appears in any degree to have affected her; but,
though evidently much attached to each other, there seems
to have been no definite engagement between them, and
eventually they quari-elled, and all intimacy seems to have
ceased, though they continued to have much mutual regard
for each other. At last, however, the brilliant coquette met
her fate in Dr Morgan, made for the occasion Su- Charles
Morgan, the family physician of the Abercorn family,
in whose house she was for some years a resident. " The
Wild Irish Girl" was not easily to be caught, and the
worthy doctor seems to have had hard times of it during
their engagement; and there is no saying how long his trials
might have endured, or how they might have ended, had not
his friend, the marchioness, come to the rescue in the follow¬
ing peremptory manner:—" On a cold morning in January,
Sydney was sitting in the library by the fire, in her morning
wrapper, when Lady Abercorn opened the door, and said,
' Glovina, come upstairs directly, and be married; there
must be no more trifling!' Her ladyship took Miss Owen-
son's arm, and led her upstairs into her dressing-room,
where a table was arranged for the ceremony, the family
chaplain standing in full canonicals, with his book open, and
Sir Charles ready to receive her. There was no escape left.
The ceremony proceeded, and the Wild Irish Girl was
married past redemption."
Once caught, Sydney Owenson made a most affectionate
and happy wife. Her husband seems to have been a man
of a highminded, generous, and affectionate nature. " He,"
says her biographer," kept her steady, and she kept him from
stagnating into indolent repose.
To Mrs Lefann, her most intimate correspondent, she thus
writes, in February 1812, a month after her marriage:—
" Since you will not even ask me how I am, I will volun¬
teer the information of my being as happy as being loved
up to my bent (ay, and almost beyond it) can make me."
And the mutual affection lasted untarnished during all the
thirty years of their married life. The first entry in Lady
Morgan's diary, after her widowhood, is—" Oh, my husband !
I cannot endure this. I was quite unprepared for this! So
ends my life. Nov. 1843, Plus ne m'est rien, rien ne m'est
plus."
In 1813, she published her novel of O'Donnel, for which
she received five hundred and fifty pounds, and which had a
success exceeding even that of The Wild Irish Girl.
In 1815-16, she and her husband visited Paris, taking with
240 The Ladies^ Edinburgh Magazine.
them introductions which admitted them to Parisian society
of every shade of politics—Madame de Genlis, Madame
Patterson Bonaparte, Monsieur de Lafayette, are among the
acquaintances of this period; and in 1817, her work on France
was published. It made a great sensation. Both abuse
and praise were showered on it in no measured degree. The
Quarterly assailed it in an article " almost proverbial for its
virulence and bitterness." Lady Morgan was rather proud
than otherwise of the commotion it made: and she amply
avenged herself by putting John Wilson Croker, who had
the credit of writing it, into her next novel, Florence
Macarthy, which appeared in the following year. Another
work was arranged for in the same year by Colburn, on
Italy, Lady Morgan to write the Observations and Sketches,
and Sir Charles the Chapters on its Laws, Politics, Science, and
Education, for the copyright of which they were to receive
two thousand pounds. This book appeared simultaneously
in London and Paris, in 1821. It produced even a greater
sensation than the Avork on France. Lord Byron writes of
it: " Lady Morgan's work is fearless, and excellent on the
subject of Italy. Pray, tell her so ; and I know the country."
Her fame was now at its height. Colburn writes, at the
close of the same year, offering two thousand pounds for
a similar work on GJermany ; but this proposition never came
to anything, Lady Morgan being then engaged on her Life and
Times of Salvator Rosa, which appeared in 1823, and for which
she received five hundred pounds. In 1827, The OBriens and
0'Flaherties, which was even more popular than her previous
stories, was published, Colburn paying her for the copyright
one thousand three Imndred pounds. In 1829, her second
work on France appeared, which Avas destined to cause her
more annoyance than any of her previous books, through the
unscrupirlous rage of her late publisher Colburn, whom she
had deserted for Messrs Saunders & Otley, and who took
every means to injure the sale of the book and her literary
reputation, with only too much success. Among her
correspondents at this time we find notes from Moore,
Campljell, and Mrs Hemaus. Her next publication Avas
Dramatic Scenes and Sketches, given by her to Messrs
Saunders & Otley, in the hope that it would prove a com¬
pensation for the loss they had sustained on her prcAdous
Avork; but neither did this prove such a brilliant success as it
deserved, though it is considered one of Lady Morgan's best
Avorks.
In 1837, Sir Charles and Lady Morgan bade farcAvell to
After the Rain. 24I
the pretty house in Kildare Street, Dublin, which had been
their  home  during  all   their  previous  married  life,  and
settled in London, where she set about writing an important
work. Woman and Her Master.    The idea of the work is to
demonstrate that, in spite of apparent subordination, women
have in all ages been " the depositaries of the vital and lead¬
ing idea of the time;" but Lady Morgan's health and eye¬
sight were failing, and only the first instalment of the work
was finished.    In 1842, the " Book loithoid a Name" a col¬
lection of sketches and articles by Sir Charles and Lady
Morgan, appeared; and in 1843, Sir Charles died.  Henceforth
Lady Morgan's life had fallen into the sear and yeUow leaf.
Eesolute as ever, she put away her sorrow, and returned to
the world which had become a necessity to her; but few
things are sadder than the subsequent entries in the Dooms-
dcnj Book, as she calls her diary, seldom opened now but to
record the passing away of another, and yet another, of the
friends of her earlier days.    " So I reel on! " she writes;
" the world is my gin or opium.    I take it for a few hours
per diem—excitement, intoxication, absence!    I return to
my   desolate   home,  and   awaken   to  all  the  horrors  of
sobriety."    In her house in William Street, using society as
a sop to son'ow, the last years of this brilliant life passed
away.    The first entry in her diary for 1859 is as follows :—
" January 1. This day my Odd Volume, probably my last,
made its appearance in the world I'enfant de ma vieillcsse.
This csqiiisse has a success more universal and cheerful than
ever attended any of my works."    Her spirit and energy,
and capacity for work, were hardly diminished from the time
of her girlhood, but the end was near.    A cold, apparently
slight  at first,  became serious;  painful attacks of spas¬
modic breathings came on, and at the end of a fierce struggle
for breath, she said to her niece, who was supporting her,
" Sydney, is this death?"    And on the evening of the 16th
of April 1859, Lady Morgan passed away.
Jeanie Morison.
AFTER THE RAIN,
The summer storm is over,
And clouds dispersed again ;
Nature, refreshed, is resting
After tke rain.
^42 '^^'■^ Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
From one leaf to another,
In a scarcely stirring plane,
The drops like tears are falling
After the rain.
And from its topmost branches
Comes a sudden joyful strain—
A blackbird singing gladly
After the rain.
I could not choose but listen,
Half in pleasure, half in pain,
To what that bird was singing
After the rain.
In my heart had raged a tempest,
There, too, it was still again,
Tho' clouds hung dark and heavy
After the rain.
My lot seemed drear and lonely.
My wild heart would complam,
No voice of praise ascended
After the rain.
And now I wandered restless,
And seeking for peace in vain.
Until that song was uttered
After the rain.
No longer I felt weary
When I heard that joyous strain ;
It fell like balm, and soothed me,
After the rain.
My heart, no more repining,
Caught up the glad refrain ;
The bird and I were singing
After the rain.
Crocus Forster Leigh.
A TALE OF SELF-SACRIFICE.
" Let me  .
Die, if dying I may give
Life to one who asks to live."
LON'GFELLOW.
There is a land of fruitful valleys and fertile plains where
the olive grows, and purple grapes are plentiful, and scarlet
pomegranates blush under the plane trees. Valleys imply
mountains, and  mountains there are:   Olympus, with its
Alcestis. 243
head among the clouds; Ossa; and Pelion,^the sentinel on
the sea-coast. Many a picturesque legend belongs to this
land of Thessaly: strange stories cling with the mists to the
mountains' sides—the brooks babble of quaint fancies.
One sweet tale has been often told with pen and pencil.
It is the story of Alcestis, the devoted wife; and the scene is
laid in Pherw, a city of the plains.
Once, in the beginning of time, there was mourning and
despair in Pheroe, the royal city of Thessaly, and in the
palace of Admetus its king, for the fiat of the Fates had
gone forth—Admetus must die. Even now the thread of
his life was spun out; and the dark-robed Atropos, with hand
upon her shears, drew near to sever it for ever.
Then in the great strait of his mortal sickness the king
bethought him of a boon the gods had granted long ago,
that if one of his nearest and dearest would die in his stead,
the sacrifice should ransom the forfeit-life of Admetus.
For a moment a ray of hope illumined the king's despair,
and then departed swiftly as it came; for where might he
look to find a mortal willing to brave death for his sake ?
Father, mother, kindred, friends, sorrowed full of anguish for
their doomed beloved one, but none volunteered to make
the required sacrifice; for ah! life is sweet, and death is
terrible !
There was one who had hung over the royal couch day
by day with loving ministry, deaf and blind as it seemed to
all except what concerned the prostrate figure lying there.
But now she rose up, this queenly form, with the flowing
draperies, and her eyes shone like twin-stars with the
inspiration of her noble purpose. She looked away dreamily
through the open casement round which vine-leaves
quivered in the sunset warm with sunny life, and in the far
distance her gaze rested on the purple slopes of Olympus,
with crest ever hidden from view like a mortal's hereafter.
She sighed: then, stooping, pushed back with gentle
fingers the curls clustering round Admetus' brow, and kissed
him, whispering softly, " Husband! sleep in peace. For
thee, Alcestis dares to brave even the shades of Death!"
Why was it summer, and the world so fair ?
The goats browsed lazily on happy hill-sides; shepherds
piped to their flocks; a sweet tumult of bird-notes filled the
zephyrous air. Nature seemed to mock Alcestis with its
vivid life, and make it harder still to die.
To loose her hold for ever of the warm hands clasping
244 TJie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
hers, to bid farewell and go alone out of this bright world
into the drear and terrible unknown, to wander a shadow
among shadows in a passionless existence, where love was
not, nor hope, nor joy of life, to drink of Lethe till even
memory grew pale. Tliese things had made even the
kingly heart of Admetus quail, and should Alcestis be
found fear-proof ?
Yes,/or him.
That thought sweetened all for the loving wife, as in the
calm dignity of high resolve she put aside all dread and
doubtings, and waited strong-hearted for the messenger of
the Fates. All day long, from sunrise to sunset, the queen
Alcestis waited, crowned doubly a queen by this majesty
of her sorrow. Her maidens wept around her, her little
children clung to her knees, and wailed with piteous voices,
but she—was tearless. And at even, when all the land was
wrapped in the dim mystery of twilight—when the very sun
had turned away his face not to witness the sad sacrifice—
the summons came. With one long-drawn yearning sigh of
farewell, Alcestis departed to the Land of Shadows, and
Admetus rose up strong and vigorous, once more to taste
what of joy life had left for him.
Joy ?—Nay ; Alcestis had stolen all the sweetness out of
life, and carried it with her to the Shadow-Land. This woi'ld
about him was emptied of delight for evermore.
IL
It clianced on the desolate day following, when all hearts in
Pherce were sore for Alcestis, that a traveller arrived at the
palace-portal, and begged admittance. He seemed a-weary
with long journeying, and rested on the knotted club he
carried, as if glad of its support.
Admetus' doors and Admetus' heart had always been
open to all who claimed his hospitality; and now, notwith¬
standing the cloud overshadowing Pherce, the palace-gates
were rolled back on their hinges, and the stranger bidden to
the best that Pheroe could give.
He was tall of stature, and it seemed as though a lurking
strength lay dormant in the relaxed muscles of his mighty
frame. He wore a lion's skin girt about his person, and the
fierce head of the royal beast, terrible even in death, glared
from over his shoulder at those who dared to look. At sight
of him the little ones of Admetus ran affrighted away, so for¬
midable was his aspect.
Akestis. 245
The board was spread, and the wine flowed plentifully,
and with it strength and boldness flowed anew into the veins
of the exhausted stranger. Then for the first time he noted
the gloom brooding over hospitable Pherce, and inquired into
the cause.
" We mourn our lady, the gentle Alcestis," replied the
weeping attendants ; and hereupon, with tears and lamenta¬
tions, they unfolded all the tale.
At that the guest of Admetus sprang to his feet, and a
gleam like summer lightning flashed from his eagle eyes.
" Whither went your lady ? " he questioned quickly.
For answer, they pointed in silence towards the Shadow-
Land.
Thereat, without even waiting to thank his host for his
entertainment, this strange visitor caught up his club and
strode out of the palace. His tread was the tread of a hero
among men; and those he had left behind looked at one
another, and whispered under their breath: " It is Heracles,
the Deliverer!" Whereupon a vague unreasoning hope crept
into their sorrowful hearts, and lodged there.
The dark mists arose from marshy swamps, and rolled up
from hidden valleys, as in brief space afterwards Heracles
stood upon the brink of the river which separates mortals
from the Shadow-Land.
Black and terrible flowed the waters of Acheron, lapping
with a sullen plash at the keel of the waiting boat; but,
nothing daunted, the hero sprang aboard, and bade Charon,
the grim ferryman, put off across the stream. As he drew
near to land, he scanned the shore eagerly, but the banks of
Acheron stretched away on either hand barren and deserted :
no glimpse could he gain of the two he was seeking.
Then Heracles flung his passage-money at the feet of his
surly steersman, and landing, strode on past the fiery torrent
of Phlegethon, deeper and deeper into the nether world. He
passed the flood of sad Cocytus, whose waters, men say,
are made of human tears; and saw close beside the dusky
portal behind which Somnus sleeps upon his ebon couch.
The drowsy influence of poppy and nightshade stole over his
senses, the river of Forgetfulness enticing plashed its
plaintive lullaby, but the hero pushed on unheeding of all.
Strange shades flitted by in the darkness, weird cries assailed
his ears and chilled his blood; the place seemed full of
piteous faces peering from dim cypress groves. Then, as he
went, imploring hands were stretched out to him,—despair-
Ko. 32.-August 187T. 2 I
246 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
ing fingers clutched at his garments, mutely beseeching
deliverance, for even to these haunts of woe his hero-fame
had spread. He was heart-wrung by this ever-present
anguish ; nevertheless, daring not to tarry, he shut eyes
and ears, and liastened on through gloom illumined by no
sunbeam, through hideous shapes and flaming fires, till far
in the distance he spied at last the two dim forms of the two
he sought—Alcestis, the pale captive, and Death, the King of
Terrors, flitting before him in the dark. Then Heracles
braced himself for the struggle and strode the faster, and
coming up with Death, at last compelled him to stay his
flight.
And now did a conflict follow such as no moi'tal mind
can picture, while Heracles, the hero-champion, WTestled
with Death for his prey.
The gloom deepened, the wmds stood still, the immortals
themselves looked on with breath suspended at the meeting
of those two great ones. Long and dreadful was the fight,
bvit for this once the mighty King of Terrors had found a
mightier than himself. Heracles prevailed at last, and,
coming off conqueror, bound Death fast with diamond
chains, and forced him to release his victim.
So the victory was won; so Alcestis, the gentle captive,
trembling, astonished, as yet scarcely believing in her
deliverance, was loosed from her bondage, and made free to
go whithersoever she would.
III.
Now it happened on a morning when the grief of Admetus
was some days old, yet every day more bitter, tliat the king
came forth at early dawn, and paced to and fro before liis
palace in sad self-communing.
The fount Hyperia was gushing forth its silver-voiced
waters, the birds were awaking with cliirping and trills to
another day of careless-hearted song; but for Admetus no
new day of joy would awaken any more. Content and he
had parted company.
Full of sorrowful thoughts, in which self-reproach barely
mingled, he walked through this blithe Thessalian land,
rich witli the plentiful fruits of the earth, and abundant
flocks and herds. Wliile he mused—contrasting this lonely
present witli the happy past—suddenly there came to the
ears of Admetus a strain of soft sweet music stealing up
out of the distance above, around, he knew not whence.
Alcestis. 247
The dawn ^as strengthening; the first beams of the
rising sun were dispersing the mists of morning. It seemed
to Admetus presently that those rosy rays gathered them¬
selves together into the semblance of a form divinely
beautifid, whom by his long floating fair hair, and by the
golden lyre he held in his hand, the king knew to be Apollo,
the Sun-God.
In former days, the great Apollo, exiled from Olympus for
some offence against the majesty of Zeus, had sought refuge
with Admetus, and served him in the disguise of a herdsman
for nine long years. Apollo, therefore, we may be sure,
could feel for the grief of the Thessalian king, because he
had known and loved the gentle Alcestis; nay, some legends
tell that he himself had stooped to plead with Death for
mercy, though in vain.
Pleased, yet half in awe at the transformation of his
lowly herdsman, the sad king welcomed his gifted visitor,
and then, sure of his ready compassion, would have poured
out his tale of sorrow, had not Apollo stopped him, and with
the kingly air of authority which sat so well upon him, bade
Admetus return to the palace where guests were waiting his
coming. "With reluctant steps, not daring to disobey,
Admetus turned towards that home whose charm was hence¬
forth lost for him. We can fancy him re-passing the portal,
and moving forward indifferent, yet courteous always,
through the as yet dimly-lighted vestibule, where stood the
new claimants on his hospitality.
The one seemed to be a female form veiled and half-hidden
by her ample loose-falUug di'aperies. In the other, Admetus,
with mild surprise, recognised the unceremonious guest who
had lately quitted Pheroe with such scant leave-taking.
Waiting for no greeting, the stranger steps boldly forward.
He is calm of speech, but there is a gleam as of triumph in
his eye.
" I left you in haste, 0 Admetus," we may imagine him
saying; " I left you in haste, and gave you no thanks for the
hospitality shown without stint to the weary wayfarer,
because I am plain of speech, as all men know, and find
deeds easier than words. Nevertheless, I noted your sorrow,
and would fain assuage it, for Heracles is not ungrateful. I
bring you here one to share your heart and throne, who shall
replace the loving lady you have lost, and be to you ten
times dearer still.    These are my thanks, O Admetus !"
And taking the veiled lady by the hand, he would have
presented her to the king, but Admetus waved him back
impatiently.
248 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
"None but Alcestis herself shall ever fiU Alcestis' place !"
he cried, vehement and determined. " None can rival my
dear lost lady !"
" Decide not so hastily," besought Heracles persisting.
" Do but lift the veil, and judge for yourself!"
"It is useless," answered the king, still obdurate. "Alcestis
was peerless among women; none less worthy shall share
my heart and throne ! "
Nevertheless Heracles persevered, again and again implor¬
ing Admetus not to despise the gift which the gods had
sent him ; so that at last, wearied with his importunity, the
king gave way and consented that the stranger should
discover herself
The silence of a moment follows in that dim grand hall—
a moment of suspense andheartbeatings; while all eyes turn
upon the silent visitor, waiting a Httle withdrawn into the
background for the king's decision.
Then at last she advances; her step is uncertain, faltering;
strangely does she tremble. Nevertheless, with ineffable
grace, the veil is thrown back, and Admetus sees—0 Death!
0 Life! what wonder is this ? Sees no stranger, but Alcestis
herself in warm living beauty standing there before him;
coming, falling on his neck, clasping liim heart to heart in
an eloquent silence!
The legend ends here: great joys, like great sorrows, should
be let alone of our poor words. But can we not picture for
ourselves the bliss of that rapturous home-comiug ?   Touched,
1 think, with something of solemnity; for none of mortal
race can travel, if only to the borders of the Shadow-Land,
and return unchanged.
Cannot our fancy go further, and build up for the two a
happy after-life, wherein the loving devotion of Alcestis
shall find its meet reward ?
And what of her brave deliverer? He went his way once
more to wage anew his lifelong warfare against the Tyrant
Death, and was hero of many another mighty deed which
crowned his name with honour.
On clear frosty nights, men, looking skyward, may still
see the memory of Heracles pricked out in sUver stars upon
an azure ground; and seeing, remember how the brave and
wise of the world do ever "shine as the brightness of the
firmament," and " as tlie stars for ever and ever!"
Gkatia,
Where shall we Go? 249
I.—TEY COESICA.
BY ONE WHO  HAS  DONE SO.
Having derived a great deal of enjoyment from two recent
visits to this comparatively little frequented island, I
propose to give a very slight account of our experiences
there, hoping to induce others to follow our example. The
voyage, short though it is, will always prevent Corsica
from being overrun by tourists, which in itself is no small
recommendation in these days, when every winter resort is
full to overflowing; but it has, besides this, much to attract
those who travel for pleasure, and like to combine a fine
climate with grand scenery, and are content with something
less pretentious than the large and expensive hotels of
the Kiviera.
We started for our first visit to Corsica in the middle of
January 1875, leaving Leghorn by one of the Eubaltino
steamers, which ply between that place and Bastia twice
a-week.
The morning was clear and frosty, and the view from the
deck of the "Bastia," at 10 a.m., was extremely beautiful,
the Apennines standing out sharply against a cloudless sky,
glistening in their dazzling covering of freshly fallen snow,
and forming a lovely background to the busy town and
harbour we were quitting. The time usually taken for the
voyage is about six hours, but our experience was unfortun¬
ately a much longer one.
The sea was very rough when we started, but by no
means unpleasant, and whilst close under Capraia the water
was almost smooth by comparison; but just when we saw
the lights of Bastia shining cheerily a short distance ahead
of us, we were doomed to a most tedious and unexpected
delay, for we were ruthlessly dashed away from the harbour
by the fierce blast of the Libeccio, for which the east coast
of Corsica is famed. This terrible wind tore down upon us
from the mountains, and literally turned our small steamer
completely round, sending her careering up the coast for
several miles, at the mercy of the savage white squall, so
common to the Mediterranean, whose acquaintance we made
for the first,  and,  we hope,  for the  last time,  on  this
250 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
occasion. No less than four times did we vainly attempt a
landing with the like disappointment; and it was only after
the fifth trial that we were enabled to come to anchor close
to the harbour, after which we had a very excitmg quarter of
an hour in a small boat, which ultimately deposited us safe
and sound, but wet to the skin, on the quay in front of the
Douane. The next day was so calm that it was almost
impossible to believe that the misery of the past evening was
not all a dream; but we were told that we had in reality
encomitered the worst Libeccio which had been known for
a year or two.
Our first day in Corsica was an extraordinary change from
the cold which we had left behind us in Italy, being exactly
like a fine warm June day in England, only that the sky
was of a far more intense blue. We spent our morning
sitting under umbrellas, for the sun was very powerful,
enjoying the warmth and the various views of the quaint old
town backed by hills; and then turning round to wonder at
the glassy smoothness of the sea, and the beautiful islands of
Capraia and Elba.
The afternoon was devoted to a drive along the coast to
see the grotto of Brando, which, though a very beautiful
specimen of its kind, was of small interest compared to the
scenery through which our road lay. It is a miniature
" Corniche," winding round a series of little bays, each with
its old martello tower, or cluster of quaint brown houses,
with here and there a private mausoleum standing in its little
garden, containing a cypress or two, and a few flowers, with a
vine or fig-tree usually trained on its wall.
The rich vegetation, scarlet aloes, anemones, yellow oxalis,
maidenhair fern, huge striped aloes, whose grand flower stems
of last summer still towered above the road; cistus bushes,
myrtles and lentiscus, groves of olives, with here and there
a lemon garden, and on the other side the glorious expanse
of sea, and the islands tinted with amethyst in the after¬
noon light, combined to keep up a continual interest. We
drove on as far as Erbalunga, after leaving the grotto, and
returned to our hotel—such a dirty one, by the way!—
perfectly enchanted with our expedition. The irext day
was pleasantly spent in strolling in the vicinity of the town,
and sketching some of the bits that most took our fancy; and
the evening found us in the hospitable salon of the vice-
consul, Mr White Jervis, where we obtained a great deal of
useful information about the island in general, and our route
to Ajaccio in particular.
W/iere shall we Go? 251
We hired a carriage from the Messagerie, and sent on
relays of horses, sleeping a night at Corte, a picturesque old
town, with a fortress perched high up on a rock, round the
base of which the houses cluster. It stands at the foot of
Monte Eotondo, and many fine excursions may be made up
the valleys later in the season.
The whole route to Ajaccio is very beautiful, but the
second day's journey is by far the finest, as the road mounts
the pass of La Foce, about 4000 feet high, to which one
ascends through a fine forest of the Corsican pine (Finns
lariccio), known as Vizzavona.
Of course, in January, there was a good deal of snow
lying at such an elevation, and we came in for a heavy
storm near the summit, which did not cease until the fine
beech forest on the other side had been passed, whence the
road descends very rapidly, by a series of steep zigzags, upon
the picturesque village of Boccagnano, where we halted for
a short time.
The rest of the drive to Ajaccio was quite delightful,
as we had left the storm behind us, and plunged into
warmth and sunshine. The vegetation was an endless
delight—large bushes, trees, in fact, of arbutus, laden with
their scarlet fruit, and covered at the same time with bunches
of white blossom; olive trees completely smothered with
masses of the graceful smilax, which hung from them in
long festoons, the currant-like bemes glistening brightly
among the dark wreaths of foliage; lentiscus, crimsoned
with its fruit; myrtles, richly purple with their large
tempting-looking berries, which were covered with a bloom
rivalling that of the choicest plums; hellebores, literally
weighed to the earth by their load of pale green blossoms ;
tiny mauve crocuses staring with wide opened eyes at the
sun, from every bank; and cistus by the acre, were amongst
the things chiefly noticed.
Not without interest were the groups of peasants, about
whom we remarked, as a decided peculiarity, that, whereas the
men almost always elected to ride their diminutive donkeys
sideways, the women invariably rode astride, and often
two together.
The road from Bastia descends till it reaches the sea
level, at the head of the bay round one side of which Ajaccio
is built, and then turns to the right, entering the town by a
long boulevard, with fine trees on either side; after which it
ascends through the populous thoroughfare of the Cours
Napoleon, untU it reaches the Place du Diamant, where
252 The Ladies Edinbiirgh Magazine.
stands the large and ugly statue of Napoleon I., and from
which a fine view of the Golfe d'Ajaccio is obtained.
Our hotel, the "Germania," was situated in the Cours
Grandval, which leads directly from the Place du Diamant
towards the hills to the north, in a charmingly open and airy
situation, with fine views from all the upper windows. Here
we took up our quarters, and remained for nearly three
months with some friends who had come direct from England,
and whom we found on our arrival already established in
the hotel.
The situation of Ajaccio is extremely beautiful, command¬
ing fine views of the mountains, with the sea in front, and
backed by liills which shelter it effectually from all cold
winds.
At the time of our arrival, the environs of the town were
very beautiful from the quantities of almond trees in full
flower; and the numerous orange gardens are a great feature
of the place. The orange trees here are treated very
differently from those along the Eiviera, being allowed to
grow quite naturally, and are therefore often weighed down
to the ground with their golden load, the fruit, in many
instances, seeming more abundant than the leaves. From
our end of the town, a walk of five minutes took us into the
olive woods, where are endless paths in all directions.
We explored all the surrounding hills, and even in
February and March found many flowers and ferns. The
temperature was so mild that we never required fires, ex¬
cept occasionally in the evenings; and rarely wore anything
beyond our usual indoor clothing when walking, though we
found it advisable to take light shawls to put on when we
stopped, as we often did, for luncheon on tlie top of some
hill.
Never were al fresco meals more enjoyed, or done more
ample justice to, than were ours after a long scramble
among the "macchie" (as the dense growth of shrubs is
here called), seeking fresh paths and fresh points of view.
Capital carriages may be hired, and many are the pleasant
excursions to be made round Ajaccio. Amongst the best of
these are those to the villages of Alata and Cauro, and the
Cols St Antoine, St George, and St Sebastien; from all of
which fine views are to be had.
We spent some days at Cauro, in an unpretending little
inn, kept by Eossi, where the rooms were clean, and the
people very civil. It is also a good place from which to make
excursions, as the surrounding country is extremely pretty.
Where shall zve Got 253
Amongst the plants found up to the time of leaving
Corsica, on April 4th, were bee, butterfly, and other orchises;
peas (scarlet, yellow, purple, and blue), vetches of endless
shades, feather hyacinths, statice, thymelea, gagea, romuleas,
crocuses, oxalis, hooded arums, asphodel, squills, narcissus ;
to say nothing of cactus, laurustinus, and the exquisitely
sweet-scented white heath.
Of ferns, we found, besides many of the common kinds,
the fragrant fern, Clicilanthes odor a; and the rare Notlio-
chlcena Vellea. A " praying mantis " and a scorpion were
also amongst the spoU.
Our second visit to Corsica was made from Marseilles,
whence we crossed to Ajaccio, on the 4th April 1877.
Nothing can well be finer than the first hour or two of
the passage from Marseilles, on a lovely evening in spring,
such as we were fortunate in having. The rocky coast and
numerous islands through which the steamer made her way,
the deep blue sea, flecked with crisp white waves (telling of
the lively night awaiting us when out of shelter of the land),
and the sunset colours in the sky, combined to make us
regret the summons to dinner, which it would have been
better policy, on the part of Valery Frferes, to have postponed
for another hour, until their passengers were feeling the full
effects of the uneasy motion of our boat, which proved to be,
as the mail agent cheered us at dinner, by informing the
poor victims—" un bateau Ms scjisitif." We were on deck
next morning by 5 A.M., hoping for a view of Corsica, but
a heavy curtain of fog hid it entirely, and only lifted as we
rounded the familiar lies Sanguinaires. We landed at
11 A.M., and were heartily welcomed by Herr Dietz, our
host of the " Germania," and soon found ourselves back in
our comfortable rooms overlooking the bay.
It is quite impossible to give any idea of the wondrous
beauty of the "macchie," on the hills round the town of
Ajaccio, at this season. One in particular, which is densely
covered with cytisus, was all aglow with a rich warm yellow,
mingled with the bright tender green of the young shoots
of arbutus, myrtle, lentiscus, and other fragrant shrubs;
which, seen against the cloudless blue sky, was a delight
from our windows.
The masses of cistus, some with immense mauve flowers,
others white, with dazzling golden centres, gave out a most
peculiar and delicious perfume, which it was a perfect feast
to inhale day and night from our open window—a fragrance
No. 32.—August 1877. 2 K
254 Tlie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
that will always be associated in our memory with the
glorious Corsican days; and which leads one to believe tliere
may be some truth in the saying ascribed to Napoleon I.,
that he could recognise the scent of his native island many
leagues off at sea. This saying was curiously corroborated
by a lady whom we met during our stay, who told us that,
when crossing from Africa to Marseilles some years ago,
she one day perceived a delightful scent in the breeze; and
on remarking it to the captain, he said it was the smell of
Corsica, and that he had often before noticed it when tlie
wind set, as it then did, from the island. Of course, for the
mere pleasure-seeker, April and May are much more enjoy¬
able than the three preceding months, as the higher routes
in the interior of the island are open by this time in ordi¬
nary seasons, and the flowers, which are such a charming
feature, are in great perfection.
Before the middle of May it is rarely too warm, except
for those who object to the temperature of an English
summer day, though we had some really hot weather when
the minimum of clothing was desirable; but we invariably
found the heat so tempered by the fresh sea breeze, that it
never was oppressive.
Towards the end of April the hills round Ajaccio became
literally gardens, and we returned day after day from our
rambles laden with spoils ; and pressed every available jug,
jar, and bottle in the hotel into the service to contain our
treasures. In addition to the flowers enumerated before, we
gathered serapias in endless variety, cyclamens, which
made a crimson carpet in an ilex wood near the town;
lupins, orchises, fumitories, a very curious flower, which we
believed to be the Limodonmn abortivum; several varieties
of garlic, all very attractive until touched, when the smell
obliged us to relinquish them ; and, above all, the queen of
Corsican flowers, the noble and fragrant Pancratium
illyricum, which grows in abundance near Ajaccio. The
orange gardens were still in great beauty, as the fruit was
only partially gathered during our stay, and the blossoms
were fully out like stars amongst the leaves; the exquisite
young tendrils of the smilax, quite pink at the tips of the
shoots, and with its leaves delicately spotted, were clinging
to everything that came in their way, and the grass was full
of tiny pinks, bugloss of intense lilue and puiple, and
gorgeous poppies.
We took advantaije of the fine weather to make an
expedition to the Forest of Bavella, hiring a carriage and
Where shall we Go? 255
sending on relays of horses, by doing which we avoided the
necessity of sleeping at the small villages, and reached S*'''
Lucia di Tallano on the first day; slept there, proceeding
next day to the forester's house at the Bocca di Bavella,
where we arrived in time to have five hours of daylight for
exploring the magnificent forest, as far as we could, and slept
in the forester's house that night. Very rough indeed was the
accommodation, and food there was none ! Happily we had
been advised to take provisions, and therefore did not suffer
from the nakedness of the land. The view from the
" Bocca " can scarcely be equalled, certainly not surpassed,
in its extraordinary beauty, and no words can convey the
faintest idea of it. One looks down from a height of 3000
feet upon the forest, which follows the steep descent of the
valley, filling it with its noble trees for miles. On the right
it is closed in by rocks of great height and wonderful forms ;
whilst on the left the huge mass of Monte Incudine rears its
cleft head, its rocky spurs following the course of the valley.
In the middle distance, beyond the limits of the forest, is a
wide plain, and in it one of the large salt lakes (which in
summer are such fertile sources of malaria, but which now
look too lovely in the sunset light for any such thoughts to
prejudice one against it!) lies gleaming like a jewel; beyond
this again, is the sea, with the island of Monte Christo glowing
ruby coloured ; and far away, beyond all, the faint outline of
the mountains of Italy, north of Civita Vecchia, All this was
bathed in the light of a most glorious sunset, which lit up the
rocks and trees with a glow as of fire. It was a scene never
to be forgotten. Next morning, after a short stroll in the
forest, during which we gathered anemones (lilac, white, and
purple) and sweet violets in abundance, we returned to S**
Lucia di Tallano. Arriving there by noon, thus having ample
time to make acquaintance with its immediate neighbourhood,
which is replete with interest and beauty, we returned on
the fourth day to Ajaccio, much delighted with our successful
expedition.
After a week's repose in our " Capua," Ajaccio, we set off
in an opposite direction to the Forest of Aitone, taking up our
quarters at Evisa for two nights. We drove into the forest
on the second day, as far as the forest house, taking with us a
side-saddle, which had been our constant travelling com¬
panion, and having sent a mule on to wait us there, we
made our way to the Col di Vergio. This forest is less grand
than that of Bavella, as the surrounding scenery is not so
imposing; and it would therefore be well to make the visit to
256 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
Bavella after that to Aitone. The trees in the latter forest are
certainly liner, hut the largest are being rapidly cut down
and shipped off from Porto to the continent.
On the third day, we left Evisa at 5 a.m., and from that
time until we reached La Piana, the scenery was grand and
beautiful beyond description. The Gorge of Otta, through
which the road passes for the first few miles, is walled in by
immense crags of rose-coloured granite, from the clefts of
which grow box bushes of vivid green, below and often
in a ravine so steep and narrow as to be invisible from
the road, dashes a fine stream ; and in front, and filling up the
end of the gorge, is the sea, intensely blue. The sharply
defined shadows of the early morning added greatly to the
wonderful gi'andeur of the scene.
From Porto the road leaves the gorge, and, turning sharply
to the left, winds up a steep series of zigzags amongst fine
woods of arbutus and myrtle, until a considerable height
above the sea is attained; then it suddenly plunges into a
wilderness of extraordinarj'^ rocks, threading in and out of
them for a mile or two. A more complete contrast can
hardly be conceived to the rich vegetation through which one
has been passing than these bare crags, without a bush
growing upon them. From this, a short bit of road leads to
the village of La Piana, which is situated on a plateau high
above the sea, and commands a fine view of the wonderful
country through which one has just travelled. The rest of
tlie route, until the village of Sagona is reached, is not strik¬
ingly beautiful. Near Sagona, one regains the road, which
leads to Evisa, and the remainder of the drive over the beauti¬
ful Col of St Sebastien is the one taken on the first
day of the expedition. The Ferula communis grows in
great luxuriance on the Col, its foliage looking like green
clouds, from amongst which rises, to a height of five or six
feet, its grand candelabrum-like head of yellow flowers—a
noble plant!—very different to the miserable specimen we
have obtained since our return home from an English
nurseryman, in the hope of some day seeing a feeble imitation
of it in our garden !
From Ajaccio we drove to Corte, staying a day there to
walk up the pretty valley of the Eestonica, well worthy of a
visit; as is also that of the Tavignagno, rather a longer
expedition.
Near Corte we drove through an acre or t^^'0 of
pancratiums, the scent of which filled the air. We passed
wild roses of great size, and of a salmon-pink colour.    The
Where shall we Go? 257
roadside was in places carpeted with a large mauve convol¬
vulus, and the shady banks were fringed with maidenhair
fern.
We stayed a day or two at Bastia, in order to see more of
its neighbourhood than on our former visit, and very pretty it
proved to be; notably, the drive to San Martino, and the first
few miles of the road to St Florent, where we found the
curious fern, Nothochlcena marantce, growing in abundance.
It is a pity that the accommodation at Bastia is so far
inferior to what one might reasonably expect in a town of
its size, as otherwise it would be an excellent point from
which to explore the country round; as it is, neither the
" France " nor the " Eoma " can be recommended. We
were told by a German gentleman, that a clean little inn
has been opened at Erbalunga, by an old naval officer.
This will be a great acquisition to those wishing to spend
a few days near Bastia, from which place it is only about
five miles distant.
We took the steamer on the 17th May to Leghorn, which
we reached after a six hours' passage, having spent a very
enjoyable six weeks in Corsica, and having the pleasant
impressions of the former visit fully confirmed. We would
strongly urge those who appreciate a charming climate, fine
scenery, and lovely flowers, to follow our example, and go
there.
It may be well to add, that there is a chaplain during the
winter months at Ajaccio, and a church is to be opened there,
it is hoped, this autumn. There is a clever French military
doctor—Melgi'ani by name ; and there are fairly good shops.
Lodgings and houses may be had at a reasonable rate.
There is regular communication to and from Marseilles
twice a-week, by means of Valery's boats, in from fifteen to
eighteen hours, which leave Marseilles on Wednesdays and
Fridays.
The shortest sea passage is from Leghorn to Bastia,
between which places there are two steamers a-week.
Diligences run between Ajaccio and Bastia in twenty hours,
also a " berline " in sixteen hours, taking only two or three
passengers ; but in either of these, much of the finest scenery
is passed at niglit. A private carriage costs about 200
francs, taking two days, and breaking the journey at Corte,
where the Hotel de rEuroi)e is fairly good.
The accommodation in the interior of the island is
very rough, and by no means suited to invalids, who must
remain at Ajaccio ; but clean beds are almost invariably to
258 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
be met -with. Food is scarce, and a few days' notice shonld
always be given of an intention to visit any of the re¬
moter villages. E. M. D.
■ »(-»> '^KSSk- » •■ » •
DOUBLE ACROSTIC.
No. 8.
Alas ! this month my first must fall
Beneath my last; good sport to all!
1. A modern " pick me up."
2. The cession of this bodes a larger appropriation.
3. A musical " circle."
4. Our national possession. Pro Tempore.
SOLUTION OF DOUBLE ACEOSTIC
No. 7.
M MONA A
0 ONSET T
D DEATH H
E EVE E
R RESIGNATION N
N NEWS S
Two answers received ; that of Message Girl only correct.
A Prize is offered at the close of the year to the solver of the greatest
number of acrostics. Solutions to l>e addressed, "Acrostic Editor,"
Publishers, 22 Howe Street, Edinburgh ; to be sent not later than the
15tli of the mouth, written clearly on a sheet of paper containing only
the solution, pseudonym, and full name and address of sender. Solu¬
tions acknowledged in the following Number ; and name and address
of winner only announced at close of competition.
OUK    LIBEAEY    TABLE.
Sermons for the Christian Year : Translated from the German
of the late Richard Rothe, D.D., with a Preface by William R.
Clark, M.A., prebendary of Wells, and vicar of Taiuiton. Edin¬
burgh : T. & T. Clark, 'l877.
This volume of sermons by Dr Rothe (one of the most famous of
recent German theologians) may well be considered a valuable addition
to any library. It is only recently (in 1868) published in Germany,
and is probably kno-\vn to few English readers ; but now, thanks to
Mr Clark and his able assistants, one of the translators being a young
Edinburgh lady, it is placed within the reach of everyone. Un¬
doubtedly it is more enjoyable to read books in the language in which
they were written ; but this translation has the unusual advantage of
being almost literally true to the original, maintaining throughout
unmistakable traces of German quaintness and simplicity. Consider¬
able variety of style is apparent in the sermons, and some are extremely
fragmentary, owing to the fact, that while some were prepared for
j)uljlication by the author, the majority were printed from his manu¬
scripts after his death, and some even from notes taken by his hearers ;
but we hardly think that this will detract from the enjoyment and
Stray Notes. 259
interest likely to be found in their perusal. The thoiight, though
frequently deep, is never obscure, but is clothed in clear and forcible
language, easier to follow than the more wordy productions of many
more familiar divines ; and the whole teaching is rather suggestive
than dictatorial; more generally helpful, we cannot but think, than the
exhaustive style, which leaves its readers nothing to argue ont for
themselves.
Miss in the Kitchen.    By Ella Burton.    Edinburgh Publishing
Company, 1877.
We often hear that " necessity is the mother of invention," and cer¬
tainly the axiom would seem to hold good in the case of the young
lady celebrated in these pages ; for her efforts at housekeeping, in the
absence alike of assistant and of previous practice, acquaint us with
many discoveries in that line, which, if not original, had, at least for
her, the attraction of novelty. The expose of the ignorance in house¬
hold matters of many of our young ladies is doubtless in the main true,
if a little overdrawn. We are inclined to think that the veriest ignor¬
amus would know that hot-water more effectually cleanses dishes—
as well as other things—than cold ! The hrocliure is, however, very
amusing, and may aid in drawing more attention to the subject.
Virginia : A Roman Sketch.    Bentley & Sons, New Burlington
Street, London, 1877.
It is rather a relief to open this book : the title has a somewhat
sombre and severe sound ; and we expected to find it a classical
sort of poem, in Homeric metre, and full of deep tragedy. Instead of
this, it is in reality a very pretty and pleasant story, printed in a type
most refreshing to overwrought eyes, and full of exqui.site touches
and sympathetic descriptions, qiiite free from sensationalism. We
will not say that there is no catastrophe, for there is one which
makes us long for the power to avert it, and fills us with exceeding
regret ; still it cannot be called cruel, and the most sensitive ndnd
will not be shocked at it. We heartily recommend our readers to
get the book, and see for themselves what it is. They will find in it
very lifelike and charming pictures of modern Rome, and modern
Romans ; together with a glimpse into the fascinating artist life, which
seems to sui'vive all revolutions and changes, and to be the most eternal
part of " the Eternal City."
" Art is long and time is fleeting," we are told, and so it is in Rome ;
and long may it be so, for among all vicissitudes of men and manners,
still the true art spirit seems to flourish better under the blue Italian
sky than anywhere else ; and even the cold Anglo-Saxon temperament
there catches some spark of the divine fire, which now and then lights
up our colder atmosphere with its reflected glow.
■ <i •■ <t "^BiC^- H - t •
STRAY    NOTES.
It is interesting to note the advance made within the last two years
iu the number of candidates attending the Local Examinations of the
Edinburgh University. In 187.5, the number was 121 ; in 1876, 285 ;
and in 1877, the number has increased to 456. Surely out of the large
class of successful candidates many will be found eager to press on for
the Women's Certificate granted to Students of the Edinbui'gh Ladies'
Educational Association, who have previously qualified themselves by
passing the Local Examinations.
26o The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
A Meeting for the Distribution of Prizes and Certificates gained at
the late Local Examinations by Students of the Preparatory Classes in
St George's Hall, was held on Friday, the 20th July—Professor Calder-
wood presiding. Tlie honours taken by these students were enu¬
merated, and showetl that tlie work had been attended by very
satisfactory results. The Second Bursary, open to all candidates,
was gained by Miss Walker, with the high percentage of 86 in
French, 86 in English Literature, 85 in Logic, and 80 in Physiology.
Of the twelve other Honour Students from these classes, seven gained
prizes, as also did seventeen Ordinary Students. Of the twentj'-eight
students taking common subjects alone, this year only two failed—one
in arithmetic, and one in Scrijature history. Four special prizes were
offered for students in these classes. They were gained as follows :—
1st prize, ^10, by Miss Burnside, Glasgow (corresponding student) ;
2d prize, £h, by Miss Ray ; 3d prize, .£3, by Miss M'Kerron,
Kennetliniont (corresponding student) ; 4th prize, ^3, by Miss Gair,
Falkirk (corres23onding student). It will thus be seen that the
corresponding students carried oft many honours in these classes,
We believe that this is the first time that a regular system of instruction
by correspondence lias been attempted in Scotland, and the results
are certainly such as should encourage its promoters to further eft'orts.
It is with great interest that we learn of the recent decision of the
Senate of the University of London, to admit women to degrees in the
other Faculties, as well as in the Faculty of Medicine.
The First Annual Meeting of the Congress on Domestic
Economy was held at Birmingham on the I7th, 18tli, and 19th July.
It was conducted in three sections, under the following heads :—
1. Needlework, Clothing, and its Materials ; 2. Cleanliness, Washing ;
3. Food and Cookery ; 4. Household Exjjenditure ; 5. Thrift;
6. Health ; 7. Sickness ; 8. The Dwelling ; 9. Warming and Ven¬
tilation ; 10. Methods of Teaching these Subjects ; 11. Text-books ;
12. Mode of Inspection ; 13. Importance of Female Inspectors;
14. Working of the Examinations of the Society of Arts in Domestic
Economy. Papers were read by Miss Chessar, Mrs W. E. Gladstone,
Professor Huxley, Mr R. Rawlinson, C.B.; and Miss Helen Taylor.
We are informed that one of the most interesting pajiers was that read
by Miss Guthrie Wright, the energetic Hon. Secretary of the Edinburgh
School of Cookery.
At the close of the Congress, a private meeting was held of ladies
and gentlemen connected with Schools of Cookery, to discuss the con¬
dition and schemes of the various Schools. It was found that the
Edinburgh Committee had managed their School with exceptional
financial success.
Ladies are invited to contribute to this Magazine.
A Prize is offered for the best article received by the Editors
before Isf March, on the subject, "Where shall we Go?" The article
on Corsica, in our present Number, is the first of the series.
A Prize is offered for the best article received by the Editors, and
accepted for insertion during the current year, on any one of our
British Female Novelists, born in the 18th century.
No meetings of the Ladies' Edinburgh Literary Society will be
held in the months of August and September.
Our Female Novelists. 261
VIII.
JANE AUSTEN.
6. 1775 ; d. 1817.
All that we know of Jane Austen's life resembles much
the record   of the  sun-dial: " I  number none but sunny
hours."    The  quiet  regular   life  in   that  middle  station
between poverty and wealth, for which the wise King of
Israel prayed ; the mental endowments fitted to shed grace
and refinement over the common-place, but not of a kind
to demand a conspicuous or peculiar sphere for their ex¬
ercise—these afford slender materials for anything  like a
detailed memoir of one of the most gifted of female novelists.
Born in 1775, her early girlhood must have partaken, even
in her quiet country home, of the excitement, the horror,
the sympathy, and the foreboding called forth in so many
minds by the stirring events passing on the Continent, at
the  close  of the last  and beginning of the present cen¬
tury.    No doubt the peaceful and refined family circle at
Steventon Eectory  was  visited  from  time  to  time, like
most other houses of the period in the southern counties of
England, by rumours of French invasion and notes of pre¬
paration  for   armed   resistance;   and   with   two   gallant
brothers constantly afloat, and exposed to all the chances of
war and shipwreck, it is impossible but that anxiety must
have been a frequent guest  at that  fireside, and stirring
scenes and notable deeds the topic of conversation.    Yet
in the few letters of the authoress preserved to us in the
graceful Memoir by her nephew, there is scarcely an allusion
to public events; and it is not among scenes of political or
warlike interest that she finds the subjects of her match¬
less stories.
The daughter of an English parson of the last century
—a character whom the nineteenth century is apt to men¬
tion with slight respect—it is pleasant to think that she
is in many respects a fair specimen of a very numerous
class, a refined cultivated gentlewoman, with talents and
virtues fitted to adorn any station, qualities which endeared
her to all  around her, and which would have been the
No. 33.—September 1877. 2 L
262 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
brightness of any man's home. Her earliest years, to the
age of twenty-five, were spent at Steventon, the place
of her birth; and the " lowly scenes and simple views"
of that somewhat tame and uninteresting part of Hampshire
may have iniiuenced the mind of the young authoress in
her choice of the common-place^ subjects, over which she
cast the glamour of her genius.
Her education was almost entirely a home one; for though
at school for a short time with her eldest sister, she was only
sent because no one could bear to part the two inseparable
companions, and her nephew says nothing of her going there
on her own account, when of an age to profit by the
instruction. Probably the method she describes in the case
of Elizabeth Bennet was that of her own girlhood: " We
were always encouraged to read, and had all the masters
that were necessary;" and mediocre as the results may
appear to our modern notions, it certainly produced what
the " higher education" of more recent times has not yet
made too common, a writer with a faultless style of pure
correct English. It has become a common-place of reviewers
to say of every dull and twaddling story which finds a pub¬
lisher, that " it is quite in the style of Jane Austen;" and it
is hard to say which is most insulted by the senseless com¬
parison—the delicate wit and masterly painting of real
living personages, or
" The dear style which flows without pretence,
With unstained purity and unmatched sense,"
contrasted with the utter insipidity and slipshod English
of many of her so-called imitators. She was accomplished,
according to the standard of those days. She knew French
and Italian; was well read in English history, poetry, and
romance; and could sing agreeably to her own accompani¬
ment. She wrote a small, clear, lady-like hand; and the
dainty finish which characterizes her novels was perceptible
in all she did with her fingers, from needlework to the
folding and sealing of letters—a lost art since the days of
adhesive envelopes, of strange and gorgeous device. She
seems to have been one to whom the exercise of the pen is
as instinctive a faculty as that of the voice or the pencil to
the born artist in music or drawing. From her childhood
she was in the habit of composition, and her nephew's
Memoir speaks of the advantage she derived in the forma¬
tion of her taste and style from the companionship and
similarity  in  mind  of her eldest brother, ten years her
Our Female Novelists. 263
senior, and from the direction of her opinions and reading
which she received from him.
By the time she was three-and-twenty, she had com¬
pleted three of her novels—Seyisc and Sensibility, Pride and
Prejudice, and Northanger Abbey, two of which bore other
names before their publication, which was long delayed.
From Mr Austen Leigh's account, it seems that a story,
under the title of Ellinor and Marianne, was the earliest of
the compositions of her ripening genius, though it was laid
aside during the growth of what some consider her most
talented work. Pride and Prejudice, which in MS. was
entitled First Impressions. None of these were published
until 1811, and no light is thrown by the Memoir on the
reasons for this long entombment within the author's desk.
We can only conjecture that she wrote as birds sing, because
she could not help it; and that diffidence and distrust of her
own powers, and the want of any such encouragement or
counsel as literary friends might have given, had something
to do with this curious reticence. Ncn^thangcr Abbey was
certainly written, her biographer states, before the end of
1798; and her own delicate quizzing, to use the word
fashionable in her day, of the then prevailing style of novel,
shows how perfectly she was aware that her own books
were addressed to a taste widely different from that of the
admirers of the Eadcliffe school. Her first venture among
the publishers must have strengthened this conviction, for
a manuscript, which must have been that of Pride and
Prejudice, was summarily declined by one with whom her
father tried to negotiate in 1798; and though Northanger
Abbey was accepted by another in 1803, he seems to have
regretted his bargain, for it lay unpublished till after her
death, when the family regained possession of the MS.
Not very long after this unsuccessful attempt, the happy
home at Steventon was broken up by Mr Austen's resignation
of his living, and the famUy seems to have led a somewhat
unsettled life for the next few years, entering a good deal
more into general society than formerly; and possibly Jane
Austen found herself less favourably situated for composition
than when her days were passed in the retirement of a
country parsonage. None of her writings can be attributed
with any certainty to this part of her life, unless it be that
charming and most promising fragment, entitled " The Wat¬
sons," which tantalizes us in the pages of her nephew's
Memoir. But she was storing her mind with fresh scenes
and characters, improving her already intimate acquaintance
264 2he Ladies Edinburgh Magazitie.
with Bath and its society, and perhaps witnessing some such
unlucky accident as Louisa Musgrove's upon the Cobb at
Lyme. Mr Austen Leigh's description of her at tliis age is
that of a very charming woman. To us it reads like the con¬
ception we have always formed of our favourite " Emma," to
our mind the most captivating of all Miss Austen's heroines.
" Fair and handsome, slight and elegant, with cheeks a little
too full," is Sir Egerton Brydges' impression of her in early
womanhood; and her appearance a few years later dwells in
the affectionate remembrance of her nephew long after this
sweet gentlewoman, so loving and beloved, had passed away
from earth. In his own old age he thus tenderly recalls the
outward presentment of his " dear Aunt Jane:"—" In person
she was very attractive; her figure was rather tall and slender,
her step light and firm, and her whole appearance expressive
of health and animation. In complexion she was a clear
brunette, with a rich colour; she had fuU round cheeks, with
mouth and nose small and weU-formed; bright hazel eyes,
and brown hair forming natural curls close round her face.
If not so regularly handsome as her sister, yet her counte¬
nance had a peculiar charm of its own to the eyes of most
beholders." Her brightness and mirth made her a favourite
with children and young people; and her qualities as a
playfellow and promoter of all their schemes met with hearty
appreciation from a large circle of nephews and nieces who
began to grow up around her.
Early in 1805, her father died; and after some years of
short residences at various places, Mrs Austen and her two
daughters found a settled home once more at Chawton, in
Hampshire. The second of her sons had inherited the name
and property of his relation Mr Knight; and though not re¬
siding much at Chawton House, he was able to put a cottage
in the village at his mother's disposal; and here, surrounded
by many of her nearest kinsfolk, Jane Austen passed the
remainder of her life. Her new home, though not strikingly
beautiful, was a great improvement upon Steventon. The
rambling and irregular old house stands a little way back
from the high road; a plain ordinary looking gate, unguarded
by any lodge, opens upon a short approach, which, ere it
reaches the hall door, makes a sudden, sharp little ascent,
at whose foot, a few yards aside from the carriage drive,
stands the simple little village church. Erom the hall door
steps you might easily look in at the windows upon the con-
creo-ation, were it not for the screen of sombre yew trees
which intervenes.    The sunny lawn is bounded by a long
Our Female Novelists. 265
green meadow stretching away towards well wooded park¬
like ground, and across the road the eye rests on fine
timber and turfy slopes, a scene of quiet English beauty. The
quaint juxtaposition of the churcli and house remind one
of the home of the dreamy young lover of the " Miller's
Daughter;"
" Late left an orphan of the S(£uire,
Where this old mansion mounted high
Looks down upon the viUage spire."
In just such proximity to the Great House as Mr and Mrs
Charles Musgrove enjoyed with regard to Uppercross, Jane
Austen spent eight happy years, a valued member of a bright
and affectionate family circle.
Within a short time of her settlement at Chawton, she
seems to have resolved on publishing, and Sense, and
Sensibility, and Pn'rfe and Prejudice, appeared in quick
succession; but even while the second of these was being
prepared for the press, her pen was once more busy, and
Mansfield Park and Envina soon added to her long with¬
held honours. The taste of novel readers must have been
undergoing a silent change during the years that had
passed since slie had last written; for in 1815, when Emma
had appeared to deliglit the lovers of fiction, the Quarterly
Review praised in high terms these three specimens of " a
style of novel which has arisen within the last fifteen or
twenty years ;" just about the time when our authoress
made her first unsuccessful attempt at publication. She
must have been a rapid writer, for her books followed one
another very quickly; and she seems more than once to
have begun working at a new story as soon as, or before, its
predecessor was actually in the hands of her readers; yet
she herself likens her composition to " working on a little
bit of ivory with so fine a brush as produces little effect
after much labour." It is pleasant to read iir the few letters
Mr Austen Leigh has rescued from oblivion, how real and
how dear to her were the creations of her genius. She
welcomes the arrival of Pride and I^rejudice from the
jjublishers, as that of her " own darling child;" she frankly
avows that she considers Elizabeth Bennet " as delightful a
creature as ever appeared in print," and "does not know how
she shall be able to tolerate those who do not like her."
She seems to have fretted a little over her mother's reading
of the book aloud; " though she perfectly understands the
characters, she cannot speak as they ought;" and Emma was
266 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
to her " a heroine whom no one but myself will much like."
The actors in her dream-world lived on in her own fancy ;
and the young nephews and nieces around her learned oraUy
many additional scraps of their history—such as the failure
of Miss Nancy Steele to catch the Doctor, Mr Woodhouse's
survival of his daughter's marriage for only two years, and
the amount of the "considerable sum" given by Mrs Norris
to William Price—namely, £1.
Though ill-health began to creep upon her, her pen was
busy almost up to the last. Persuasion was finished in the
middle of 1816, and may owe much of the sweetness and
pathos for which it is to be distinguished, to the inward
discipline of suffering working upon a noble and gracious
nature. Hand and brain were at work again, a few months
after, in sj^ite of mortal sickness; but she was not permitted
to bring any further effort to completion. The serious
nature of her malady, which seems to have been long
concealed from herself and her friends, became suddenly
apparent; she was removed to Winchester for better medi¬
cal advice; but all that skill could do was of no avail, and
there, in July 1817, the end came. It must have been a
great wrench to her to part with life when there was so
much to endear it to her. Her simny temper, powers of
enjoyment, unaffected pleasure in the use of her talents, and
the absence of great trials and disappointments in life, all
combined to make this world a happy place to her.
" Have I not found a happy earth ?
I least should breathe a thought of pain ;
Would God renew me from my birth,
I'd almost live my life again ! "
She must have felt thus when she heard her sentence; but
having lived so as to dread " the grave as little as her bed,"
she resigned herself with calm wiUing submission, and died
in peace, tenderly watched over by her sister and brothers.
Her nephew's Memoir, Avith something of that delicate
reticence which distinguished his aunt's writings, and which
we may deem a family characteristic, dwells lightly on the
last scenes; but enough is said to prove what, in spite of her
own reserve, shines out in many passages of her novels—the
strength and depth of her religious principles.
Persuasion and Northangcr Abbey came out after her
death, and added much to her slowly-earned fame. It is a
curious instance of what has been often observed, talent
unappreciated in its more immediate circle,—that, in her
Our Female Novelists. 267
own neighbourhood, the books which commanded the admira¬
tion of men of the highest reputation were but little thought
of. Her own family, indeed, rated them as they deserved;
but they only received a slight degree of praise from the
common-place and unintellectual society which she had so
truthfully delineated; " and if," says IVfr Austen Leigh,
" they had known that we ranked her with Miss Edgeworth
and Madame d'Arblay, they would have smiled at it as an
amusing instance of family conceit." A second review in
the Quarterly, about four years after her death, from no less
a critic than Archbishop Whately, probably did much to
draw general attention to her great merits. She had never
been without the warm admiration of some of the leaders in
the literary world. Sir Walter Scott read and re-read her
books wdth endless pleasure, envying " the exquisite touch
which renders ordinary and common-place things and
characters interesting from the truth of the description and
sentiment." Dr Whewell spoke warmly in praise of all her
novels, and " quite fired up in defence of Persuasion, which
a friend had pronounced rather dull," insisting that it was
the best of all her works. Southey thought them " more
true to nature, and containing passages of finer feeling than
any others of this age." Coleridge, Lord Holland, Sydney
Smith, Sir James Mackintosh, Miss Mitford, and Lord
Macaulay, have all left their admiration on record. Mons.
Guizot declared, that he found in her works and those of
other English lady-novelists, " toute v,ne dcole de morale."
The favourable verdict pronounced by so many first-rate
judges could not fail to have an influence on the general
public. She grew rapidly in popular estimation, partly
owing to the change of taste in fiction to which we have
alluded as having set in; partly because some were led by
the approbation of these guides of opinion to weigh her
merits for themselves ; and partly, perhaps, because many
were ashamed not to admire in such good company, even
though they might fail to stand what some one, with the
jest that has much truth in it, called "a new test of ability "
—the power of axjpreciating Miss Austen's works.
They have fairly taken their place now among our English
classics; but how difficult it is to analyse their peculiar
merit. We can praise the easy grace of the narrative ; the
sound, high principle evident in the author, but never ob¬
truded ; the pure, correct English, a model to lady-writers of
all time. But how shall we describe in words the nameless
charm which is the real attraction of all these works ?    True
268 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
it is, that the incidents she deals with are tame, the characters
of no grand or heroic type, and often silly and vulgar to the
last degree; yet our authoress delineates vulgarity without
being offensive, and folly with a wit that makes us enjoy it
more than wisdom. It is, indeed, as her reviewer in the
Quarterly has well remarked, one of her highest excellences,
and " a merit far from common, that she is as happy in her
portraiture of fools as of people of sense ;" and he ranks her
fools as second to none but Shakespeare's in their individu¬
ality and fidelity to nature. They are the occasion of some
of her most felicitous writing. Are we not all mentally the
richer for our acquaintance with Mr Eushworth, with his
pink satin cloak and his forty-two speeches, and not knowing
what to do with so much meaning as Sir Thomas liertram
ascribed to him ; and with Mrs Elton, armed with her " little
basket and large bonnet, and all her apparatus of happi¬
ness ; " with lier " vivacity " and her " resources," and her
fortune " of so many thousands that it would always be called
ten ?" On gala occasions, what can any of us do, whether
duchess or dairymaid, but follow the judicious advice of the
Kev. Mr Collins, and " merely put on whatever of our clothes
is superior to the rest ? " And how grateful we ought to be
to dear Mr Woodhouse for the profound medical opinion
obtained from Mr Perry, "that wedding-cake might certainly
disagree with many—perhaps with most people—unless
taken moderately." And when our tempers are tried by
the shortcomings of "good j^lain cooks," do we not covet
that treasure of the Hartfield establishment, " Serle, who
understands boiling an egg better than anybody else ? "
Miss Austen surely must have done her own style injustice
when she spoke of it as laboured. Those dainty shafts of
wit must have darted from her pen with as little premedita¬
tion as they would have done from her lips, for we meet
with the like -in her letters which cannot have been studied
compositions ; and she was evidently one of those who en¬
liven the most trivial matters by their humorous way of
putting things.
Next to her bright playful wit, Jane Austen is remarkable,
compared with some writers who have succeeded her, for a
certain delicate reserve. It is impossible, as Archbishop
Whately has said, not to recognise in her a distinctly Chris¬
tian writer; her good people act in all serious matters on the
liighest principles, but tliey do not talk about them; nor are
deep and holy subjects brought forward by tlie authoress;
and this we are sure proceeds from reverence, and not from
Our Female Novelists. 269
indifference. With somewhat too much of an opposite
tendency in the light literature of the present day, it is re¬
freshing to turn again and again to an author who is not
always analysing motives and dissecting consciences, with
the risk thereby of fostering in young minds an unwhole¬
some habit of self-contemj)lation.
One other of Miss Austen's works claims a brief notice,
the curious tale, if so it can be called, published with Mr
Austen Leigh's Memoir under the title of " Lady Susan."
It is thought to have been an early composition; and there is
great talent shown in the way in which the plot is unfolded,
and the various characters are sketched in a series of letters.
But the authoress judged well in never publishing it. The
principal character is simply detestable, and the rest of the
group of correspondents are too slightly delineated to attract
much interest or to redeem the piece. It would not have
introduced our authoress agreeably as a novelist, though as
a relic it possesses some merit. To admit that Miss Austen's
works have some faults is only to say that she is human ; but
we shall decline the ungracious task of dwelling upon them.
We wiU only conclude with Lord Carlisle's graceful serio¬
comic tribute, " Lines on a Lady Eeading a Novel," which
may also serve fitly to introduce the next figure in this
series,—
" Beats thy quick pulse o'er Inchbald's thrilling leaf,
Brunton's high moral, Opie's deep-wrought grief ?
Has the mild chaperon claimed thy yielding heart
Carroll's dark page, Trevelyan's gentle art ?
Or is it thou all-perfect Austen ?   Here
Let one poor wreath adorn thy early bier.
That scarce allowed thy modest youth to claim
Its living portion of thy certain fame !
Oh! Mrs Bennet !    Mrs Norris too !
While memory surv-ives we'll dream of you.
And Mr Woodhouse, whose abstemious lip
Must thin, but not too thin, his gruel sip.
Miss Bates, our idol, though the village bore ;
And Mrs Elton ardent to explore.
While the dear style flows on without pretence,
With unstained purity and unmatched sense ;
Or, if a sister e'er approached the throne,
She called the rich ' Inheritance' her own."
A. DUNDAS.
No. 33,—Skptember 1877. 2 M
270 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
®n Sccontriirg fbxtcation of ®omcn in Stotlanir.
NOTES ON THE ST GEORGE'S HALL CLASSES AND
SYSTEM OF INSTRUCTION BY CORRESPONDENCE.
" I feel strongly the extreme difficulty of giving to girls what really deserves the name
of education intellectually."—flr Arnold.
In the early spring of 1876, an advertisement to the follow¬
ing effect appeared in the Scotsman:—
"A Student of the Edinburgh Ladies' Educational Association
wishes to meet with others who, like herself, are desirous of obtaining
the University Certificate for Women, with whom she might study for
the Preliminary Local Examinations."
Before many weeks had elapsed, this student had entered
into partnership with other persons likeminded ; for a more
detailed advertisement was inserted, setting forth as follows
the plan of study of these associates :—
" Edinburgh University Local Examinations.—Ladies wishing
to pass this Examination in June 1876, are invited to join a Class for
the Preparation of Students.
" Tutor—Mr M'Glashan.
" Subjects—Grammar and Analysis, Aritlimetic, History, Geography.
" Candidates may be prepared for Honours.    The Class will meet
three times a-week.
" Terms, £1, Is. for the Course.
" For further particulars, afply to S. M., 5 Chester Street."
Nearly all of these ladies had, like the first advertiser,
studied in the classes of the Edinburgh Ladies' Educational
Association, and not a few had won prizes, and possessed a
goodly bundle of parchment, i.e., of first class certificates,
testifying to their diligence and ability.
But, by decree of the Senatus, all were alike disqualified
as candidates for the Higher or University Certificate for
Women in Literature and Science, because none of them
had passed the Local Examinations. To gain this pass
certificate was then their object, and they proposed to attain
it by forming a class under a competent tutor, first, for the
" preliminary subjects ;" and next, for such honours studies
as tlie majority should select.
Before going any further, and telling how this plan was
carried out, it will be well to explain what a Local Examina¬
tion is, and what it is not. Eirst of all, it cannot be too
often repeated that a Local Examination, as such, is not a
test of higher or University Education.    Its aim is merely to
On Secondary Educatio7t of Women in Scotland.   271
supply a test of that secondary or school education which
everyone in pohte society is supposed to have received.
This description applies to all ordinary Local Examina¬
tions of whatever university, unless they are specially
characterised as being " Higher " Examinations. The Edin¬
burgh Board of Examiners grants certificates of two grades,
i.e., ordinary and honour certificates. No candidate is
exempted from a previous examination in the so-called
" preliminary subjects," a series belonging not to secondary
but to primary education. This examination might easily be
passed by the elder scholars in any well-taught public
school; for its subjects are simply grammar and analysis,
reading aloud and dictation, arithmetic, and the barest
rudiments of history and of geography.
Yet, strange to say, with scarcely one exception, our band
of lady students agreed that to them this was by far the most
formidable ordeal; and, to come to details, they said that they
were weaker in arithmetic and in geography than in any¬
thing else. Many added that they had never learned any
English grammar at all, and that they were totally ignorant
of what was meant by the analysis of sentences.
The department of special and honours subjects, on the
other hand, includes those ordinary studies in which young
ladies are supposed to spend their school-days. Erench and
German, English literature and accidence, history, and the
elements of physics, are among the studies from which a
choice of two or more may be made. Some of these honours
papers are sulficiently elaborate, and can only be answered
successfully by well-trained candidates; and none save
diligent students can hope to gain the much-coveted prizes
awarded by the university to those who take a first class in
more than one subject, or to be, among a host of eager com¬
petitors, the happy winners of certain valuable scholarships.
But the ordinary pass is distinctly easy of attainment, since,
like all pass examinations, it is not intended for clever, but
only for average learners.
To return to what took place in April 1876. Our adver¬
tisement gathered together a class of decidedly able and
well-read women, many of whom had mastered a variety of
subjects, and had their knowledge well in hand. They were,
however, far more afraid of the simplest requirements of the
Local Examiners than they had been of university class
papers; and, indeed, their mere presence in the class-room
showed that they would not have ventured to go up for
examination in the common subjects without special pre-
2/2 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
partition. Success in the lecture-room, where they had
pursued higher studies, had not blinded these ladies to their
real shortcomings; and, instead of besieging the Senatus with
petitions to have their disabilities taken away, they one and
all agreed that, in exacting some proof of secondary instruc¬
tion, the University Board had been wise in their generation.
They accordingly, on the principle that it is never too late
to mend, set to work right cheerfully to lay anew the very
foundations of learning. One of the foremost of them all
was not long in writing to a friend, tliat she found the study
of grainmar and geography, when carried on in good com¬
pany, and with a definite aim, to be " quite as fascinating "
(the words are her own) " as science or literature."
We think that these ladies would have worked even more
cheerily had they known that they were not only achieving
culture for themselves, but also doing much to help forward
the secondary and, through it, the higher education of Scot¬
land. For their example tended to exalt thoroughness and
accuracy in the eyes of society, and did something surely to
show the University of Edinburgh that these ladies
coveted the promised honour of its certiticate for women,
since they were ready to work hard in order to pass
through the previous examinations. It also taught the
younger sisters, and, we may add, the nieces of some of these
students, that it was needful to be painstaking and careful
in their own elementary lessons, if they were not to go through
life bemoaning a bad education, or murmuring that the
world was gTowing too clever for them to live in!
The class was fortunate in its tutor. Mr M'Glashan
entered on his singular task of teaching the rudiments of
grammar and of arithmetic to grown-iip women with all the
zest and freshness of one who makes an experiment.
The results at the Edinliurgh Local Centre, in June 1876,
were that, after but three months' work, 30 of these ladies
went up for examination in common subjects, 29 took the
ordinary pass certiticate, and 10 gained honours. The best
student. Miss Menzies, won the £40 scholarship offered by
the Ladies' Educational Association, and stood second
among 280 candidates, with a total of 270 marks, besides
taking honours in music and in drawing.
These events were a good deal talked about, and various
friends at a distance asked whether dwellers in the coun¬
try could not obtain guidance in private study, and be
assisted to work on the same lines as the fortunate members
of the class.    In short, they suggested a plan for teaching
On Secondary Ediication of Women in Scotland.   273
by letter. The already existing Cambridge system, with its
class fee of £4, 4s. per subject, was much too expensive for
Scotland. But it appeared possible, if a corresponding class
were worked along with the Edinburgli one, and if printed
papers were largely used in both, to do it more easily and
cheaply.
We resolved to make the attempt. A smaU committee
undertook to make the business arrangements, and to gua¬
rantee the advertisements and other preliminary expenses,
so that prizes of £lU, of £5, and of £3, might from tlie first be
offered. Mr M'Glashan made no difficulty. He was not
even unduly alarmed at a prospect of unlimited correspond¬
ence throughout the winter. The plan was advertised in all
the leading county papers, and two articles, entitled, " How
I passed the Local Examinations," and " Notes on Instruc¬
tion by Correspondence," appeared in the pages of this
magazine. Both attracted some attention at the time, and
when republished separately they sold well. These essays
are out of print; and events move so rapidly in educational
matters, that they could not be re-issued without alteration,
since, in spite of containing much solid and lasting informa¬
tion about private preparation for Local Examinations, both,
in one short twelvemonth, have become antiquated.
In November, 40 students met in St George's Hall for
the study of the Preliminary subjects ; and before long there
was a class of 52 correspondents. A few ladies wrote from
England, and there were a good many north of Ireland
members. It is not unlikely that these ladies were attracted
by the circumstance that the University of Edinburgh places
no restriction on the age of candidates, and thus offers to
ladies who have not secured a certificate before the age of
eighteen, an opportunity of doing so even when consideralily
older. But, since tlie object of the promoters was to stimulate
culture at home, the main interest of the winter's work lay in
their correspondence with ladies living in the remoter districts
of Scotland. Such letters were often very interesting; and,
out of zeal for a common cause, valuable friendships have
sprung up between the managers of the scheme and certain
unseen correspondents. One or two writers, after a few
months' correspondence, came to Edinburgh in order to join
the class. They found its members working at precisely
the same point as themselves, and, we must add, not one whit
more advanced in knowledge. Letters came from all parts.
They came from prosperous Lowland county towns, and
told us that life was dull there, and society rather bored with
274 'TJie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
itself. The writers asked whether, in working for an exami¬
nation, there might be a possible remedy for a social condition
which they aptly described as one of intellectual stagnation,
solely mitigated by—
" Personal talk
Of friends, who live within an easy walk,
Or neighbours, daily, weekly, in our sight."
Letters came from country-house schoolrooms where the
governess had long solitary evenings for study, in which her
elder pupils were rarely spirited enough to join. Many
came from Glasgow itself, testifying to the difficulties
which, even in a great city, beset any solitary grown-up
woman in the pursuit of knowledge. Some of the writers
were teachers in schools, who knew, by professional experi¬
ence, the worth of an honoiirs certificate, wliich admits its
holder's name to the Kugby Calendar for lady-teachers.
Letters came, and these were the most welcome of all,
from tlie far north, and from wild glens of the west, where
the post comes but seldom. They came too from Skye,
and from the Isles, and from Highland manses, where the
daughters, once their school-days are past, are, as a rule, cut
off from aids to learning.
The majority were uneasy about their arithmetic; and, as
a whole, the correspondence bore testimony to the disor¬
ganised state of secondary education, and to the difficulty in
many districts of obtaining anything beyond primary in¬
struction. Still, this correspondence proved that, even where
there is no teaching to be had, save in the parish school,
something may yet be done by a girl who is quite resolved
to learn and to be well taught. One clever lady, whose
arithmetic was in a hopeless state of disrepair, narrated how
she had amazed a head-master by coming suddenly before him
with the request that she might join his class! He entered
into our friend's views, told her that it was the very best
thing she could do, and made room for her, slate in hand,
among the children, until the mysteries of vulgar fractions had
become plain. We should be glad to see so good an example
widely followed; for, if rudimentary learning be but securely
based, a good system of teaching by letter may guide diligent
students to a great deal of knowledge. The experience of
the session teaches, that no one need think it very difficult
to stiidy in this way. For, from first to last, the tutors
found that progress was as marked witli the one set of
learners as with the other.    Nay, it seemed as if the leisure
Oil Secondary Education of Women in Scotland.   275
and stillness of country life in winter produced work of
greater solidity than was done amidst the distractions of
town; and no surprise was felt by those who had looked on
from the very first, when three out of five prizes were
awarded to correspondents.
In the winter of 1876-77, it was necessary to engage the
services of a second English tutor, and we were fortunate in
securing Mr E. Reid. A Latin class, under Mr A. B. Thom¬
son, and a German one, under ^Miss Eappenegger, were also
formed, and prospered. In April, the promised class for
honours was opened. It was also found expedient to announce
a second class for the study of the previous examination in
common subjects, because a few ladies prudently resolved to
go through the wliole elementary drill a second time, and to
rest satisfied with passing the preliminary examination only
in June 1877. No fewer than 32 members joined this class
and its corresponding division.
The Local Examinations of the University of Edinburgh
in June 1877 were, throughout Scotland, a very great suc¬
cess. The St George's Hall classes sent up no fewer than
55 candidates to the Edinburgh Centre. But the promoters
of these classes rejoiced still more over one or two new local
centres, which were mainly due to the exertions of corre¬
spondents, even when they were not entirely made up of
them. The results of the winter's work were made known
at a meeting held on July 20th, at which Professor Calder-
wood presided.    The Chairman summed up the results :—
In Honours, no failures. 11 times 80 per cent, and
upwards of marks were gained; and of the 14 Honours
Candidates, 9 won University Prizes.
In the Ordinary Special Subjects—
3 times Candidates took 90 per cent, of marks.
10     „ „ „    80       „ „
In the Preliminary Subjects—
3 times 90 per cent, were gained.
10     „     80        „
29     „     70        „
Of the 16 holders of Ordinary Pass Certificates, the names
of 12 appeared in the University I*rize List.
Professor Eraser told the meeting that, as examiner, he
had been amply satisfied with the logic papers. Indeed,
had he known how thorough the study of Jevons Primer
had Ijeen, he might have made the questions harder.    He
2/6 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
added that it would be well if all university men entered
his class as well prepared in logic as these ladies.
During the winter of 1877-78, it is intended to hold these
classes again, and to organize and extend the correspondence.
There can be no doubt that this is the part of our work
which has real national importance at the present moment.
Ladies in Edinburgh who wish to repair a defective edu¬
cation, or to begin any new study that strikes their fancy,
can get up a class, and find some one to teach them, if but
by following the example of our original student with her
advertisement. But it is very different in the country; and
we would suggest to ladies living in county towns, or in
populous neighbourhoods, that tliey should form Ladies'
Educational Associations, and use our correspondence system
as a means of directing a local instructor in his work. A
future paper will, we trust, relate how well some of our
friends are already organizing such associations.
But what, we would ask, is to become of the daughters of
those families in the country, where means are awanting to
send all to school, or to give the high salary necessary to
secure a really capable and well-trained governess ?
One young correspondent replies, from her own experience,
that they should, like the lady already mentioned, make use
of the nearest public school. We have this writer's per¬
mission to quote her very sensible letter:—" Let a clergy¬
man's daughter, in the Highlands, attend the public school.
This will be better than having the master to teach her
privately, as one learns much from the mistakes of others,
Another advantage of the parish school is, that arithmetic is
there taught more thorouglily than in most ladies' schools.
She should certainly learn Latin, altliough this might mean
hard work at first. I never understood English grammar
until I had learned Latin. When a class of boys began
Latin, we girls joined it, as we did those for Greek and
mathematics. Our parents said that we ought to take
advantage of such education as was within our reach, and
that, if the foundation was well laid, other things could be
added. In addition to our lessons, we had always a sliare
of the household work to do. It was no unusual thing for
me to have a lesson-book open beside me, in order to take a
peep at it now and then while I was doing out a room,
ironing, or washing the tea-cups. I was told that the one
part of education was as essential as the other; and that
labour fairly divided between mind and body preserved the
health of both."    Her concluding words are eminently satis-
Our Scotch Cousin. 277
factory to us, for she adds—" Such a young lady should by
all means join the corresponding classes. She could easily
do so while attending school; and more than one session of
teacliing by letter would be an advantage to her. Although
I had the benefit of excellent instructions, I need not have
attempted the Local Examinations had I not had the help
of this correspondence."
A Member of Committee.
WORK AND LOVE.
Work, work, work,
Though Ufe be long aud weary ;
Work, work, work,
Kor pause to think life dreary.
Weariness only is, where loving work is not—
Dreariness only is, where blessings are forgot.
Working for tliose we love^
Our Father over all;
Perhaps renouncing cherished plans,
Obedient to His call.
Did not our Elder Brother work—■
Saviour and Lord of all? '
They say that work is prayer—
Are work and love not one'?
One in our Father's great command.
One in His blessed Son ;
One in the promised great reward,
When the long rest is won i
Work, work, work.
Making brightness in the night;
Work, work, work.
With the true love wliich is might.
Let loving work go on, till breaks the longed-for day,
When, before the glorious light, the shadows llee awav.
L. G. C.
©itr Stolrl^ Cnusiit.
Jack and I were at breakfast one morning, when a letter
came announcing the death of an old aunt of ours in Scot¬
land, who had left a great deal of money to her orphan
niece, our cousin. As she had always lived with her aunt,
she was now left homeless, and our aunt had wished us to
take her to live with us, which wish we resolved to attend
Xn. :!3. —September 1877. 2 N
2/8 TJic Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
to. So Jack wrote to our cousin, and very soon we had an
answer—written in big sprawling characters—saying that
she would come to us in a lew- days.
" Wliat is lier name. Jack ?" I asked, after he had read
the letter.
" Something very Scotch," he replied, laughing; " it is
spelt Auchindachie, but I don't know how to pronounce it."
" Poor thing, what a name to come to London with!" I
exclaimed ; " I sha'n't venture to call her anything but
Janet."
Well, Jack went away to his business as usual, and all
day as I went about I thought of our cousin, wondering
what she would be like. Then when Jack came home, we
talked of her until slie became a perfect heroine to us.
At last the day of her arrival came, and as train-time ap¬
proached, I grew very impatient, doing nothing but looking
out into the lamp-lit streets to see if the cab was coming.
Jack had gone to the station to meet her, knowing—kind,
thoughtful boy that he was!—how strange a Scotch girl
would feel coming to London for the first time, all alone.
Well, at last I heard a cab stop at our door, and I rushed
downstairs and had it open before the maid could come up.
I looked eagerly out—there was a figure coming up tlie
steps—that must be J anet! I did not stop to look what she
was like before I gave her a hearty embrace. But after I
had kissed her and bade her welcome, I did look at her.
She was big, rather stout, and red-haired. Her face was red,
too, and had a conceited, self-satisfied expression, which I
did not like. I was surprised to see she wore no mourning.
Her dress was reddish browai, made in last year's fashion,
and very badly fitted. She wore also a smart velvet jacket,
and a bonnet which was a perfect mass of flowers and
feathers. She carried a big umbrella, and a shabby leather
bag, the latter evidently well-filled. I had time to notice
this while she saw her boxes taken in, and then, when she
turned upstairs, I looked towards Jack, who was evidently
as much disappointed in our cousin's appearance as I was.
" Oh, Jack, I'm sure she's not a bit a lady !" I whispered;
for I always know a lady the minute I see her, and this, I
was sure, was not one. Jack only laughed, and I followed
Janet upstairs and showed her into tlie bedroom prepared
for her. When I told her we should have dinner presently,
she seemed astonished, and said bluntly, " I didn't know it
was tlie fashion to dine at supper-time ; we ahvays dine at
one."
Our Scotch Cousin. 279
I left her, and went to the dining-room, where slie soon
joined us, and we sat down to dinner. She, poor thing,
looked so awkward, that I felt sorry for her, and would have
tried to help her if I could have done so. She handled her
knife and fork very clumsily, looked at her table-napkin as
if she had never seen such a thing before ; used a steel
knife to eat fish, and tried to cut roast beef Avith a fish-knife.
She helped herself with her own spoon, and drank tlie water
in her finger-glass. I could hardly help showing how
shocked I was, while .Tack seemed inclined to laugh every
time I looked at him; so it was a great relief to me when
dinner was over, and we went to the drawing-room. I tried
to make her talk, but it was hard work.
" You must be tired after such a long journey, Janet ?" I
said, sitting down beside her, determined to be as agreeable
as possible.
" Yes," was all the answer I got.
" What part of Scotland is it you come from ? " I next
asked.
" Auchtermuchty," replied my companion.
I did not confess that I was no wiser for this infcffmatiorn
but cast an appealing glance to Jack, who was laughing
behind a newspaper, and did not notice my mute entreaty.
I resumed my efforts at conversation, trying eveiy sub¬
ject I could think of, but her replies were still monosyllabicv
and I was just about to give up in despair, when Jack
asked carelessly, " Your aunt kept a farm, did she not ?"
The effect was like magic; Janet began to talk at once.
She addressed herself to me, and told me of cows, pigs,
butter, poultry, and other things connected with a farm,,
while I listened with as much interest as I could assume.
In a little while, to my great relief, the servant brought
in the tea-things. Janet partook largely of the contents of
the cake-basket, and the only observation she made of her
own accord was, " Isn't it a pity to take tea so soon after
dinner ?    I can't do justice to this fine cake."
I was too much taken aback to speak; but Jack said
gravely, " It saves the cake, you know, cousin."
" Ay, so it does," she rejoined; " and it must come ex¬
pensive for you making cakes; I guess the eggs are
dear."
" Of course we don't make cakes at home when we can
so easily buy them," I said coldly. She looked astonished,
saying regretfully, " I've got some fine recipes, which I
thought you might like to try."
28o TJie Ladies' Edi/iburgh Magazine.
" So you might," ,Tack suggested, with a sly glance towards
me, and I promised to see about it.
Soon after this, Janet declared herself tired, and went to
bed, while Jack and I remained talking for a little.
" How do you like her, Ethel ?" he asked, as soon as
Janet had left the room.
" Not at all," I returned ; " I'm quite disappointed in her,
she has no manners."
" Poor Janet," he said, laiighing ; " you must teach her to
be a lady, a task you are quite capable of."
" A task 1 don't like, all the same," I answered crossly,
and bade him good-night, wishing that Janet had stayed in
Scotland—or anywhere else away fi'oni London.
Next morning, when I went down in time to make coffee
before breakfast, I found Janet sitting in front of the fire,
knittin"'.
" I forgot I was in London this morning," she said rather
sulkily, after I had bade her good-morning, " I have been
down for about an hour."
I was secretly wondering liow the servant had liked this,
when Janet explained, that being tired of waiting, she had
gone out for a walk.
" Alone !" I exclaimed in amazement, " and before break¬
fast ! We don't do such things in London, cousin," I added
kindly; but she retorted quite angrily, " I don't care what
you London ladies do, you needn't dictate to me;" and
flinging down her work, took her place at the breakfast table.
She hardly s]5oke to me during the meal, addressing her¬
self wholly to Jack, and talking loud and fast, with a strong
northern pronunciation, on a variety of subjects. Slie
seemed quite at home this morning, and as soon as breakfast
w^as over, she proposed tliat we should take her to " see
London," as she expressed it. She seemed to expect Jack
to go with her, and was disappointed when he told her he
would be engaged all day. "Ethel will go out with you in
the afternoon," he added, as he left ns.
" I can go out alone if you are busj^," she said graciously,
turning to me. " You must have a good deal to do of a
morning."
" No ; I have very little," I answered. " I sliall be ready
to go out when you like ; but we don't generally go out so
early as this."
" Well, well, I am in no hurry," she said, and sat down to
her knitting again.
After lunch we went out, and I took her, first of all, to a
Our Scotch Cousin. 281
dressmaker's, where a large order was given, under my
directions, which would let Janet appear, in her dress at
least, a lady. After a few more shops had been visited, we
came home, Janet full of wonder and admiration at all she
had seen while she was out, and ready to listen to all we
told her about London.
By the end of a week Janet was regularly at home with
us, and thoucrh I confess I did not like her, I was civil and
attentive,  and  slie   seemed   quite   happy  with  us.    Her
manners did not improve, and I tliought her more suitable
for the kitchen than for the drawing-room.    She seemed from
the first to take a great liking to Jack, and after she had
been with us for about a month I suddenly discovered that
she was deeply in love with him.    Slie soon  afterwards
confessed this to me, with many hysterical sobs and tears,
declaring she could not live with us any longer unless he
loved her in return, and concluding by begging me to tell
him so !    I was horrified, but declined as quietly as possible
to do any such thing, and all day she remained inconsolable,
shutting herself up in her bedroom, and refusing to be com¬
forted.    Next morning she looked pale and miserable, and I
felt that this state of things wouldn't do.  I told Janet so, pretty
decidedly, and to my surprise she agreed with me, expressing
her intention of leaving us for a while tUl she got over it.
I was far from sorry, and she gave out that she was going
away to visit a friend in Yorkshire, as the sudden change to
London from the country had made her ratlier unwell.    So
one morning she set oft', and I must say I did not miss her.
But a few days after she was gone I did miss something else.
We were uoim; out to dinner, and when I was dressing I
found that  aU my jewelry had been stolen.    The box in
which it lay had been broken open, and everything was gone.
While I was lamenting my loss a maid came in to announce
that a quantity of plate was also missing.    I was amazed
and vexed.   It was so unaccountable.   Both our servants were
strictly honest—one  of them had been with   us  since we
were children—it was out of the question to suspect them.
We were sure no thief could have entered the house ; there
remained only to  suspect Janet, and this I confess I did,
though it seemed preposterous.    We gave information to the
police, but in vain; a week passed, and we heard notliing of
our lost property.    We heard nothing of Janet either, which
confirmed my secret suspicions.
I was meditating a conversation with Jack about her,
when   I  heard the door-bell rinu,', and a minute afterwards
282 The Ladies' Edifibiirgk Magazine..
the servant announced a young lady wishing to see me. It
was an unusual hour for visitors, as it was after dinner, but I
went down to the library where the stranger was.
When I entered, there rose to meet me a young lady,
neatly dressed in mourning, of small stature, and very pretty,
with regularly formed features, and soft grey eyes. I paused
a moment in surprise, and was about to ask her errand when
the little thing put back her veil, and said, smiling so prettily,
" I am Janet Auchindachie, and you, I suppose, are my
cousin Ethel!"
I was so overwhelmed with surprise that I stood staring
at this second Janet—so utterly unlike the first, and so
much more like what I would have wished our cousin to be.
At last I stammered, " There must be some mistake. One
Janet Aucliindachie was here before. Please sit down till I
go and speak to my brother;" and leaving my visitor, now as
much amazed as I had been, I rushed upstairs and told
Jack what had happened.
" It's as I was beginning to suspect," he exclaimed.
" That young person was no more our cousin than I'm a
Dutchman. In fact, I'm mistaken if she is not our mysterious
thief."
"I've been thinking so too. Jack," I replied. "But do
come down at once and see this young lady ! She is so
pretty, so different from the other ! "
We both hastened downstairs. Jack prepared with all
manner of questions, to prevent our being taken in a second
time. But the moment he saw her he bade her a hearty
welcome, and all his suspicions melted like hoar-frost.
" I have sufficient proof here of my identity," said
the stranger laughing, after the story of our other cousin
had been told to her. She then produced several letters and
documents, among others the letter we had written asking
her to come to London.
We at once made her at home, and after she had rested
and taken some dinner, we told her aU about the impostor—
for such she was without doubt. When we concluded, Janet
said gravely, " I think I know who it was—a girl who
lived with my aunt; as a servant she was far from honest,
and after my aunt's death she went to England. I re¬
member giving her the letter I wrote to you to post, and
telling her I would pay some visits in Scotland before
coming to London. ]\Iy impression is that, knowing my
plans, she must have destroyed the letter, and determined to
personate nie here for a time.    She always wished to go to
Where shall zve Go? 283
London, and prided herself on her lady-like appearance, so I
have little doubt but that she thought you would welcome
her without suspicion."
" Which indeed we did," interrupted Jack.
" You know how she took advantage of you," continued
Janet, " for I have little doubt that she is the thief, and I'm
afraid we shall never hear more either of your property or
your false cousin."
Janet was right. From that day to this we have never
heard of the thief, nor of our stolen goods. The real Janet
proved as pleasant and lady-like as the false one was the
opposite, or as I had at iirst sight imagined she would be.
She had been with us only a very short time when I saw
that Jack and she loved each other. This was wliat I had
expected and hoped since she had first come, and it was a
very happy day for me when I acted as bridesmaid to my
cousin. They would not hear of my leaving them, and
declare that they won't let me go until I have a home of my
own, which I always reply will never happen.
And we often, in the winter evenings, sit by the fireside
and talk over the strange story of our pretended cousin. One
evening I told them the reason she had given for leaving us,
and Jack replied merrily, " I guessed as much, Ethel, but I
waited for the real one, you see, and I'll never repent my
choice as long as I live," he added, looking fondly at his
wife.
Thus our cousin became Jack's wife, and if every Scotch
girl makes as good a wife as she, I advise all Englishmen
to do as my brother did, and marry their Scotcli cousins—
if they have any.
Ceocus Forster Leigh.
II.—HELVELLYN.
That depends, as the " Cheshire Cat" would tell you, on
wiiere you want to go, and what you want to do when you
get there ! We shall imagine ourselves addressing an in¬
telligent audience, wlio, having neither unlimited time, nor
unlimited cash, are tired of work, and want a little play in a
pretty playground. Where shall they go ? Dear friends,
suppose you try the green Lake country. Why do so many
people know the Italian and Swiss Lakes, and so many more
284 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
the Scottish, and so very few the English ? They are not
grand, you say. Well, perhaps not, and strawberries are
not as big as pine-apples ; but you don't refuse to taste them
for that sole reason. But how is it that with limited time
and means, we are ready to run all over Europe, and endure
all manner of hardships with the best possible grace, when
comparatively few hours and few shillings would take us
into so pleasant a region as this wonderful little north-west
corner of England, where, in an area of thirty miles, there is
as charming a combination of hill and glen, wood and cliff,
mere and waterfall, as you need wish to see ? We will grant
that the quiet beauty of the country is better known, and
consequently better appreciated, if you can stay some time
in it, and are " up " to hill-rambles, not only to the regular
" sights," but in search of the less well-known beauties ; tlie
wild tarns, the deep ghylls, the foaming becks, each in itself
too small, perhaps, for regular sight-seers to
" Hunt it, and make it a lion, and get it at length into guide-books."
But if you have no more time than will serve for the
regular tourist-round, even this must be charming to
anybody with eyes and brains. Though all is on a small
scale, what of that ? The mountains are real mountains,
and the lakes real lakes. If you sketch or botanize, there
are the materials ready to hand; if you are what Mrs
Gradgrind calls—"something-ological," tliere are lead-mines,
and copper-mines, slate-quarries, pebbles, plumbago, miner¬
als and metals enough to keep you and your geological
hammer in full employ. If you love the Lake poets, you
can read them on their own ground, and enjoy them as you
never did before ; if you do not love them—more shame for
yoxi!—you need not read them. If, again, you are adventur¬
ous, and want to nearly break your neck, there are rocks
and every sort of convenience; if you want nearly to be
drowned by the upsetting of a crazy boat, to be lost in a
mist, to be belated, beniglited, terrified out of your wits in
any reasonable way (some people are unreasonable in their
demands), you can be as well accommodated in these respects
at Iveswick as at Kiissnacht. Go, then, and see the English
Lakes, if you have never seen them, and pay special regard
to Thirlmere—lovely, lonely Thirlmere—before Manchester
drinks it all up ; for Manchester, we hear, is turning sober,
has taken the Temperance pledge, and intends in future to
slake its thirst with Thirlmere. Albeit strong in the cause
of Temperance, we  could not but hope there might  yet
Where shall we Go? 285
be a slip between the cup of Thirlmere and the lip of
Manchester.
Go where you will, a holiday ramble is a deliglitful thing.
Nobody disputes that in theory; but it is only fully enjoyed
as a set-off to hard work, and some people dispute tliat. Do
not be friglitened : we are not going to quote the proverbial
" dull boy " Jack; only what about tlie Jack-asses who
have all play and no work ? Are they beneath the dignity
of a proverb ? They certainly cannot enjoy holidays as we
did, when, fresh from the labour of gaining our Local
Certificate, we set off to enjoy our play.
As to special modes of enjoying oneself, no two people,
probably, think quite alike. If a whole party start together
on a pleasure-hunt, ten to one but you will see that the real
zest of the search is different to each one. If two of us sat
down to make mud pies, one would place her happiness in
brown mud, and the other in black—[N.B. there would
most likely be enough for both in this summer of 1877 ')
But the fact is, that nobody's mind will unbend e.x;actly in
the same way as anybody else's mind. Mrs Sarah Battles
worked at whist, and unbent her mind afterwards over a
book ; Domitian killed flies, and other great characters have
had some peculiar sfogo;—we lilce going up a hill. A
mountain-pass is delightful, where you get higher and
higher, till you can peer over tlie top, and see what there is
on the other side; but better still, a mountain-top, especially
if it be the highest in its own neighbourhood. Not merely
for the sake of the view, which is all very well in its way, but
even with the certainty of no view—and in this insular
climate, the odds are, there will be none—we like the actual
going up, the gradual unfolding and widening of the map
below you, the relative change of position of different points
of thd landscape; it is all pleasure the whole way. As to
the view itself, that is far finer, in the artist's sense of the
word, half-way up than at the top ; the higher you go, the
picture becomes more of a map, and only gains in width to
lose in picturesque beauty at every step.
As to Helvellyn, that king of the Lakes, you have not done
your duty by the country till you have stood on his storm-
swept crown. He is not quite as high as Scawfell; but while
that fine hill sulks away in his corner, and only looks on
Wastwater, Helvellyn is the very centre point of the
district, a great mountain mass, sending forth spurs, whose
feet are washed on one side by UUeswater, on the other by
Thirlmere, Grasmere, and Eydal.  Four or five other lakes, and
No. 33.—September 1877. 2 0
286 TJie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
many tarns, are in siglit; the Solway Firth, Morecambe Bay,
and a goodly belt of blue and silver sea.
And has not our own Sir Walter Scott trod its turfy steep,
bearing the wizard staff, which turned all it touched into
gold ? Did he not so immortalize poor Charles Gough, as
to leave him and Helvellyn in our hearts for ever ? when
he folded his pilgrim to sleep
" In the arms of Helvellyn and Catcliedecam."
Can the melody of the beautiful little poem ever cease to
delight us ? Dear romantic young lady-tourist, could you
not engage the Poet-Laureate to commemorate you in such
magic verse, and then go up—let us say—Scawfell in a fog,
tumble into the Mickledore chasm, and rest assured of fame,
and our best thanks ?
Eut here we were at Ambleside; days were passing,
Helvellyn was still waiting, and so were we, for the
weather was unsettled, and somewhat thundery, and we
were giving up the idea, when a chance visitor, though he
could not settle the weather, unsettled our minds by saying,
" Here's a glorious day ! why don't you go ? Too late ? not
at all; take the one o'clock coach to Grasmere, get ponies
there and a guide."
So in shorter time than we can write the words, a sand¬
wich was eaten, the waterproofs and umbrellas strapped,
the guide-book secured, and all the barometers within reach
looked at. They were all going down; but when a gloomy
morning has cleared into a superb day, and that ubiquitous
and useful person, the " oldest inhabitant," tells you it is
going to be irne, what can you do but trust him ?
And now we were on the Grasmere coach, and had fixed
upon the Grasmere, or Tongue's Gill ascent. Much longer
than the Wythburn, it is much more beautifid. A few days
before, we had been talking from the top of the Keswick coach
to a guide who was leaning against the inn-door at Wyth¬
burn, as to the best route. We had been greatly diverted, too,
by the remarks of a young fellow-traveller, who informed tlae
passengers that she lived in London, and knew nothing about
mountains. On Helvellyn and Skiddaw being pointed out
to her, she expressed great dissatisfaction : she had " thought
'ills were 'igher," and tliat they " went straight up." Know¬
ing somewhat of hill-climbing, we had privately opined that
if the poor little soul had set off from that point, straight up
the stey braes of Helvellyn, she would have ceased to wish
him higher, or straighter up, before she had gone far!
At the Eotha Hotel, Grasmere, we were soon furnished with
Where shall we Go? 287
a capital guide; and as to ponies, there may be as good, but
there never can be better than the two clever and nimble
little beasts on which we were mounted. A tedious bit of
dusty road, and then we struck the Tongue's Gill, up a steep
path above the pretty wooded ravine, down which a brawl¬
ing beck dances and foams. Up and on, through fern and
foxglove, the ponies choosing their own way zig-zag up the
long turfy tongue, or promontory, wliich parts the two
streams, while we look back at the ever-widening view—
Grasmere like a sheet of glass, set in her emerald green
meadows, the quiet village and old massive church at her
head, where " Ilotha with her silver tide," bathes more than
one lionoured English grave.
Now the Coniston mountains come into sight, and
Coniston, Esthwaite, and Windermere lakes, and a long bar
of golden sand, and then the sea. When Southey and
Wordsworth waUced Sir W. Scott up here, who would not
have been of the party ? But we leave the thymy turf
and get upon grey rocks, the ponies climb like wild cats,
and now make a sharp descent down a kind of rocky stair¬
case on the side of a cliff. We are rounding the shoulder
of Seat Sandal, and the next sharp ascent will bring us in
sight of the first tarn. A heavy driving shower is falling,
but we do not mind it much; the wind is rising and the
clouds drift fast. Over some marshy ground, up a green
face; and by the end of the first hour we are landed on a
heathery platform, with the southern panorama still in view,
.while directly below us to the north, a wild lonely tarn is
lashed into mimic waves by the wind. It lies with its
steel-blue waters locked in by Seat Sandal and the huge
shoulder of Fairfield, and beyond it rises due north a steeper
hill than either, with a kind of undefined scratch on its side.
A vague idea shoots across us, that tins may be our actual
path, but it seems almost silly to ask. Ponies might go
up, and people might, separately; but how anything was
to stick on a pony's back the while ;—well, we wind down a
shelf, about as wide but not as smooth as the mantelpiece,
and at the north-east corner of the tarn ford the stream, which
leaves it to dash down a steep dark glen to the north. Oh,
what a scene for a painter ! Down goes the stream, lost in
a series of cascades, through the deep defile of Glenridding, and
there, under the dark rain-clouds, lies Ulleswater, spanned by
a double rainbow, and framed by St Sunday Crag and Place
Fell. The sun breaks out again, the gidde settles us in our
saddles, looks to the girths, remarking that the hardest work
288 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
is before us. " What! are we going up there ?" "Yes, just
where you see the path." It was just what one did not see;
but the ponies turn to the hill, and make for the afore¬
mentioned scratch, as if they knew their business, while a
half-recollected quotation from "the Enterkin" runs through
one's head :
" Commodore Rogers was a brave man—exceedingly lorave—quite par¬
ticular,
He climbed high rocks—exceedingly high—quite perpendicular,
And what made this the more inexpressible
That these same rocks were quite inaccessible !"
The attempt at a track disappears now and then, but the
ponies find their way, and one's energies are employed in
sticking on, and not rolling down into Grisedale Tarn, as we
leave it deeper below us. " Are we nearly up ?" " Well,
about half-way; but once on the top of this, the path is
dead level." One can't converse at ease sticking on the
wall of a house, or one would say—" Once on the top, what
more is there ? "
Now look over the western slope of Seat Sandal. The
beautiful blue heads of the Derwentwater and Buttermere
hills rise one by one, hailed with delight as old friends, bits
of sea and lake, flashes of light on tarns, and Skiddaw, how
purple-blue ! The ponies quicken their scramble into a trot.
Here we are at the cairn ! " No, ladies, it's a cairn, but there
is the cairn, just two miles off—see." The path winds off
into distance, and ends at a speck seen against the sky.
" This is a spur of Helvellyn. What is this tremendous
hill ?" " The Dolly Waggon Pike." People who go with¬
out a guide often stop, thinking their work is done, and turn
downhill from this point.
We rest here, and study the view. Go a couple of yards
to the north; the sight nearly makes one's head swim. Down
drops the hill, in sheer cliffs, towards Patterdale, and the
glens that look so beautiful from UUeswater. The lake lies
curled like a blue feather among its hills; we can trace the
silver Eamont into distant woodlands beyond Pooley Bridge ;
there are the green heights of Upper Lonsdale, the moorlands
of Shap, all ending in the ridges of Crossfell, dark now with
thunder-clouds. North-west and west, Ave look to the
Solway and the sea, the Scotch coast, Criffel looking at
Skiddaw, the bright Bassenthwaite Lake, a scrap of Derwent¬
water, and mountains all tossed in wild masses, all of darkest
indigo, save where the sun glints on the Honister Crag,
showing the pass to Buttermere, and makes the broad green
Where shall we Go? 289
top of Grassmoor like a new-mown lawn. Far beyond,
behind the Pillar and High Stile, another pale strip of sea,
with the Isle of Man like a cloud. Scawfell is sulky, and
keeps his cap on ; but all his attendant heights are grand—
Lingmell and the Great Gable, and the cliffs of Great End—
why, we see right over the Sty Head Pass. Further south,
Powfell, Wetherlam, the Old Man of Coniston; and paler blue
beyond them, Wordsworth's beloved Black Combe. Still
southwards, what a sweep of shining water, the chain of
lakes enclosed in wood and hill, ending in the sea again,
Morecambe Bay down to Lancaster. Over Ingleboro' dark
clouds are brooding. We heard afterwards of a tremendous
thunderstorm in Yorkshire at the time.
We doubt if a more varied panorama could be seen from
any hill in the island; not certainly in the Lake country.
Skiddaw sees too little water, and Scawfell, we are told, too
much, nothing but sea and Wastwater. Ihe variety of this
view is quite wonderful.
We push on. The weather is going to change ; a sudden
blast of wind, icy cold, sets the clouds in rapid motion.
Onwards, along the top of the precipice-wall, and again we
quote Sir W. Scott—how well he always chooses his epithets I
Truly, " the mighty Helvellyn,"—never can his vastness be
so well appreciated as in the walk from Dolly Waggon Pike
on to liis broad shoulder. And the " dark brow,"—never did
mountain frown more sternly than he, with those beetling
red cliffs. And the " arms of Helvellyn and Catchedecam,"
tliose long rocky arms of Striding and Swirrel Edge, folding
round the Eed and the Kepplecove tarns ! We wondered
how many eagles sailed and " yelled " in Sir Walter's day.
They are all silent now.
As we cross what the Swiss would call a col, a narrow
isthmus with just footing and no more, a stony slope on one
side and a precipice on the other, and make our last ascent
to the cairn, an ugly rust-coloured cloud comes sweeping
from the sea, a white steam boils up as if out of the tarns, in
a minute the whirls of vapour meet and close ; we are in a
black cloud, can see each others' faces and our ponies' ears,
and the cairn which we are touching, but further—alas, no !
A gulf of cloud, driving with a speed that makes one dizzy,
that is all. We know that one step would be over a cliff,
and we stand still.
" It may lift in ten minutes, and may not for ten hours,"
says the guide. And now the cloud looks greenish, and the
icy blast brings a hissing sound ; we know what that means.
290 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
A hail-storm rattles down, whitening the rocks. The ponies
shake their dear little heads, fold their tails close, turn their
noses to the cliff; we unfurl umbrellas, and sit quiet. The
guide relates how last Easter Monday a party—three ladies
and two gentlemen—had to stay up here all night; so dense a
fog closed round them, they could not find the path. Think
of that, dear young lady-tourist! could you have been more
romantically uncomfortable on the Matterhorn ?
The hail scatters the mist, and we begin the descent,
passing the col, and taking the Wythburn path. It is
boggy in many places, and the heavy rain makes it worse ;
miniature waterfalls abound. In places where there is any
chance of one's neck being broken, one likes to have a good
view of a performance so personally interesting; declining
umbrellas, therefore, we get drenched. Never mind; the
clouds are breaking, here is the sun, Thirlmere's twin lakes
flash out below us, and cramped with cold and wet we insist
on walking. " I was just going to advise it," says the guide,
" the path gets so steep here." " Not worse than ' IJolly
Waggon?'" "0, yes; the steepest you've seen to-day."
Down, down, such stairs of rocks. What an ascent this must
be, more direct than Tongue's Gill, straight enough to satisfy
our London friend. But " a haggis, Cot pless her, can charge
down-lull"—we race down, looking back to see how gal¬
lantly our little beasts do it, without a slip. Eeaching a
green ghyll, we mount again, doing honour to Coleridge's
pretty little " word-picture" of the Knight's Tomb, by
settling that " the grave of Sir Arthur 0' Kellyn " must
have been somewhere among these birch-trees, where the
brook is brawling down.
Wythburn Inn at last.    We had intended bidding guide
and ponies good-bye, and taking the Ambleside coach here,
but the latest had passed long since.    We are tired, but
must perforce ride back to the hotel, four miles further,
'which will make a round of fourteen miles.
It is a glorious evening, and without further peril we
reach the " Eotha," take leave of our trusty guide and four-
footed companions, dry our stiffened skirts at the kitchen fire,
and drink steaming coffee, while the light carriage is pre¬
paring wliich will take us down to Ambleside.
So good-night, dear reader; and if you still ask, where
shall we go ?—take our advice, and go up Helvellyn.
L.  DUXDAS.
Double Acrostic. 291
DOUBLE ACROSTIC.
No. 9.
When I was young and gay,
I sailed from shore to shore.   .
Alas, and well-a-day !
These golden hours are o'er.
Nor blue waves of the Spanish main,
Nor northern gulfs a-mist with rain,
Shall I see ever more ;
Yet in my mind their hues remaia
As life-like as before.
Now I am old and worn,
My fint to me is sweet;
But those shall be my scorn
Who seek it ere 'tis meet.
They find my srxondls with'ring lilight,
Which soils the fair, and dims the bright,
And vanquislios the fleet;
lily first is age and labour's right
For weary hands and feet. E. J. 0.
SOLUTION OF DOUBLE ACROSTIC
No. 8.
B       B. and S.       S
I INCH H
R RONDO O
D DEBT T
Correct answers received from " B.," Hawthorn, and Message Girl.
A Prize is offered at the close of the year to the solver of the greatest
number of acrostics.    For Rules, see former numbers of this Magazine.
• H-H -jiGt- tf ■■ W ■
STEAY    NOTES.
We learn that the Glasgow Association for the Higher Education of
Women is about to begin its practical work. Thougli tlie arrangements
for classes to be held next winter are not yet completed, they are
in good progress ; and meantime our Glasgow readers will hear with
pleasure that Professors Caird, Veitch, Young, and M'Kendrick,
have agreed to hold classes for the Association.
Whatever may be thought of the progress made in Great Britain
towards the Higher Education of Women, there can be little doubt
that New Zealand is losing no time in furthering the cause. Canter¬
bury College has for some time opened its lectures to women, with
the very natural result of finding that, from the want of previous
training, many did not reap full advantage from them.    The Board of
2g2 TJie Ladies Edmbiirgh Magazine.
Governors has therefore agreed, that a High School for girls shall be
founded, with, if possible, an endowment of a landed estate. This is
indeed establishing matters on a solid basis, and we send a warm
greeting to our fellow-workers at the antiiiodes.
We are favoured with a Prospectus of the Preparatory Classes for
the Edinburgh University Local Examinations. The preparations
appear to u.s to be very complete, comprising Classes for all tlie
Preliminary Subjects, as well as for English Literature, Logic,
Mathematics and Algebra, French, German, and Latin. The system of
instruction by correspondence will l^e carried on in connection with
all these classes. We hope that ladies in many remote parts of the
country will devote some of the dark hours of winter to a systematic
course of study, such as is now brought within the reach of the most
isolated inhabitant of our island.
We are glad to announce that another of our subscribers has re¬
sponded to our appeal for j^rizes in special subjects at the Local
Examinations of 1878. A prize of £10 has been placed \>y her in the
hands of the Treasurer of the Edinburgh Ladies' Educational
Association, to be awarded to the candidate who shall take the highest
marks in English Literature ; subject to the conditions of continuing
her studies in the classes of the Association, and of having taken Latin
as a "common subject" in the Local Examinations. This prize is
further limited to ladies who intend to become teachers. We remark
that no prizes are offered for sjiecial excellence in Logic or in
]\Iathematics. May we suggest to others to follow in this or another
line the above good example ?
A CORRESPONDENT expresses her surprise that E. M. D., in her
charming article on Corsica, says nothing about the Chalybeate springs
of Ozezza. They are a ferruginous Seltzer w^ater, very rich in iron,
and very eflervescent. One of their chief merits, however, is that of
all known chalybeates—that they retain their properties when bottled ;
and tlierefore they are largely coming into use, both abroad and in
England. They can now be had in Edinburgh ; and a friend of the
writer has used them this summer, instead of going to Schwalbach.
We are requested to make the following correction on our note
of last month concerning the names of the students who have gained
prizes in Mr M'Glashan's Preparatory Classes for the Edinburgh
University Local Examinations. 1st prize ^10, gained by Miss
M'Phail, Kilmuir, Uig, Skye (corresjionding student) ; 2d jnize £10,
gained by Miss Burnside, Glasgow (corresponding student) ; 3d prize
£b, gained by Miss Ray Edinburgh ; 4th j^rize £3, gained by Miss
M'Kerron, Kennethmont, Aberdeenshire (corresponding student) ;
5th prize j£3, gained by Miss Gair, Falkirk (corresponding student).
Ladies are invited to contribute to this Magazine.
A Prize is oft'ered for the best article received and accepted by
the Editors before \st March 1878, on the subject, "Where shall we
Go?"
A Prize is offered for the best article received by the Editors, and
accepted for insertion during the current year, on any one of our
British Female Novelists, born in the 18th century.
No meeting of the Ladies' Edinburgh Literary Society will be
held till October.
Our Female Novelists. 293
®«r   J|cm;ik  IJiDbclisls.
IX.
MISS   FEERIER.
h. 1782; d. 1854.
It has happened to us more than once, on putting the
question—Do you like Miss Feri'iei''s novels ? to be met by
tlie answer, " I never even heard of Miss Ferrier."
Peaceful times, whether in history or private life, have
the disadvantage, so to speak, of aflbrding comparatively
slender materials for the historian or biographer to work
upon. Yet it is an honourable tribute to domestic life, that a
woman with talents which would have distinguished her in
a far wider sphere, should have been content to pass her quiet
and happy days with no ambition beyond what could be
gratified by the possession of the esteem and love of all who
were privileged to call themselves her friends—content to
pass away, leaving no public memorial save three charming
books, which, although they stamp their authoress at once
as a wit, a genius, and a well-bred Scottish gentlewoman,
are by no means universally known or read. Such a woman
was Susan Edmonston Ferrier, born in Edinburgh in 1782.
She was the daughter of James Ferrier, a Writer to the
Signet, and for some years man of business to the Duke of
Argyll. This connection of his was the means of bringing
his daughters into a more extended circle of acquaintances
than they might otherwise have formed. To the visits she
was thus enabled to pay in the West Highlands, we are pro¬
bably indebted for some of Miss Ferrier's best scenes and
most amusing descriptions. Her mother was a Miss Coutts,
and was distinguished for great personal beauty.
As Clerk of the Court of Session, James Terrier was at one
time the colleague in office of Walter Scott. To name him
in such company shows under what happy auspices the
little maiden entered the literary world. We need not
dwell on the charms of Edinburgh society as it then was,
so many records of it are within our reach. A few still
linger, of the numbers who in our own childhood could tell
us stories of old family friends and kinsmen among the men
and women whom Eaeburn painted, and for whom  Scott
No, 34.—October 1877. 2 P
294 '^^^^ Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
wrote, who laughed with Cockburn and Jeffrey, and trod
many a merry measure to the strains of Niel Gow. But as
the numbers dwindle, year by year, of those who saw and
spoke with that generation, we often feel glad that so many
of its characteristics have been preserved from oblivion, by
being wrought into the fascinating prose of Miss Terrier's
novels. She paints from the life, and gives us a series of
undying portraits, where, but for her, we should only have
had uncertain oral traditions of the ways and fashions, grave
and gay, of our forefathers. Scottish peculiarities are fast
dying out, social landmarks disappearing like the beautiful
outlines of our historical Edinburgh, under the touch of
modern improvement. No such materials can ever be had
again ; no future day can produce an " Uncle Adam," a
" Lady M'Lauchlan," a " Glenroy," a " Miss Grizzy," a " Miss
Pratt." Whethei', therefore, we rejoice in or deplore the
rapid friction of modern life, which reduces all angles to one
dead level, we must at least be thankful to her who com¬
mitted such sketches to the safe keeping of the world of
fiction, before the originals disappeared from the land.
Miss Terrier was attacked in early life by small-pox,
which destroyed the sight of one eye, and weakened the
other. This misfortune does not seem to have hindered her
enjoyment of society, and certainly did not impair her won¬
derful quickness of observation. Not the less remarkable is
it, that, with such keen wit and dangerous powers of satire,
it is not upon record that she ever made an enemy, or alien¬
ated a friend, by her writings. As her stories are all of her
own day, and the scenes laid in the places she habitually
frequented, she might have given endless offence, but that
her tact and self-control kept other talents in their right
bounds.
She was an intimate friend of Sir W. Scott's family, and
we have a pleasing little notice in his diary of her last visit
to Abbotsford in his lifetime :—
May 12, 1831.—Miss Ferrier comes out to us. This gifted per¬
sonage, besides having great talents, has conversation the least exigeante
of any author—female, at least—whom I have ever seen among the long
list I have encountered with ; simple, full of humo\ir, and exceedingly
ready at repartee, and all this without the least affectation of the blue¬
stocking.
Perhaps a still more uncommon possession than that of
intellectual gifts, is the power of so carrying them as neither
to encumber their owner nor the bystanders.
I
Oiw Female Novelists. 295
As long journeys were few and far between in those days,
much of the amusement of society in Scotland consisted in
country-house visiting, and of tliis so pleasant a guest had a
good share. The clannish feeling still survived, which
opened the great man's doors to all his kindred, and wel¬
comed to his table all with any tie of blood, however dis¬
tant. This gave variety to remote neighbourhoods, and
supplied many incidents to a quick observer like Miss
Terrier. A spinster of good birth might live almost entirely
in a round of visits to great connections, even while retain¬
ing a little 'pihd a terre, to which a retreat could be made at
times; thus we see Miss Pratt, one day feasting on venison
with her cousin the earl, desceudincj on the next to a domestic
bathos of Babby Braidfoot and barley broth.
As people did not tlien live, neither did they write by
railroad—the better for their brains, their books, and their
readers. Miss Ferrier was past five-and-thirty when her
first novel was published. She had formed a strong friend¬
ship with a Mrs Clavering and her daughter, connections of
the Duke of Argyll. In concert with Miss Clavering, she
began writing a story, till, perceiving the superiority of her
friend's work to her own. Miss Clavering wisely withdrew
her share, and suffered Miss Ferrier to proceed alone. This
story, entitled Marriage, appeared in 1818.
It opens with the elopement of a London beauty of high
rank with the younger son of an impoverished Highland
family, and the introduction of this uncongenial bride into
his ancestral home, to the hospitality of his old father, the
society of five gawky sisters, an elder l)rother and his wife,
and the care of three old maiden aunts. Lady Juliana's
notion of a castle in the Highlands is a chateau en Espagnc;
based partly on the description by noble friends of a duke's
shooting-lodge, where wealth makes a luxurious picnic life
agreeable for a week or two—partly on the recollections of
her bridegroom, who had left Glenfern at eight years old,
and partly on the drop-scene of the Italian opera. The
grim reality thus bursts upon them both :—
" They had gained the summit of a very high hill, and
the post-boy, stopping to give his horses l)reath, turned round
to the carriage, pointing at the same time to a tall thin grey
house, sometliing like a town, that stood in the vale l^eneath.
A small sullen-looking lake was in front, on whose banks
grew neither tree nor shrub." A significant look from the
driver made the colour mount to Douglas' cheek as he
stammered out, " Surely it can't be ? yet somehow I don't
296 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
know. . . . Pray, my lad, what is the name of that house ? "
" Hooss !" repeated the driver—" ca' ye thon a hooss ?
thon's gude Glenfern Castle !"
Of a piece is the life which follows—the sordid life of a
decayed Highland family. Poor Lady Juliana ! she loathes
the advice and advantages proffered her, from the " few
family broth " produced for her refreshment on her arrival,
to the society and patronage of the magnate of the country¬
side, and oracle of the spinsterhood, Lady M'Lauchlan.
The dingy rooms, at siglit of which her fine lady's-maid
throws up her place, declining life "among such Oaten-
Toads "—the sight and smell of the red-herrings and scones,
the strains of the piper which send her into hysterics, to
the wrath of the Laird : " A Ijonny bargain indeed, that
canna stand the pipes ; she's no the wife for a Hielandman!"
The spirit and fun of the whole are indescribable.
The eldest son's wife, as well-born as Lady Juliana, and
better bred, tries to reconcile her sister-in-law to the lot
which she herself endures with cheerful good sense, but
" Mrs Douglas' attenjpts to teach her to play at chess and
read Shakespeare, were as unsuccessful as the endeavours of
the good aunts to persuade her to read Fordyce's Sermons,
and make baby-linen."
Lady M'Lauchlan and Sir Sampson arrive on a visit. A
specimen of her ladysliip's style shall be given on her first
appearance in the parlour before dinner. She thus accosts
the eldest son, who holds her in abhorrence:—
"' So Major Douglas, your servant. Why, it's so long since
I've seen you, that you may be a grandfather for aught I
know.' The poor Misses came at that moment sneaking
into the room. ' As for you girls, you'll never be grand¬
mothers ; you'll never be married, unless to wild men of the
woods. I suppose you'd like that; it would save you the
trouble of combing your hair and tying your shoes, for then
you could go without clothes altogether, humph I you'd be
much better without clothes than to put them on as you
do'—seizing upon the luckless ]\Iiss Baby, as she en¬
deavoured to steal behind backs. And here, injustice to the
lady, it must be owned, that for once she had some grounds
for animadversion in the dress and appearance of the
Misses Douglas."
The climax is reached when the Laird tries to settle his
son on a small farm near him, a proposal which sends Lady
Juliana into shrieking hysterics, and makes poor Harry's
blood run cold as he thus remonstrates with his father:—
Our Female Novelists. 297
" ' But Lady Juliana, sir, has never been accustomed.' . . .
' Let her serve an apprenticeship to your aunts; she cou'dna
be in a better school.' ' But her education, sir, has been
so different.' ' Edication! what's her edication been, to
raak her different frae other women ? If a woman can
nurse her bairns, mak their claes, and manage her hooss,
what mair need she do ? If she can play a tune on the
spinnet, dance a reel, and play a rubber o' whist, nae doot
these are accomplishments, but they're soon learnt. Edica¬
tion! Hoot! I'll be bound Leddy JuUy Anie will mak as
gude a figure by-and-by as the best edicated woman in the
country.' ' But she dislikes the country, and'—-—' Wait a
wee till she has a wheen bairns, and a hooss 0' her ain,
and I'll be bound she'll be as happy as the day's lang.'
' But the climate does not agree with her,' continued the
tender husband, almost driven to e.xtremity by the persever¬
ing simplicity of his father. ' Stay a wee, till she gets to
Clackandow! there's no a finer freer-aired situation in a'
Scotland ; the air's sharpish, to be sure, but fine and bracing,
and ye've a braw peat-moss at your back to keep you
warm.'"
After the birth of twin-daughters, Harry and his wife at
length escape to England, leaving one infant to Mrs
Douglas' care. Lady Juliana ruins her husband, who goes
in a marching regiment to India, and dies there. She
finds an asylum with her brother, the Earl of Courtland.
Whatever her opinion of the comparative dnlness of English
and Scotch country-house life, we find Glenfern the more
amusing of the two. Dr iLcdgill, the physician, is well
described, but the story drags at Beech Park. The deserted
twin is sent there at eighteen on account of delicate health.
Her journey to Edinburgh affords some capital scenes,
especially a visit paid to Mrs Violet M'Shake, the tank a
Mritage of the family, \\-ell-nigh a hundred. On hearing
of Mary's health, she exclaims:—
"' Health I It w^ould niak an ool laugh to hear the wark
that's made about young fowk's health noo-a-days. I won'er
what ye're a' made 0'!'—grasping Mary's arm in her
great bony hand—' a wheen puir feckless windlestraes—
ye maun awa up to Ingland for yere healths—set ye up !
I won'er what cam o' the lasses i' my time that bute to
bide at hame ? And whilk 0' ye, I suld like to ken, '11 ere
live to see ninety-sax, like me ?    Health ! he, he !' "
At Beech Park, Mary would have a bad time of it with
her selfish mother and heartless twin, Adelaide, were it not
298 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
for the partizanship of a very lovable cousin. Lady Emily
Lindore. By an introduction from Lady M'Lauchlan, she
visits a blind and bereaved Mrs Lennox, whose only sur¬
viving son is Mary's "fate." The romance is in great peril,
when poor Mary accidentally comes into the room where
Colonel Lennox is being implored by his blind mother to
" try and love " Mary Douglas. Lady Emily's consolations
are characteristic.
" ' In my situation,' sobs Mary, ' what would you have
done ?' ' Done! why, taken the old woman by the
shoulder, and cried Boh ! in her ear. Well, never mind,
you don't care for the man, so there's no harm done ; you've
only to change the drainatis perso7ice. Fancy you heard me
recommending you to Dr Redgill for your skill in cookery ;
you'd only have laughed at that; so why should you cry at
tlie other ?' "
Adelaide marries a duke, and then elopes with a former
lover, and after many complications, and a most amusing-
episode in old aunt Grizzy's visit to Bath with the
M'Lauchlans, Mary becomes the wife of Colonel Lennox,
who turns out to be heir to Sir Sampson, whose opportune
demise on the wedding-day leaves the young couple to reign
at Lochmarlie amid Aunt Grizzy's felicitations.
" 0 Mary ! what a lucky creature you are ! Never, I'm
sure, did a young person set out in life with such advan¬
tages. To think of your succeeding to Lady M'Lauchlan's
laboratory, all so nicely fitted up with every kind of thing,
and especially plenty of the most charming bark, which I'm
sure will do Colonel Lennox the greatest good, as you know
all officers are much the better of bark."
To unalloyed felicity and unlimited bark, we commend
the young pair, and pass to a still more striking book.
The Inheritance appeared in 1824, with a better-laid plot
and more sustained interest than the former work. The
pompous Earl of Eossville is thus described :—
" He possessed a wide range for his unwearying powers
in his own family; for he could weary his steward, and his
housekeeper, and his gamekeeper, and liis coachman, and
his groom, and his gardener, all the hours of the day, by
perpetual fault-finding and directing; he deemed it his
bounden duty to direct and manage every man, woman,
child, or animal who came within his sphere, and that too
in the most tedious and tormenting manner."
As a foil to this gem, we have his cousin and bugbear,
Miss Pratt.
" Everybody wearied of her, and everybody abused her;
Our Female Novelists. 299
while yet she was more sought after and asked about than
she would have been, had she possessed the wisdom of a
More, or the benevolence of a Fry. She was, in fact, the
very heart of the shire, and gave life and energy to all the
pulses of the parish. She supplied it with streams of gossip,
and chit-chat in others, and subjects of ridicule and abuse
in herself. Even the dullest laird had something good to tdl
of Miss Pratt, and something bad to say of her, for nothing
can convey a more opposite meaning than these apparent
synonyms. As well might Lord Eossville have attempted
to admonish the brook that babbled past him, or have read
lectures to the fly that buzzed around his head. Eor forty
years he had been trying to break her in, but in vain. Yet
they only jarred, they never quarrelled ; for they had been
accustomed to each other all their lives, and while she laid
all the rebuffs and reproofs she received to the score of bile,
he tolerated her impertinences on account of blood."
Lord Eossville's luck biings him a niece from abroad, his
ward and heiress. He destines her to a nephew in Parlia¬
ment—she falls in love with one in the Guards, while a third
falls in love with her, and the game of cross-purposes goes
through the tale, greatly helped by Miss Pratt.
The secondary characters are the glory of the book,
each a portrait in a pen-stroke. Lady Betty, known only by
her lap-dog, and tigers in cross-stitch; Mrs Fairbairn, in one
morning visit; Mrs Goodwilly, and Miss Becky Duguid, by
one accidentally dropped letter; and Anthony Whyte—he is
only a " name," but how well we know the precise, well-ap¬
pointed bachelor, his small mind and small jokes, his well-
hung pictures and well-arranged dressing-room, his projected
dinner-trumpet and bills in Parliament, and his three
thousand a-year! At first sight of Gertrude, Miss Pratt
discovers her likeness to a fancy portrait in the character
of Diana, which hangs in a turret-room; and after a wrangle
with Lord EossviUe, she jumps up with—
"' Come away, my dear, and see yourself as a goddess—
seeing's believing, my lord.' ' Miss Pratt!' cried the earl, in
a tone enough to have settled quicksilver itself. ' Miss
Pratt! this behaviour of yours is—is—what I cannot pos¬
sibly permit; the Yellow Turret is my private dressing-room,
and it is surely a most improper and unwarrantable liberty.'
. . . 'Ibegyoutenthousandpardons,my dear Lord Eossville!
I really had quite forgot the change you have made in your
dressing-room; but, at any rate, I would have figured every
creek and corner of yours fit to be seen at all times.    There's
300 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
Anthony Wliyte, his dressing-room is a perfect show, so
neat and nick-nacky; his silver shoe-horn would be an orna¬
ment to any drawing-room.'"
Lord Eossville, in pique, suffers the invasion, and the
likeness in indisputable, supplying a notable feature in the
story. Gertrude is, in fact, a spurious heiress, and grand¬
daughter to the original of this picture, Lizzie Lundie, the
liuntsman's daughter. Mrs St Clair is a woman of low
birth, who, to retrieve her position with her husband's family,
has induced him to connive at her passing off as her own
the infant child of a woman she met abroad, and recognised
as Lizzie Lundie's daughter. She takes Gertrude, after they
are settled at Rossville, to visit her own family. An old
Uncle Adam is one of Miss Terrier's best eftbrts. Lizzie
Lundie was his early love, and for her sake he went to
India. Eeturning thence a millionaire, he finds her faithless,
his friends scattered, his father's cottage swept away, to make
room for an ornamental park. He buys this, shuts it up,
and lives in the county-town an old, soured, broken-hearted
man. At Mrs St Glair's visit, and the sight of Gertrude,
" the picter o' bonuie Lizzie Lundie," the leal Scottish heart
grows young again. His devotion to her is beautiful, and
when tlie disclosure of her birth makes the St Glairs cast
her off, he positively rejoices that she should " owe nae-
thing to that proud thrawn pack. Lizzie Lundie's bairn must
be my bairn." He installs her as his heiress at Broom Park,
till she finally marries tlie constant lover, Edward Lyndsay.
But if Lord llossville cannot be mentioned without Miss
Pratt, neither can Uncle Adam without his niece. Miss Bell
Black—we beg her pardon, Mrs Waddell—as maiden and wife,
his pet abhorrence. " I ne'er see that craater that I dinna
wish mysell blind, and deaf, and doited." Her marriage
w-ith Major Waddell makes no difference in his treatment of
her, and his repulses of her attacks upon his hoards. It has
been adduced as an instance of Sir W. Scott's powers of
vivid narration, that the crowds that visit Graignethan
Castle ask with one consent for the window out of which
Cuddie got his " het kail." We hold it as an equal tribute
to Miss Ferrier, that of all ranks in the service, a Major
comes before us at a certain comic disadvantage. Be his
prowess and his charms what they may, he has always some
lee-way to make up in our good opinion, in order to avoid
being bracketed with Miss Bell's conjugal victim. " Me a
married woman, and a man of the major's rank! " follow
him like an echo.    We look to see him kept dry by end-
Oiir Female Novelists. 301
lesfe changes of over-tight boots, kept cool by imprison¬
ment in a hot room wrapped in a military cloak, till, if he
be really worthy of our regard, we wish him speedy promo¬
tion, a brevet-colonelcy even, to remove his image from
among the chronicled absurdities of poor Major Waddell!
We will give a specimen of Uncle Adam with Miss
Pratt, both being Gertrude's guests after Lord Eossville's
death. She is reading the papers, and his ire is excited
hrst, by proposals to publish a print of the Rev. Peter
Pirie ; secondly, by the birth of " a son and heir " to the
" lady " of Lieutenant Duncan Dow ; but finally explodes at
the newspaper apotheosis of " 'Nathaniel Lamb, Esq., hosier
and glover,' ' To the purest benevolence, the most enlight¬
ened piety, and the most devoted patriotism, Mr Lamb
united the firmest principles, the most perfect integrity, and
the most affable address.' Here Uncle Adam broke out
with—' Affable address ! the affability o' a hosier ! I never
could bear that word a' my days, and far less noo; dinna
read ony mair, ma'am. Affable ! affable ! I wonder wha wad
tak affability affthe hands o' a glover! but it's a'just 0' a piece
wi' a' thing else in this world noo. Half-pay lieutenants maun
lia'e leddies and heirs; and bodies 0' schule-maisters and
ministers maun sit for their pickters and ha'e their faces
printed, as though they were kings and conquerors. The
newspapers are iilled wi' the lives o' folk that naebody ever
heard o' till they war dead. I dinna ken what things are
to come to !'"
In much the same vein is Uncle Adam's answer to Mrs
Waddell's demand for admission to Broom Park : "' Weel,
weel, dinna plague me; gi'e me pen and ink, and ye shall
ha'e an order, if that's a' ye want,' said Mr Ramsay impati¬
ently Mrs  Major glanced   her  eye   over   it,
then reddened, and exclaimed, ' Such a way of wording it!
Good gracious ! Uncle, can you suppose I will go on these
terms ? ' Admit Major "VVaddell and his Mdfe !' Wife ! I
never met with anything like that '' ' What is't ye
mean ?' demanded Uncle Adam in a voice of thunder; ' are
ye no Major Waddell's wife ?' ' Why, my good sir !'
began the Major, ' you know it is not customary to call
ladies of a certain rank xoivas now.' ' Certainly not,' inter¬
posed the lady. ' I thought everybody had known that,
wife ! What else could you have said if the Major had been
a carter ?' ' What are ye, then, if ye're no his wife ?'
'Why, my lady, you know, my dear sir, would have been the
more correct and delicate thing.'   ' Your leddy,' cried Uncle
No. 34.—OCTOBKR 1S77. 2 Q
302 Tlie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
Adam with a sardonic laugh; 'your leddy!' 'Certainly,' said
the lady, with much dignity, ' there can be no doubt about
that; and I have too much respect for Major Waddell and
myself to submit to any such low vulgar appellation.' ' I've
met wi' mouy a daft thing in my day,' said Uncle Adam,
' but this beats them a'—a married woman that'll no submit
to be ca'd a wife ! I dinna ken what's to come next. Will
ye be his dearie, then ?' "    .    .    .    .
We must hasten on; yet how pass unnoticed the last scene
in Lord Eossville's life ? As he looks from his window in
a snow-storm, he is startled to see a hearse draw up at his
door, and horrified when Miss Pratt issues therefrom. In a
moment his hands are grasped, and his admiration claimed
for—" my Jerusalem dilly, as Anthony Whyte calls it! "
Her carriage has been upset on Coeklestontop Muir, in the
snow, and she has availed herself of the passings hearse of
the radical distiller to reach Eossville. The unhappy earl
nearly throws physiology to the winds, and Miss Pratt into
the snow ; but the final struggle between bile and blood is too
much : he retires to his Yellow Turret, and dies in the night,
qualifying himself for a journey in Miss Pratt's equipage,
which has but one end for all travellers—the Earl and the
radical distiller.
Destiny is less easy to quote, but it is a beautiful tale,
with more of passion and romance than the others. In its
transitions from light to shadow, we are constantly reminded
of music dropping suddenly into a minor key. Whether it
is merely the work of maturer years, and therefore the re¬
sult of deeper insight into the human heart; or whether she
had really known the wrench of ceasing to esteem, we know
not; but we feel that Edith Malcolm is drawn with a force
and reality that may well have their source in the
sympathy—
" AVliicli only souls in suffering tried,
Bear to their .sull'ering brethren's side."
But she is far too deep a thinker not to interweave play¬
fulness with sadness, even as it is in our chequered lives;
and the wit and humour never fail. Grlenroy, " with a
family-tree on which all the birds of the air might roost;"
Eenbowie and his waistcoats ; Mrs Malcolm of Inch Orran's
dress, with its " number of bows that tied nothing, and ends
that had no ends to answer, save to swell the milliner's
bill;" Molly Macaulcy, too, our favourite in all the books,
a fact which might have astonished her simple self, but no
Our Female Novelists. 303
one else. As to Mr M'Dow, with his manse, his love
affairs, and his courtship of Lucy Malcolm, we know of
nothing in fiction to equal him, save " Mr Collins " with
Lizzy Bennet. Edith's English experiences are more
diverting than poor Mary Douglas. The Cockney house¬
hold, Mrs Ribley's hemming, her husband's speculations for
their nephew, on Miss Mogg, the muffin-maker's daughter—
" Three hundred thousand pound, and old Mogg in a dropsy !"
Have we never had a quiet laugh, when some alliance
having been effected witli the peerage, the connection is
apparently considered to go backwards through the family ?
Have we never quoted Mr Eibley's comment to his wife,
when Miss Mogg marries a Marquis' son ? " Only to
think, Kitty, my dear, of old Mogg being a dowager
marchioness ! "
If we have said too much of her books and too little of
herself, our excuse must be the quietness of a life that
justified no intrusion into its details. Destiny was in¬
scribed to Sir W. Scott, and published in 1831. One
memorial of her last visit to Abbotsford that same year we
gladly give. As that great poet-life darkened to its close,
lilfe " sweet bells jangled, out of tune," were the tones of that
harp at times.    Thus writes his son-in-law:—
" He would begin a story as gaily as ever, and go on in
spite of the hesitation in his speech, to tell it with highly
picturesque effect, but before he reached the point, it would
seem as if some internal spring had given way; he paused,
and gazed around him Avith the blank anxiety of look that
a blind man lias when he lias .dropped his staff. Unthink¬
ing friends sometimes pained him sadly, by giving him the
catch-word abruptly. I noticed the delicacy of Miss
Eerrier on these occasions. Her sight was bad, and she
took care not to use her glasses when he was speaking, and
she affected also to be troubled with deafness, and would
say—' Well, I am getting as dull as a post; I have not
heard a word since you said so-and-so, being sure to
mention a circumstance behind that at which he had really
halted. He then took up the thread with his habitual
smile of courtesy, as if forgetting his case entirely in the
consideration of the lady's infirmity."
Such an instance of unselfish tact needs no connnent of
ours.
Sir Walter is said to have declared, that he would rather
have written her three stories than all his own. This was
probably playfully said; yet we own that in the special line
of portraying Scottish character, she has excellencies wliich
304 The Ladies EdinbnrgJi Magazine.
lie only has equalled, and which even he has not surpassed.
On the first appearance of Marriage and the Inlieritance,
many, it is said, shared in the opinion quaintly expressed by
the " Shepherd" (JVodcn Amlros., vol. i. p. 254): " I aye
thocht they were written by Sir Walter, till it spunked oot
that they were written by a lady." We scarcely think the
same could have been said of Destiny. The style is more
unmistakably feminine; and whereas a man could not have
so well depicted Lady Elizabeth, so also he would have
given us an idealized, but far less real, Edith Malcohn.
Before her death, in 1854, the weakened sight was wholly
lost. She would regret to one of her nieces, that she had
not used her talents more distinctively in God's service.
We may be permitted to doubt whether a better use could
have been found for such powers. If we would not have a
fatal gulf between duty and pleasure, to carry the highest
principles into the lightest hours is surely an excellent work.
When we mark, in her books, the invariable condemnation
not only of the grosser forms of evil, but of all that is petty,
narrow, and selfish, in high life or low; when we recognise
the religious principle, always present, and never obtrusive;
the moral pointed, but never strained; when we see that
vice can never " bolt her arguments," that no young heart
can ever be misled by her into calling wrong right, and
putting sweet for bitter, we feel that, however customs may
vary and times alter, Miss Eerrier's books have a value
above that of mere amusement, and that, as " la beauU est
toujours dans son pays" their power to cliarm is inde¬
pendent of change or chance, or the fasliion of a world that
passes away.
A minor service she renders us in common with Miss
Austen, that of showino; the amusing undercurrent in the
quietest stream. Her stories have more plot than Miss
Austen's, but her wittiest scenes are the dullest bits of every¬
day life. Who would be delighted to breakfast with the
Kibleys, lunch with Mr M'Dow, dine with the Eairbairns,
fiddle and sup with Lord Eossville ? Yet tliese could only
be amusingly described by one who, in real life, would have
enjoyed what most of us would call aa insufferable bore.
Miss Eerrier, like Miss Austen, makes us ashamed of our
own stupidity, in not finding out what an amusing thing
common life is after all! On Dr Johnson's principle, then,
—blessed is the man who contributes to the harmless stock
of public amusement,—we record our undying obligations to
Susan Eerrier. L. Dundas.
Edinburgh University Local Examinations.       305
SONG.
Dearest, who, like a fond spirit from Heaven,
Gleamd'st o'er my sight
As a ray from the sun through a thundercloud riven,
Pure, fragile, briglit;
I feel 'mid the tears which like lava streams sere me.
Riving my heart,
That thou shalt no more like a dove nestle near me—•
We, too, must part.
In the poppy's red breast burn the sunrays of morning ;
So, love of thee
Shall burn in my heart till at eve the cold warning
Of death set me free.
Soiled as I am with the world's dusty travel,
I dare not stain
Thy soul's white purity.    Life must unravel,
Death make all i)lain.
I must toil on for the rest which thou knowest.
Weeping for thee ;
Bear to the Heavens, dear child, where thou goest.
One prayer for me.
Margaret Thomas.
-a-M-
NOTES ON THE EDINBUEGH UNIVERSITY
LOCAL EXAMINATIONS.
" The iron of examination which has entered into the soul
of the nation was forged at Oxford and Cambridge;" and
although non-gTemial or middle-class examinations were
invented at Oxford in 1858, they did not cross the Tweed
until seven years later, when the University of Edinburgh
followed tlie fashion, and instituted Local Examinations,
as they were by this time called.
In 1866, a beginning was made with about 70 candidates
and 40 certificates—14 of these were girls; but by 1871, these
numl)ers had not increased, for in that year we find only 69
candidates—26 senior (13 boys and 13 girls) and 43 junior (35
boys and 8 girls). At this date a restriction, cojjied from the
English regulations, as to the age of candidates, was in force,
and undoubtedly liindered many ladies from coming- up for
examination. No girl who was over 20, nor boy over 18,
could obtain a senior certificate; neither was any candidate
over 16 admitted even for a junior. To the removal of this
limitation as to age, in 1872, after Professor Calderwood had
undertaken  the secretaryship to  the  Board,  not a little
306 TJie Ladies EdinbitrgJi Magazine.
recent success must be attributed, for it had prevented
all those enterprising ladies who do not begin the work of
self-education till after they are grown up, from appearing
at these examinations. That such ladies find a certificate
worth having is shown by what has taken place in Ireland.
There, as elsewhere, until this year, the usual limitations of
age existed; so that some ladies who desired certificates, but
were thus excluded, actually began to study for the Edin-
l)urgh Examinations, iir the hope of planting a local centre
in their own country. In consequence of this, the Dublin
University Board removed all restrictions from their
Senior Examinations, although still limiting tlie Junior
Certificate to candidates \inder 16. But the limitation of
even this lower examination to young candidates is, we
venture to think, unfortunate. Many ladies who wish to
M^ork, but who have no love of teaching, desire to use these
certificates as evidence that they have such solid rudimentary
knowledge as should be possessed by the applicants for certain
situations, such as that of the matron or superintendent of a
home or of an orphanage, by a secretary or by an instructress
of cookery. Granted that it is too late at 25 for a half-
educated woman to begin the long course of studies leading up
to a higher examination, it is a matter of everyday experience
here in Edinburgh, that it is by no means too late for her to
repair the shortcomings of early training, by preparing for an
ordinary, or so-called junior certificate. We therefore would
ask. Since these diplomas Im^-e so much practical value, not
merely for teachers, but as testimonials of fitness for persons
in quest of situations where knowledge of accounts, and the
ability to write a good letter, or even to read aloud well, are
required, why debar a woman from qualifying herself for
them because she did not happen to have done so before she
was 20 ? Again,- in those cases so common among gover¬
nesses, where no preparation for a Junior Certificate is needed,
it is often felt to be a very great hardship that the stamp of
a University Certificate cannot be obtained unless the can¬
didate can journey to some Edinburgh Local Centre in order
to get it.
In 1875, the appearance of 121 candidates from 7 Centres
gave promise of better days to come; and Professor Calder-
wood, in a letter to the Committee of the National Union
for the Education of Women, gives it as his opinion that
" the offer of the £60 scholarship by Miss Houldsworth, and
that of £25 from the National Union, have led to much
keener competition than we have ever had before."    These
Edinburgh University Local Examinations.      307
words suggested to several members of the Edinburgh
Ladies' Educational Association, that some action on the
part of that society might have a good effect, especially if
it were in the direction pointed out by Professor Calder-
wood. Accordingly, at a meeting of the Association,
held January 7, 1876, a motion, " that the executive
committee be directed to take steps for collecting a student's
bursary in Edinburgh, and for raising local bursaries in
country to\\^lS," was unanimously carried. A sub-com¬
mittee was formed, and corresponded with local secretaries,
with heads of schools, and with other persons interested in
education. The Eeport of this Committee was published in
the Annual Eeport for 1876, and shows that mucli indiffer¬
ence on the subject existed.    We learn from it tliat—
" Tlie answers received by the committee were so far satisfactory ;
that in general tlie idea of district scholarships was approved
of. But, on the otlier hand, the writers were apt to assert that
in their own neighbourlioods, from ignorance and indifference, or
from poverty, it was doiilrtful whether the plan could be tried. The
rector of one of the forenif^st burgh schools in Scotland described a
state of things which may be regarded as typical. He expressed his
own deep interest in our endeavours ; but such is the apathy of the
town and district, that he could give no hope of success in raising a
scholarship. This in<lilference to female education he regrets the
more, because so many clever girls attend his school : one in last
session carried off the honours of the advanced English class ; and
others have, during the last 14 years, learned Latin, and have read
Horace and Cicero."
There was, however, a small measure of success, for, in
consequence of the suggestions of this committee, a bursary
of £4U was raised at Forres, and a fund of £65 for assisting
local efforts by grants in aid was collected privately by cer¬
tain members of the Association. For this plan of a central
fund, raised by subscriptions from all quarters, tlie sub-com¬
mittee was indebted to the suggestion of Dr Barrack, of
the Dollar Institution. There is little doubt that until it can
be thoroughly carried out, the Local Examinations will only
flourish in wealthy districts, and will fail to reach many
schools where they would be a valuable stimulus to the higher
studies. In the autumn of 1876, a grant of £25, and one of
£20, were claimed by the Local Committees of Kingussie and
of Helensburgh; but that a third grant of £20 should have
remained unappropriated, shows that little interest M^as
felt in the subject elsewhere. Two grants, one of £25, and
one of £20, have been again offered, in September 1877,
by the Association. Under Professor Calderwood's care,
university prizes have also been awarded to all those candi-
3o8 TJie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
dates who take more than 70 per cent, of marks. These
volumes, gay with the university arms on their boards, are
very much valued; and we think that such tangible signs of
an honourable proficiency already attained, have done not a
little to make the Local Examinations popular. The story of
the St George's Hall Classes, and of the system of instruc¬
tion by correspondence in connection with them, is suffi¬
ciently well known to need no telling, and enough has surely
been said of the successful Local Examinations of 1877,
when 456 candidates came from 23 Centres; and when a
higher average of marks was reached than had ever been
known before.
But, together with this success, we regret to notice that
some of the earlier local centres, such as Wick and Lerwick,
are conspicuous by their absence; and also that fewer names
of country schools appear in the class lists than would have
been the case 10 years ago. The answer of a teacher in one
of these schools, that to the " trammelling effects of standard
work " this change is to be attributed, is no doubt a perfectly
correct explanation of the fact. We regret that it should be
so, let statesmen and theoretical educationists say what
they will in praise of recent changes as having been
altogether for the better, or as having been made in tlie
best possible way. At the other end of the scale, there
is indeed some exceedingly small consolation for the
absence of any barefooted Highland damsels, such as those
whose Latinity once astonished l)r Wiese,^ in the presence
of some names well known in the world of Edinburgh,
which began to appear in 1876, together with those of not
a few clever young lady students, fresh from success in the
lecture-rooms of the university professors.    All these ladies
1" An inspector of schools told nie that when he asked in a Hiohland
school if many scholars learned classical languages, several, both boys
and girls, stood np. One barefooted girl construed a chapter of Caesar
very well, and went through a geometrical pi'oblem correctly. The
schoolmaster sent out to a field for his best scholar, who was at work
there, and the boy came in with tlie traces of work on hands and feet.
His teacher handed him Virgil and the Anabasis, and he translated cer¬
tain 2)assages to the inspector's satisfaction. Such things happened in
other country schools."—(German Letters, by Ur L. Wiese, vol. ii. p. 74.)
Dr Wiese admires, though he does not approve of, the characteristically
Scottish "romantic disorder" of this mixture of secondary and primary
instruction. We would ask, how else, when the population is thin
and scattered, can any secondary education at all be provided for a
clever boy or girl, if they happen to be the children of a working
man ?
Sir Arthur s Inheritance. 3^9
were attracted by the desire of gaining the University
Higher Certificate, for whicli the Local Pass is the indispens¬
able preliminary examination, so that the authorities did
an excellent thing to help their Local Examinations, when,
in 1874, they granted the prayer of the Ladies' Association,
and instituted the " University Certificate for Women in
Literature, Science, and Philosophy."
A.  DUNDAS.
Sir Slrlhxtr's Inbtrititntc.
Chapter I.
From John Ashby, Hoverton Court, to Arthur Morton,
Esq., Christ Church, Oxford—
" Your uncle died suddenly at eight this morning. Come
immediately."
This telegram was received by the person to whom it was
sent in the midst of a breakfast he was giving, in the joy of
his heart, at just having taken his degree; and he startled
his guests by the sudden exclamation, " By George !"
" Wliat is it ? wliat is it ?" was the universal question,
half checked by good breeding.
" Nay, tliere is no reason I should not tell you all," he
replied, after a moment's reflection ; " indeed, you may as
well read it for yourselves;" and he handed the paper
round. They read it, and as they did so, they almost
simultaneously rose to go.
" I'm awfully sorry, but you must want to get rid of us,"
one of them said; and in a few minutes they were all gone
but one, his best friend, Lionel Harford.
" Can I be of any use, Morton ?"
" Not just now, thanks. I will write to you about my
affairs here; they are all pretty straight, I believe; but don't
go. I can't be off for an hour or so, for there is no train
till 2'20.    I will just have my portmanteau packed."
He called his scout, and gave the necessary orders.
" Now let me tell you about this. I did not care to tell
all those fellows at once, but they may as well have tlie
story right; it will be all known soon and told wrong pro¬
bably. This uncle of mine who is just dead was Sir Horace
Morton."
" Yes; and so they want you to go to his funeral, do they?
It is very civil to telegraph so quick."
No. 34.—October 1877. 2 I?
310 TJie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
" Well, I'm his heir ; that's the reason."
" The deuce you are!   Is it a large fortune ?"
" Rather; and a wonderful old house, I believe—I never
saw it."
" How very odd; why?"
" My father and he quarrelled; he was a strange sort of
man, I believe, and never would see any of us. He has
never taken any notice of me, and I always felt he might
marry any day; he was only about 65."
" Then am I to congratulate you on being a baronet ? "
" Well, I am one, I suppose; but whether it is matter
for congratulation I cannot say. It always seems to have
been an ill-omened sort of name and place. The house is
haunted, they say."
■' My dear fellow, excuse me; but you do not seem to
appreciate your good fortune. I like you all the better,
thougli; it is a gloomy thing your uncle dying all of a
sudden, and your never having known him. But I hope
you have got all your happiness before you ; and now I am
sure I had better go. Never mind me—I'll walk out and
join you as you go to the station."
Hoverton Court might indeed be justly described as " a
wonderful old house." It was an odd mixtm'e, being an
Elizabethan building, joined on to the remains of an old
castle, where one massive dark grey tower, and bit of parapet,
looked over the more modern front, and out upon a terrace
of the garden, or "pleacaunce" as it might more fitly be
called. Beyond lay a bowhng-green, ornamented with
curiously cut yew-trees; and outside stretched the park,
bordered with magnificent woods.
" What a croquet-ground !" was the very matter-of-fact
thought that shot through Arthur's mind, as the most
common-place ideas will, at the most solemn moments.
He \vas driving up to the house by the light of the moon;
as he approached, the door was thrown open, and a grey-
haired butler appeared, bowing solemnly.
" I am Mr Artliur Morton. Was it you who sent me the
telegram ? "
" It was, sir. Sir Horace was found dead in his bed this
morning; " and the old servant's voice faltered.
" How very shocking! What did he die of, do you
know 1"
" Disease of the heart, sir, no doubt. The doctor had said,
a few months ago, that this might liappen at any time."
Arthui' was silent for a few moments,
Sir A rthur's Inheritance. 311
" I wonder you knew where to find me," he presently
observed.
" My master charged me to telegraph to you, sir, if any¬
thing should happen ; and his orders were, ' not unless any¬
thing should happen.'"
" He never wished to see me then ?"
" Well, no, sir.    He had lived alone for many years, and
he wished to die alone.    It was not my place to offer him
advice, sir."
" Certainly not; you have done quite right. I should be
glad to see the doctor in the morning, and anyone else who
may be able to tell me my uncle's wishes. Is there a A\ill ?"
" There is one certainly, sir, but it has not been touched
yet. I thought it best to send first for you, as my master
desired, and I sent word to Mr Smith the lawyer, and he
will be here to-morrow, sir."
" Very good; thank you.    Now, will you take me to my
uncle's room ?"
" To-night, sir ?"
" Yes; why not ? I should like to see all that remains
of him."
" I beg your pardon, sir," said the old man rather timidly,
" perhaps you may not have heard—this  is an awkward
house to go about at night—at least the old part."
" You mean, it is said to be haunted ?"
The butler bowed.    " Sir Horace's  room is just at the
entrance to the old jjart of the house, and perhaps if you
were to wait till the morning " 
" I really cannot do that. I ought to pay this respect to
the dead without loss of time, but I am sorry to take you
there. If you will come and show me the door, I will go in
by mJ^self."
The old man looked at him with increased respect.
" This way, then, sir," he said; and Arthur followed him
through a length of rooms and corridors, up an old oak
staircase, and through more passages and lobbies.
At last they came to an arched door, of different archi¬
tecture from the rest, and through this they passed into a
room that seemed to have Ijeen used as a study; through
this again was a small bedroom, and here Sir Horace
Morton had l:>reathed his last.
Arthur stood for a few moments gazing on the face of the
dead. It was that of a handsome man of about 60 or 65,
with well-formed features, and black hair mixed with grey;
all around was arranged with the greatest care and respect;
312 Tlie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
and having satisfied himself on this point, he felt at liberty
to go to his own room. On entering the study, he perceived
a door that seemed to lead into some other chamber; and
turning to Ashby, who had remained in attendance, he asked,
"What door is that?"
" That door opens into the old part of the house, sir,"
whispered the old man nervously. Arthur mentally resolved
to explore it before long; but he thought it best to ask no
furtlier questions at that moment, and silently followed his
giiide to a pleasant room at some little distance, where the
sight of his portmanteau and hat-box greeted him, and gave
an air of reality to the affair.
" But you'll take some refreshment, sir ? We did not
know exactly when you would arrive, or we would have
had dinner ready. But there is a cold supper laid in the
dining-room."
Arthur's first impulse was to decline food altogether; but
on second thoughts it occurred to him that this would be
foolish, and he followed the butler to the dining-room. It
was a good-sized room, panelled with old carved oak, ceilr
ing and all, and the plate and all the appointments were
equally antique.
Having finished his repast, Arthur retired at once to his
own I'oom, declining all further offers; and there, sitting
down in an arm-chair, he proceeded to try to realise the
change that had suddenly taken place in his fortunes, and
get rid of a certain dreamy, unreal feeling that oppressed
him—a feeling well known to most people at some time or
other.
" So this is my house," he thought; " my property, my
furniture, my plate, my pictures, and so forth;" then, taking
up the candle, he looked round the room, but soon sat down
again. " The wretched thing is," he went on, "that I have not
got a soul belonging to me to care whether I have it or not—
no father, mother, brother, or sister. I daresay my aunt
will write and say she is delighted, but there is no one for me
to talk things over with. I might rather like looking into
everything if I had anybody to do it with me. As it is, I
can only feel at present as if I were making myself at home
in somebody else's house. If my poor uncle had gone on
living and asked me to stay with him, I should have enjoyed
it a great deal more; as it is, I suppose I shall have the
lawyers upon me to-morrow. The haunted rooms interest
me more than anything else; some time I shall go and look
at them, but not now.    I cannot feel as if it were my home
Sir Arthur's Inheritance. 3^3
yet, and T shall conduct myself like a guest, till after the
funeral at all events. This room looks modern and cheer¬
ful enough," and he turned his head and looked round. " I
shall have no supernatural visitors here, I feel sure. If only
I could dream of somebody—of my mother ! Oh ! mother,
mother! could not you come and see me in my sleep ?" he
said with a sigh, laying his head on his crossed arms on
the table.
Presently he looked up, and there was no one to see the
dew that glistened on his eyelashes.
Nearly a week passed, and the funeral took place in
strict obedience to the MTitten injunctions of the deceased.
Arthur had managed to get through the time somehow or
other, though there was but little occupation for him as long
as he felt bound to adhere to his intention of only " behav¬
ing like a guest." He had read a good deal, and had ex¬
plored the gi'ounds and the woods beyond, where he was
not likely to meet anyone; and he had held consultations
with Mr Smith the lawyer, with the doctor, and with the
clergyman of the parish, and tried to find out all he could
of the character and wishes of his uncle, but without much
success. Sir Horace had lived for many years in complete
retirement with his books and his scientific studies, and but
little was known of him. "A very peculiar man," the
clergyman pronounced him ; and the doctor added that his
health had long been indifferent. He was very silent, and
had hardly ever spoken of his nepliew, except to leave the
order that he should be sent for in the event of anything
happening, on which the faithful Ashby had so promptly
acted.
" Everything is to go on the same for the present."
This announcement was made in an authoritative manner
by Ashby to all the other servants the morning after the
funeral, and it was received with satisfaction; though
whether the old domestics, accustomed to Sir Horace's
quiet life, would approve of the company and variety that
a young man like Sir Arthur might be expected to have,
remained for time to show. He, meanwhile, was trying to
enter into the spirit of his new position ; and he found it
easier than he expected to accept the situation and be a
man of large property.
" The first thing I have got to do is to buy some horses,"
he reflected;   " there are none but carriage and cart horses
314 The Ladies' Edinhnrgh Magazine.
here at present, and I must have something to ride soon.
In the winter I shall hunt, of course, but T want a couple
of hacks now. I would run up to Oxford and see what I
ctjuld find there, only it is vacation time. I wonder where
Harford is now. He ought to write to me. I have a great
mind to ask him down here, or make him meet me in
London, and go with me to Tattersall's. I had better write
to him at his mother's house, I suppose; but I must get
tilings a little straight here first."
He scon wrote, and Lionel responded, but said that he
could not accept his invitation directly, as he was just in
the act of taking his mother and sisters to Paris for a few
weeks; and as there was no one else he cared to invite to a
Utc-a-Ute visit, Sir Arthur was left alone.
Meantime he had carefully explored the whole house,
and the liaunted rooms had attracted liim especially : he had
gone there first in broad daylight, and had walked through
them with Ashby, who could hardly be induced to speak
till the last door was closed, and he and his young master
were once again in the outer world.
" We do not know who may be listening in there, Sir
Arthur," he said; " and they never lil:e being talked about."
One evening the fancy seized Arthur to go there by moon¬
light. He knew his way now; it was a suite of rooms one
through another, chiefly unfurnished, or with only the
remains of tapestry and curtains hanging in rags and
cobwel)s ; but there was one room at the end which was in
much better order. It was a small chamber hung with
dark red, and with dark red cushioned sofas placed round
the walls; it would have been a pretty little room if it had
not been so far off, and if it had not felt so " uncanny."
And, lastly, there was a flight of wide stone steps leading out
of the passage adjoining this room, winding round the outside
of the old tower, the most ancient part of the house, and
going down, it was supposed, into some subterranean passage
that communicated with the cellars ; only it was choked up
at the bottom by a large heap of rubbish. Arthur had
spoken of removing this, but Ashby had dissuaded him.
" Better let it alone. Sir Arthur; the old passages are pretty
(j^uiet now; better let 'em stop."
On the night of which I speak, the moon was shining
brightly, and Arthur had walked out after dinner with his
cigar, and was pacing up and down the broad walk of the
garden between the yew trees.
Sir Arthur's Inheritance. 315
" How Kght the old part of the house looks now," he
thought: " I wonder what I should see if I were to go and
look at it ?"
He glanced at his watch: " Half-past nine; just time to
go in and have my coffee, and then I will explore."
Ad hour afterwards, having seen the last of the servants,
and gone to his own room, he pro\dded himself with a box
of matches and a lamp, wliich, however, he did not then
light.
" The moon will be quite enough to show me how to walk
about, and I think I shall see farther if I am not carrying a
candle in my hand."
He then quietly left the room, Avalked rapidly along the
passages till he came to the arched door ; opened it, closed
it behind him, and then began to saunter slowly through the
deserted chambers.
Nothing unusual happened; the moonlight fell brightly on
the rotten old floors and walls : now and then the waving of
a rag of tapestry, or a thick cobwelj, gave him a momentary
start, but soon he became quite accustomed to the feeling of
the place, and rather enjoyed the scene of utter quiet and
solitude that prevailed.
After this night he often went there, sometimes with and
sometimes without a light; according to whether or not the
moon was likely to be a sufficient illumination. He now
generally made a practice of walking through the rooms the
last thing l)efore going to bed, giving vent there to those
\'ague imaginings which suited the place. He often thought
of his mother, who had died many years before : of his
father, and of the various relations he had seen or heard of.
Family life was, to him, a thing almost unknown, and he
wondered wliether he should like it; he had grown so used
to solitude, that he now rather dreaded the liability to con¬
stant interruption, and the loss of retirement which he would
find if others were living with him; and yet he thought
that perhaps he should be glad of one, person—somebody to
whom he could speak of his affairs and of his thoughts.
It miglit be Lionel Harford; but he would get bored if he
had too much of this sort of thing. These and other
ideas were rushing through his mind one night while he
was leaning against the wall in one of the empty rooms,
looking out on the moonlight in the pleacaunce; suddenly
a sort of shiver came over him, and some inexplicable feeling
made him turn round and look back. Yes ! there was
somctliinij: he could not be mistaken; he certainly saw a
3i6 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
dim white figure, like that of a woman, glide across the
further end of the room, and vanish through the doorway into
the next.
Arthur was no coward. For a moment, indeed, he felt a
sensation of terror, a wild desire to fly, but then a counter
principle awoke within him: he knew that if he gave way
to the fear, he should be a coward for life; that, once
yielded to, the demon of superstition would have him for his
prey, and that if he began to run, he should probably go out
of his mind, at least for a time.
" And why should I give way ?" he thought. " This is my
house ; I have a perfect right here; I have done no wrong.
If a mortal guest came to see iue, I should offer a courteous
welcome, as it is my place to do. Why should I fail in
courtesy, because I am honoured by a presence from another
world—if it be so?"
He took up his unlighted lamp and turned towards the
door through which the figure had gone; he passed straight
through this room and into the next, and there he saw her
again, turning through the opposite door. He followed her
quietly, resolved above all that nothing should make him
quicken his steps. He gazed at her steadily, but her back was
towards him, and he could see nothing but an indistinct
white trailing dress, and what looked like long fair hair.
At last she came to the little red room. He knew there was
no door on the other side of that, and no room through it,
and it was with a beating heart that he followed her in.
She turned round, and he saw her face ; it was very pale and
very lovely, and her eyes were large and dark and wide open,
but they did not appear to see him or to observe anything;
they were fixed in a vacant and almost frightened gaze as
she stood motionless before him ; and even while he looked
at her, she faded from his sight and was gone—how and
where he could not say. There was no further door through
v.hich she might pass unperceived, and she seemed to have
melted into air, and he was left alone with the bright moon¬
beams shining in through the old turret-window. For
some time he could not make up his mind to move; he
stood quite still awe-struck, and yet hoping that the appari¬
tion would re-appear, but she did not, and after a while he
began to collect his ideas.
Perfectly himself by this time, he went about seeking
in vain for traces of her. In the course of her progress he
had remarked that she had stood still for a moment at the
to}) of the old stone steps that led round the outside of the
Sir Artluirs Inheritance. 317
tower and within the parapet, but which was blocked by an
iron door; here she had turned with a sort of terrified
movement, and entered the rooms which led to the red room
in which she had disappeared. The more he thought of
this, the more he felt that this had been a special point in
lier movements, and the more he longed for an explanation.
In fact, he had now so entirely lost all sense of fear in the
impression of her beauty and the interest of her appearance,
that he was only anxious to see her again. He followed what
he rememljered of her footsteps, vainly trying to see her
once more ; and it was not till a late hour that, after a
long and perfectly unsuccessful search, he retired to his
OAvn room, determined to visit the old part of the house every
night till his unearthly visitor should re-appear before him.
Having once thrown off all sensation of fear, Arthur was even
conscious of a sense of strange fascination about the place.
He became more and more fond of his old house, and less and
less inclined to leave his retirement and go into the world
again; he ceased to wish for a companion, partly because
he dreaded that his supernatural tastes might be found out
and ridiculed. His mysterious visitant did not very often
appear, but she did so sometimes, and this was the great
event to which he was always looking forward. He used
to wait and watch for her, and follow her as she glided
through the rooms, sometimes in one direction and some¬
times in another, but always going to the top of the stone
steps, and then with a shiver turning and entering the red
room, where she invariably vanished. He never could gain
so much as a glance from her, nor indeed did she ever
seem to see anything ; her large dilated eyes retained their
fixed gaze into space, and her whole face its vague dreamy
expression, which had also something terrified in its look.
Sir Arthur felt a strange unwillingness to speak of these
mysterious circumstances, but at last one day he made up
his mind to investigate the stories about the old part of the
house, and see if there were any history, any supposed
explanation, that could throw a light on his beautiful vision,
and explain how and why the rooms came to be haunted.
But he could not find out much: every one said they
were "bad rooms;" of that there seemed no doubt, but of
legends and stories there were none to be found. The
rooms had always been spoken of with dread, and care¬
fully shunned, from the earliest recollections of the oldest
inhabitants; and they said that their fathers and mothers
had told them the same, but there were no anecdotes to
No. 34.-OCTOBEB 1877. 2 S
3l8 TJie Ladies Edhibiirgk Magazine.
account for it. There only seemed to be a general idea
that some who had lived and died in the house were apt to
revisit it; and especially those who had been there when
it was besieged by Cromwell, who destroyed a great part of
it, after having killed many of the defenders in the attack.
There were vague stories of his soldiers pursuing people
down the old stone steps, and slaying them in the vaults
below, and a peculiar shudder was generally brought on by
the mention of these steps, especially if Arthur hinted any
intention of re-opening the communication.
There was only one story that assumed any definite
form : a story about a white doe that had been a great
favourite of one of the children at the time of the siege.
It appeared that, when food ran short, the child had gone on
secretly feeding the doe from his own scanty allowance, till at
last, wlien they were put to sore straits, it was said that the doe
ought to be killed and added to the stock of provisions. The
boy resisted with tears aud entreaties, but at last it became
impossible to hold out, and most rmwillingly Sir Ifalph
Morton, the boy's father, was forced to pass sentence of
death on the favourite. It was said that the boy had fled
to the vaults below with his beloved doe, who was there
slain at his feet. Soon afterwards the place was taken by
assault; Sir Ealph was slain and the boy kept a prisoner,
till he escaped to France, and returned with King Charles
the Second.
" But this throws no light on my beautiful apparition,"
thought Arthur; "and if a fair maiden was put to death at
this or any other time, how strange tliat her fate should be
forgotten, while that of a doe is remembered. I wish I
knew something of her story, for she interests me. I
wonder if I coTild get her to speak to me: I hardly like
breaking our silence; one does not know what might
happen."
And thus amid dreams and shadows some weeks glided
by, and Arthur grew more and more to love this luireal
sort of life. He shrank from coming out from his solitude,
half feeling as if he himself had become a phantom of
the unseen world, aud as if he, like the other vague shadows
of the night, dreaded the crowing of the cock, and shrank
from tlie light of day.
Annibal.
Maty Crndelius. 319
MARY CRUDELIUS.
The recent premature death of Mrs Crudelius was a heavy
and (in spite of her long ill health) an unlooked for loss, not
only to many attached friends, but to the cause of education
in Scotland. We have to speak of it exclusively in the
latter aspect, and to tell something of her services to that
cause—how her active and fertile brain originated the
movement here for the higher education of women, lier
remarkable power of organization fashioned the means of
carrying it on, her enthusiasm and energy overcame the
difficulties which beset the commencement of every under¬
taking of moment.
It is now just ten years since the Edinburgh Ladies'
Educational Association—the creation wholly of Mrs
Crudelius—came into being. The course of thought from
wliich it sprang we cannot trace in any detail. But Mrs
Crudelius herself used to say that she had always felt a
strong interest in education, and taken pleasure in compar¬
ing the different methods which she saw practised around
her, and in testing them by their results. Coming, on her
marriage, to reside in Edinburgh, she ere long set about in¬
quiring into the means of instruction open to women in that
supposed seat of culture. She found that, except the
ordinary schools, there was none. On the otlier hand, con¬
tinued intercourse with her early home (Manchester) made
her aware of the efforts of the North of England Women's
Union—in which some of her friends were actively inter¬
ested—to provide instruction for girls wlio had left the
schoolroom. Miss Davies also was at this time drawing
attention to the education of women by her writings, and
still more by her endeavours to obtain public support for
the proposed college, since established at Girton.
The knowledge of these movements, acting on her own
latent desires, may have suggested to Mrs Crudelius the
desirableness in Edinburgh of some means of instruction
for women beyond and above that received at school. But
the practical working out of the idea was all her own. She
saw that it was better to adopt a system already in use than
to attempt the formation of a new one, especially when in
itself the former seemed well fitted for the purpose in view.
The Scottish Universities, with all their shortcomin"s, had
proved themselves suited to the peculiar genius of the
Scottish character.    Their constitution had in it something
320 Tlie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
of freedom and elasticity, and the non-residence of students
in college seemed favourable to the Universities includino;
women in their sphere of operations. The idea, in short,
which Mrs Crudelius at first formed, and never ceased to
hold before herself as the goal of all desire and exertion,
was that of higher education to be provided for women
in Scotland hy the Univci^sitics, as a regular part of their
activity, and by means included in their ordinary machinery.
About the particular way in which this end was to be reached,
she cared little; and for mixed classes of men and women
in Arts she had no desire, though she was not opposed to
such an arrangement. She has not, alas! lived to see the
full realization of her idea, which indeed is likely to be long
of reaching its accomplishment. Nothing short of this,
however, would she ever accept as that which she wished
and looked for; and she was able to inspire others with so
much of her own belief, that in the Association a hope is still
cherished of the Universities some day taking up the pro¬
blem of women's education, and giving to it a more satis-
factory solution than any which can now be reached. Mean¬
while, through Mrs Crudelius' intiuence, its form and methods
in Scotland were fashioned on the model of those of the
national Universities, as far as this could be done by indi¬
vidual efforts. We have now to speak of the means by
which this was effected.
As a first step, Mrs Crudelius strove to interest in her
plans some personal friends, and one in particular (Mrs
Daniell) may be named, to whom Mrs Crudelius always
expressed herself as under the deepest obligations for valu¬
able help readily and unsparingly given. By the exertions
of these two ladies, along Avith one or two others,
the Ladies' Educational Association was formed—not
without much toil and trouble. The members were
pledged to advance by all means in their power especially
the hio-her education of women. Not that Mrs Crudelius
was indifferent to the claims of secondary education; but
the other seemed to her not only in itself greatly needed,
but sure, if supplied, to re-act favourably on the lower stages,
by making strongly felt the defects of actual early training.
She was anxious, in particular, for a Avider use of the Uni¬
versity Local Examinations liy girls—an aim this which,
dropped perforce by her, has since been taken up by others,
and carried out with a success in whicli none could rejoice
more than she did.
The first thing done by the Association was to carry out
o
Mary Crudelius. 321
a schem.e of instruction by courses of lectures (never fewer
than forty) from Professors of the University of Edinburgh,
in most cases identical with those given to their University
students, except that they are much shorter, not extending
beyond forty, or at most sixty, lectures. In 1868, a single
class of English Literature was held by Professor Masson.
Tliis has been repeated every winter since, but always
accompanied by other classes, M-hich have now come to
number as many as six. Mrs Crudelius strongly desired
raduation for women ; but discerning, with her usual good
sense, the impossibility of obtaining this at once, she
acquiesced in tlie best arrangement that could be made, and
accepted the existing certificate. Incorporation with the
University remained to the last her aim, and, while that was
not granted, it seemed to her a matter of comparatively
small importance whether or not Professors in their indi¬
vidual capacity took part in the management of the Associa¬
tion. It is, however, a satisfaction to those who to the end
looked on Mrs Crudelius as its natural leader, that last
winter's reconstruction of the Association was in its details
shaped according to her suggestions.
In 1868, Mrs Crudelius accepted the post of Secretary,
and during the greater part of the last ten years acted in
that capacity. Nearly all the time, she suffered from ill¬
ness in various forms; but against this she struggled
bravely, and during the first year of the Association's ex¬
istence, its affairs were practically conducted by her alone.
Afterwards she became unable for this, and frequent com¬
pulsory absences from Edinburgh, as well as shattered health,
forced her at last to give up the work in which her interest
was centred. Still she was there to guide others by her
clear insight and wise counsel. Now it is so no more ; and
none feel so deeply as those who worked witli her, and thus
learned to know the largeness of her views, the singleness of
her aims, her courage and openness, her generosity, lowliness,
and utter carelessness of self, how great was the value of her
life—how irrepaiable the loss when she passed away from
the scene of all earthly activity.
E. H.
322 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
DOUBLE ACROSTIC.
No. 10.
Upon the arid plains see thousands languish,
And England hastens to relieve tlieir anguish.
1. A doubtful expression.
2. The acme of all.
3. Sweet " diez nous."
4. A pair of "eyes."
5. Indefinite.
6. Negatively indefinite. F. M.
SOLUTION OF DOUBLE ACROSTIC.
No. 9.
R
E
S
T
Four answers received—the following three correct :—" B,"
M. C. B., Message Girl.
A Prize is offered at the close of the year to tlie solver of the greatest
number of acrostics.    For Rules, see former numbers of this Mayaeine.
ROVER
R
Ehed
U
Seas
S
Tint
T
le    follow
ing
-«x?s>-*-
S T E A Y    NOTES.
" RuSTiCA " wishes to know how tlie instruction by correspondence is
managed, as she does not at all agree with your Member of Committee,
that no one need be afraid to study in this way. Will one of last winter's
students give a record of her jjersonal experiences in a note ? " Rustica"
is particularly anxious to know whether the answers and corrections
were always easy to understand ? Also, how often one may write to
the tutor. [We hope that some interesting notes will be sent in
answer to " Rustica."]
" Clerica " writes to ask how much the books required in order to
study for an ordinary pass will cost ? [She will find tliis information
by comparing the St George's Hall Prospectus with the price list jiub-
lished on the cover of the Report of the University Local Examina¬
tions, to be had from J. Thin, 55 South Bridge, Edinburgh.]
Another Correspondent writes to ask if she may take honours witli-
out going up first for the ordinary pass certificate 1 [Has this lady
studied the University regulations ? There is no objection to her
doing so.]
A Correspondent, who intends to study in Edinburgh next winter
for the University Certificate for Women, writes as follows :—" Is
there a preliminary examination before entering the Professors' classes ?
Does the Honours Certificate of the Local Examinations exempt one
from such examination." [There is no such examination, except for
those under 17 years of age, and for these a University Local Examina¬
tion Certificate is accepted as a substitute. These queries show how
very little is known by persons outside a certain cliarmed circle about
Stray Notes. 323
the mode of working of examinations, lectvxres, and classes for women.
We wish that readers would make use of our "Stray Notes" to put
such practical enquiries. Abundance of information has been pub¬
lished, but only persons who are already well versed in this apparently
intricate subject know where to look for it.]
The Committee of the St George's Hall Preparatory Classes have
rejirinted the article on Secondary Education of Women in Scotland
which appeared in our September number, believing that the informa¬
tion it contains on the subject of instruction by correspondence cannot
be too widely spread throughout Scotland. Ladies who will kindly
help the committee to circulate this pam])lilet are requested to apply
for copies to Miss Dundas, Polton House, Lasswade.
The Prospectus of the Glasgow Ladies' Educational Association will
appear in about a fortnight. We learn, with some regret, that the
courses will not, as in Edinburgh, extend to 40 lectures, but will be
very much shorter. However, an excellent remedy for this inade(|uate
supply of instruction has been found in an arrangement, b}' which one
set (jf lectures comi)letes the pi'eceding, and both together form one
continuous couree, though under different teachers.
For example, a course of Psychology, from November till Christmas,
is to be followed by one of Moral Philosophy, beginning in January ;
and, still better, a course of Natural History (we trust that this
means Comjjarative Anatomy) will precede Dr M'Kendrick's promised
lectures on Physiology.
In annou.ncing academic lectures on the French Language and
Literature, the ladies of Glasgow act as the pioneers of the Scottish
Universities, and show our reformers in what direction public opinion
considers new chairs to be most urgently needed. If we are to criticise
the programme, we should say that it is, if anything, too varied ; for in
addition to these courses. Professor Grant is to lecture on Astronomy.
At anyrate, we cannot join in the regrets sometimes expressed that
Professor Nicliol sees no room for a course on English Literature,
since we are entirely of the same o^iinion. We are glad to learn that
there will be tutorial classes in Latin and in Mathematics, in this the
very first year of the Association's history.
A corresponding member of the St George's Hall Classes has sent
us some interesting information about the Dublin University
Exaniinations for Women. There are three graded examinations—
a Junior, an Intermediate, and a Senior Examination. No lady can
obtain a Junior Certificate who has completed her eighteenth year,
but all limits of age have this year been removed from the other
Examinations. As far as we can judge from the questions and from
the regulations, the Dublin Junior Examination is certainly not easier
than that for the Edinburgh Ordinary Pass. For, although only one
"special" subject is required, against this must be set, that the
standard in each is decidedly higher. For example, in Edinburgh we
have only (|uestions in certain prescribed French and German books,
while in Dublin there is always one ad uperturam passage for
translation into English. The authors selected for study are also
more difficult ; such as Les Horaces and Wilhelm Tell, instead of
TeUmaque and the Thirty Years' War. In classics, both agree in
choosing a passage from the Anabasis, Bk. i., for translation into
English, but the Scottish Examiners are contented with Ccesar, while
nothing easier than the JEneid will satisfy the Irish. If we turn
from the regulations to the questions set at the last Examinations, it
324 TJie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
is impossible not to be interested in those given by Professor Edward
Dowden in English grammar and philology, in historical ac¬
cidence and in literature. They show that he expects to find not
only a thoroughly scientific knowledge of our mother-tongue, but also
a wide range of well-directed reading among the candidates for his
certificate. We rejoiced over such as the following : " Exhibit your
acquaintance with one sonnet of Shakesj^eare, Keats, and Wordsworth."
Or, how deliglitfiil to have the dryness of an examination paper
relieved by the enquiry, " How do you account for Hamlet's levity
after his interview with the ghost?" We hold Professor Dowden to be
worthy of all honour among examiners, were it on no other account
than on this, that he has appended as a note to his list of queries :
" N.B.—A special additional mark will be given for excellence in style
in the answers to the alwve questions." The italics are his own.
But where there is so much to admire, we would fain ask why analysis
of sentences is omitted from the whoie series of papers \ Here¬
in Scotland, this subject is one of the hardest which our candidates
have to master, and we are inclined to think that it would be easier
for a young lady to get up a bowing acquaintance with half the
sonnetteers in the English language, than to learn Morell's Analysis.
But some readers may know so little of the conditions on which the
l>rosperity of examinations depends, as to ask why the Edinburgh
standard is not higher than that of Dublin 1 If they will compare
page 56 of our University Report, with page 6 of the Dublin Regulations
for 1878, they will find in the former that only two scholarshijjs were
offered at the examinations of last June, while the latter contains the
following long list of scholarships :—A Junior Bursary of i,'25, the
gift of Trinity College. Three Senior Bursaries of £ib. Two Ex¬
hibitions of .£10 each, the gift of the Countess of ileatli, for proficiency
in knowledge of Scripture. Two of .£20 each ; and lastly, a scholarship
of £40, founded by the Governess's Association of Ireland. The
conij)etition for so many prizes must tend to keep up a high standard,
and in reality it is remarkable that the Edinburgh papers should be
as good as they are, when there are so few rewards. Signs are however
not wanting that better days may be in store for our Scottish
Examinations. Reference to the regulations for 1879 will show
that much has been done quite recently to provide exhibitions, so that
in June 1879, there will be more bursaries than have ever before been
ofl'ered. We shall reserve details for a future article on scholarships
for women in Scotland, without which our series of essays on
education would be incomplete. We must add that, simultaneously
with the sudden increase of numbers at the last two examinations, the
standard has risen rapidly, and that, in all liiielihood, a fresh impulse
will be given throughout the country by the recent institution of
examinations at Glasgow.
Ladies are invited to contribute to this Magazine.
A Prize is offered for the best article received and accepted by
the Editors before \st March 1878, on the subject, " Where shall we
Go?"
A Prize is oft'ered for the best article received by the Editors, and
accepted for insertion during the current year, on any one of our
British Female Novelists, born in the 18tli century.
The next meeting of the Ladies' Edinburgh Literary Society will be
held at 5 Chester Street, on Saturday, 13th October, at 11 o'clock a.m.
»
Our Female Novelists. 325
X.
MISS   EDGEWOETH.
&. 1767 ; rf. 1849.
I THINK it was Professor Masson who once said: " Tlie
novel is the first literary fortress which has been seized by
women." And who can deny that one of the earliest to
mount the breach and plant her banner on the summit of the
citadel was Maria Edgeworth ?
When her novels were given to the world in the latter half
of the last, and beginning of the present century, they
had but few rivals in the popular favour. The Evelina of
Miss Burney, put forth with trembling, a timid dove upon the
waters of the world of literature ; its one or two successors
—Mrs Inchbald's Simple Story, and the Romances of Mrs
Eadclift'e—were almost the only competitors by writers of
her own sex. Miss Edgeworth had already reached the
zenith of her well-earned fame, when Sir Walter Scott, fired
by her .example, set about trying " to do for Scotland what
Miss Edgeworth had done for Ireland."
She was born at Black Bourton, Oxfordshire, of English
parents, in 1767. She was therefore, by birth, an English¬
woman ; but from the early age of four years, until her
death, she resided in Ireland upon lands inherited by her
family.
Edgeworthstown is about forty miles distant from Dublin.
Under its hospitable roof there were gathered, as years went
on, the children and grandchildren of its owner in a
harmonious group, beautiful for its unity. Eichard LoveU
Edgeworth, the father of our authoress, was four times
mariied. Maria was the child of his first wife, and after her
came a succession of brothers and sisters, some well-nigh half
a century younger than herself. To them, and in due time to
their respective families, she attached herself with all the
warmth of an ardent and affectionate nature. Her father's
pupil and counsellor, the sharer of her stepmother's domestic
burdens, the sympathizer with all in their joys and sorrows,
Maria Edgeworth was the centre and rallying-point of that
happy home.   Her friend and follower in the path of literature,
No. 35.—November 1877. 2 T
326 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
Mrs S.C.Hall (who in the year of Miss Edgeworth's death paid
an affectionate tribute to her memory in the pages of the
Art Journal), has pictured her to us in the midst of this wide¬
spread family circle, as she has seen her with her own eyes,
seated at her own especial writing-table in th& great
comfortable library at Edgeworthstown. Pen in hand,
wrapped up in her subject, she painted the word-portraits of
her charming stories, undisturbed by the social talk going on
around her, by the play of her little nephews and nieces, or
by the comings-in and goings-out of friends and visitors ;
looking up now and again to put in her word—never morose
nor unsociable. May not the affectionate unity of this happy
family have unconsciously served as a model for the many
home-interiors painted for us by her graphic pen ?
Miss Edgeworth is described as small in person, with a
manner full of vivacity. Her face was pale and thin, her
features irregular; " they may have been considered plain
even in youth," we are told, " but her expression was so
benevolent, her manner so entirely well-bred, partaking of
English dignity and Irish frankness, that you never thought
of her in reference to plainness or beauty. She had a
pleasant voice, her words being always well-chosen, and her
manner of expression graceful and natural." This, one might
fairly expect from the originator and mainspiingofher Lady
Delacour's sprightly conversations and epigrammatic vit; yet
for all her conversational talent. Miss Edgeworth could
"listen as well as talk." Her friend Mrs Hall expressly
notes it of her. A rare virtue this, in one who feels within
herself the power of wielding the weapons of conversation.
She had a vivid perception of the ridiculous—a quality
which one notices as almost inseparable from a large and
noble mind ; but it was kept well under restraint for fear of
giving pain to others.
It was Miss Edgeworth's own express desire that none of
her letters should be printed, and that no life should be
written of her. We cannot therefore, as with some of our men
and women of genius, follow out the minutiae of her daily life,
her innermost thoughts and feelings, the intricacies of her
character. But in her intercourse with some of her gifted
friends, of whom there were several knit to her in the
bonds of sincerest friendship and esteem, one catches many
a glimpse of Maria Edgeworth in her Irish home. We see
her dispensing its hospitalities to rich and poor, to friend and
stranger, to her comrades in the brotherhood of authorship.
We find her helping on with kindliest sympathy, schemes
Our Female Novelists. 327
for th*, benefit of her poorer neighbours and dependants,
amid afl her literary labours never too busy to aid those
around her with words of counsel or unselfish deeds. We
come across many a trait of a good and sweet disposition,
shedding its influence upon all its surroundings. The 7nind
of the authoress we see in her works, but it is pleasant to get
this insight into her heart.
The humble violet of the hedgerow is doubtless the truest
emblem of a lowly life, such as hers,—unobstrusive, never
forcing itself upon the notice of the passer-by; only
discaverable by its fragrance, and in this unrivalled.
Castle Radcrcnt, the first of Miss Edgeworth's novels, was
published anonymously, and called forth the highest praise
from Sir Walter Scott. It was followed by Belinda and the
Talcs of Fashionable Life, Ennui, Abneria, &c. Patronage,
in many respects the most important of her novels, made its
appearance in 1813. Her pen was indefatigable. " Our
friend Miss Edgeworth writes all the while she laughs, talks,
eats, and drinks," Scott says of her ; " and I believe, though
I do not pretend to be so far in the secret, all the time she
sleeps too!"
Miss Edgeworth's deLtneations of fashionable life, its curses
and follies, are vigorous and truthful. Her tales may lack the
" fairy colouring of high fancy and romantic tenderness," but
they hold a faithful mirror up to nature. " The proper study
of mankind is man," and in her retired Irish home Miss
Edgeworth entered upon it with persevering fidelity. Her
forte consisted not so much in poetic descriptions or in the
painting of striking scenes ;—there are no special high-lights
to rivet the attention, but the sunshine falls pleasantly on
divers points throughout, and the reader is carried on
insensibly from page to page by the well-sustained interest
of her tales.
Here is a specimen of her style. It is a speech addressed
by the lively Eosamond Percy to her more sedate sister
Caroline, the heroine of Patronage, who has just rejected an
unworthy suitor:—
" You have decided prudently, my dear Caroline, I acknowledge.
But—I begin to think you are a little too prudent for your age. —Bless
me, Caroline, if you are so prudent at eighteen, what will you he at
thirty 1 Beware !—and in the meantime you will never be a heroine
—what a stupid heroine yovi will make ! You will never get into any
entanglements, never have any adventures ; or if kind fate, propitious
to my prayer, should bring you into any charming difficulties, even
then \»*p]eoUld not tremble for you, or enjoy all the luxury of pity,
because we should always know that you would be so well able to
328 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
extricate yourself— so certain to conquer, or—not die—but endure."    .   .
 " Caroline, my dear," continued she, "you shall not be
my heroine ; you are too well proportioned for a heroine—in mind, I
mean : a heroine may—tnust have a finely proportioned person, but
never a well-proportioned mind. All her virtues must be larger than
the life ; all her passions those of a tragedy queen. Produce—only
dare to produce—one of your reasonable wives, mothers, daughters, or
sisters on the theatre, and you would see them hissed off the stage—
good people are acknowledged to be the bane of the drama and the
novel—I never wish to see a reasonable woman on the stage, or an un¬
reasonable woman off it. I have the greatest sympathy and admiration
for your true heroine in a book ; but I grant you, that in real life, in a
private room, the tragedy queen would be too much for me ; and the
novel heroine would be the most useless, troublesome, affected,
haranguing, egotistical, insufferable being imaginable !—So, my dear
Caroline, I am content that you are my sister and my friend, though I
give you up as a heroine."
Eosamond herself is a charming character, and her high-
spirited brother Godfrey also interests us. Here is a little
scene in which he plays an important part. The Miss
Hauton in question, a young lady of beauty and fashion,
shows an evident preference for his attentions, and he is
naturally flattered at being thus distinguished. He is
spending a morning in her company at her brother's house,
trying to believe against his better judgment that she is all
his conscience could approve as a wife.
A certain Captain Bellamy makes his appearance.
" Maria," said Colonel Hauton, turning to his sister, " don't you
know Bellamy ?—Bellamy ?" repeated he, coming close to her, whilst
the gentleman was paying his compliments to Lady Oldborough,
" Captain Bellamy, with whom you used to waltz every night, you
know, at what's the name of the woman's '?"
" I never waltzed with him but once—or twice, that I remember,"
said Miss Hauton, " and then, because you insisted upon it."
" I !—Well, I did very right if I did, because you were keeping all
the world waiting, and I knew you. intended to do it at last—so I
thought you might as well do it at first. But I don't know what's the
matter with you tliis niornuig—we must drive a little spirit into you at
Cheltenham."
Captain Bellamy came up to pay his respects, or rather his
compliments, to Miss Hauton. There was no respect in his
manner, but the confidence of one who had been accustomed
to be well received.
" She has not been well,—fainted last night at a ball—is hipped this
morning ; but we'll get her spirits up again wlien we have her at
Clieltenham. We shall be a famous dashing party !—I have l)een
beating up for recruits all day—here's one," said Colonel Hauton,
turning to Godfrey Percy.
Our Female Novelists. 329
" Excuse me," said Godfrey, " I am engaged—I am obliged to join
my regiment immediately." He bowed gravely to Miss Hauton—
wished her a good morning ; and without trusting himself' to another
look retreated, saying to himself—
" Sir, she's yours—you have brushed from the grape its soft blue ;
From the rosebud you've sliaken its tremulous dew ;
Wliat you've touched you may take.—Pretty waltzer, adieu ! "
To the romantic school of writers Miss Edgeworth never
belonged. The prudence, the reserve in expression of
feeling, the strong common-sense which characterize her
heroines, contrast powerfully with the sensibility, the reck¬
lessness, the freedom to which we are now-a-days accustomed.
The novel-readers of the present time smile at the homeliness,
the formal manners, the old-fashioned ejaculations, the
ponderous poetic justice of Patronage, Belinda, and Helen ;
but in days to come, when the ephemeral popularity of our
highly-spiced favourites shall have passed away, we may
safely prophesy that our children's children will take down
the tales of Miss Edgeworth from their hiding-places in
remote corners of dusty bookshelves, and delight themselves
like former generations in the literary lore, the keen insight
into character, the knowledge of men and things, the high
uncompromising principles which distinguish her writings.
Sir Walter Scott entertained the highest opinion of Miss
Edgeworth's power in delineating character. "If I could
but hit Miss Edgeworth's wonderful power of vivifying
all her personages, and making them live as beings in your
mind, I should not be afraid," he said to Ballantyne at the
outset of his career as a romance-writer. And gratefully
considering that he owed to her the inspiration of the idea
of his Scotch novels, the Great Unknown sent her through his
publisher a copy of Waverley inscribed, " Erom the Author."
In 1823, during the course of a tour which Miss Edge-
worth was taking through Scotland, Scott had the pleasure
of making her personal acquaintance, and doing the honours
of his lately finished home at Abbotsford to one whom he
held in such high esteem. The beginning of that fortnight's
visit was one of the happiest days in his life. The meeting
between the two friends must have been a pleasant picture—
close at hand the poet's newly completed house of Abbots-
ford, looking its noblest in the lovely weather, which
happened to be especially favourable,—the cordial host
stepping forth eagerly to welcome his friend and fellow-
author beneath the archway of his home,—the visitor with
lier face lighting up as she exclaims impetuously : " Every¬
thing about you is exactly what one ought to have had
wit enough to dream ! "
330 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
Two years later Scott returned the visit at Edgeworths-
town, and after enjoying its hospitalities for a few days,
persuaded Miss Edgeworth to join his party in an expedition
to the Lakes of KiUarney. Happy must have been the
fortunate persons privileged to be of the company !
We are here considering Miss Edgeworth the novelist, but
we must not forget that the same gifted imagination which
provided Helen and Belinda for the amusement of our
maturer years, illustrated for us the first principles of
morality and integrity in Simjilc Susan, Waste Not, Want
Not, A Day of Misfortunes, and other favourites of our
nursery days. Yes; and in Early Lessons taught us to
reflect with Frank, and learn experience with Harry and
Lucy. The last-named tale was originally written by Maria
Edgeworth's father and stepmother for the use of their own
children, and more than twenty years afterwards was grafted
by his daughter on to Early Lessons.
It is noteworthy that the Sandford and Merton of Mr
Day was originally designed by its author as a short story
for insertion in Harry and Lucy. The writer was an old friend
of Miss Edgeworth's father, and during her early years she
spent much of her time at his house. Indeed, throughout
her life she was rich in friendships. Besides her admiring
disciple Mrs S. C. Hall (who speaks of her as the " most
delicious friend " it was possible to have), Miss Edgeworth
in later years became the friend and correspondent of
Eogers, Moore, Cuvier, Miss Seward, and Mrs Hofland.
Once or twice in her life our authoress had the opportunity
of playing the part of a literary lion during occasional visits
to London, when the brilliant notorieties of the time were
gathered together to meet her, esteeming it a privilege to
see and speak to one of whom the world had heard so much.
" I have lost all my eloquence to-night," said L. E. L. to a
friend on one of those occasions,—" I can only feel how
superior that little woman is to everybody else!"
In Miss Edgeworth's green old age, when she was between
seventy and eighty, Mr and Mrs Hall at length visited her
at Edgeworthstown, and were struck by her perennial youth-
fulness—" Miss Edgeworth had used time so well that lie
returned the compliment," as Mrs Hall aptly expressed it.
In her seemed to be illustrated those words of the poet
Southey, in which he compares such an old age to the ever¬
green holly, more sober, perhaps, in youth than its gayer
neighbours, but far outlasting tliem in brightness and vigour:
Where shall we Go? 33^
" So serious would my youth appear among
The thoughtless throng ;
So would I seem amid the young and gay
More grave than they,
That in my age as cheerful I might be.
As the green winter of the Holly Tree."
Beloved and honoured, with faculties unimpaired to the
last, with her bright spirit unquenched by its long life-
combat, Maria Edgeworth passed to her rest after a brief
half-hour's illness in 1849, at the age of eighty-two.
Gkatia.
III.—LET   US   GO   TO   SKYE!
So said one of three ladies, on Sunday, the 1st July 1877,
as they were driving from church in Mull, and caught a
dim peep of the Skye hills.    So they went.    Why to Skye ?
" For when we're there
Although 'tis fair,
'T may prove another Yarrow."
It may, but it may not; so we shall tell why the prospect
of Skye is so fascinating—1st, Historically. 2d, Because in
its grandeur it stands alone.
One hundred and thirty-one years ago, Skye, till then
unknown to the outer world, became famous as the hunting-
ground of the " Prince of Wales," the " Young Chevalier,"
or the " Young Pretender," as love or hate called Charles
Stuart; and whatever may be our opinion of him or
his cause, whether we be Jacobite or Hanoverian, yet
all must acknowledge the honour of the people of Skye,
who suffered a man with £30,000 on his head to hide in
safety among their caves and mountains. The romance of
Flora Macdonald and Prince Charlie will ever hang in
beauty about the wild shore of the Hebrides.
One hundred and four years ago, the Cockney of the
Cockneys, albeit perhaps the greatest Cockney, tore himself
from his beloved Fleet Street, and penetrated those distant
regions, further from London in those days than Kurdistan
or Khiva is in ours. He received the hospitality of the
proprietors, marvelled at their cvdture, visited the ministers,
wishing that men of such varied accomplishments did not
332 TJie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
belong to a schismatic " sect," and went to and came from
Skye without mentioning tlxe Coolins. The great lexico¬
grapher was there late in the season. Clouds might often hang
about their rugged summits; and if his defective eyesight
did rest on them, he probably thought them monstrosities,
inferior, from a civilised point of view, to Cornhill or
Holborn. It is the fashion to speak of Dr Johnson's injus¬
tice to Scotland. Is there not some misconception in this
judgment ? His opinion of Scotland and the Scots seems to
me most flattering. He was prejudiced against the nation
because of its Presbyterianism and its conduct in the
betrayal of Charles I. He thought, because it had refused a
" Church," and its army had sold the king to the English
Parliament which sentenced and beheaded him, it must be a
nation of savages; and he struggled in vain to discover that
the Scots were what he hoped to find them. That a man
of liis obstinacy should have left the record he did of
pleasure, in his intercourse and conversation with the
people of even the most distant parts of the Highlands, is
most gratifying. " Sir," he said at one time to Boswell,
" it is not the invasion of England by the Scots that I ob¬
ject to, it is the conquest."
Forty-one years after the visit of Johnson, the " Wizard
of the North " landed on the shores of Skye, and touched
with his magic wand her hills and lochs. The Lord of the
Lsles told the world of the Coolins and Loch Coruisk,
names till then unknown beyond the narrowest limits; and
set men wondering how these marvels could be seen. Years
afterwards, Hutcheson's steamers solved the difficulty to the
non-yacht keeping multitude ; and then again a railway to
the confines of the mamland gave many more an opportunity
of going. " How gladly we should visit Skye," says the
Ehine and Swiss-going tourist; " but the hotels are often so
full you can get no accommodation, and it rains there con¬
stantly !"
Query, Are the hotels never full in Switzerland; and does
it never rain there ? But why are the hotels full ? It is
because everybody will go at exactly the same season of the
year! It seems to be one of the unwritten laws of the
Medes and Persians, or of a stiU more binding statute-book,
that of fashion itself, that it is not the " thing " to travel in
Scotland till after the 12th. Because Parliament, " like a
wounded snake, drags its slow length along" during the dog-
days, until the night begins to lengthen again, and the evenings
to become chilly, because the young birds ai'e not ready till the
Where shall we Go? 333
12th; ladies, who certainly do not as yet sit in Parliament,
and who rarely take out the " licence;" and men—who, if not
at liberty to travel for long, might at least exercise a little
discretion as to their holiday-time, think they must not
wander until after the middle of August; and consequently
the hotels are full, and heavy rains often, not " always," fall.
Our three ladies, however, jomed the "Clydesdale" at
Tobermory, on Tuesday, the 3d of July. When one is in
Mull, one is pretty well independent of the outer world;
communication is slow and infrequent; and so, when they had
resolved, there was no one to say them " nay," no one to cast
doubtful looks at the clouds and prophesy failure. A little
hitch occurred about going to Tobermory. The horses were
otherwise engaged, a boat was at command, but winds
and waves are proverbially fickle, and the " pull " was long.
However, on Tuesday, the wind was all that could be desired,
and with a full sail and a round sea, as one of the boatmen
expressed it, they ran into Tobermory Bay—beautiful beyond
even Oban or Portree. The day was not perfect, angry
looking clouds were flitting about, and there was one very
heavy shower in going to Tobermory ; but they took courage,
and telegraphed to Broadford to have ponies waiting at
Coruisk next day.
Two of the party had already visited Skye; to the third,
who had only seen the outline of its hills from a far distance,
it had ever seemed more a dream and a romance than a
reality. She was a little bit of a Jacobite, not very dangerous
in these days. In her early youth she had done violent
battle for Queen Mary's innocence and King Charles' hon¬
our. She had believed in the nobleness of the cavalier and
the chivalry of Prince Charles. If some of her feelings are less
strong than in her school-girl days, yet enough of the dream
remains to invest Skye with the charm of a living romance ;
besides, a hundred other recollections hover around it, and
nature is to her the object of the deepest reverence and love.
She wistfully looked at the sky, and hoped almost against
hope.
The journey was disappointing, as drenching rains came at
short intervals; but, when it was fine, who shall venture to
describe its fineness ? Tlie colouring, when tlie clouds rolled
back, was rich in proportion as the darkness had been dark
before. The cargo in the " Clydesdale " was heavy, so she
generally stopped at the ferries for about half an hour, and
the glimpse we got made us wish for good ponies, uidimited
time, and interest at the " weather-office," and a look into
No. Jo.-N"oVi:MHEK 1677. 2 'X'
334 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
all the nooks and crannies. To some, a pony, not a yacht,
is the ideal of bliss. We reached Broadford in the evening,
were told how wet it had been, were encouraged by the
Cassandras of the district, got supper, and went to bed.
And here let us ask what are the necessaries for a tour in
Skye ? The smaller and fewer the " impedimenta" the
better—a good rule in all travelling, but indispensable where
there are no railways or coaches. \st. A sufficiency of
money. Travelling is expensive in Skye, but as the dis¬
tances are not great, the sum total is not higher than in
other places. 2d. Information and knowledge beforehand.
My experience is, that the West Highlander is not com¬
municative; at least, I have rarely found the "open sesame."
I have met, and could mention, a few exceptions; but, on the
whole, I find that information is not volunteered. 3f?. For
ladies—dress in general that is not the worse for a " bit
showery;" a serge, rather short, a warm jacket, and hat of
the same material. 4^A. Boots that will defy bogs, if possible
—no pretence about them ; ploughman's boots without high
heels. One's comfort depends on boots, 'oth. An Ulster;
and, if one has it, a light waterproof An Ulster generally
keeps one dry, although it ships rather too much water itself.
An umbrella is generally added; but umbrellas, unless they
are of the size and material of tents, are of little use to one's
self, and are a great nuisance to one's neighbours. Besides
these, good health, sure feet, a steady head, and, above all
things, a good temper. One note out of tune! How one
knows it on a journey ! Our little party, T am thankful to
say, had most of the requisites; and it must ever be a bright
and shining memory to us.
On Wednesday, we were up betimes. The weather was
not encouraging, b^^t our ponies were to be sent to Cambus-
uinary, and what could we do ? A shower cleared off about
nine, our carriage was prepared, and we started for Torrans
on Loch Slapin. We little thought when we set out what a
day was before us ! We believed there would be bright in¬
tervals between the showers ; we scarcely even hoped there
would be no shower; and instead, a magic brightness reign¬
ing from morn till eve.
TheBeinn-ua-Cailleach (the old woman's hill) is the most
striking object on leaving Broadford; but Blabheinn is before
us, and at each step it becomes clearer and more strange.
On reaching Torrans, the nearness of Blabheinn still shut out
the Coolins, but even there the view was grand. A pleasant
sail brought us to the Spar Cave, celebrated by Scott and
Where shall we Go? 335
others. Many persons say that ic hardly merits a visit
now, but we thought it wortli going to, if merely to see the
rocks that surround the entrance ; and the interior, to those
who have sure feet and steady heads, and can accomplish a
very steep climb with a river running below, and heavy
drops falling from above, is very wonderful. The landlord
of the hotel at Broadford ought to have provided us with
caudles, but did not; so, with the exception of one little taper
which we had with us by the sheerest chance, and which
was insufficient to show us the wonders of the cave, we were
in darkness. Still we saw enough to make us wish to see
it better.
We soon rounded Aird's Point, and entered Loch Scavaig,
and then we saw the Coolins. At first, having nothing to
compare them with, they disappoint you as to height, but
their outline is extraordinary. The top ridge is compared,
not inappropriately, to a wreath of holly. The hUls in Skye
all rise from the sea level, and when near you have no idea
of their height.
We were ignorant when sending our message, and we did
not know whether our ponies were to be at Cambusuinary,
or at the top of the ridge above Loch Coruisk. We found
them rightly enough at Cambusuinary, to which place we
ought to have sent our baggage, thus leaving those of us who
were willing free to walli to the top of the ridge, and see on
such a glorious day Coruisk to all advantage. But we had
not been warned at Broadford (get your information before¬
hand), and our boatmen, although most anxious to do every-
tliing for us, had not an extensive command of English.
Our knowledge of Gaelic, though pretty strong on the whole,
did not sustain a long business conversation, and we can
only be tliankful that we saw so much. The view from
Loch Scavaig is unrivalled, both to the north and to the
south. Kum, with its bold mountains; Ardnamurchan, high
and dark; Scuir, Eigg, Canna, and Muck, are all seen to
the south; and the Coolins,prominent among them Scuir-nan-
Gillean. Scuir-na-Banarach and Bruch-na-Frea are to
the north. Coruisk, first mentioned by Scott, and since then
visited by thousands, is too well known to justify us in
trying to describe it. We wandered for a time about its
si lores, and reluctantly leaving it returned to our boat,
and went under sail to Cambusuiuary, about three miles
off. Our boatmen entertained us during the day, by singing
Gaelic songs, with their solemn bagpipe-like drawl, so much
in keeping with the spirit of the surroundings.    We were
336 TJie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
sorry when our  boat journey for the day was over, but
Glen Sligachan lay before us.
MacLeod of MacLeod offered to take Scott to that unknown
and almost unnamed loch (Coruisk) by land; but Scott, un¬
willing to divide his party, refused to go. He little knew
what he was losing in Glen Sligachan, and the world has in
consequence lost his description. Failing the picture Scott
would have given, which might have been still better,
though of that I am not sure, let any one who intends
visiting it, read the account in Norman Madeod's Life,^
and he will hardly regi'et that Scott was not there. No
words of mine need be added to that account, so attainable
by all. Suffice to say, that oui' ponies did nobly; and the
one of our party who preferred walking did nobly too,
although the ground was a little " soft" here and there.
We arrived at Sligachan in time for dinner, between seven
and eight, and were not sorry for the rest and refreshment.
Next morning we started for Portree. The day was again
lovely; and although our backs were to the Coolins, we often
looked round, and they seemed to grow larger as we drove
away from them. We reached Portree early in the day,
took a boat, and rowed eight miles up the coast to the
shore, visiting Prince Charlie's Cave by the way. The coast is
steep, and has neither beach nor footpath along its edge. We
should have liked to have continued our sail to Loch Staffin,
and visited the Quirang from the east side, but strong boats
are not to be got in Portree; and it was not safe to go further,
so Loch StafBn is among the things of the future. The shore
is difficult of access, and not so much visited as the Quirang;
yet the view is much finer, and the surroundings almost as
tine.    This was our second happy day in Skye.
Our third day, Friday took us to the Quirang. We drove
from Portree in the public waggonette via Uig. By this route
you skirt Loch Snizort on yom* left, when you look out far be¬
yond to the Outer Hebrides, pass a little to the right of the
site of Kingsburgh House, and arrive at the lovely Uig
Bay. From Uig there is a road that goes to the north of
the island passing Duntulm Castle, the most ancient seat
of the Macdonalds, and Kdmore Churchyard, where Flora
Macdonald lies buried, and turns southward to Loch
Staffin, whei'e I believe there is an inn, whence one might
return by the Quirang to Uig next day. We, however,
drove by a steep inland road from Uig to the Quirang.    We
1 Vol. i. pp. 108-9.
IV/iere shall ice Go? 337
had some very heavy showers, which did not hurt us much;
and we saw some of the wonderful mist effects that are
common in hill countries. Photographs have made the
Quirang familiar to all; nor are photographs flatterers. Its
wonders are unrevealed, except to those who have gazed
upon it. The climb, especially after you leave the " needle,"
is stiff; you have literally to put " a stout heart to a stae
brae;" but if your boots are good (remember boots, intend¬
ing pUgrim ! that will not turn round) it is worth the trouble.
When you leave the rocks, you come to the " Table," which
is so soft and green. Such a bed of luxury and verdure!
What a play-gTound for fairies on a summer night! Again
you see the Outer Hebrides and Eoss-shire. " Wlaat is the
thing most worth seeing in Skye ?" is asked. Echo answers
" Wliat ?"
On Saturday, as we wished to see the west of the island
we drove to Dunvegan. Of course that implied our staying
over Sunday in the quiet of Dunvegan, wliich out of six
days was perhaps extravagant; but as Sunday afternoon
turned out very wet, and we happened to be alone in the
inn, we rested better than we should have done at Portree
or Sligichan. Dunvegan is a lovely contrast to the wilder
beauties of the south and east, and not less worth seeing.
Then again we wished we had another day that we might
have gone by boat to Loch Bracadale, and see Macleod's
Maidens and Talisker Point. As it was, we wandered in
the Dunvegan woods, open to all visitors, and rowed in the
lovely bay. We were particularly gratified by the lady of
the castle, with a courtesy whicli is necessarily rare in
these tourist days, speaking to us on Sunday, and inviting
us to see the castle on Monday, when she would show us
the treasures, and unfold to us their marvels. We were glad
to see a place celebrated by Johnson, as almost reminding
him of England. " Boswell," he said, " we came in at the
wrong end of the island." " Sir," replied Boswell, " it was
best to keep this for the last." Johnson answered, " I would
have this both first and last." Scott too has poetised, and if
possible idealised this spot, describing minutely its wonders,
with the addition of a little poetic untrutlifulness, caused
perhaps by mortification that the ghost would not appear to
him (a Highland ghost troubling itself with a Lowlander !)
although that Lowlander had almost a Highland spirit, ami
might almost have been so honoured), though he slept on
purpose in the haunted chamljer. We saw the ancient chalice,
the famous drinking-horn of Euari Mor, the Fnirv Flag, and
33^ Tli^ Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
were shocked to learn that the then chief had broken its
spell by showing it to Dr Johnson. Does it not haunt his
great and superstitious spirit that he made such a poor
return for the chieftain's hospitality ? We saw some little
things belonging to Flora Macdonald, a fly leaf of a Bible,
in which she had inscribed her own marriage and the birth
of all her children; also hunting knives and chain armour,
the dungeon and the haunted room, one lovely Eaeburn
portrait head, and letters written by Dr Johnson and Sir
Walter Scott after they had left Dunvegan. Dr Johnson's
is written in a clear modern hand, most courtly in style,
and yet not rounded into Johnsonian English. That of
Scott accompanied liis presentation copy of the Lord of the
Lsles, and spoke of how much that poem owed to the chiefs
kindness. It was altogether a most delightful hour spent
among the things of the past, and we left Dunvegan with
regret. I must say one word about the service in Duirinish
Church on Sunday. It was a mixture of Gaelic and English,
and we especially liked the singing of the Gaelic psalms.
They "give out the line," but instead of reading it the
" precentor " intones it in a most musical key. We have
observed this custom at all Gaelic services, but it was un¬
commonly beautiful on that Sunday.
Our time was now fast drawing to a close. The " Clans¬
man " was to leave Portree at 4 a.m. on Tuesday, and we
had to join her; and we started from Dunvegan about 12
to go to Sligichan. By this route one ought to get a fine
view of the Coolins ; but a grey mist hung over the hills, and
we felt thankful that it kept fair. The day improved how •
ever; and when we came to Loch Bracadale, it was soft and
lovely. Talisker Point stood before us bold and firm, and
the whole scene fed our imagination. A hundred little
waterfalls, with their green banks, transformed tlie hill-sides
to enchanted bowers. As we approached Sligichan, the
Coolius became sharp and cloudless, and we saw them once-
more in their grand and rugged beauty. It seemed abnost
too sad to leave Sligichan; and we spoke of lingering there
f(ir the night, starting for Broadford before daybreak, and
there joining the " Clansman;" but learning that we could
get on board that night at Portree ; remembering that it
was much easier to start at 3 a.m. the night before than the
next morning; that the evening was fine; that it was
wet sometimes even in Skye; and that "discretion
was the better part of valour," we resolved to go to Portree.
It was our last look   of  the   Coolins, for   the   mornin<.
o
Where shall zve Go ? 339
broke dark and gusty, and torrents of rain fell. Wlien we
left Portree, Skye was a happy dream, and Ardnamurchan a
stern reality. Of the beauties of the way we saw none.
Loch Hourn and Loch Nevis and the Coolins might have been
a hundred miles off; even bold Eum was lost; and one of
the party, and many on the steamer, were glad when
Ardnamurchan was to our stern. We entered Tobermory,
when our party separated for a time; two remaining in
Mull, the third hesitatingly resolving to round the " Moil"
that night. Fortune favoured her, as it is said to favour the
brave. In going down the Sound of Mull, the clouds rolled
back, and she had the view almost unrivalled, even in Skye,
between the Sound and Oban. It surely is the finest view
in Scotland; perhaps those who have travelled far would
say, that when the weather is clear, (the "when" of Scotland),
it is one of tlie finest in the world. One could gaze for
months on that ^■iew in its varied beauty, and grow wiser
and better everj^ day. The Mull of Cantyre was rounded
at midnight, and we went up the Clyde like an arrow.
The " Clansman" is very different from the top-heavy
" lona," that rolls even in a dead calm. I would recom¬
mend even bad sailors to go round the " Mull." The bad
time is short, and sailing is very different in a deep-sea boat
from what it is in a summer paddle-steamer.
Our week in Skye is a very pleasant recollection to all
the party ; but for complete enjoyment, a fortnight is better,
without hurry, and in June and July the weather is generally
fine. Those who have been to Skye are sure to agree with
the writer, and wiU wish each other a speedy return.
Jane F. Stuakt.
]^Q     *     *     *     *
As in the undimmed mirror of thine eye
Mine sees itself reflected bright and clear ;
So doth the image of my soul appear
Pourtrayed in thine when I behold thee nigh
The clouds are lifted from my mental sky,
With sun and moon and stars my steps to cheer,
And light me onward without doubt or fear
While all the phantoms of the darkness fly.
My soul with iixed gaze must penetrate
The deej) recesses of thy kindred soul,
To know itself and be from error free :
Then rising from captivity elate
In harmony divine and self-control
It owns true wisdom, fair Sophrosyne.
ESTEIJ.E.
340 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
Chapter II.
" It won't do, it won't do," muttered old Ashby to himself,
as he stood behind his master's chair one evening at dinner,
having vainly offered various wines and viands for his accept¬
ance. He did not speak audibly, of course ; but a suppressed
groan might have been heard, had anyone listened. It was
lost, however, upon Sir Arthur, who was sitting alone, sur¬
rounded by the old family portraits ; and it would be hard
to say whether he or they were least life-like.
" It is just the way Sir Horace went on," the old butler
continued, thinking to himself; " eating and drinking next to
nothing; seeing no one and doing nothing—only mooning
about, or going into those old rooms, I am afraid, very often
—as if any good could come of the living keeping company
with the dead! It will bring grief on the old home some of
these days, if I know anything."
At this moment his meditations were cut short in the
most unexpected manner by liis master, who suddenly
informed him that he meant to go from home for a short
time, and began giving instructions with tha,t view. When
the dessert was placed on the table, Arthur took out a letter,
and began to read it as if to refresh his memory.
It was as follows:—
" Dear Arthiu-,—Wliy won't you come and see us ? You have often
promised me a visit, and you cannot be obliged to stay in your lonely
old house for ever. There are one or two horses for sale in this neigh¬
bourhood that might suit you, and you had better come and see them,
for I will not take upon myself to choose a horse for any man. My
mother will be glad to see you at any time. Write and say your day
and your train.—Yours faithfully, Lionel Harford."
" I suppose I must go," thought Arthur. " Lionel does
not like being refused, and I have not so many friends that
I can afford to lose him. Besides, he is too good to lose,
dear old Lionel! and I want to see these horses. Why am I
so unwilling to go ? I feel as if it would break up my
life here, which suits me so well; and I am not fit for society
after living alone so long. Still, what can I say ? Yes,
I will go."
It need hardly be said that the night before he left home
Arthur went into the haunted rooms.    He felt as if he were
Sir Arthur s hiheritance. 341
bidding adieu to  his  mysterious  visitant, and  could not
resist a vain hope as to whether she might vouchsafe him
some sign which he could cherish in his heart, among other
scenes and in more earthly society.    After waiting  some
time he saw her, lovely as ever, passing through the rooms
in her usual manner; and yet he thought he could trace in
her a slight difference.    What was it ?    Could it be that
there was a sort of tremulous movement about her, where all
was wont to be cold and still, sad and spiritual ?    Could she
recognise  his  presence ?    The  thought was too wild to be
acknowledged. Could she know of his approaching departure ?
and if so, how could that explain a variation which seemed to
indicate some sensation the reverse of sorrow ?
His own heart beat quickly as he looked at her ; but when
he tried to follow and approach nearer to her; she passed
into the red room and disappeared.
*****
It is a strange reflection, though not a new one, that those
persons who are destined to meet and influence each other's
lives in the strongest manner, have often to pass many years
in absolute ignorance of each other's existence—that while
«'c are living and loving, and perhaps hating, with all the
little varieties of sentiment that are tlie forerunners of the
great feeling not yet aroused, they are doing the same—
perhaps miles away, perhaps very near us, yet equally
unknown and unsuspected, till the supreme moment arrives
and we recognise our fate ! It may be at this dinner-party;
at that ball; in a casual walk in the park; at a morning visit;
or in any of the countless incidents of daily life that
the introduction is made, the acquaintance begun, the last
volume of the story opened.
We must transport the reader to a small and pleasant
country-house in the south of England, where we find
Lionel Harford speaking to his mother, who is awaiting the
announcement of dinner in the drawing-room. Her two
daughters Edith and Ella are there also, and look up as their
brother comes in and speaks.
" Don't wait, mother," he says; " Morton is come, but his
train was late. He would much rather you would begin
dinner and let him come in when he is ready."
" That does not seem hospitable," said Mrs Harford.
" He will be miich happier really; in fact, I believe he
would like best to dine alone with me. He seems quite out
of sorts; I can't think what is come to tl^fellow."
" How do you mean ? " jr^
No. 3.'i.    NovLM.-.KR 1,S77. •■ 2  X
342 The Ladies Edinbiif-gh Magazine.
" He is grown so pale and quiet; that old house and all
the rest of it seems to have taken all the life out of him. He
turned quite shy when I spoke of' the ladies,' and said ' he
had hoped we were alone.'"
Dinner was about half over when the door was opened, and
a tall figured glided in, shook hands in silence with the
hostess, bowed to the young ladies, and dropped into the
vacant chair which was placed beside Ella. He replied
briefly, but courteously, to Mrs Harford's remarks, and
Lionel's eager hospitality, and seemed to be gradually warm¬
ing into the spirit of the family circle. He had answered
some question of Edith's, who sat opposite, and was turning
to say something to Lionel, when for the first time he
encountered the eyes of the younger sister; and suddenly
stopping short, he appeared to lose all recollection of what he
was saying. ^Vlly Ella's fair quiet face and soft fawn-like
eyes should thus suddenly have unmanned him, it were vain to
try to exj)lain ; she had not spoken to him, being young and
shy, and habitually silent in company ; she had only looked
at him for one half moment, and he was at once reduced to
silence, and the same strange absent expression came over
his face that had at first attracted Lionel's attention on his
arrival. All further attempts to support the conversation
were vain, and it was a relief when the ladies left the room,
and the two young men sauntered out on the terrace.
Here they began to discuss business, with reference to the
horses that Lionel wished his friend to look at; but even this
theme was at last exhausted, and Lionel suddenly stopped
short, and turned round full on his friend, saying—
" My dear fellow, what has come to you ?"
" How do you mean ?" said Arthi.r, taking his cigar from
his lips and holding it out between his two fingers, while
he returned the look given him, till his eyes wandered off
into space, and his friend remained steadily gazing at him.
" I do not know; you are so altered. You look so thin
and worn, and you stare about you so curiously. And why
could not you talk at dinner ?    You always used "
" I did not know what to say."
" It would not much have mattered what you said ; any
twaddle would have done. As it was, you frightened us all,
I believe."
" Not really ? My dear fellow, I am very sorry. What a
brute I must be ! I have not seen any ladies for so long,
that I do not know how to behave, I believe. I am afraid
Mrs Harford will think me an idiot. I had better go away
the first thing in the morning."
Sir Arthurs Inheritance. 343
But as he said this, a thought passed through his mind
of a pair of soft eyes like a fawn's. Where had he seen
them ? Curiously enough, they seemed the eyes of Ella,
blent with the vision of his own mysterious chambers, and
it was as if they both aj^pealed to him not to go away.
Lionel, at all events, would not hear of such a proposal.
" Go away ? Nonsense; you shall do nothing of the
kind—only wake up a little and be like yourself—you wiU be
all right in the morning, I dare say. It is only that you have
been living too long in that gloomy old house, with nobody
but the ghosts to speak to. I say, have you ever seen any¬
thing of them ? My dear fellow, don't tell me you have !"
he continued, as a moment passed and no reply came.
" Honestly, I would rather not tell you anything about it
at present," Sir Arthur said at last. " It is an awkward
subject, and I hardly know what to say; but this much I
may tell you: I love the old house, and all it contains.
Perhaps some day I may be able to explain myself"
" How mysterious!" muttered Lionel; and he thought to
himself, " He's dazed, there's no doubt of that; he is moon¬
struck, living by himself and smoking by moonlight, no
doubt, half the night, and fancying he sees ghosts. I am
beginning to feel rather ' eerie' myself, by only walking
with him. We had better come in—perhaps a good night's
rest will set him to rights."
Sir Arthur Morton did not leave Woodleigh the next morn-
ing. On the contrary, he stayed on day after day, and fell
gradually into the ways of the house, so that while he grew
by degrees more "like other people," the other inmates
acquired a liking for him, and for those individual points of
his character which were sure to rescue him from ever
growing commonplace. There was only one of the party
with whom he never could feel at ease, and this, strange to
say, was the young and gentle Ella—or, as she had been
really named, Ellafyne.
It came out one day in the course of conversation that
this was her proper appellation.
" It was a fancy of my father's," said Edith, in reply to
a question as to its origin. " I believe it meant something
about a fawn, and Ella's eyes, even when she was a baby,
v.ere supposed to be like those of a fawn."
This in truth they were; and why their soft and appealing
glances should have had such a subduing effect upon Arthur
it is indeed hard to say. It certainly was not from any
sort of dislike, for, on the contrary, he felt himself perfectly
344 '^^^^ Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
fascinated by them, and so anxious to please her that
nothing seemed good enough to say to her; and therefore
he very seldom talked to her, and only watched her humbly
and from a distance.
The first time the ice was broken between them was one
evening when the two sisters were out on the terrace, and
a conversation arose between them on the subject of dreams.
It began, as such talks usually do, with generalities, and by
degrees assumed a more personal form, and by the time
they were joined by Lionel and his friend, Edith was ex¬
tracting from Ella a description of a dream of hers.
" I have dreamed it several times," she was saying; " I
often dream it, so that it seems quite familiar to me. It
is about a number of rooms."
Here she would fain have stopped on seeing her brother
and Sir Arthur, but Edith's curiosity w^as roused, and she
tried to lead her on. EUa, however, seemed uncomfortable,
and would not say much, and Lionel began arranging with
Edith about an excursion they were to take the next day.
As soon as they were fully absorbed in the business, Sir
Arthur, turning to Ella, said—
" I could not help hearing you saying something about a
dream you had had as we came up, and it made me very
anxious to hear more. Do tell me about it, if you do not
mind."
" Yes, if you wish," said Ella; " but it is really nothing,
and it sounds very silly." She blushed and hesitated.
" Do you really want to hear it?"
" I do, indeed," said Arthur eagerly, " unless it is disa¬
greeable to you to talk about it."
" Well, then," said EUafyne, lowering her voice and draw¬
ing a step nearer, " it is only that I sometimes dream oi'
wandering through a suite of rooms, one through another,
and very old looking; with faded tapestry hanging in rags,
and full of cobwebs, and some curious old flight of stone
steps winding down I don't know where, for I am always
frisrhtened to go down. Then there is, a little room all
lined with red or with old red couches; and that is generally
the last thing I see in my dream."
Ella stopped suddenly, appalled by the strange look on
Sir Arthur's face. He was gazing fixedly at her, and
seemed rooted to the spot where he stood.
" "Wliat is the matter ?" she exclaimed involuntarily.
" Nothing, nothing," he replied hurriedly, coming to him¬
self as it were.    " It is a very curious dream, most curious
Sir Arthur's Inheritaiice. 345
indeed," he whispered, as if to himself. Ella felt frightened
as she looked at him, and both of them, as by a mutual
impulse, turned round and joined the others.
The following morning at breakfast, when the letters
were brought in, Arthur received one which moved him
to make an exclamation of annoyance, and Lionel asked
tlie reason.
" Why, I am sorry to say, I have a summons home that
I must attend to at once. Mrs Herford," he continued, " I
am so very much vexed—but I can hardly expect you to
be so—the fact is, I must go home to-morrow."
" I am very sorry to hear it—why must you ? if it is
not a secret."
" It is no secret at all. My aunt, Mrs Seymour, has
written to say that she is going into the north, and will be
passing close to Hoverton, and she hopes I shall be able to
receive her in a few days. She is my nearest—indeed, my
only living relation, and I could not put her off without
strong cause."
" Of course not, but I am very sorry; you must come
again another time, and pay us a longer visit." And Mrs
Herford smiled as she rose up and locked the tea-chest.
Lionel began to lament loudly; Edith expressed her
regrets with her usual frank kindliness; Ella said nothing,
but went straight out of the room.
By-and-bye Arthur came up to Mrs Herford, as she sat
writing in the drawing-room, just as the dog-cart was
coming round to take him to the station.
" Mrs Herford," he said, " will you let me ask you a very
great favour? I think you were saying that you meant to
leave home before the whiter. Would it be possible—
might I hope—to persuade you all to come to Hoverton and
meet my aunt ? She will be with me for two or three
weeks, I expect."
" You are very good," Mrs Herford began, but she was
interrupted by Lionel.
" Mother, it is the very thing—it will just fit in with
that visit you want to pay in Lancashire. It will be a
capital half-way house, and we should like to see Hover¬
ton," he continued, looking round for approval.
" It would be charming," said Edith. Ella started and
looked as if she wanted to say something, but the words
died away on her lips. Mrs Herford required little j)er-
suading, ])ut she could not pledge lierself to such a step at
once; so she promised to write her answer, and Artlmr liad
346 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
to make his adieus, and set out on his homeward journey.
Adieus are, after all, very commonplace things, and it is
seldom at these moments, when we are armed point de¬
vice in a conventional routine, that any special feelings
appear; and Arthur and Ella wished each other good-bye
in the usual manner. The next day, having consulted
Bradslmtv, and had tete-a-tete discussions with each of her
children and her maid, Mrs Herford wrote and promised a
speedy visit at Hoverton.
Arthur meantime was once more thinking of his mys¬
terious visitor, as well as his new interest. " Will she
come to me again," he thought, " now that I have left her
so long ? I have never spoken of her. . . I felt I must
not do that unless it were to communicate mth . . .
. . but that is nonsense. Besides, it would make her
afraid to come. And yet I feel uneasy, and as if something
Avould happen when they are both in the same house. That
strange mysterious likeness!—what can it mean ? I can
only wait and see how we all go on, and whether these
mysteries are ever explained—these curious sympathies and
dream-like feelings,—the way in which her presence
fills me with a desire to talk to her, and yet deprives me of
the power to do so; though I feel as if, in some remote
time, I had known her intimately. She, too, is shy and
constrained with me to a painful degree, and seems anxious
to avoid me—and yet, is it entirely from dislike ? Well,
perhaps I shall never know. Perhaps these things are
never to be explained in this world;—only in the next,
when we are all, in that respect, on the same terms—spirit
among sj)irits, immortal among immortals—will these things
be made clear."
The announcement that company was expected at Hover-
ton Court produced great excitement there. The servants
had rarely received a visitor before, and seemed at first
overwhelmed with the idea of a house full of guests
arriving, ladies as well as gentlemen! However, they took
a more cheerful view of the innovation by degrees; and
after the first shock had subsided, old Ashby expressed his
opinion that " Change was good for us all sometimes;" that
" Sir Arthur was a young gentleman, and it was not to be
supposed but that he would want to see his friends now
and then. To be sure the ladies, .... he could not
say when any ladies had been inside Hoverton Court before.
He hoped they were not timid ladies, and that they had
not heard    .    .    .    anyhow, they must do their best to
Experietices of Corresponding Students. 347
have things proper and comfortable. Perhaps, if Sir Horace
had had a little company now and then to cheer him up,
he might have gone on longer." And with the deep sigh
which the thought of his late master never failed to bring
forth, the excellent old servant betook himself to the duty
of cleaning up all the unused family plate, in honour of the
expected guests, and for the credit of the house.
It need hardly be said, that after his return Arthur had
lost no time in visiting the haunted rooms. He went aU
over them the very first evening of his return; and not a
night passed without his spending some time in wandering
through them in such wise, that had he been seen, he might
have been taken for a ghost himself. But the fair appari¬
tion never appeared.
" Perhaps," he thought, " she is displeased at my having
been away. Can she know how much I have thought of
her ?^conslant and yet inconstant!—thinking of her, and
yet almost blending her identity with that of another. Oh,
EUafyne! " And the former thought again recurred, " What
can be the secret of this mystery ? Shall I ever understand
it ? or is it among those things to which death alone can
supply the ' mot de I'enigme ?' " Annibal.
{To he continued).
■ X -u »< •■ > -Tti^- ^ - ?t - K •
€^tumtt% of Corrcsponbing Stitbtnts.
Letter I.
My dear 
You bid me describe my last year's experiences, in
order to show you that it is possible to study my letter. But
I must ask you to have patience with a fragment of auto¬
biography, l)y way of introduction, as I should like to tell my
story from the very beginning, before coming to what took
place in November 1876. To look back is to recall wasted
school days—a present body, but a too often absent mind,
when in class—hurriedly and incorrectly written exercises,
and distracted thoughts; there was, in those days, no visible
goal to be reached, no real prize to be won, and so I followed
hither and thither the bent of my own foohsh fancies. This
is the record of my first youth. I had brothers; we often
worked together—they with steady purpose, but I at " every¬
thing by turns, and nothing long."    The possible for women
34^ TJie Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
appeared to be very small; for, in the range of the wildest
fancy, no striving, however unwearied, seemed capable of
opening a career to me. My brothers went out into the
world to seek their fortunes; I stood on the threshold and
said good-bye, or, as Jean Paul Eichter has it," I—I remained
alone behind them with the night;" our paths in life had
severed, and afterwards, in the routine of existence, I merely
sought for something wherewith to stifle ambition, or to dis¬
pel melancholy. I read all sorts of books. Pope told me
that " women had no characters at all," and were best defined
as " black, brown, or fair." Milton seemed to have considered
my great mother as unfit to talk with even an affable arch¬
angel ! On the other hand, the " modish" existence of a
gentlewoman seemed to enjoin a dolce, far niente life upon
such as myself, since modern inventions had taken from us
much of the household work which fell to the share of our
grandmothers; and so, with a quiet conscience, I took to my
books again—to those books which I had come to look upon
as " the silent friends that ever please "—and resolved to be
content. Knowledge I knew to be power,and to me everything
seemed worth knowing; so that, at first, a series of pleasing sur¬
prises from freshly-acquired information really enlivened and
varied my life not a little. Languages, history, science, poetry,
fiction, all passed before me. I worked hard, but my work
was desultory, and my efforts were scattered over too many
subjects. I needed, as it were, to be driven in harness, and
to be kept in the right track by the strong bit of a fixed
purpose, and with the spur of a well-directed aim. I never
paused to consider what I meant to do, for, conscious only
that I wanted knowledge, I read on at random, taking for
my motto the saying of the Greek sage, " The gods sell their
gifts to men for labour;" or these lines of Browning—
" No end to lecarning ;
Earn the means first, God surely will provide
Use for the earning.
Others mistrust and say, ' But time escapes,
Live now or never.'
He says, ' Wliat's time 1 leave Now to dogs and apes,
Man hath Forever.'"
For a time this answered, but in the outside world the
education of women had meanwhile undergone a rapid revo¬
lution. I heard of ladies who were at work preparing for
University Examinations—of Local Centres established here
andthere—and of scholarships that might be won. Little school
girls put me to the blush by their thorough understanding
Experiences of Corresponding Students. 349
of the beginnings of learning. Friends, who had been trained
in classes and in lecture-rooms, came to visit us in their
summer vacations, and showed a precision and an accuracy
which all my reading had failed to give me. My past
seemed purposeless, my learning bore the stamp of no Uni¬
versity brand, nor in an emergency was it likely to possess
any marketable value. My very books had surely been false
friends !    What then was I to do ?
One day, in the autumn of 1876, a small pamphlet came
into my hands. It was the " Eeport of the University of
Edinburgh Local Examinations," and I found appended to
an advertisement of preparatoiy classes for this examination
the following: " N.B.—For the convenience of ladies at a
distance, a course of teaching by correspondence will be
carried on in connection with this class." This was surely
the very thing that I wanted, for did not I live in the far
distant north ? Without a moment's hesitation I wrote to
S. M., to whom I was referred for information about this
system. November came, and I was enrolled as a member
of the correspondence class, and received a printed programme
which detailed the studies for two months to come. 1
rejoiced in its precision. The rudiments of history and
geography, of grammar with analysis, and of arithmetic, were
the subjects prescribed; and, full of hope, I set to work.
The first thing to be done was to set apart a certain portion
of each day for uninterrupted study, and to divide this and my
subjects into corresponding portions. Thus, in history, the
task for November and December was chaps, v.-xv. of Scott's
TctUs of a Gi^andfather. This represented so many pages
per week to be studied; and, together with my reading, 1
found it useful to exercise my memory by means of Nelson's
excellent Date Book of Scottish History. In like manner,
I found the manual of questions and answers which accom¬
panies Anderson's Geography to be very useful.
It was easy to acquire a general knowledge of the out¬
lines of mountain ranges, of plains, and of river basins, but
I confess that I was not a little alarmed at the direction—
" Candidates will be required to fill in an outline map of
some European country;" for of map-drawing 1 knew abso¬
lutely nothing, and I felt but little interested in this branch
of art. The fiords of Ncjrway tormented me ; the coast line
of Holland, with its river-mouths and cliaracteiiess indenta¬
tions, was confusing; the required angle for the peculiar hang
of the Iberian peninsula was surely very mysterious; and
'he leg of Italy was to the last a puzzle, only to be equalled
No. 35.—NovEMBEK 1877. 2  Y
350 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
by the outline of the mulberry-leaf of the Mored. But,
though distasteful, this toil was not fruitless, for a daily
quarter of an hour's practice enabled me, at our December
examination, to send up an outline which bore some resem¬
blance to reality, when we were directed to " Trace the
coast-line of Europe from Cape Ortigal to Cape Spartivento,
inserting the most prominent features."
Arithmetic required careful daily practice. I had forgotten
most of what I had never accurately known, and those
long tables of weights and measures in Colenso had never¬
theless to be attacked. But when a hard sum or a difficult
rule brought me to a standstill, a note of inquiry sent to the
tutor always produced a clear and satisfactory reply, and gra¬
dually practice made the way plain. However, I worked at
my sums steadily every day. Last in my syllabus, though not
last in my thoughts, came grammar. In my school days, the
consideration of nouns and of verbs had bored me, and I had
learnt nothing of analysis of sentences. Imagine, then, my
feeHngs of perplexity, when I read in our first examination
paper, " Analyse the following sentence:—'Towards the west
lie the fertile shores that stretch along the Adriatic'" Before
the arrival of this paper, I had been studying Morell's
Grammar, beginning with Part I.; but I now discovered
that in order to do the work properly I must, at the same
time, read Part III., which treats of the structure of sen¬
tences. It was interesting from its very novelty, and ere
long I was quite at home among such terms as Comple¬
tion of the Predicate, Indirect Object, Extension of the Pre¬
dicate, Complex Sentence, and so on. The corrections
made in my answers to the examination papers threw suffi¬
cient light on the subject, and I learned much from my own
mistakes.
Altogether, the winter's work was very pleasant. Direc¬
tions came once a fortnight, showing me exactly how much
study would be necessary in order to attain a given definite
object. Now I had often found in time past that home read¬
ings had been irregular and fitful, frequently interrupted, and
not seldom overdone from excess of zeal. But these fort¬
nightly directions regulated my proceedings, and substituted
continuous work for spasmodic bursts of labour. To me the
arrival and despatch of a packet was a pleasant excitement;
andlquite agree with the motherofa fellow-student,who lived
ill an equally out of the way part of the world with myself,
when she said, "We all enjoy Mr M'Glashan's questions; and,
even among the boys, the attempt to 'clear' each paper
creates emulation."
Experiences uf Corresponduig Students. 351
The examination of June 1877 was the goal set before us.
Is it not worth something, when you dwell in the wUds,
to know that you are keeping pace with your times, and
that you are not debarred by the conditions of a quiet life
in the country from gaining that most useful possession—
a University Certificate ? M.
Letter II.
I was educated at home, and after leaving the school¬
room was at a loss how to study alone. The Local Examina¬
tions were suggested to me, but how to prepare for them
was a difficulty.
A friend told me of the Correspondence Class, and I wrote
to S. M., from whom I got all particulars 
In November came a notice of what books were to be read,
and of what parts were to be studied in a certain time.
Once a fortnight we got printed questions, to which we had
to send replies. I cannot tell you how I used to long for the
arrival of the corrected papers, that I might profit by the
red ink markings, with which mine were at first plentifully
studded. " Not clear enough," " rather short," " note the
definite form of the question," were frequent criticisms, and
taught me to aim at a style of answering better fitted for
Local Examinations. At last, I had the pleasure of seeing
some of my papers marked "excellent" or "very satisfactory."
I enjoyed working in this way very much, and the longer I
worked the easier it became." B.
Letter III.
Dear Eustica,
I shall try to give you, in as few words as possible,
an account of my own experience of the Correspondence
System. The advertisement of Mr M'Glashan's class, with
the words, " Instruction by Correspondence," caught my eye
last year while I was rather enviously, I confess, looking for
the aimouncement of Lectures to Ladies, which appears in
the Scotsman every autumn. I did not then know that
Local Examinations existed, and I wi'ote to S. M. to make
inquiries. In return came a delightful letter, telling me
about the proposed plan for helping dwellers in the country,
and enclosing the University Eeport. This was mvaluable
to .me.
I cannot say that there   seemed to be  anything very
352 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
mysterious about the scheme. Careful study of the Uni¬
versity Eeport showed me what the work would be. My
first communication from Mr M'Glashan was a " plan of
study," printed, telling what parts of certain books to read
within a given time. The papers of questions were also
printed, and came about once a week. To these I sent
answers, and they were returned with clear and full correc¬
tions. Any questions I asked were satisfactorily answered,
but I generally tried to puzzle things out for myself. The
first Examination Paper was an event. It came on the
evening of the day named, so I was prepared for it, and did
it at once. Of course, while all help either from books or
from friends is permitted in writing the replies to the
ordinary papers of questions, in answering an Examination
Paper one is on honour to do it all by oneself, and never to
look into a book after opening it. Mr M'Glashan sends us
the number of marks deserved by our Examination Papers,
so that we know what our probable place in a Local Exa¬
mination would be. These examinations at home are an
invaluable part of the training for the final examination.
J3ut for them I am sure that I never could have got through
it. My opinion of the system is, that it is capital as a
guide, and that no one need be afraid of beginning even a
new siibject in this way. 1 began Latin by correspondence,
and worked at it for six months without any other help
whatever. It is a great benefit to be thrown so much on
one's own resources, for this in itself is an excellent dis¬
cipline. Besides, students may be led to seek for such
help as their own district affords ; and I tliink they will
often, as I did, discover this in quarters where they might
not otherwise have thought of looking for it. The great
temptation in private study is to be discursive and un¬
methodical ; and the correspondence system, in giving a
method and an aim, just supplies what is wanted.    F. G.
October 16, 1877.
DOUBLE ACROSTIC.
No. 11.
Her sweetest strains by memory made more sweet.
1. The channel through which that powerful stream flowed.
2. The spell of an eastern enchantress would almost yield the palm to
such song.
3. Her voice was ever this ; not in mere speech, but song.
4. We fain would claim her as our own ; but Germany cries " Theft I "
5. Would that in this mere abridgment we could sound half her praises !
'i.  Like this stately bird, she " left this world with singing and joy."
7. Let all lament ! her strains we shall neve:' hear more. F. M.
Our Library Table. 353
SOLUTION
OF DOUBLE ACROSTIC.
No. 10.
I
If
F
N
NE PLUS ULTRA
A
D
DULCE DOMUM
M
I
II
I
A
AN
N
N
*N0NE
E
* " No one " ia accepted as alternative for " none."
Correct answers received from " B," F. G., M. C. B., and Message
Girl.
A Prize is offered at the close of the year to the solver of the greatest
number of acrostics.    For Rules, see January number of this Magazine.
-«—*wt—«-
0 U K    L I B E A E Y    TABLE.
The Marquis of Lossie.    By George Macdonald, LL.D.    London :
Hurst & Blackett, 1877.
No one but George Macdonald could have written such a book as
this, which forms a fitting sequel to his former tale, " Malcolm." It
would have been impossible for any other writer so to mingle the
mystical and the practical—so to weave into the texture of a thril-
lingly interesting, sometimes even sensational tale, high and ennobling
views of life, and deep and true lessons in religion. Nor is it grand
theories alone which are given ; there are hints how to do as well as
to dream. High speculations are made the basis of rules for every¬
day life ; and those great truths on which George Macdonald never
fails to insist—the Fatherhood of God, and the Brotherhood of man,
shine forth from every page.
It may be objected that the tone of the book is unreal, and some of
the characters too good for common life. But its very charm lies in
this, that we find here depicted men and women at their best—not so
much what they are, as what they may become ; and life not quite as
it is, but as it might be, if only men and women would be true to that
which is highest and best in them. If men and women in ordinary
life do not talk quite as do Malcolm and Mr Graham and Lady Clemen¬
tina, or even Blue Peter and his wife, we cannot help thinking how
delightful it would be if they did.
To readers of " Malcolm " the characters are nearly all familiar, and
it is with ever fresh delight we meet with one and another of our old
friends. Malcolm himself—fisher, groom, and marquis, " about whom
there is simply so much manhood, one never thinks of rank when in
his company "—Miss Horn, the tender-hearted, continually proclaim¬
ing that she has " nae feelin's "—Mr Graham, the " heretical" school¬
master—Florimel, the spoilt child of fortune—old Duncan, with his
inveterate hatred of the "Cawmills"—Blue Peter, with his rugged
piety, and his wife with her simple faith—the fisher folk with their
manifold prejudices—all of them again apjiear, although of some we
see less than we could wish.    The contrast between the characters of
354 ^/^^ Ladies' Edinbu7'gh Magazine.
Lady Clementina and Florimel is splendidly drawn and full of mean¬
ing. The upward progress of the one, with her earnest mind longing
for truth, brought at the most critical period under the influence of a
"Master" indeed, and the do^v^lward progress of the other, wrapt in
selfish worldliness, utterly unworthy of the affection of the poor artist
Lenorme, with his " great forehead" and " prominent eyebrows," but
redeemed from ruin at last by the dormant power in her to " love the
highest when she sees it," form a study of great interest and value.
The book teems with lovely morsels for quotation, epigrammatic
sentences, conveying in a few words " some deep truth," which seems
so simple as we read it, but which we could not have evolved for our¬
selves after years of thought. We open it almost at random, and find
such lines as these :—
" Eh, but God's unco quaiet! Sae lang as He kens till Himsel' 'at
He's a' richt. He lats fowk think 'at they like—till He has time to let
them ken better."
" What of conscience she had was not yet conscience toward God,
which is the guide to freedom, but conscience toward society, which is
the slave of a fool."
" Does a man ever do his duty in order to be better than his neigh¬
bours ?    If he does, he won't do it long."
" God never gave man a thing to do concerning which it were irre¬
verent to ponder how the Son of God would have done it."
Perhajis the most charming passages in the book are the conversa¬
tions of Lady Clementina with Mr Graham. This is how he winds
up one of them—" If you have ever seen the Lord, if only from afar—
if you have any vaguest suspicion that the Jew Jesus, who professed
to have come from God, was a better man than otlier men, one of your
first duties must be to open your ears to his words, and see whether
they commend themselves to you as true ; then, if they do, to obey
them with your whole strength and might, u]iheld by the hojDe of the
vision promised in them to the obedient. This is the way of life,
which will lead a man out of the miseries of the nineteenth century as
it led Paul out of the miseries of the first."
The love-scenes toward the end of the book are quite glorious in
their exalted purity. Extracts would convey no idea of them. They
must be read as a whole to be appreciated.
The ending is idyllic, showing, as none but a poet could show, the
poetical side of herring-fishing. The calm evenings, the moonlit sea,
the fishing boats going out, the people cheered in their toil by the pre¬
sence of the marquis and his lady, the return home in the early morn¬
ings, the singing of the hymn, with four lines of which the book is
closed—
" Like the fish that brought the coin
We in ministry will join.
Bring what pleases Thee the best,
Help from each to all the rest."
We seem to see and hear it all. With those scenes rising before our
eyes—with those sounds greeting our ears—with that atmosphere
bathing our spirits—it is with intense reluctance that we bid our
friends farewell.
Si tray Notes. 355
STEAY   NOTES.
The replies to Rustica's enquiries, in the October number, are too
long for our Stray Notes. They are, however, so interesting and
useful, that we have decided on offering them to our readers as a
separate paper, under the title of " Experiences of Corresponding
Students ;" they will be found at page 347 of our present number.
Tramontana is the eldest of a large family ; she left school some
years ago, and has forgotten a good deal of the little she once knew.
It has lately become necessary for her to seek employment, and, as she
has a natural love of teaching, she would like to become a governess.
What should she do in order to gain a certificate ; and which are the
most useful subjects to select ?—[By all means let Tramontana be¬
come a member of some class for instruction by correspondence. There
are excellent ones at Cambridge ; but if Tramontana is not prepared
to study for a higher certificate for women, she had better enter the
St George's Hall Classes for teaching by letter, as the University of
Edinburgh has no restriction regarding age for its junior or ordinary
certificate. She must, of course, begin with the preliminary subj ects, i.e.,
grammar, arithmetic, rudiments of history and of geography. But, at
the same time, wc would recommend her to take up, at least, one modern
language ; and if she already possesses a little half-forgotten Latin, she
cannot do better than refresh such knowledge. The modern system of
teaching languages is much more scientific than was the case in former
years, and some knowledge of Latin is now considered indispensable
for a good teacher of English or of French.
Tramontana would do well, after she has passed her preliminary
local examination, to aim at honours without passing the intermediate
or ordinary pass examination, because she would then have a right to
inscribe her name on the Rugby Calendar. But if she wishes to be a
well-equipped teacher, she ought to study the theory and practice of
education under Professor Laurie. His certificate would be invaluable
to her professionally ; and there are, besides, excellent arrangements by
which these students are permitted to attend model classes in the
Normal Colleges and in various public schools.]
Will any reader give E. B. information about the Berlin Lectures
for Ladies ?—[In our December Stray Notes, we hope to give some
account of the Tenth Annual Report of the Berlin Victoria-Lyceum,
from which E. B. will gain at least some of the information she desires.
If any of our readers will send us information as to the expense of
living in Berlin, while attending lectures, we think it would be useful
to ladies who wish to study there.]
We have received the Prospectus of the Glasgow Association for the
Higher Education of Women, giving full particulars of the arrange¬
ments for the ensuing session, which opens on Monday, Nov. 12, and
of the different courses of lectures which we mentioned in our notes
of last month.
Professor Young's Class of Natural History, beginning in November,
has, as its special subject for this session, " The Nervous System in
the Animal Kingdom ;" while Professor M'Kendrick takes uj) the
sametopic after Christmas, in his Lectures on Physiology, the special
subject of which is, " The Physiology of the Nervous System and the
Senses." Professor Veitch gives, in the first part of the session, a course
of Lectures on Introductory Psychology, with logical rcfcrencer-.     Such
35^ TJie Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
a class will form a useful preparation either for a fuller study of Logic
in some future session, or for Professor Caird's course, in the latter half
of the winter, of Introductory Lectures on the " Natm-e and History
of Philosophy."
M. Lacaille's course of French Literature continues through the
whole session ; but it will be divided into two courses of lectures—one
before Christmas on the Literature of France up to the 17th Century,
and a second, beginning in January, on the Literature of the 17th and
18th Centuries.
After Christmas, Professor Grant will give a course of Lectures on
Astronomy, which will include visits to the observatory, and experi¬
mental illustrations of the spectra of metals. Certificates for success
in voluntary written examinations will be given by the Professors.
We are requested to state, that copies of the Prospectus may be ob¬
tained on application to Mr Maclehose, bookseller to the University,
St Vincent Street, Glasgow.
It is said that, in January, Mr Ruskin will exhibit a selection from
his famous Turner Collection. The pictures will be shown in the
Rooms of the Fine Art Society, in Bond Street, and will be explained
and criticised in a catalogue raisonne, which he is writing for the
benefit of art students. Mr Ruskin has always collected Turner's
works, and no man could have done so with a more discriminating
judgment. It is understood that the coming exhibition will form
a complete series, illustrative of the earlier and later manner of the
painter. Of late years Mr Ruskin has brought out his writings
privately, without the medium of either publisher or bookseller.
Those who may wish to possess his " Elements of Drawing," which
he has lately re-issued in an altered form, must address themselves to
Mr Ruskin's agent, Mr George Allen, Sunnyside, Orpington, Kent.
Part I., we believe, costs 3s., and is a small book easily sent by post. A
beautiful volume of illustrations, intended as a graduated series of
copies for beginners, is in preparation. We are sure that many art
students will welcome this intelligence, as the original edition has
long been out of print.
" Working Bee " will be much obliged to any one who will tell her
if instruction can be had in Edinburgh in Crewel-work. [AVe regret
this query arrived too late for insertion or answer last month. " Work¬
ing Bee " is recommended to apply to Mrs E. H. Hoddle, 6 Johnston
Place, Stockbridge, who gives private lessons in Embroidery, Crewel-
work, Cutting-out, and Fitting. Mrs Hoddle will form a class for
ladies, if desired. We may also refer our correspondent to Miss
Henderson, 7 St Vincent Street.]
Ladies are invited to contribute to this Magazine.
A Prize is offered for the best article received and accepted by
the Editors before 1st March 1878, on the subject, " Where shall we
Go?"
A Prize is offered for the best article received by the Editors, and
accepted for insertion during the current year, on any one of our
British Female Novelists, born in the 18th century.
The November meeting of the Ladies' Edinburgh Literary Society
will be held at 5 Chester Street, on Saturday, 3d November, at 11
o'clock A.M. Debate—" Is a thorough English education attainable
without a knowledge of Latin i "
Our Female Novelists. 357
XI.
MARY  EUSSELL MITFOED.
6. 1787; d. 1855.
" About sixty years hence, you know, my letters will be
rummaged out, and the whole correspondence will be sorted
and transcribed, and sent to the press, adorned with portraits
and facsimiles, and illustrated by lives of the authors, be¬
ginning with the register of their births, and ending with
their epitaphs. Then it will come forth into the world,
and set all the men a-crowing and talking over their old
nonsense (with more show of reason, however) about the
superiority of the sex. What a fine job the transcriber of
my letters will have ! I hope the booksellers of those days
wUl be liberal, and allow the poor man a good price for his
trouble."
So writes Mary Eussell Mitford, at the age of twenty-five,
to her friend Sir William Elford, with a true, albeit some¬
what sarcastic, prediction of her posthumous fame. The
voluminous and illegible letters have been given to the world,
the life has been written, the productions of her patient
and painstaking pen are ranged as classics in our libraries,
and pictures of herself and her home adorn the volumes.
Although her works have now-a-days retired, as it were,
from public life, to make way for their modern successors
and competitors in the fields of literature, it is yet a task
alike of interest and of pleasure to turn back for awhile to
renew and to strengthen our acquaintance with one who
holds a place of acknowledged eminence among British
female writers of fiction.
The father of Miss Mitford belonged to an ancient North¬
umbrian family. He graduated as physician at Edinburgh,
obtained the hand of Miss Eussell, daughter of a Hampshire
gentleman of good family, the only surviving heiress of a
considerable fortune, and settled at Alresford, with the
intention of practising his profession. There Mary was
bom, the only and idolized child of her parents; and there
she spent ten years of a happy childhood, in a charming
home.    But, in 1795, the family were obliged to leave this
No. 36.-December 1877. 2   Z
358 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
dwelling, when those troubles and anxieties began, caused
by the imprudence and reckless expenses of the father, and
which continued during the whole long period of the life of
Miss Mitford, only increasing and intensifying with every
advancing year.
The first move was to Lyme Eegis; and now, at the very
beginning of their misfortunes, it seemed as if a turn had
occurred in their favour. The little daughter became the
possessor of a lottery ticket for £20,000, having determinedly
adhered,in spiteof some slight difficulties, to her choice of what
proved to be a winning number. Under these unexpected
circumstances, Dr Mitford established his family at Eeading,
and from thence Mary was sent to school in London, in 1798.
Her letters and her conduct at this time bear witness to a
precocity and strength of intellect quite unusual. She re¬
turned to the paternal roof in 1806, and in the autumn of
that year her father took her to the north of England to
visit his friends and connections there—a tour which her
letters describe in detail with great vivacity. The pleasure
of it was marred by a " thoughtless and selfish vagary of
her father's—his deserting her for an electioneering freak,"
and leaving this young girl, of barely twenty, without warn¬
ing, to the care of her newly-formed acquaintances. After
some interval, however, he rejoined her, and they returned
to the south together towards the end of the year. Ere long,
notwithstanding the windfall, the extravagance of his mode
of life began to tell. The showy house he had built at
Reading, on the site of a picturesque old farmhouse, had to
be quitted, and the broken fortunes of the family found
shelter in a wayside cottage at Three Mile Cross, not far
from the town. This was Miss Mitford's home till within
a few years of her death. Here her mother died in 1829.
Nothing is more touching than the terms in which the
daughter speaks of the loss of that dear parent —" dear
saint," as she calls her again and again in her letters.
From this small and humble home—" I seem to fill it,"
she writes—emanated nearly all the literary work of Miss
Mitford's life. Here she wrote her stories, her dramas,
and her immense correspondence—here she was visited
by her many admirers—and here she devoted herself cease¬
lessly to the care of her father, till his death in 1842, at the
advanced age of 82. In her younger days. Miss Mitford
was perhaps more closely drawn to his energetic and
enthusiastic temperament, to which her own bore many
points  of resemblance,  than to  her   gentle  and  " some-
Our Female Novelists. 359
what characterless " mother. But towards both parents no
more striking instance of filial duty and affection is to be
found, than that wliich, with undeviating self-devotion and
self-forgetfulness, she exhibited throughout the whole
course of her life.
Of the character of Dr Mitford, it is, however, necessary
to say a few words.    To quote Mr Chorley—
" The sorrow, the disadvantage, the mistake of Miss Mitford's life
should be clearly unfolded. Hers was the story of a credulous woman
sacrificing herself to an utterly worthless idol, told over again, but
with some difference from its usual formula."
Selfish, unscrupulous, imprudent—a speculator, a gambler,
and a profligate—his character lias now met on all hands
with the reprobation it deserved. Handsome in an un¬
common degree, a real Adonis in his youth, to his "beauty,"
joined to reckless good-nature and cheerfulness, he was
mainly indebted for the influence he exercised over the
affection of both wife and daughter. To retrieve, or rather
to arrest, the downfall of their fortunes. Miss Mitford from
an early period became in effect the " bread-winner " of the
family ; never repining, and indeed, with " a delusion almost
trenching on moral obliquity," upholding and supporting
her idol to the end of his days. That his death must have
been a real grief to her is abundantly evident from the way
she writes of him. " I love him a million times better than
ever," she says to Miss Barrett, the recipient of her fullest
confidences, at the time of his failing health, when almost
her whole day was given up to reading to him and playing
cribbage with him, " and can quite understand the love of
a mother for her first-born, which this fond dependence pro¬
duces in one so looked to." Her love for him led her to be¬
lieve that he was equally honoured and esteemed by others.
After Dr Mitford's death, a subscription was raised to
enable his daughter to pay the debts he left behind him,
and to provide an annuity for her declining years. She was
forced to remove from Three Mile Cross—which was literally
falling to pieces—to Swallowfield, a less comfortable cottage,
some miles from Eeading. Here her death occurred in 1855 ;
worn by sickness, but calm and thankful, she passed away
from a life of which the later years were marked by more
than ordinary anxiety and suffering.
Such is a sketch of the principal events in Miss Mitford's
career—free indeed from stirring incident, but marked, from
an early period, by the worry and cares of pecuniary embar¬
rassment.    To the  necessity   for exertion thus  devolving
360 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
upon her, we owe, however, the productions of her pen, if
we may believe the oft-repeated assertions of her letters.
" I assure you I should like nothing so well as to be able to fling
my tragedies and my articles into the fire. ... I confess that, for
a friend's own happiness, I would never persuade her into writing.
It is not a healthy occupation. I always detested it; and nothing but
the not being able to earn the money wanted by my parents in any
other way, would have reconciled me to the perpetual labour, the
feverish anxieties, the miserable notoriety, of such a career. I have
said this to a hundred aspirants. But, however, when there is really
tlie impulse, the inspiration, why then let it come !"
And again:
to"
" Nothing astonishes me so much as that anybody who can live
without writing should take the trouble, especially in prose, for poetry
will come."
This at sixty years old; and we can perhaps readily
understand such a sentiment from a mind harassed by over¬
whelming work, and a body of failing strength.
Of Miss Mitford's character we may form a clear idea
from her correspondence; its marked individuality impresses
itself strongly upon the reader of her voluminous letters.
We learn to regard her as a woman of varied powers, of
large sympathy, of extended interest, no less in the diverse
paths of literature than in all the relations of social life.
We see in her a nature which turns with delight from
serious writing and reading to the pleasures of country
walks, of rural scenery, to the care of her pets, and the cul¬
ture of her garden. We find her natural cheerfulness sorely
tried, and yet we have a more or less forced preservation of
it to the last, shown both in her patient demeanour under
bodily suffering, and in the continued vivacity of her letters
and writings.
Her love of flowers is perhaps the most marked character¬
istic of what we may call her natural tastes. We find its
traces in every page of her books, and of her familiar
letters. " Nothing can be more vulgar than my taste in
flowers, for which I have a passion. I like scarcely any
but the common ones," she writes, and then goes on to give
a long list of her favourites, calling it her " confession of
faith." " I place flowers in the very first rank of simple
pleasures: and have no very good opinion of the hard
worldly people who take no delight in jthem." She writes
what she calls " a rhapsody " to Miss Barrett, on a stolen
revel by night among the meadows and flowers—" Flush,
and the puppies, and I!    I myself, I verily believe, the
Our Female Novelists. 361
youngest hearted of all. I ran away, leaving my father
asleep—I could not help it."
Joined to this, her " passion," and to her love of the
country, was her delight in all animals, but especially her
dogs, in whose dumb but eloquent affection she was ever ready
to seek companionship. It seems true in the case of almost
all who have large and widespread sympathies, that they
bestow a portion on the lower creation. Dr Mitford's
greyhounds were aU dear to her, but above any she prized
her dear "Mossy"—abbreviated from " Mosstrooper"—and
writes an affectionate tribute to his memory.
Her love of the beautiful did not find its sole satisfaction
in nature. She seems to have possessed an ardent artistic
temperament, which, even if not highly or technically culti¬
vated, yet combined very true and delicate instincts with
much discrimination. Some of her art criticisms are incisive
and appreciative, and her taste was to a certain extent formed
by her acquaintance among painters.    She says—
" I do love pictures better than anything else in the world, except
flowers, and books, and greyhounds, and fresh air, and old friends."
A goodly list of exceptions truly! The most noticeable
blank in her artistic sentiments is the want of love or
appreciation of music. With one or two very slight excep¬
tions, the subject is never touched upon. We have, however,
a theory, that for such total absence of appreciation a defective
education is mainly responsible.
We turn with some confidence to the glimpses we receive
in her letters of her views on deeper matters; for in one so
open-hearted and enthusiastic, it is probable that on such
points we shall find tolerably outspoken confessions.
Here is her remark on the varying impression we receive
of the length of time, with which all must often have been
struck—
" I am quite certain that the time which seems, while it is passing,
the fastest (or, rather, which treads so lightly as to banish all idea
of time), is that which, on looking, back, seems the longest."
On many of the topics of to-day, such as the education
question, which she held to be " the very greatest of any,"
and the necessity of providing amusements for the people.
Miss Mitford's opinions were far before those of her time.
There are other lighter matters which crop up in her memoirs.
She speaks thus of the old crewel work, now so adndred and
imitated—
" It is one of the pleasantest signs of the times to see how beauti-
362 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
fully flowers are fainted now, by the aid of the needle, on all sorts
of materials . . . everywhere flowers, and really most beautifully
imitated they are."
She was made an honorary member of an Archery Club,
but she thotight it " a very troublesome way of making a
hole in a piece of canvass !"
The indication we have tried to give of the character of
Miss Mitford would not be complete without some descrip¬
tion of her as she appeared to her friends. She cannot be
said to have laid any claims to personal beauty. She was
short, and, from her earliest youth, in plain words,/a;!; she
herself often alludes amusingly to the rotundity of her little
person. But the intellect of her countenance, the " grand
head," with its " wonderful wall of forehead," were attrac¬
tions which overbalanced other personal defects. Her
ignorance of the becoming in dress was curiously extreme ;
she was absolutely indifferent on the matter; and both in
private life, and on more formal occasions, her want of taste
led her into tmfortunate mistakes—witness the velvet hat
and feathers, and gorgeous blue satin-lined cloak, Avhich she
substituted, in sitting for her portrait to Mr Lucas, for the
simple cap and soft lace which she usually wore.
The literary life of Miss Mitford falls naturally under
three principal heads—her letters, her tragedies, and her
prose works. The first of these divisions contains neces¬
sarily large reference to the home aspect of her life—reveals
her personal character—and in tliis is to be found its inte¬
rest. We have already alluded to the immense bulk of her
epistolary effusions. They abound, even more than her
graver works, in original terms of expression, quaint phrases,
and bright or tender thoughts. Such as the following seem
to us to yield almost the greatest charm of her writings.
First we have, to express a contrast, " the vulgar hurry
of business, or the chilling apathy of fashion. Here is mock
modesty turned off with a happy phrase—
" I have always had a strong ambition to resemble great men ; and
having despaired of catching their virtues, have been wisely contented
with adopting their faults."
Then, for vivacity—
" A most respectable gojivernante at Guildford has just brought out a
new-old love match of twenty-one years' standing. Only think of a
secret's coming of age !"
" A book ladeu with an impeccable heroine ought to be covered all
over with cork jackets, not to sink."
" I do believe (so and so), first, because it is incredible, and incred¬
ible facts are very aliuiidant in this world."
Our Female Novelists. 363
In her graver reflections we learn that—
" High animal spirits are amongst the best of God's gifts."
" Truth, which in art as in everything, is a grace above all graces."
" A Laugh has a long echo."
" Friendship is the bread of the heart. I thank God far more ear¬
nestly for such blessings than even for my daily bread."
We are struck by the large number of celebrated people
to whom these letters are addressed, including Mrs Brown¬
ing, Haydon and Lucas the painters, Douglas Jerrold,
Kemble; and among her own special friends, the Eev. Hugh
Pearson, vicar of Sonning; Eev. William Harness, one of
the family trustees; Mrs Hofland; and last, but almost most
important. Sir William Elford, who had taken a fancy to
her when quite young.
It is in these letters that we find scattered about her
criticisms of authors, ancient and modern; and in one who
overtook such an immense amount of reading, their variety
is not matter of astonishment. Some specimens will be in¬
teresting.    Of Byron's Childe Harold we find her writing—
" The sentiment is so strange, so gloomy, so heartless, that it is
imijossible not to feel a mixture of pity and disgust, which all our ad¬
miration of the author's talents cannot overcome. . . . Out of
charity we nmst hope that his taste only is ia fault."
Then we find, from an English heart, a quiet but empha¬
tic expression of a love for Burns—
" Read Bums, even though you should happen not to understand him.
All his prose, you know, is English, ay, and most excellent English to
boot ; and whenever his sweet muse takes her iipward flight, she
drops her Scotch pipes, and sings above the clouds in the language
nearest to heaven. In plain prose, all his loftiest passages are pure
English."
It is possible, however, that these sentiments may not
be deemed complimentary on this side of the Tweed. Then
hear her on Chaucer—
" I am not sure that I don't prefer him (setting Milton and Shake¬
speare aside), to almost any writer in the circle of English poetry.
. . . There is such painting, such individuality in his personages,
such freshness in his landscapes, that even those passages which have
been echoed by every succeeding poet seem new again in him."
Of Keats she says he had " a thousand faults and a mil¬
lion of beauties."    She tried hard to admire Wordsworth—
" But, alas ! my admiration was but a puny flickering flame, that
wanted constant relighting at Mr Talfourd's enthusiasm, and constant
fanning by Mr Talfourd's eloquence. He went to town, and out it
went for good. ... I should never have done for a disciple of
Mr Wordsworth ... too much self-will about me, too much
spirit of opposition."
364 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
We are amused by the clear evidences of the slow growth
and increase of her appreciation of our Poet Laureate. From
her criticism on The Princess, and her doubt " if these dark
people know their own meaning," she comes to confess that
she thinks " his three lovely volumes the most delicious
that have appeared for many years."
It is curious to read her speculations, by no means uner¬
ring, on the authorship of the books of Sir Walter Scott.
She delights in his novels—"We have had nothing like
them yet, and I do not think we soon shall." With Euskin
she was quite captivated, and Charles Kingsley inspired her
with deep admiration, which must have been to some ex¬
tent mutual, judging by an eloquent sonnet he wrote in her
honour.
On the female writers of her day we look with interest
for her opinion. She speaks enthusiastically of Miss Austin,
though blaming her for a " want of eloquence," as almost
her only fault. She " anticipates with delight" every book
of Miss Edge worth's, which she says is but to re-echo the
opinion of all the world; she admires her " exquisite dis¬
tinction of character." For her dearly-loved Miss Barrett,
afterwards Mrs Browning, she has nothing but praise. She
passes severe strictures on Hannah More. As to Madame
D'Arblay, " what she says wants so much translating into
common English, and when translated would seem so com¬
monplace." Of Mrs Opie she says—" One knows the
usual ingredients of her tales just as one knows the com¬
ponent parts of a plum-pudding;" and these hard com¬
ments are but slightly atoned for by the confession, in
perusing Lady Morgan's 0'Do7mel, that " instead of indulg¬
ing my malicious expectation of laughing at her, I was ob¬
liged to content myself with laughing with her."
The range of Miss Mitford's reading was not bounded by
English books. She had a large acquaintance with French
literature. Balzac, Moliere, Dumas, and endless other
authors, she read and criticised with much discrimination.
She had much praise for some of the novels of Georges Sand;
but she thought " the French beat us more in history than
in novels."
We suppose all good writers have been great readers,
though perhaps few have had so insatiable an appetite as
Miss Mitford. On removing from her cottage at Three Mile
Cross to Swallowfield, she computed her library to contain
over 6000 volumes.
We have lingered long over Miss Mitford, the woman.
Our Female Novelists. 365
because we find the key to her genius in the traits of her
domestic character, and gather from these our strongest im¬
pressions of her personality. No sketch of Miss Mitford,
however, would be complete without some detailed refer¬
ence to her works.
Like most young literary aspirants, the first productions
of her pen were poems. At the age of twenty-three a
volume of " Miscellaneous Poems " was published, and favour¬
ably reviewed in many quarters. To this a long pause in
literary work succeeds. " I had (of this proof of tolerable
taste I am rather proud) the sense to see they were good for
nothing, so I left off writing for twelve or fifteen years;"
and not till 1823, at the age of thirty-six, does the pressure
of poverty and the hard necessity of writing for money cause
her dramatic efforts to find their first successful result in
J^dian, acted at Drury Lane, with Mr Macready as the prin¬
cipal character. Her other plays—Foscari, produced in
1826; Bienzi, in 1828 ; and diaries the First, in 1834, when
she was forty-seven years old—achieved for her a very con¬
siderable fame as a tragic authoress. Success alone in this
branch of art is a proof of merit. It is impossible here to
find space for either extracts, or outlines of the plots of these
plays, which have now become the property of " dumb forget-
fulness;" but they possessed many merits both of diction
and situation.
We turn to Our Village, in which we find in their per¬
fection the distiuguishing characteristics of Miss Mitford's
pen.    In these sketches lies the source of the honour ac¬
corded to Miss Mitford, of being the veritable founder of a
style of writing which for purity is unequalled, and the
delicate word-painting of which is as finished as the produc¬
tions   of the  most  ardent   pre-Eaphaehte.     "We  find  in¬
dividuality and lifelikeness in every character and in the
description of every object, sometimes of almost startling
distinctness.    The surprising number of these little tales
and descriptions—numbering upwards of one hundred—is
only less wonderful than their originality.   Our readers must
acknowledge the difficulty of choosing from among so many
specimens.    It is  impossible to describe a plot, when the
only plot consists of the little incidents in narrating which
lies the beauty of the  tale; but for description we  give
the following, choosing almost at  random.    Here is "An
Admiral on Shore "—
" He was a most kind and excellent person, although a little testy
and not a little absolute; and a capital disciplinarian, although addicted
No. 36.—December 1877. 3 A
366 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
to the reverse sins of making other people tipsy while he kept himself
sober, and of sending forth oaths in volleys whilst he suffered none
other to swear. He had besides a few prejudices incident to his con¬
dition—loved his country to the point of hating all the rest of the
world, especially the French ; and regarded his own profession with a
pride which made him intolerant of every other. To the army he had
an intense and growing hatred, much augmented since victory upon
victory had deprived him of the comfortable feeling of scorn. The
battle of Waterloo fairly posed him. ' To be sure, to have drubbed
the French was a fine tiling—a very fine thing—no denying that! but
why not have fought out the q^uarrel by sea %'"
The vivacity with which she describes " lost keys" is
charming—
"' The keys, if you please, ma'am, for the wine and the Kennet ale,'
said Anne, my female factotum, who rules, as regent, not only the
cook and the undermaid and the boy, but the whole family, myself
inchided, and is an actual housekeeper in every respect except that of
keeping the keys. ' The keys, ma'am, if you please,' said Anne ; and
then I found that my keys were not in my right-hand pocket, where
they ought to have been, nor in my left-hand pocket, where they
might have been, nor in either of my apron pockets, nor in my work-
basket, nor in my reticule ; in short, that my keys were lost!"
Like a piece of mosaic is the elaborate description of
" Modern Antiques "—
" They were old maids and sisters, and so alike in their difference
from all other women, that they may be best described together.
Both, then, were as short as women well could be without
being entitled to the name of dwarf, or carried about to fairs for a
show. Both were made considerably shorter by the highest of all high
heels, and the tallest of all tall caps ; each of which artificial eleva¬
tions was as ostentatiously conspicuous as the legs and cover of a
pipkin, and served equally to add to the squatness of the real machine.
Both were lean, wrinkled, withered, and old ; both enveloped their
aged persons in the richest silks, displayed over large hoops, and stays
the stiffest and tightest that ever pinched in a beauty of George the
Second's reign"—
and much more in the same style.
We cannot pass over the humorous account of the
sampler—
" Really, that sampler was a superb thing in its way. First came a
plain pink border ; then a green border, zig-zag ; then a crimson,
wavy ; then a brown of a different and more complicated zig-zag ;
then the alphabet, great and small, in every colour of the rainbow,
followed by a row of figures, flanked on one side by a flower, name
unknown—tulip, poppy, lily—something orange or scarlet, or orange-
scarlet ; on the other by the famous rose-bud ; then diverse sentences,
religious and moral, . . . then, last and finest, the landscape in
all its glory."
Perhaps the most charming pieces of writing are those
entitled " Walks in the Country," where the different aspects
Our Female Novelists. 367
of rural scenery are described.   Here is a beechwood, or rather
coppice—
" They are like no other coppices, or rather none other can be com¬
pared with them. The young beechen stems, perfectly free from
underwood, go arching and intertwining overhead, forming a thousand
mazy paths, covered by a natural trellis; the shining green leaves,
just bursting from their golden sheaths, contrasting with the smooth
silvery bark, shedding a cool green light around, and casting a thousand
dancing shadows on the mossy flowery path, pleasant to the eye and
to the tread,' a fit haunt for wood-nymph or fairy.'"
We join in her enthusiastic delight at the finding of " the
first primrose "—
" There, better and rarer than a thousand ghosts, dearer even than
nightingales or glowworms, there is a primrose, the first of the year t
atuft of primroses, springing in yonder sheltered nook, from the mossy
roots of an old wUlow, and living again in the clear bright pond. Oh,
how beautiful they are—three fully blown and two burstmg buds !
How glad I am I came this way ! "
What can be more beautiful than her picture of "Frost ?"
" At noon to-day I and my white greyhound, Mayflower, set out for
a walk into a very beautiful world—a sort of silent fairy land—a
creation of the matchless magician, the hoar-frost. There had been
just snow enough to cover the earth and all its colours with one sheet
of pure and uniform white, and just time enough since the snow had
fallen to allow the hedges to be freed of their fleecy load, and clothed
^vith a delicate coating of rime. The atmosphere was deliciously calm ;
soft, almost mild, in spite of the thermometer ; no perceptible air, but
a stillness that might almost be felt ; the sky, rather grey than blue,
throwing out in bold relief the snow-covered roofs of our village, and
the rimy trees that rise above them ; and the sun shining dimly as
through a veU, giving a pale fair light, like the moon, only brighter.
There was a silence, too, that might become the moon, as I stood at
our little gate looking up the quiet street—a Sabbath-like hour of
work and play."
Belford Regis—" Homely Sketches," as Miss Mitford
called them—followed in 1835, differing in no material
aspect from the style and manner of their predecessors.
The tales purport, however, to be concerned with " a country
town" instead of a hamlet. In 1854 appeared Atherton
and other Tales, the long-projected and much-dreaded novel,
whose success she tried to ensure by adding to the one
volume which contained it two others of shorter tales, which
had already been given to the public. The last of her works
was entitled Recollections of a Literary Life, and may best
be described in her own prefatory words,—" an attempt to
make others relish a few favourite authors as heartily as I
liave relished them myself" Many of these papers consist
mainly of extracts from the works of the various authors;
but we find intermixed a good deal of appreciative criticism.
368 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
These were Miss Mitford's last literary works. Before
drawing this paper to a close, it may be interesting to note
some of her own opinions on composition. " A novel," she
thought, " should be as like life as a painting, but not as
like life as a piece of wax-work." On no point is she so
emphatic as on the paramount necessity of " clearness of
style." " I have a love of clearness—a perfect hatred of all
that is vague and obscure." Then she says, " I am so
fidgetty respecting style, that I have the bad habit of ex¬
pecting a book which pretends to be written in our lan¬
guage to be English." She thought herself "the. slowest
writer, perhaps, in England," touching and re-touching per¬
petually. She frequently speaks of re-writing her books,
even three times before the final edition. Her strong pre¬
possession in favour of cheerful stories is thus attested—
" I don't like to feel as if I wanted to cry. I had far rather laugh,
or at least feel that quiet, cheerful pleasure which the sunny and the
beautiful are sure to inspire ta any art."
She somewhere gives as a reason for this, that she had
known so much real sorrow. A pathetic confession is the
following to Miss Barrett:—
" I have a tendency to reverie, an under-current of melancholy, be¬
longing essentially to the poetical temperament, and which we have
in common, my only point of superiority being higher animal spirit.s,
and a greater power of throwing myself into outward things. How
else would I live as I do, alone, and yet keep up a cheerfulness which
I have retained through the most depressing disorder to which the
human frame is liable \"
" Miss Mitford," says the Saturday Bevieio, " had a taste
for success in others, as well as that more common form of
the liking, a taste for success in herself." Yet it acknow¬
ledges " she was a real celebrity." Although no writer of
power is without a conception more or less clear of his or
her own merits, we are constrained to admit that Miss Mit¬
ford was singularly free from any undue estimation of her
talent. She writes with much humility, in 1843, to the
Rev. William Harness, in words of graceful modesty, which
may fitly conclude this paper—
" I only pray to God that I may deserve half that has been said of
me. So far as the truest and humblest thankfulness may merit such
kindness, I am, perhaps, not wholly undeserving, for praise always
makes me humble. I always feel that I am overvalued ; and such is,
I suppose, its efl'ect on every mind not exceedingly vain-glorious."
Elizabeth L. Seton.
Sir Arthur s Inheritance. 369
Sir grtbwr's InJ^^ritanre.
Chapter III.
The old house had been brilliantly lighted; Sir Arthur
was anxious that the first impression should be a cheerful
one, and the evening was dark, and the train late by which
his expected guests were to arrive. It was even later than
he had foreseen, and it had been a dull drizzling day, so that
the travellers could see nothing as they drove through the
park. Ella's heart sank within her. She did not know why,
but she felt thoroughly nervous, and when at last the car¬
riage stopped, she involuntarily seized Edith's hand, and
held it so tight, that it required some self-control to say no¬
thing ; but in a moment the doors were thrown wide open,
and their host himself appeared upon the threshold, eager to
receive them, and pressing before the servants to hand the
ladies out.
The background seemed a perfect blaze of light, and the
guests felt the full influence of so warm a welcome.
Lionel sprang from the carriage and grasped his friend's
hand, and then they both assisted Mrs Harford to alight.
Edith followed, and lastly, Ella, stepping down with a trem¬
bling foot, passed into the house.
At that moment, without any preparation, there rang
through the whole buUding a sound, so loud and sudden,
that they all started and looked round in silence. It rang
with a clang and a crash, and shook the old house to its
foundations; and Mrs Seymour, who had been waiting in
the drawing-room, ready to bestow a dignified reception upon
Mrs Harford, forgetting everything, rushed out into the hall,
her hands clasped, and exclaiming—" What is that ?"
Sir Arthur was looking round with an angry spot on his
cheek, which she had never seen there before.
" Some monstrous piece of carelessness," he thought; " and
at what a moment!"    Then, forcing a lauoh—
" I see what it is," he said; " it is only this thing."
And he walked up to the end of the hall, where over the
fireplace there hung a trophy of armour and weapons. Some¬
thing had disturbed the arrangement of this, and several of
the pieces had suddenly fallen to the ground with a tremen¬
dous noise.
" It  is  all right," he said, "only this  is broken;"   and
370 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
taking up the hilt of a curious old sword, which had snapped
in two—" Put it all to rights as well as you can," he said to
old Ashby, who had followed him, " and let the things be
better fastened up, if possible." He put the two pieces of
the sword into the servant's hand and turned away, never
seeing that the old butler's face grew deadly pale, and his
hands trembled violently as he took it.
Mrs Seymour had now recovered herself, and proceeded
to take the guests to their rooms. No one was present
when old Ashby, holding the broken sword in his hands,
was looking at the pieces and muttering, while he shook his
head:
" It is no use, no use; I am afraid some misfortune is
coming on the old house; it is old Sir Ealph's sword, who
died in the civU wars."
The evening passed off very pleasantly; the ladies retired
to rest rather early, and then Lionel asked " if they might
not go and have a look at the old ruins."
Sir Arthur looked grave, but after a moment's thought,
he opened a door and led the way to the old Phasaunce;
but though the mists had partly cleared, and the moon was
visible, it was still cold and damp.
" It won't be comfortable," he said. " We had better be
practical, and come to the smoking room."
" Perhaps it might disturb the ghosts," said Lionel; but
he remarked that Arthur remained grave. He looked as if
he were going to speak, but after a moment's thought, he
changed his mind and said nothing; and Lionel, intimate as
he was, and utterly free from what he called superstition,
could not press the subject. They did not sit up long, and
as soon as his friend had gone to bed, Arthur heaved a sigh
of relief.
" Now," he said, " I am free . . . free to see how the
old places are influenced by the new presence, and whether
she, who so strongly affects my inmost feelings, seems to in¬
voke the strange visitor who has foreshadowed her."
He opened the oak door, closed it behind him, and pro¬
ceeded to make a careful investigation, staying longer than he
had ever stayed in the old rooms before, but seeing nothing.
Only the moonbeams enlivened the surrounding gloom ; and
in time, weary with watching, he also retired to rest.
Several days passed very agreeably at Hoverton Court;
nothing was said of the haunted rooms ; nor would any one
who witnessed the cheerful faces, and heard the conversation
Sir Arthurs Inheritance. 371
that went on, have imagined that in close connection with
this pleasant society there remained a strange mystery,
never explained, yet hardly ever absent from the minds of
some of the party.
Meantime the company amused themselves- in their
different ways. Mrs Seymour and Mrs Harford chatted
over their work in the mornings, and walked or drove in the
afternoons, and the young ladies either accompanied them
or went elsewhere. There were no near neighbours to vary
the party, but they did not wish for variety; sometimes
Edith and Ella rode with the gentlemen, and explored the
beautiful woods and hills around.
They had started one autumn day on one of these expe¬
ditions, and were returning home in the waning light, when
they came on a sudden turn in the road that brought them
within a short distance of the old part of the house. The
evening was fine, and yet suggestive of storms, with banks
of dark cloud here and there. The air felt unnaturally
still, the greater part of the sky was clear, and yet the rapid
motion of the clouds, that occasionally swept across it,
seemed to prognosticate some approaching disturbance, none
the less for the heavy and almost oppressive calm below.
" It is a strange evening," remarked Sir Arthur, who was
riding with Ella a little behind their companions.
Ella did not reply; she was gazing intently at the ancient
building before her, and as she turned towards him she was
seized with a sudden fit of shivering.
" I am afraid you are cold. Miss Harford," he remarked;
" we ought to have got home sooner."
" Oh! no," she replied, " I am not cold, and the ride has
been charming." Then, looking at the old house, she hesi¬
tated a moment: she knew Sir Arthur pretty well now, and
they had discussed all manner of subjects together: she had
a question she wished to ask, but she was not sure whether
he might like to be interrogated about his own affairs.
However, she went to work cautiously, and merely said,
" Has this part of the house ever been photographed or
engraved ?"
" I really do not know," he said; I fancy it exists in an
old county history, and it may have been done often since,
very likely, but I have never seen it. Would you like a
photograph of it ?" he continued; " I will have some done,
and you shall choose which you like."
" Oh! thank you, but I did not mean that; I only asked
because I have felt, ever since I came here, as if 1 had seen
3/2 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
this old side of the house before, and knew it quite weU, and I
thought I must have seen a picture of it, especially that bit,"
she added, pointing with her whip to a bit of old staircase,
that was dimly visible descending round an old turret just
within a wall, and apparently going down into unknown
depths; and then again she shivered.
Sir Arthur observed it, but he said nothing. They were
now coming down a steep road to the front of the house, so
he could not quicken the pace, and did not wish to attract
the attention of the others, who were on in front. Ella, then,
with an obvious effort, though attempting to be quite at
her ease, turned to him and said, with a nervous sort of
smile—
" You have never shown us the old part of the house."
" No," he said, and hesitated; " would you like to see
it?"
" Yes, I should," she replied, in a more decided manner
than was usual with her.    " I am very anxious to see it."
Arthur felt as if some crisis in his destiny were approach¬
ing, which he could neither resist nor avert.
" You know," he said, " that there is a melancholy sort of
legend attached to it. Have you ever heard the story ? It
was in the time of the civil wars; my ancestor. Sir Ralph,
was a devoted Cavalier, and defended this place stoutly
against Cromwell's forces, who were commanded by a certain
General Ford. The sieije was long, and the inhabitants were
driven to desperate straits, and forced to eat whatever they
could lay hands on. At last a demand was made for the last
remaining animal in the place, a white fawn, that was the
favourite of Sir Ralph's son, a young boy. He had kept her
concealed in one of the vaults, and fed her from his own
scanty allowance of food, and but what is the matter,
Miss Harford ? you look very ill."
" No, no; it is nothing," answered Ella faintly; " pray do
not take any notice, but—I know what you were going to
tell me—they killed the fawn, and then the place was
taken."
" Yes, that is the story," replied Sir Arthur, surprised.
" How did you know it ?"
" 1 cannot tell," she said. " I do seem to know it per¬
fectly well, as if I had been there at the time. I can fancy
I feel them hunting the poor, timid creature from the vault,
up and down steps, and through long suites of rooms, and
then -" she shivered, and then added, with an effort,—" It
is curious, but that General Ford was an ancestor of mine.
Sir Arthurs Inheritance. 373'
His son changed his name to Harford after the Eestora-
tion."
" Strange, indeed," replied Sir Arthur, gravely. " It almost
seems as if your knowledge of the story came by inheritance.
Can it be that an instinctive consciousness of former deeds
can be thus transmitted to us ?"
Ella made no reply, and alluded no more to the subject of
the haunted rooms.
The evening passed away much as usual, but Arthur
on retiring to rest found himself quite unable to close his
eyes. His conversation with Ella haunted him, and he was
continually wandering oft' into all sorts of wild speculations.
" It is of no use," he cried at last, " these things are amongst
those ' undreamt of in our philosophy,'—mysteries of nature
that perhaps might be easily explained if we had the key,
but into which science as yet has failed to penetrate. Who
knows whether the various curiosities of spiritualism, of
electro-biology, and other marvels, may not one day be better
understood, and found to be but a part of some occult
sphere of Nature's power, to which the ancient superstitions,
ghosts, and dream-lore, may also belong ?"
After a time, weary of sleepless inaction, he rose, and
following some unconscious instinct, went towards the rooms
of which he had been thinking so deeply. To his surprise,
as he was about to open the oak door, he found himself con¬
fronted by Lionel.
" I was coming to look for you," said the latter. " Some¬
how or other, I cannot sleep to-night, and I thought I heard
somebody moving about. I suppose it was only you. What
are you going to do ?    Have a cigar ?"
" No," said Arthur; " but I wiU come down and have one
with you, if you like."
" I'll tell you what I would much rather do, have a look
into those old rooms. It would be just the time, between
twelve and one, and a glorious moonlight night. I should
like to have a chance of seeing a "
He stopped short. Very few people like to jest about the
unseen world at midnight, however they may plume them¬
selves on being free from superstition.
" As you please," said Arthur, coldly; " but remember it
is on your own responsibility."
" Certainly," said Lionel, with some surprise; " I could
not think of going away from this house without having seen
those rooms, and that by night."
" Be it so," answered his friend, and threw open the door.
No. 36.—December 1877. 3 B
374 '^he Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
The moonlight was streaming in through the casement,
revealing the remains of ancient tapestry that hung on the
walls, the groined ceilings, the carved chimney-pieces; even
the cobwebs that hung festooned from one quaint old orna¬
ment to another.
" But fitful was the histre, pale and wan,
As watchliglit by the bed of some departing man."
Ever and anon a dark cloud swept over the moon, com¬
pletely obscuring the place, and a low hollow sound was
heard, as of distant thunder or distant wind, it was hard to
say which, as it rose and fell at intervals; but whatever it
might be, it was certainly something born of storm and
hurricane.
Even Lionel was silenced at first under the influence of
mystery within, and the expectation of some natural con¬
vulsion without; but, as a deeper shadow than usual passed
by, leaving the intermittent moonlight, he tried to talk as
before. Looking round the rooms with a rapid glance, he
turned to Arthur. " Very curious, indeed." " What a large
place ! You ought to have these rooms restored!" and other
such remarks, to which his host made little reply; and he
soon succumbed to the feeling of awe, that made it impossible
to keep up a conversation, much less to jest. He was aware
of a strange chill, a sense he could not account for, as if of
some unusual presence, though he saw nothing. They made
the complete circuit of the rooms as far as the old stone
staircase, and then turned to retrace their steps. They had
got to the last room, when Lionel looked back, and suddenly
stopping short, exclaimed in a whisper, " Look, look; for
heaven's sake, what is that ?"
Arthur quietly smiled, and said nothing. He was not
startled; he only saw the fair white form he had watched so
often that it had become a familiar presence to him. It
glided softly along in the usual way, and, as if drawn on by
an irresistible impulse, both the spectators followed it. They
saw it go towards the stone parapet, and seem to look down,
and then, after a pause, proceed to the little red room. There
it turned slowly round, stood still and confronted them with
eyes wide open, but obviously seeing nothing. There was a
look in those eyes that sent a cold shiver even to Sir Arthur's
heart. There was something in this appearance of the vision
that differed from every former experience; something less
spiritual and at the same time more fearful. On each previous
occasion he had been more and more impressed with the
calm unearthliness of her aspect.    Now it was calm, cer-
Sir Arthurs Inheritance. 375
tainly, but it was rather the quiescence of bodily lethargy
than the serenity of one above the vicissitudes of this world.
He stood gazing on her, transfixed and expecting her to
vanish after her usual fashion, till his attention was attracted
by a sort of convulsive groan from Lionel. He turned
towards him, and saw him rooted to the ground, his hair
erect, his eyeballs distended, and his hands clenched, while
he muttered between his teeth a half choked exclamation,
and the name of his sister.
The sound of his voice seemed to have an effect upon the
apparition. She half turned, and began to murmur some
confused sounds, which by degrees formed themselves into
words.
" It is here," she said. " It is here ; up and down here,
and into the red room; but not, oh! not down the steps."
She paused and wrung her hands. " What have I to do with
the blood that was shed here ? The loyal innocent blood !
And yet I know it, and the vision has come to me from the
days that have long passed away."
Meanwhile, the night, which had before been frequently
Ulumined with moonlight, had suddenly become completely
overcast. Dark clouds fleeted across the sky, and the rooms
in which they stood grew so dark that they could hardly
distinguish anything. Suddenly a vivid flash of lightning
shot through the building, revealing every stone and bit of
carving with a glow brighter than that of the sun, and a
tremendous peal of thunder at the same instant seemed to
shake the old house to its foundations.
The shock opened the lips of Lionel, and restored his
power of action. Bursting from the restraining hand of his
friend, he rushed headlong forward, shouting loudly the loved
name that the vision had called to the hearts of both, but
which Sir Arthur had never dared to pronounce.
" Ella, Ella," he called, " in heaven's name what are you
doing here ?"
The figure did not vanish, on the contrary she seemed to
grow more human; a terrible shiver passed over her. As
Arthur gazed astounded, the discovery flashed on him that
on this occasion she was perambulating these rooms, not only
in spirit, not only in dreams, when—as some believe—our
souls are for a time detached from our bodies, and free to
wander where they list; but that these mysterious events
had reached their culminating point. The force of her spirit,
combined with her actual vicinity, had brought her to its
accustomed haunts in a state of somnambulism.
376 The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
He tried once more to arrest Lionel.    " She is walking in
her sleep; if you awake her suddenly she will die."
But even while he spoke, came a second flash, more vivid
than the last, illuminating every chink and cranny of the
gloomy chamber, as with the glow of a hundred summer
days condensed into one intense moment, and seeming to
kindle and absorb the long golden hair which floated like a
halo round the head of Ella. Simultaneously with the flash
came the tremendous peal, re-echoing through the rooms till
the old house rocked again; and even before it ceased, another
crash was heard and felt, as of falling stones and crumbling
walls.
But neither Arthur nor Lionel listened to it; both had
rushed forward with extended arms in the direction of Ella,
and as the darkness again closed round them. Sir Arthur,
whose knowledge of the place gave him the advantage over
Lionel, reached and supported her now insensible form.
" A light, a light," he shouted, " quickly, for heaven's
sake—if you have one."
Even as the words were uttered a red glow was seen to
spread gradually over the opposite wall; a slight crackling
sound was heard, and the smell of smoke became clearly
perceptible.
The house was in flames, struck fatally by the forked
lightning. Was some angry spirit borne on the flash, and was
this the hour of vengeance ? Was the child of the old
Eoundhead soldier to fall an innocent victim to her ancestor's
sins ?
Fate and revenge are strong; but there is a yet stronger
power to resist them—the power of love and forgiveness,
blotting out the past, and bringing a mightier spell to
counteract that of an ancient curse.
Sir Arthur raised the girl in his arms, and calling to her
brother to follow, strode rapidly on through the volumes of
smoke which now threatened to choke them back.
" On, on this way," he shouted. " Do not try to go back
—the flames divide us from the rest of the house. Follow
me down the old stone steps."
As they reached the edge of the parapet, they caught
sight of old Ashby below, wringing his hands and moan¬
ing ; several others were with him, and Mrs Harford and
Edith were seen clinging to each other and calling vainly
for Ella.
" She is here—she is safe," said Sir Arthur; " only bring
a ladder and be ready to receive us."
Dark Days. 377
Hoverton Hall was burned to the ground, and old Ashby's
nerves were so shaken by the terrors of this night that he
never would resume his former duties, but preferred to live
and die in retirement and silence. A new house was built
in another part of the grounds, and there Arthur and Ella
lived long and happily, in spite of the " uncanny " outset of
their story. His courage and determination had triumphed
over his ancestral misfortunes, and her gentleness and affec¬
tion more than atoned for her forefather's rebellion and
cruelty, and so ended the mysterious doom that for years
had clouded " Sir Arthur's inheritance."
Annibal.
{Concluded.)
DARK DAYS.
A TRUCE to frets and fumings—
A truce for a while I pray ;
A truce to the weary longings
For a richer, fuller day.
Why sit still at the casement
Watching the dark clouds meet ?
Better come forth to the bustle
And stir of the busy street.
Something there may reach thee,
May make thy soul forget
The terrible self that haunts thee—
The self that pains thee yet.
That Death, the true and tender.
Points to a certain goal ;
Is this thy best Life-comfort,
0 weary, waiting soul ?
Yet think !—If a Fonn should meet thee,
And Voice of reproachful power
Should say, as Death thou greetest,
" Couldst thou not watch one hour ?"
JoAK Scott.
37^ The Ladies Edinburgh Magazine.
IV.—TO LUCCA.
A QUESTION which we, being essentially town-mice, will
generally answer, very much to our own satisfaction, By
going from city to city, storing up "sunny memories of
foreign lands" from quaint Italian towns, lying basking,
like their native lizards, in the southern sun, or from the
more bustling homes of French or German life.
In the poet's May of last year, after debating at Florence
the knotty point of where to go next, we determined to deviate
a little from the beaten tourist track, and bend our steps to
Lucca, the old-world town, proudly surnamed by its inhabit¬
ants L'Industriosa, which seems not much visited by
foresticri, though it can boast of some Koman remains, as
well as of ecclesiastical antiquities. Like most north
Italian towns, Lucca suffered in the Guelph and Ghibeline
feuds ; then passing from the power of one master to that of
another, after some centuries of independence, it was merged
in the United Kingdom of Italy, having previously become
a French Principality in 1799.
A three hours' journey by rail from Florence, through a
vividly green country, covered with trailing vines festooned
from tree to tree, brought us to Lucca, where, relying as
usual on Baedeker, we went to the Croce di Malta—which
may be the best hotel in the place—being put at the top of
his list; but if so, what any other can be is better imagined
than experienced. We appeared to have been, judging by
the visitor's book, the lirst Inglesi who had ever ventured
to pass a night in this very Italian hotel; and certainly
travellers unused to " roughing it," or retaining unaltered
English prejudices in favour of cleanliness, would find them¬
selves in far from comfortable quarters. But any discom¬
forts we underwent would have been weU repaid by the
wonderful Fra Bartolomcos, which form the artistic glory of
Lucca. His most famous picture is the " Madonna della
Misericordia," in which the human pitiful mother is pleading
with her Divine Son, for the salvation of the men, women,
and children, who have crowded under the protection of lier
outspread, overshadowing mantle. For a wonder, considering
the present low state of Italian Art, in the Pinacoteca there
Where sJiall we Go ? 379
is one really good modern painting by a native artist. It is
a sort of shadow or dream of Tintoret's " Massacre of the
Innocents at Venice," or that almost more touching one in
the Tribuna at Florence, by Davidde da Volterra, which
involuntarily fills one's eyes with tears. Here, one of the
murdered children, a straight little white figure, is lying on
the ground quite dead ; and, beside it, the mother, spent with
grief, her eyes nearly closed by weeping, one hand clasped
lightly among her dishevelled black hair, is prone on the
ground, one arm clasping the lifeless baby form. All
around is grey ground, stones, pillars, houses—only the
highest part of a building in a background has caught the
bright red light of the setting sun.
Of course Lucca has a catliedral (what foreign town
worthy of the name does not possess one ?) dedicated to
San Martino, whom it felt rather surprising to find so far
away from his own home of Tours. It is a Lombard-Gothic
building of the 11th century, with a three-storeyed faqade
added in 1204; the decorations everywhere are of the most
grotesque description, recalhng the unnamed animals, and
entertaining scroll-work, found on the " Sculptured Stones "
of this country. The interior is in the form of a Latin cross,
with a handsome clerestory over the aisles; the arches are
slightly pointed, just enough to suggest the Gothic additions
which did take place in the 14tli century. San Martino is
not behindhand in the possession of a relic to uphold its
rank in the list of cathedrals—a very notable one too—which
alone would have given name and fame to Lucca, had it
been able to put forward no other claim to distinction. This
is " II Volto Santo," a crucifix in cedar wood, said to have
been carved by Nicodemus after the Deposition from the
Cross—he having been moved to undertake the work by
Divine inspiration or command ; winds and waves miracu¬
lously conveyed it to Lucca in 782. It is exposed, for the
veneration of the faithful, three times a-year only—of which,
fortunately for us. May 3d is one; so we came in for a very
" gran' festa " indeed.
From early morning, on that sunny Feast of the Invention
of the Cross, the streets of Lucca were astir, every human
being, whether coming from the country, or belonging to the
town, having apparently but one object in life for the time
being—to pay their respects to the Volto Santo; of course
we went with the multitude. The unpriced relic has a
shrine to itself, in the centre of the Duomo, " II Tempietto "
by name;   it is an octagonal  chapel of marble, partially
380 The Ladies' Edinburgh Magazine.
gilded, where, for 362 days in the year, the crucifix is en¬
closed behind strong doors, and curtains of crimson silk.
The antiquity of the image is evident, to even unartistic
eyes, but its real date is as unknown as its history. The
Volto Santo is life-size, the Head slightly inclining to one
side; the Face, sad and drawn, with very little " beauty " in
it; from the waist downwards the Figure is clothed in blue
velvet, richly embroidered with gold; jewels literally cover
the head and neck.
We went to the cathedral rather early, and found its
great nave crowded with a motley and most picturesque
assemblage—women in bright coloured head-dresses, in
which orange predominated; men in almost equally gay
gala attire; little children, black-eyed, rosy and smiling
impersonations of Domenichino's or Eaphael's cherubs;
while monks of various orders were almost too numerous, as
in their neighbourhood the " odour of sanctity" is more
powerful than pleasant. Round the shrine, the crowd was
dense ; some worshippers kneeling motionless on the marble
floor; others pressing on to get the earliest possible view of
the venerated relic; a good many were hearing mass in the
quiet side chapels ; while the less devout whispered together,
evidently regarding the day's work as a mere " ploy."
Beneath II Volto Santo an altar was dressed with lace,
flowers, and candles, garnished, moreover, with money boxes
for the offerings of the faithful, which seldom amounted to
a larger sum than a soldo or five centimes piece. Beside
this altar stood a priest, who had more than enough to do
touching the Feet of the Figure with medals and rosaries, one
at least of which each devotee brought to be thus hallowed.
We passed on with the crowd, and were looked at several
times as if suspected of heresy, though doing very much at
Eome as the Eomans do; they (substituting Lucchesi for
Eomans) poured in at one door of the chapel, and out at the
opposite, pausing for a moment before the crucifix to cross
themselves and say a prayer, which those pressing on from
behind, never allowed to be uninterrupted, or too long.
The whole scene was essentially Italian; so was the un¬
mistakably real, though possibly transient, devotion: it
seemed quite in keeping with the bright warm sunshine,
which streamed through the clerestory windows, lighting up
rows of dark, earnest faces. Through the seldom-opened
great West doors, across the arcaded vestibule, one could look
into the grass-grown Piazza, usually quiet and deserted, the
echoes of which that Festa day were wakened by many
Where shallive Go? 381
footsteps of those who joined holy day and holiday together,
in a way wliich seems possible only on the other side of the
('hannel. In the cathedral, not far from the west door,
liangs, suspended by a long chain from the roof, a hexagonal
frame-work of iron, not unlike a skeleton brazier. A\'henever
the Arclibishop says Pontifical high mass, this is filled with
tow, which, during the singing of the Gloria in Uxcclsis, is
set on fire, and wliile it blazes up the Archbishop pro¬
nounces the words, "Sit trunsit (jloria mundi,"—an impressive
piece of ritual, for which we have been able to find no special
meaning or origin.
Our time in Lucca being limited, we had onlv one walk
on the br(jad grass-grown ramparts, which entirely suiround
the town, and form a deliglitful promenade for its iuliabi-
tants. The views from the gravelled pathway on the top
are beautiful, especially looking nortliwards towards tlie blue
mountains of (Jarrara, tlie white streaks in which scarcely
show at sucli a distance.
AVe made one very pleasant excursion to the Bagni di
Lucca—the favourite " villeggiatura " of the townspeople,
famed far and near for its watei's, and mucli resorted to by
invalids for the cure of rheumatism—lying about 12 miles
north of Lucca. The road to tlie Batlis runs tlirougli a lovelv
country, by the side of the impetuous rushing Serchio, under
mountains, green and terraced to their very summits,
covered with a profusion of wild flowers. We saw laburnum
(h'opping its golden rain, from tlie most arid-looking rocky
clefts, and long strings of leafy vines swaying backwai'ds and
forwards in the soft summer wind. The " stabilimenti " are
not all under one roof, l)ut scattered up and down a steep
rocky valley ; the furtliest distant are about a mile from
I'onte di Serraglio, wliich last is the fashionable resort of
Italians in " the season." We could imagine it a charming
sinnmer abode, though possibly, as we ^\•ere told it was, some¬
what warm and enervating. Mr Hemans, son of the
poetess, and well known to all frequenters of liome as an
anti(iuariau of great taste and learning, died last \k\v at the
Bagui (li Lucca. M. S.
Xo.  3C,—DpfFMT-.lP. ISTT.
382 The Ladies' Edinhurgli Mayaziue.
DOUBLE ACROSTIC.
No. \-l.
" Of solvers every month we've had so few,
That to this pastime here we say Adieu."
1. The scene of a celebrated feat of Archery.
2. The luminary of the festive board.
3. A silver snake.
4. Ancient infallibility.
5. Winter's winding-sheet.
6. The medium of speech.
7. Falsely worshipped.
8. An historical consjiiracv.
F. i[.
ANSWER TO DOUBLE ACROSTIC
No. 11.
T
THROAT.
T
H
HOCRI.
I
E
ELOQUENT.
T
R
RAUBEREI.
1
E
EPITOME,
E
S
SWAN.
N
A
ALAS.
S
Correct answers received from " B," M. C. B., and M(!ssage Girl.
Our Series of Acrostics clo.ses here for the present.    The winner of
the Prize will be announced in January, with the last solution.
CUE    LIBRA E Y    T A P, L E.
Our Trip to Blunderland.     By Jean Jambun.     Edinbui'^h and
London : W. Blackwoud & Sons, 1877.
Whoever wishes to enjoy an hour or two of delightl'ul nonsense,
had better take up Our Trip to Blimtkrland. We \entiire to altirm
they will haixUy lay it down till they have accompanied Norval,
Jacques, and Ranulf, tlu-ough all their adventures. And who .shall
tell the number of delightetl little ones who will pore over these pages
as they have done over those of Alice in Wonderland, between which
and the Trip to lUunderland there is a good deal of resemblance l
They will learn here the lesson (true alike for old and young), that the
entrance to the enchanted ground is won by deeds of love ; and will,
we truist, bear in mind the fairy's words to the little heroes, " You will
see every day the a<lvantage of being good and brave." The illustrations
are abundant, and charming in humour.
WoRKiXG AND Sellincj.    Edinburgh : A. Elliot, 17 Princes Street.
We wish to call attention to this little  brochure, and by its means
to forward the objects of the Society who have issued it.    Our country¬
women are certainlv behind the ai^e in tlie exe<;ution of reallv artistic
Stray Notes. 383
needlework ; and ladies who wish to improve tliejnselves and others
in this respect, would do well to study the information <,'iven in these
few pages. An Art-Needlework School for Scotland seems to us an
excellent idea, and we liope that the Exhibition and Sale of Needle¬
work, to he held this month in Ediuburyli, may give fresli stimulus to
efforts made in this direction.
S T II A Y    NOT E S.
The Berlin Victoria-Lyceum.—We have received the Tenth An¬
nual Report of an institution the counterpart of our own Educational
Association. Tliis institution, as its name suggests, has owed much to
tlie patronage of the Crown Princess, especially in the days when it was
an untried experiment in Germany. We hope one day to welcome, as
an addition to our Educational Series, a historical sketch of the Victoria
Lyceum. The Report tells of a prosperous state of matters : it an¬
nounces a wider choice of subjects, several new lecturers, with names
not unknown to fame, and an increase of 100 over the number of stu¬
dents in i876 ; thus bringing up the total to 900. In three classes
there was an attendance of upwards of 100, and one lecturer addressed
more than 200 hearers. These statistics would make us think that
(ierman ladies must be as deeply studious as their fellow-countrymen,
were it not for the very next sentence, which leads us to infer tliat, as a
rule, these students do not attend any e.xaminations ; for it is men¬
tioned, as a proof of real substantial progi-ess, that a Latin class, wliich
had distinguished itself by unwearied diligence, petitioned to be ex¬
amined. This important class was ikj larger than our own, as it
numbered but nine students, two of them withEnglish names. We have
heard that German professors continue to keep up the attention of their
students without frequent examinations, and we would invite a note on
this subject from any one capable of giving accurate inlbrmation. The
prospectus for 1877-78 is .so varied, and oilers so inany entertaining
subjects for study, that it very nearly sent us to Berlin for tlie winter !
We regret that no such course can be liad in Edinburgh—even in the
University—as that which Dr Jerden will deliver. His subject is 2)er-
ha]is, to well-educated persons, the most interesting that could l)e chosen.
" The Italian Renaissance, The Intellectual Revival of the 13th Cen¬
tury, The Italian Gothic, Franciscan and Dominican Ritual, Birth of
Plastic Art under the Pisani, Dante, Influence of the Divine Comedy
on Art, Lyrics of Petrarch, The Florentine School, Giotto and his
Works in Padua, Assisi and Florence, Siense School, &c." This course
is to be abundantly illustrated with pictures, prints,and models, and each
lecture is to last for an hour and a half. There are also to be lectures
on Physics, on Botany, on Physical Geography, on Hi.story ; on French,
English, American, German, and Italian Literature. In each case, we
are struck with a remarkable diti'erence of method from our own. Each
lecturer, instead of giving a sketch of an entire subject, takes only an
exceedingly narrow portion of it, in order to treat this as fully as pos¬
sible. For instance, Dr Lindner delivers two courses on Shakesjieare ;
and Dr Lasson lectures on Tuesday, on Goethe and his Times, and on
Friday on The Theory of the Drama, illustrated from Goethe's Plays,
and from Faust. Again, in Botany, a course on Lichens, Algai, ancl
Fungi is followed by another on Mosses and Ferns,     The absence of
384 The Ladies Edinhitrgh MagarAnc.
an}' "degree certificate'" to regulate the lectures may jierhaps explain
how it is possilile to work in tliis way with such a leisurely thorough¬
ness and attention to detail, as must \w delightful to those who would
fain study for culture's sake, and without the disturhing phantom of
coming examinations. In short, there is an air of enjoyment ahout
this whole lecture system, just as there is an air of business about our
own; and, to quote the words of an English resident in Berlin, '• Salon-
subjects are with us decidedly in the ascendant, when comj^ared with
academic studies."
Expense of Livixg in Berlin.—At the Victoria-Stift, Konig-griit-
zen Strasze, 93, ladies sharing a room can be boarded and lodged for
15 marks (= 15s.) per week—20 marks for a separate room. With Eng¬
lish or Scotch (■ompanions, a lady might inake this arrangement, but
German boarders are often of a lower social grade. At a private
l)oarding-house, such as Frau Woyeke's—17, Belle Alliance Platz—
more comfort can be had for the same terms ; but those willing to pay
from 30s. to £-2 per week, can secure far better accommodation at lirst-
class boarding-houses. Ladies are advised, however, to see and judge
for themselves, before coming to any decision.
The Ladies' Debating Club, formed in London during the winter
of 1874, contiinu's this year under somewhat new conditions, and has
now a distinct local habitation at 22 Berners Street, W. The club,
numbering at present between 60 and 70 members, meets once in three
weeks, from 8 to 9.30 v.M. Annual subscription 2s. 6d.—election by
ballot (two black-balls excluding). The office of permanent President
has been abolished : the Club is managed by a Committee, a Treasurer,
and two Secretaries—all elected annually. Among the rules of the
club we notice the following:—"That in order to ensure quickness
of reply, the discussion at some of the meetings be on subjects chosen
by the President from a book, pamphlet, or newspaper, on the evening
of meeting.'' " That one evening a-year be set aside, in which gen¬
tlemen may be admitted as visitors, taking ])art in the debate on the
same terms as other visitors." The passing of the latter rule seems to
us a rather daring act. We hear, however, that these nuxed debates
have been very successful. The London King's College Debating So-
ci(!ty has more than once invited the Ladies' Club to a disciission, on
which occasions the ladies seem to have acquitted themselves well.
Will none of our readers contribute a jjaper on the Employment of
Women as Librarians ? Mr AYinsor, the President of the American
Library Association, considers, that among the many women who are
now governesses, some, at least, might be found, who, in giving their at¬
tention to the above-named occui^atiou, might enter upon what he calls
" a more important sphere of usefulness."
Ladies are invited to contribute to this Magazine.
A Pkize is offered for the best article received and accepted by the
Editors before Is* March 1878, on the subject, " Where shall we Go ! "
A Prize is oft'ered for the best article received by the Editors, and
accepted for inseition during the current year, on any one of our
British Female Novelists, born in the 18th century.
The next meeting of the Ladies' Edinburgh Literary Society will be
held at 5 Heriot Row, on Saturday, 1st December, at 11 o'clock, a.m.
Debate—" Is the Saxon element in our Literatui'e at present more
powerful and elevated tlian the Norman ?"
-)«i
,'
if' U
' ."*-
■",;,.'*v'',^'':\'*
'"■ jf'-
r
A"
p
>;■'
a^^ V*    
-/_vS5T|!A*l4?%'?Sl-». Jw>
